Trained Mamba Emulates Online Gradient Descent in
In-Context Linear Regression

Jiarui Jiang∗ 1 , Wei Huang∗ 2 , Miao Zhang† 1 , Taiji Suzuki3 2 , Liqiang Nie1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
RIKEN AIP
3
University of Tokyo
jiaruij@outlook.com, wei.huang.vr@riken.jp, zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, nieliqiang@gmail.com

Abstract
State-space models (SSMs), particularly Mamba, emerge as an efficient Transformer alternative with linear complexity for long-sequence modeling. Recent
empirical works demonstrate Mamba’s in-context learning (ICL) capabilities competitive with Transformers, a critical capacity for large foundation models. However, theoretical understanding of Mamba’s ICL remains limited, restricting deeper
insights into its underlying mechanisms. Even fundamental tasks such as linear
regression ICL, widely studied as a standard theoretical benchmark for Transformers, have not been thoroughly analyzed in the context of Mamba. To address this
gap, we study the training dynamics of Mamba on the linear regression ICL task.
By developing novel techniques tackling non-convex optimization with gradient
descent related to Mamba’s structure, we establish an exponential convergence
rate to ICL solution, and derive a loss bound that is comparable to Transformer’s.
Importantly, our results reveal that Mamba can perform a variant of online gradient
descent to learn the latent function in context. This mechanism is different from
that of Transformer, which is typically understood to achieve ICL through gradient
descent emulation. The theoretical results are verified by experimental simulation.

1

Introduction

State-space models (SSMs), notably Mamba (Gu and Dao, 2024), have recently emerged as compelling alternatives to Transformer-based architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017). Mamba integrates
gating, convolutions, and state-space modeling with selection mechanisms, enabling linear-time
complexity. This effectively addresses the quadratic computational costs typically associated with
self-attention mechanisms in Transformers. Consequently, Mamba demonstrates superior efficiency
in processing long sequences while maintaining or even surpassing Transformer performance across
diverse benchmarks (Gu and Dao, 2024; Dao and Gu, 2024; Patro and Agneeswaran, 2024; Liu et al.,
2024; Ahamed and Cheng, 2024; Li et al., 2024a,b).
In-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020) is a powerful paradigm that enables models to
generalize to unseen tasks by dynamically leveraging contextual examples (such as input-output
pairs) without task-specific fine-tuning. This capability has become a defining characteristic of large
foundation models, significantly enhancing their flexibility and adaptability. While extensive research
has provided substantial insights into Transformer-based ICL mechanisms (Garg et al., 2022; Gatmiry
et al., 2024; Sander et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025), the principles underlying
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

