Imbalances in Neurosymbolic Learning:
Characterization and Mitigating Strategies

Efthymia Tsamoura†∗
Huawei Labs
efthymia.tsamoura@huawei.com

Kaifu Wang†
University of Pennsylvania
kaifu@sas.upenn.edu

Dan Roth
University of Pennsylvania
danroth@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We study one of the most popular problems in neurosymbolic learning (NSL),
that of learning neural classifiers given only the result of applying a symbolic
component σ to the gold labels of the elements of a vector x. The gold labels of
the elements in x are unknown to the learner. We make multiple contributions,
theoretical and practical, to address a problem that has not been studied so far in
this context, that of characterizing and mitigating learning imbalances, i.e., major
differences in the errors that occur when classifying instances of different classes
(aka class-specific risks). Our theoretical reveals a unique phenomenon: that σ can
greatly impact learning imbalances. This result sharply contrasts with previous
research on supervised and weakly supervised learning, which only studies learning
imbalances under data imbalances. On the practical side, we introduce a technique
for estimating the marginal of the hidden gold labels using weakly supervised data.
Then, we introduce algorithms that mitigate imbalances at training and testing time
by treating the marginal of the hidden labels as a constraint. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our techniques using strong baselines from NSL and long-tailed
learning, suggesting performance improvements of up to 14%.

1

Introduction

The need to address the limitations of deep learning motivated researchers to explore neurosymbolic
learning (NSL) [13], a family of techniques that integrate neural mechanisms for inference and
learning with symbolic ones. This work considers one of the most popular NSL learning settings
[12, 61, 20, 28, 40, 39, 37] in which a neural classifier f is learned assuming access only to a vector
of inputs x = (x1 , . . . , xM ) to f and to the result of applying σ to the gold labels of the xi s. The
gold labels are hidden during learning. An example is illustrated below:
Example 1.1 (Example adapted from [36]). We aim to learn an MNIST classifier f , using only
samples of the form (x1 , x2 , s), where x1 and x2 are MNIST digits and s is the maximum of their
gold labels, i.e., s = σ(y1 , y2 ) = max{y1 , y2 } with yi being the label of xi . The gold labels are
hidden during training. We will refer to the yi ’s and s as hidden and weak labels, respectively.
Our learning setting, which we will refer to as N E S Y, has been extensively adopted in NLP [58, 49, 47,
68, 16]. Recently, N E S Y has been successfully adopted to fine-tune language models [73, 29], align
∗

Work started before Efthymia Tsamoura joined Huawei Labs.
These authors contributed equally to this work.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

