PipeFusion: Patch-level Pipeline Parallelism for
Diffusion Transformers Inference
Jiarui Fang ∗†
ByteDance
fangjiarui123@gmail.com

Jinzhe Pan∗†
HUST
eigensystem@hust.edu.cn

Xibo Sun
Tencent
xibosun@tencent.com

Aoyu Li†
ByteDance
aoyuli2000@outlook.com

Jiannan Wang†
The University of Hong Kong
steaunk@connect.hku.hk

Abstract
This paper presents PipeFusion, an innovative parallel methodology to tackle
the high latency issues associated with generating high-resolution images using
diffusion transformers (DiTs) models. PipeFusion partitions images into patches
and the model layers across multiple GPUs. It employs a patch-level pipeline
parallel strategy to orchestrate communication and computation efficiently. By
capitalizing on the high similarity between inputs from successive diffusion steps,
PipeFusion reuses one-step stale feature maps to provide context for the current
pipeline step. This approach notably reduces communication costs compared to
existing DiTs inference parallelism, including tensor parallel, sequence parallel
and DistriFusion. PipeFusion enhances memory efficiency through parameter
distribution across devices, ideal for large DiTs like Flux.1. Experimental results
demonstrate that PipeFusion achieves state-of-the-art performance on 8×L40 PCIe
GPUs for Pixart, Stable-Diffusion 3, and Flux.1 models. Our Source code is
available at https://github.com/xdit-project/xDiT.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the capabilities of AI-generated content (AIGC) have rapidly advanced, with diffusion
models emerging as a leading generative technique in image [1–4] and video synthesis [5, 6]. The
model architecture of diffusion models is undergoing a significant transformation. Traditionally
dominated by U-Net [7] architectures, these models are now transitioning to Diffusion Transformers
(DiTs) [4]. The context length of diffusion models is also increasing, which is crucial for handling
long videos and high-resolution images.
DiTs suffer from quadratic latency growth in long-sequence generation due to attention computation.
Given that a single GPU cannot satisfy the latency requirements for practical applications, it becomes
necessary to parallelize the DiTs inference for a single image across multiple computational devices.
However, tensor parallelism (TP) [8], commonly used in serving Large Language Models (LLMs), is
inefficient for DiTs due to their large activation volumes. In such cases, the communication costs often
outweigh the benefits of parallel computation. To address the challenges posed by long sequences,
sequence parallelism (SP) [9, 10] is applied for the parallel inference of DiTs, which partitions the
input image into patches and needs data exchange across different devices in the attention operations.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
This work was completed when Jiarui Fang, Jinzhe Pan, Aoyu Li, and Jiannan Wang were with Tencent.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

