EPA: Boosting Event-based Video Frame Interpolation
with Perceptually Aligned Learning
Yuhan Liu1,2 , Linghui Fu2 , Zhen Yang2 , Hao Chen3 , Youfu Li4,5 , Yongjian Deng2,5*
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China,
Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
3
Key Lab of Computer Network and Information Integration, Southeast University
4
Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR
5
CityU Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, P.R. China
1
yuhanliu@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {fulinghui@emails., yangzhen@, yjdeng@}bjut.edu.cn,
haochen303@seu.edu.cn, meyfli@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Event cameras, with their capacity to provide high temporal resolution information
between frames, are increasingly utilized for video frame interpolation (VFI) in
challenging scenarios characterized by high-speed motion and significant occlusion. However, prevalent issues of blur and distortion within the keyframes and
ground truth data used for training and inference in these demanding conditions are
frequently overlooked. This oversight impedes the perceptual realism and multiscene generalization capabilities of existing event-based VFI (E-VFI) methods
when generating interpolated frames. Motivated by the observation that semanticperceptual discrepancies between degraded and pristine images are considerably
smaller than their image-level differences, we introduce EPA. This novel E-VFI
framework diverges from approaches reliant on direct image-level supervision by
constructing multilevel, degradation-insensitive semantic perceptual supervisory
signals to enhance the perceptual realism and multi-scene generalization of the
model’s predictions. Specifically, EPA operates in two phases: it first employs a
DINO-based perceptual extractor, a customized style adapter, and a reconstruction
generator to derive multi-layered, degradation-insensitive semantic-perceptual features (S). Second, a novel Bidirectional Event-Guided Alignment (BEGA) module
utilizes deformable convolutions to align perceptual features from keyframes to
ground truth with inter-frame temporal guidance extracted from event signals. By
decoupling the learning process from direct image-level supervision, EPA enhances
model robustness against degraded keyframes and unreliable ground truth information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that this approach yields interpolated
frames more consistent with human perceptual preferences. Codes are available at
https://github.com/yuhan0802/EPA.

1

Introduction

Recent years, Event-based Video Frame Interpolation (E-VFI) has attracted significant attention due
to its outstanding performance under extreme conditions. Leveraging the high temporal resolution
of event cameras [23, 48], E-VFI demonstrates clear advantages over frame-based VFI methods in
challenging scenarios involving fast motion, severe occlusion, and non-rigid object deformation.
It enables more accurate inter-frame motion estimation [40, 41, 21, 31], or even directly provides
temporal priors at the interpolation location [28, 8], thereby facilitating the generation of higherquality intermediate frames. However, previous works often overlook a critical issue exposed in such
challenging environments: the presence of motion blur and image degradation caused by the inherent
* Corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

