Exploring Structural Degradation in Dense
Representations for Self-supervised Learning

1

Siran Dai1,2
Qianqian Xu3,4 ∗
Peisong Wen5
5
Yang Liu
Qingming Huang5,3∗

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

daisiran@iie.ac.cn
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
{wenpeisong, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn
liuyang232@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In this work, we observe a counterintuitive phenomenon in self-supervised learning (SSL): longer training may impair the performance of dense prediction tasks
(e.g., semantic segmentation). We refer to this phenomenon as Self-supervised
Dense Degradation (SDD) and demonstrate its consistent presence across sixteen state-of-the-art SSL methods with various losses, architectures, and datasets.
When the model performs suboptimally on dense tasks at the end of training, measuring the performance during training becomes essential. However, evaluating
dense performance effectively without annotations remains an open challenge.
To tackle this issue, we introduce a Dense representation Structure Estimator
(DSE), composed of a class-relevance measure and an effective dimensionality measure. The proposed DSE is both theoretically grounded and empirically
validated to be closely correlated with the downstream performance. Based on
this metric, we introduce a straightforward yet effective model selection strategy
and a DSE-based regularization method. Experiments on sixteen SSL methods
across four benchmarks confirm that model selection improves mIoU by 3.0%
on average with negligible computational cost. Additionally, DSE regularization consistently mitigates the effects of dense degradation. Code is available at
https://github.com/EldercatSAM/SSL-Degradation.

1

Introduction

Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has greatly benefited from advancements in training algorithms,
larger datasets and models, and extended training periods, leading to significant success in image-level
representation learning [10, 16, 3, 29]. However, dense (patch or pixel-level) representation learning
remains challenging with only slight improvements [70, 5].
While training models for extended periods to extract high-quality representations has been a common
practice in SSL, we identify and study a counterintuitive phenomenon, named Self-supervised Dense
Degradation (SDD), which helps explain the challenges in self-supervised dense representation
learning. As illustrated in Fig. 1, although the training loss converges and classification performance
steadily improves, the dense performance declines at the later stages of training. Consequently, the
final checkpoint exhibits a significant performance gap compared to the best performance observed
during training.
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

