Latency NMS Attacks:
Is It Real Life or Is It Just Fantasy?

Jean-Philippe Monteuuis
Cong Chen
Jonathan Petit
Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
{jmonteuu, congchen, petit}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
“Caught in a landslide, no escape from reality" summarizes the state of the research
in AI offense: an attack might work on paper but does not necessarily in practice.
In the last 5 years, we have seen the rise of latency attacks against computer vision
systems. Most of them targeted 2D object detection, especially its Non-MaxSuppression (NMS) block, via adversarial images. However, we uncovered that,
when tested in realistic deployment settings, the NMS latency attacks, accepted
to top conferences, have very limited negative effects. In this paper, we define an
evaluation framework (EVADE) to assess the practicality of attacks, and apply it to
state-of-the-art NMS latency attacks. Attacks were tested on different hardware
platforms, and different model formats and quantization. Results show that these
attacks are not able to generate the claimed latency increase, nor transfer to other
models (from the same family or not). Moreover, the latency increases remain
within the latency requirements of downstream tasks in our evaluation, suggesting
limited practical impact under these conditions. We also tested three defenses,
which were successful in mitigating the NMS latency attacks. Therefore, in their
current form, NMS latency attacks are just fantasy.

1

Introduction

Perception systems use camera inputs to perform tasks such as object detection, object classification,
or segmentation. They rely on the performance of machine learning models to offer proper services.
Especially, the latency of perception output plays an important role in delivering satisfactory user
experience or safety-critical functions.
The maximum latency for real-time object detection models depends on the target application. For
example, for autonomous driving, the maximum latency is typically around 100 ms to ensure safety
and responsiveness (Lin et al., 2018).For surveillance systems, a latency of up to 200 ms is acceptable,
as these systems often prioritize accuracy over immediate response (Hussain, 2024). In industrial
robotics, latencies of up to 100 ms are often acceptable, but for more precise tasks, lower latencies
around 10-20 ms are preferred (Vijayakumar and Vairavasundaram, 2024).
Most of the object detection models use Non-Max Suppression (NMS) to process all the candidate
bounding boxes and output the most probable ones. It has been demonstrated that an attacker could
craft perturbations to create many high-probability bounding boxes that would not be filtered by the
NMS, and hence, increase the latency Wang et al. (2021).
However, as we are going to demonstrate in this paper, the prior art omitted many important aspects
of deployed ML models that seriously question the relevance of current NMS latency attacks. More
precisely, we tackle the following research questions.
• RQ1: How does the hardware affect the Attack Success Rate (ASR) of latency attacks
against NMS?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

