Leveraging semantic similarity for experimentation
with AI-generated treatments

Lei Shi
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
leishi@berkeley.edu
Ritwik Sinha
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110
risinha@adobe.com

David Arbour
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110
arbour@adobe.com

Raghavendra Addanki
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110
raddanki@adobe.com

Avi Feller
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
afeller@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) enable a new form of digital experimentation
where treatments combine human and model-generated content in increasingly
sophisticated ways. The main methodological challenge in this setting is representing these high-dimensional treatments without losing their semantic meaning
or rendering analysis intractable. Here we address this problem by focusing on
learning low-dimensional representations that capture the underlying structure
of such treatments. These representations enable downstream applications such
as guiding generative models to produce meaningful treatment variants and facilitating adaptive assignment in online experiments. We propose double kernel
representation learning, which models the causal effect through the inner product
of kernel-based representations of treatments and user covariates. We develop
an alternating-minimization algorithm that learns these representations efficiently
from data and provide convergence guarantees under a low-rank factor model.
As an application of this framework, we introduce an adaptive design strategy
for online experimentation and demonstrate the method’s effectiveness through
numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Randomized experiments are a cornerstone of measuring the efficacy of content (e.g., messaging,
imagery) in modern industry (e.g., Sun et al., 2021; Grimmer and Woolley, 2014; Leung et al., 2017)
and social science (e.g., Gerber et al., 2018; Green et al., 2023; Salovey and Williams-Piehota, 2004)
contexts. Historically, generating the content itself has been the core challenge. The advent of Large
Language Models (LLMs) and other generative models involving text, images, and videos (Goł ˛
abAndrzejak, 2023; Baek, 2023; Kumar and Kapoor, 2024) in recent years has dramatically decreased
this design burden. By integrating human creativity with model-generated content, generative models
are transforming digital experimentation and streamlining treatment generation.
The ability to generate many content variants for experiments, however, has come with new statistical
challenges, especially since the corresponding experiment populations have largely stayed fixed. As
a result, practitioners often face the choice of either running underpowered experiments or leaving
many treatment variations unexamined. In this paper, we explore an alternative: to improve statistical
efficiency by explicitly incorporating semantic similarity from treatment embeddings (numeric
representations of the treatments). This raises two key technical challenges: (i) Effectively leveraging
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

