Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning with
Max-Min Criterion: A Game-Theoretic Approach

Woohyeon Byeon1

Giseung Park2

Jongseong Chae1

Amir Leshem3

Youngchul Sung1 *

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a provably convergent and practical framework
for multi-objective reinforcement learning with max-min criterion. From a
game-theoretic perspective, we reformulate max-min multi-objective reinforcement
learning as a two-player zero-sum regularized continuous game and introduce an
efficient algorithm based on mirror descent. Our approach simplifies the policy
update while ensuring global last-iterate convergence. We provide a comprehensive
theoretical analysis on our algorithm, including iteration complexity under
both exact and approximate policy evaluations, as well as sample complexity
bounds. To further enhance performance, we modify the proposed algorithm with
adaptive regularization. Our experiments demonstrate the convergence behavior
of the proposed algorithm in tabular settings, and our implementation for deep
reinforcement learning significantly outperforms previous baselines in many
MORL environments.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) focuses on sequential decision-making in Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), which have been extensively studied both theoretically and practically. However, in
several practical decision-making problems such as autonomous vehicles, resource allocation and
communication, multiple objectives should be simultaneously optimized instead of a conventional
single objective [27, 23, 24, 60]. These scenarios motivate the development of Multi-Objective
Reinforcement Learning (MORL), an extension of RL in which the reward function yields a vector
rather than a scalar. In recent years, MORL has seen significant progresses [61, 50, 31, 37, 20]. A
widely-adopted approach to MORL is the utility-based approach [46, 22], which is formulated as
follows: for a utility function u (also called scalarization function), solve maxπ u(V1π , . . . , VKπ ),
where π is a policy and Vkπ is the value function of the k-th objective. As long as the utility function
is non-decreasing in the sense of Pareto dominance, the optimal policy for u(V1π , . . . , VKπ ) is also
Pareto optimal [46].
Although many previous works on MORL considered the weighted sum utility function [61, 8, 31],
the weighted sum utility function is not the desired design metric in many cases, especially when
considering the application of MORL to resource allocation where fairness is an important issue. For
example, consider scheduling of cloud computing resources, in which a computing job is typically
divided into multiple subtasks and each subtask is performed by a different resource and completed
subtasks are combined to finish the overall job [47, 57]. In this case, the overall time for finishing the
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Republic of Korea, 2 University of Toronto Robotics Institute,
Canada, 3 Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Israel. *Correspondence to: Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>.
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

