Multi-agent Markov Entanglement

Tianyi Peng
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
tianyi.peng@columbia.edu

Shuze Chen
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
shuze.chen@columbia.edu

Abstract
Value decomposition has long been a fundamental technique in multi-agent reinforcement learning and dynamic programming. Specifically, the value function of
a global state (s1 , s2 , . . . , sN ) is often approximated as the sum of local functions:
PN
V (s1 , s2 , . . . , sN ) ≈ i=1 Vi (si ). This approach has found various applications
in modern reinforcement learning systems. However, the theoretical justification
for why this decomposition works so effectively remains underexplored. In this
paper, we uncover the underlying mathematical structure that enables value decomposition. We demonstrate that a Markov decision process (MDP) permits value
decomposition if and only if its transition matrix is not “entangled”—a concept
analogous to quantum entanglement in quantum physics. Drawing inspiration
from how physicists measure quantum entanglement, we introduce how to measure
the “Markov entanglement” and show that this measure can be used to bound the
decomposition error in general multi-agent MDPs. Using the concept of Markov
entanglement, we proved that a widely-used class
√ of policies, the index policy, is
weakly-entangled and enjoys a sublinear O( N ) scale of decomposition error
for N -agent systems. Finally, we show Markov entanglement can be efficiently
estimated, guiding practitioners on the feasibility of value decomposition.

1

Introduction

Learning the value function given certain policy, or policy evaluation, is one of the most fundamental
tasks in RL. Significant attention has been paid to single-agent policy evaluation [39, 8, 40]. However,
when it comes to multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), single-agent methodologies typically
suffer from the curse of dimensionality: the state space of the system scales exponentially with the
number of agents. To tackle this problem, one common technique is value decomposition,
V (s1 , s2 , . . . , sN ) ≈

N
X

Vi (si ) ,

i=1

where Vi is some local function that can be learned independently by each agent. It quickly follows
that this decomposition greatly reduces the computation complexity from exponential to linear
dependency on the number of agents N .
The remaining question is whether this decomposition is effective. This is non-trivial due to the
coupling of agents—individual agent’s action and transition depend on other agents. For example, in
a ride-hailing platform, if one driver took the order, then other drivers are not allowed fulfill the same
order. As a result, value decomposition may lose information and introduce bias without considering
the global constraints.
In the past several decades, both positive and negative results have been reported. Back to the last
century, [49, 47] apply Lagrange relaxations to decompose the global value and obtain the well-known
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

