Improving Task-Specific Multimodal Sentiment
Analysis with General MLLMs via Prompting

Haoyu Zhang† , Yinan Zhang† , Chaolong Ying† , Xiaoying Tang‡ , Tianshu Yu†∗
†
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
‡
School of Science and Engineering, The Chiese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{haoyuzhang3,yinanzhang1,chaolongying}@link.cuhk.edu.cn
{tangxiaoying,yutianshu}@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) aims to predict sentiment from diverse data
types, such as video, audio, and language. Recent progress in Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance across various tasks. However, in MSA, the increase in computational costs does not always
correspond to a significant improvement in performance, raising concerns about the
cost-effectiveness of applying MLLMs to MSA. This paper introduces the MLLMGuided Multimodal Sentiment Learning Framework (MMSLF). It improves the
performance of task-specific MSA models by leveraging the generalized knowledge of MLLMs through a teacher-student framework, rather than directly using
MLLMs for sentiment prediction. First, the proposed teacher built upon a powerful
MLLM (e.g., GPT-4o-mini), guides the student model to align multimodal representations through MLLM-generated context-aware prompts. Then, knowledge
distillation enables the student to mimic the teacher’s predictions, thus allowing it
to predict sentiment independently without relying on the context-aware prompts.
Extensive experiments on the SIMS, MOSI, and MOSEI datasets demonstrate that
our framework enables task-specific models to achieve state-of-the-art performance
across most metrics. This also provides new insights into the application of general
MLLMs for improving MSA.1

1

Introduction

Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) aims to predict sentiment from various types of input, such
as language, video, and audio. Accurate MSA is crucial for several applications, such as HumanComputer Interaction and Healthcare [1, 2]. Compared to unimodal sentiment analysis, the mutually
complementary nature of multiple modalities typically leads to better performance, thereby improving
the applicability of MSA in real-world scenarios.
A series of studies focused on improving MSA through well-designed representational learning and
multimodal fusion networks. For example, Tsai et al. [3] introduces a novel model which employs
multiple Transformers for pairwise alignment of modality information. Hazarika et al. [4] propose
a method to disentangle each modality into modality-invariant and modality-specific features for
multi-perspectives fusion. Additionally, Yu et al. [5] apply self-supervised learning to generate
pseudo-labels for each modality to learn both modality consistency and inconsistency. Zhang et
al. [6] make language modality as dominant modality to guide the learning of representations in other
modalities, thus mitigating potential conflicts between different modalities. After years of exploration,
∗
1

Correspondence author
Code: https://github.com/LOGO-CUHKSZ/MMSLF

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

