Analyzing Similarity Metrics for Data Selection for
Language Model Pretraining

Dylan Sam∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Ayan Chakrabarti
Google Research

Afshin Rostamizadeh
Google Research

Srikumar Ramalingam
Google Research

Gui Citovsky
Google Research

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research

Abstract
Measuring similarity between training examples is critical for curating high-quality
and diverse pretraining datasets for language models. However, similarity is
typically computed with a generic off-the-shelf embedding model that has been
trained for tasks such as retrieval. Whether these embedding-based similarity
metrics are well-suited for pretraining data selection remains largely unexplored.
In this paper, we propose a new framework to assess the suitability of a similarity
metric specifically for data curation in language model pretraining applications.
Our framework’s first evaluation criterion captures how well distances reflect
generalization in pretraining loss between different training examples. Next, we use
each embedding model to guide a standard diversity-based data curation algorithm
and measure its utility by pretraining a language model on the selected data and
evaluating downstream task performance. Finally, we evaluate the capabilities of
embeddings to distinguish between examples from different data sources. With
these evaluations, we demonstrate that standard off-the-shelf embedding models
are not well-suited for the pretraining data curation setting, underperforming even
remarkably simple embeddings that are extracted from models trained on the same
pretraining corpus. Our experiments are performed on the Pile, for pretraining
a 1.7B parameter language model on 200B tokens. We believe our analysis and
evaluation framework serves as a foundation for the future design of embeddings
that specifically reason about similarity in pretraining datasets.

1

Introduction

The recent success of language models [Brown et al., 2020, Chowdhery et al., 2023] is in no small
part due to pretraining on large and diverse text corpora scraped from a variety of sources [Raffel
et al., 2020, Gao et al., 2020, Penedo et al., 2024]. Researchers have explored a variety of approaches
to assemble effective pretraining sets, typically by selecting a high-quality and diverse subset from a
larger corpus of examples scraped from multiple data sources. These data curation approaches have
shown promising results by improving example quality and reducing redundancy in pretraining sets.
Many of these methods use notions of similarity between examples. Similarity of an example to
text from known high-quality sources (such as Wikipedia) has been used as a proxy for the quality
of that example [Gunasekar et al., 2023, Penedo et al., 2024]. Meanwhile, methods focused on
diversification [Abbas et al., 2023, Tirumala et al., 2023] make direct use of similarity metrics to
identify and remove redundant examples.
In this context, similarity between training examples has often been measured in terms of distances
in an embedding space. Many approaches have typically used generic embeddings for this purpose
∗

Work done while interning at Google Research. Correspondence to dylansam@andrew.cmu.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

