CaliGCL: Calibrated Graph Contrastive Learning via
Partitioned Similarity and Consistency Discrimination

Yuena Lin 1,† , Hao Wei 1,† , Haichun Cai 2 , Bohang Sun 1 ,
Tao Yang 3 , Zhen Yang 1, , & Gengyu Lyu 1,∗
1
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing
2
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou
3
Idealism Beijing Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing
yuenalin@126.com, haowei@emails.bjut.edu.cn, fjsmchc@163.com
sunbohang@bjut.edu.cn, yangtao@ilxzy.cn, yangzhen@bjut.edu.cn
lyugengyu@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) aims to learn self-supervised representations
by distinguishing positive and negative sample pairs generated from multiple
augmented graph views. Despite showing promising performance, GCL still suffers from two critical biases: (1) Similarity estimation bias arises when feature
elements that support positive pair alignment are suppressed by conflicting components within the representation, causing truly positive pairs to appear less similar.
(2) Semantic shift bias occurs when random augmentations alter the underlying
semantics of samples, leading to incorrect positive or negative assignments and
injecting noise into training. To address these issues, we propose CaliGCL, a GCL
model for calibrating the biases by integrating an exponential partitioned similarity
measure and a semantics-consistency discriminator. The exponential partitioned
similarity computes the similarities among fine-grained partitions obtained through
splitting representation vectors and uses exponential scaling to emphasize aligned
(positive) partitions while reducing the influence of misaligned (negative) ones.
The discriminator dynamically identifies whether augmented sample pairs maintain
semantic consistency, enabling correction of misleading contrastive supervision
signals. These components jointly reduce biases in similarity estimation and sample
pairing, guiding the encoder to learn more robust and semantically meaningful representations. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks show that CaliGCL
effectively mitigates both types of biases and achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

General graph contrastive learning (GCL) follows a pipeline to realize self-supervised representation
learning [1, 2, 3], which includes: implement augmentations on raw data to generate multiple views
[4], encode the augmented data to produce representations [5], and finally adopt a common contrastive
supervision that corresponding samples across different augmented views are positives while others
are negatives for contrastive learning [6, 7, 8]. Even though this GCL framework is well recognized,
it still incurs similarity estimation bias and semantic shift bias, which may degrade the graph
encoder to generate inferior representations.
The similarity estimation bias arises from the fact that representations produced by the encoder are
typically composed of conflicting positively- and negatively-synergistic feature elements, where the
∗

Corresponding author, † equal contributions.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

