SegGraph: Leveraging Graphs of SAM Segments for
Few-Shot 3D Part Segmentation

1

Yueyang Hu1 , Haiyong Jiang1∗ , Haoxuan Song1 , Jun Xiao1∗ , Hao Pan2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University
{huyueyang23, songhaoxuan24}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{haiyong.jiang, xiaojun}@ucas.ac.cn
haopan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This work presents a novel framework for few-shot 3D part segmentation. Recent
advances have demonstrated the significant potential of 2D foundation models
for low-shot 3D part segmentation. However, it is still an open problem that how
to effectively aggregate 2D knowledge from foundation models to 3D. Existing
methods either ignore geometric structures for 3D feature learning or neglects
the high-quality grouping clues from SAM, leading to under-segmentation and
inconsistent part labels. We devise a novel SAM segment graph-based propagation
method, named SegGraph, to explicitly learn geometric features encoded within
SAM’s segmentation masks. Our method encodes geometric features by modeling
mutual overlap and adjacency between segments while preserving intra-segment
semantic consistency. We construct a segment graph, conceptually similar to an
atlas, where nodes represent segments and edges capture their spatial relationships (overlap/adjacency). Each node adaptively modulates 2D foundation model
features, which are then propagated via a graph neural network to learn global
geometric structures. To enforce intra-segment semantic consistency, we map segment features to 3D points with a novel view-direction-weighted fusion attenuating
contributions from low-quality segments. Extensive experiments on PartNet-E
demonstrate that our method outperforms all competing baselines by at least 6.9%
mIoU. Further analysis reveals that SegGraph achieves particularly strong performance on small components and part boundaries, demonstrating its superior
geometric understanding. The code is available at: https://github.com/YueyangHu2000/SegGraph.

1

Introduction

3D part segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision and graphics with broad implications
for shape analysis [1], 3D modeling [2, 3], and robotic manipulations [4, 5]. For instance, a user can
edit a 3D shape based on part components and embodied agents need to interact with diverse object
parts for different manipulations, such as identifying a drawer’s handle or a bottle’s neck. Many of
these real-world applications involve novel shapes, and it is essential to achieve high-quality 3D part
segmentation with only a few number of annotations.
2D foundation models (FMs) with powerful generalization capacities have brought new possibilities
to part segmentation. Nevertheless, the modality gap between 2D images and 3D geometric shapes
poses a fundamental challenge for their direct deployment in 3D domains. A prevalent strategy [6, 7]
∗

Joint Corresponding Authors. Haiyong is the Project Lead.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

