VLA-OS: Structuring and Dissecting Planning
Representations and Paradigms in
Vision-Language-Action Models

Chongkai Gao1

Zixuan Liu1

Zhenghao Chi1

Yiwen Hou1

Yuxuan Zhang1

Yudi Lin1

Junshan Huang2
Zhirui Fang3

Xin Fei3
Zeyu Jiang4

Lin Shao1
1

National University of Singapore 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Tsinghua University 4 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Recent studies on Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have shifted from the
end-to-end action-generation paradigm toward a pipeline involving task planning
followed by action generation, demonstrating improved performance on various
complex, long-horizon manipulation tasks. However, existing approaches vary
significantly in terms of network architectures, planning paradigms, representations,
and training data sources, making it challenging for researchers to identify the
precise sources of performance gains and components to be further improved. To
systematically investigate the impacts of different planning paradigms and representations isolating from network architectures and training data, in this paper,
we introduce VLA-OS, a unified VLA architecture series capable of various task
planning paradigms, and design a comprehensive suite of controlled experiments
across diverse object categories (rigid and deformable), visual modalities (2D and
3D), environments (simulation and real-world), and end-effectors (grippers and
dexterous hands). Our results demonstrate that: 1) visually grounded planning
representations are generally better than language planning representations; 2)
the Hierarchical-VLA paradigm generally achieves superior or comparable performance than other paradigms on task performance, pretraining, generalization
ability, scalability, and continual learning ability, albeit at the cost of slower training
and inference speeds. Video results are in https://nus-lins-lab.github.io/vlaos/.

1

Introduction

Building intelligent and generalizable robots capable of perceiving, reasoning about, and interacting
with physical environments remains a persistent challenge in the robotics community [34, 23]. Recent
studies have increasingly emphasized the development of foundational models for robot manipulation
tasks by training large Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) on extensive datasets [8, 82, 43,
54, 2, 12, 7, 22]. Different from end-to-end foundation models in computer vision [58, 45, 40]
and natural language processing tasks [1, 30, 89], recent studies of VLAs have shifted toward a
new paradigm capable of performing task planning and policy learning either simultaneously or
sequentially [98, 95, 27, 72, 48, 5, 77, 82]. This shift arises from the inherent complexity of robotic
manipulation tasks, which naturally exhibit hierarchical structures involving both high-level task
planning and low-level physical interactions [9]. Compared to end-to-end VLAs that only generate
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

