Preference Distillation via
Value based Reinforcement Learning

Minchan Kwon1
1

Junwon Ko1

Kangil Kim2∗

Junmo Kim1∗

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST)

{kmc0207, kojunewon,junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr, kikim01@gist.ac.kr,

Abstract
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) is a powerful paradigm to align language
models with human preferences using pairwise comparisons. However, its binary
win-or-loss supervision often proves insufficient for training small models with
limited capacity. Prior works attempt to distill information from large teacher
models using behavior cloning or KL divergence. These methods often focus on
mimicking current behavior and overlook distilling reward modeling. To address
this issue, we propose Teacher Value-based Knowledge Distillation (TVKD), which
introduces an auxiliary reward from the value function of the teacher model to
provide a soft guide. This auxiliary reward is formulated to satisfy potential-based
reward shaping, ensuring that the global reward structure and optimal policy of
DPO are preserved. TVKD can be integrated into the standard DPO training
framework and does not require additional rollouts. Our experimental results show
that TVKD consistently improves performance across various benchmarks and
model sizes.

1

Introduction

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [24] is a powerful paradigm for aligning large language
models (LLMs) with human preferences. Unlike Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) [22], DPO enables efficient learning through pairwise comparisons, without requiring
additional rollouts and reward model training. However, since DPO supervision is provided only in
terms of binary win-or-lose preferences over entire sequences, it becomes difficult to evaluate how
good a given response is. This coarse-grained feedback offers limited insight into the magnitude
or quality of preference, making it challenging to assess fine-grained improvements or to interpret
alignment quality beyond simple pairwise comparison. In small language models (SLMs) which have
limited capacity and language understanding, this issue becomes more crucial [9, 16].
To address this issue, several methods have attempted to leverage the rich information from large
teacher models through diverse ways such as KL-divergence [9, 16] or online rollouts [30, 2].
However, most prior works focus on imitating the behavior of the teacher, without modeling its longterm reward structure. This issue has been widely discussed in the inverse RL [1, 33, 21] literature,
where it is known that mimicking behavior without reward modeling can lead to compounding errors
and poor generalization. Moreover, prior methods often disregard the potential conflict between
the reinforcement learning (RL) objective and teacher information, leading to misalignment with
the intended preference signal in datasets. For example, simply integrating KL-divergence with the
∗

Co-supervising authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

