Joint Modeling of fMRI and EEG Imaging Using
Ordinary Differential Equation-Based Hypergraph
Neural Networks
Yan Zhang, Yang Gao, Min Li∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Central South University
Changsha, Hunan 410083
limin@mail.csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Fusing multimodal brain imaging has been a hot topic since different modalities
of brain imaging can provide complementary information. However, due to the
size of simultaneous recorded fMRI-EEG dataset being limited and the substantial
discrepancy between hemodynamic responses of fMRI and neural oscillations
of EEG, the joint modeling of fMRI and EEG images is a rarely explored area
and has not yielded satisfactory results. Existing studies have also indicated
that the relationships between region of interest (ROI) are not one-to-one when
synchronizing fMRI and EEG. Current graph-based multimodal modeling methods
overlook those information. Based on this, we propose a hypergraph based fMRIEEG modeling framework for asynchronous fMRI-EEG data named FE-NET. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to jointly model asynchronous
EEG and fMRI data as Neural ODEs based hypergraph. Extensive experiments
have demonstrated that the proposed FE-NET outperforms many state-of-theart brain imaging modeling methods. Meanwhile, compared to simultaneously
recorded fMRI-EEG data, asynchronously acquired fMRI-EEG data is less costly,
which demonstrates the practical applicability of our method.

1

Introduction

A major goal in neuroimaging research is to develop predictive models aimed at analyzing the
association between comprehensive functional connectivity patterns across the brain and behavioral
traits, which can enhance the understanding of both normal brain function and dysfunction [1]. A
robust modeling method plays a significant role in assisting the diagnosis of neurological disorders,
predicting infant neurodevelopment, and assessing sleep quality [2; 3; 4]. Usually, researchers model
brain imaging in the form of graphs to accomplish this goal [5].
In recent years, modeling multimodal brain imaging has emerged as a focal point of research. fMRI
indirectly measures brain activity through the Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) signal,
while EEG directly records brain activity by measuring the electric fields generated by cortical
pyramidal neurons. EEG enables non-invasive observation of brain electrical activity and serves as a
complementary modality to fMRI:
The integration of fMRI with EEG signals offers a promising approach to bridging the gap between
hemodynamic responses and neural oscillations, providing insights into the origins of fMRI signals
and their large-scale patterns. However, deep learning-based joint modeling of asynchronously
recorded fMRI and EEG is a relatively underexplored area and has not yielded satisfactory results.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

