MoniTor: Exploiting Large Language Models
with Instruction for Online Video Anomaly Detection

Shengtian Yang* , Yue Feng* , Yingshi Liu, Jingrou Zhang, Jie Qin†
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education, China

Abstract
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to locate unusual activities or behaviors
within videos. Recently, offline VAD has garnered substantial research attention,
which has been invigorated by the progress in large language models (LLMs)
and vision-language models (VLMs), offering the potential for a more nuanced
understanding of anomalies. However, online VAD has seldom received attention due to real-time constraints and computational intensity. In this paper, we
introduce a novel Memory-based online scoring queue scheme for Training-free
VAD (MoniTor), to address the inherent complexities in online VAD. Specifically,
MoniTor applies a streaming input to VLMs, leveraging the capabilities of pretrained large-scale models. To capture temporal dependencies more effectively,
we incorporate a novel prediction mechanism inspired by Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks. This ensures the model can effectively model past states
and leverage previous predictions to identify anomalous behaviors. Thereby, it
better understands the current frame. Moreover, we design a scoring queue and an
anomaly prior to dynamically store recent scores and cover all anomalies in the
monitoring scenario, providing guidance for LLMs to distinguish between normal
and abnormal behaviors over time. We evaluate MoniTor on two large datasets
(i.e., UCF-Crime and XD-Violence) containing various surveillance and real-world
scenarios. The results demonstrate that MoniTor outperforms state-of-the-art methods and is competitive with weakly supervised methods without training. Code is
available at https://github.com/YsTvT/MoniTor.

1

Introduction

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to locate abnormal activities or behaviors in videos, which is
crucial for video understanding applications [16, 12, 10, 11]. However, existing VAD methods [1,
47, 41, 7] are mostly in an offline fashion, ignoring the demands for real-time monitoring and realworld applications, which also play an important role in many real-life scenarios, such as intelligent
surveillance [14, 15, 18, 37, 17], autonomous driving [4], etc.
Compared to offline VAD, anomaly detection can be further complicated in scenarios where data
arrive in a streaming/online manner, especially when it is required to identify anomalies as they
occur. The difficulties lie in, moreover, the inherent characteristics of online anomalies, because they
are discontinuous and occur infrequently in real scenarios, which results in a scarcity of extensive
and diverse anomaly data for training. Moreover, the high complexity of human behaviors (i.e.,
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

