Multi-Objective Coverage Bayesian Optimization
(MOCOBO)
Natalie Maus∗ Kyurae Kim
Yimeng Zeng
Haydn Thomas Jones
Fangping Wan
Marcelo Der Torossian Torres Cesar de la Fuente-Nunez Jacob R. Gardner
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Abstract
In multi-objective black-box optimization, the goal is typically to find solutions
that optimize a set of T black-box objective functions, f1 , . . . fT , simultaneously.
Traditional approaches often seek a single Pareto-optimal set that balances tradeoffs among all objectives. In contrast, we consider a problem setting that departs
from this paradigm: finding a small set of K < T solutions, that collectively
“cover” the T objectives. A set of solutions is defined as “covering” if, for each
objective f1 , . . . fT , there is at least one good solution. A motivating example for
this problem setting occurs in drug design. For example, we may have T pathogens
and aim to identify a set of K < T antibiotics such that at least one antibiotic can
be used to treat each pathogen. This problem, known as coverage optimization,
has yet to be tackled with the Bayesian optimization (BO) framework. To fill this
void, we develop Multi-Objective Coverage Bayesian Optimization (MOCOBO), a
BO algorithm for solving coverage optimization. Our approach is based on a new
acquisition function reminiscent of expected improvement in the vanilla BO setup.
We demonstrate the performance of our method on high-dimensional black-box
optimization tasks, including applications in peptide and molecular design. Results
show that the coverage of the K < T solutions found by MOCOBO matches or
nearly matches the coverage of T solutions obtained by optimizing each objective
individually. Furthermore, in in vitro experiments, the peptides found by MOCOBO
exhibited high potency against drug-resistant pathogens, further demonstrating the
potential of MOCOBO for drug discovery. All of our code is publicly available at the
following link: https://github.com/nataliemaus/mocobo.
20

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO; [1–3]) is a general
framework for sample-efficient optimization of
black-box functions. By using a probabilistic surrogate model, such as a Gaussian process (GP; [4]), Bayesian optimization balances
exploration and exploitation to identify highperforming solutions with a limited number of
function evaluations. BO has been successfully
applied in a wide range of domains, including
hyperparameter tuning [5, 6], A/B testing [7],
chemical engineering [8], drug discovery [9],
and more.
∗

Correspondence to: nmaus@seas.upenn.edu

Objective value

1

covers f1

10

covers f2, f3

0
−10
Pareto frontier
Cover set (Reward: -8)

−20
−30
−40

Pareto point (Reward: -32)
−8

−6

−4

−2

0

2

4

6

8

x

Figure 1: Traditional multi-objective optimization
for T objectives might select any point along the
Pareto frontier, but in some situations like this any
Pareto optimal point performs poorly on at least
one objective. In situations where multiple K <
T solutions are allowed (■), we can sometimes
optimize all objectives well. Note that this is a
simplified schematic meant to illustrate intuition.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

