CoUn: Empowering Machine Unlearning via
Contrastive Learning

Yasser H. Khalil

Mehdi Setayesh

Hongliang Li

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montreal, Canada
{yasser.khalil1, mehdi.setayesh1, hongliang.li2}@huawei.com

Abstract
Machine unlearning (MU) aims to remove the influence of specific “forget” data
from a trained model while preserving its knowledge of the remaining “retain” data.
Existing MU methods based on label manipulation or model weight perturbations
often achieve limited unlearning effectiveness. To address this, we introduce CoUn,
a novel MU framework inspired by the observation that a model retrained from
scratch using only retain data classifies forget data based on their semantic similarity to the retain data. CoUn emulates this behavior by adjusting learned data
representations through contrastive learning (CL) and supervised learning, applied
exclusively to retain data. Specifically, CoUn (1) leverages semantic similarity
between data samples to indirectly adjust forget representations using CL, and (2)
maintains retain representations within their respective clusters through supervised
learning. Extensive experiments across various datasets and model architectures
show that CoUn consistently outperforms state-of-the-art MU baselines in unlearning effectiveness. Additionally, integrating our CL module into existing baselines
empowers their unlearning effectiveness.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of machine learning (ML) has raised concerns regarding data privacy and
regulatory compliance, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [1, 2]. Machine
unlearning (MU) [3, 4, 5] addresses these concerns by removing the influence of specific training data
(i.e., forget data) from a trained model, termed the Original model, while preserving the knowledge
of the remaining data (i.e., retain data). Retraining the model from scratch on retain data is considered
exact unlearning [6, 7], termed the gold-standard Retrain model. While exact unlearning is effective,
it is computationally inefficient. Alternatively, approximate unlearning aims to efficiently achieve an
unlearned model that performs approximately the same as the Retrain model [8, 9, 10].
To develop an effective approximate unlearning algorithm, we first analyze how the Retrain
model classifies forget data. Figure 1 illustrates the representation space of two Retrain models: one trained without ‘truck’ class samples (i.e., class-wise forgetting) and another trained
without 10% randomly selected samples (i.e., random forgetting). Our analysis reveals that
the Retrain model classifies forget samples into clusters of retain samples that exhibit the highest semantic similarity to them. For instance, in class-wise forgetting, forget ‘truck’ samples are mostly misclassified as semantically similar clusters, like ‘automobile’ (69.32%), ‘airplane’ (13.47%), and ‘ship’ (12.60%), with no correct classifications due to the absence of a
‘truck’ cluster. In random forgetting, 97.42% of forget ‘truck’ samples are correctly classified
as ‘truck’ due to their semantic similarity with ‘truck’ samples in the retain data, while most
of the others are misclassified as ‘automobile’ (1.23%), ‘airplane’ (0.38%), and ‘ship’ (0.4%).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

