Integrating Drug Substructures and Longitudinal
Electronic Health Records for Personalized Drug
Recommendation
Wenjie Du1,2 , Xuqiang Li1,2 , Jinke Feng1,2 , Shuai Zhang1,2,4 , Zhang Wen3 , Yang Wang1,2,†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, China
3
Huazhong Agricultural University 4 Baidu, Inc
{jinkefeng, shuaizhang, xuqiangli}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
zhangwen@mail.hzau.edu.cn {duwenjie,angyan}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Drug recommendation systems aim to identify optimal drug combinations for
patient care, balancing therapeutic efficacy and safety. Advances in large-scale
longitudinal EHRs have enabled learning-based approaches that leverage patient
histories such as diagnoses, procedures, and previously prescribed drugs, to model
complex patient-drug relationships. Yet, many existing solutions overlook standard clinical practices that favor certain drugs for specific conditions and fail
to fully integrate the influence of molecular substructures on drug efficacy and
safety. In response, we propose SubRec, a unified framework that integrates representation learning across both patient and drug spaces. Specifically, SubRec
introduces a conditional information bottleneck to extract core drug substructures
most relevant to patient conditions, thereby enhancing interpretability and clinical
alignment. Meanwhile, an adaptive vector quantization mechanism is designed to
generate patient–drug interaction patterns into a condition-aware codebook which
reuses clinically meaningful patterns, reduces training overhead, and provides a
controllable latent space for recommendation. Crucially, the synergy between
condition-specific substructure learning and discrete patient prototypes allows
SubRec to make accurate and personalized drug recommendations. Experimental
results on the real-world MIMIC III and IV demonstrate our model’s advantages.
The source code is available at https://DrugRecommendation/.

1

Introduction

Drug recommendation is a pivotal task in healthcare, focused on identifying the optimal combination
of drugs to address a patient’s diagnosed conditions [26, 40, 8]. This task aligns conceptually with
sequential recommendation systems, where decisions are made iteratively across a patient’s series
of clinical visits. With the increasing availability of individual medical data, such as longitudinal
electronic health records (EHRs) [11, 18]—which capture patients’ historical visit sequences, including diagnoses, procedures, and prescribed medications—there is a rich foundation for developing
learning-based predictive models. In this context, drug recommendation emerges as a critical data
mining challenge. It leverages advanced machine learning techniques, particularly deep neural
networks, to analyze complex clinical event sequences. By integrating a patient’s current clinical
events with their historical records, these systems aim to generate personalized drug plans while
minimizing drug-drug interactions (DDIs) to satisfy safety principles [28, 7, 19].
† : corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

