Revisiting Frank-Wolfe for
Structured Nonconvex Optimization

Hoomaan Maskan∗

Yikun Hou∗

Suvrit Sra†

Alp Yurtsever∗

∗

†

Umeå University, Sweden
Technical University of Munich, Germany

Abstract
We introduce a new projection-free (Frank-Wolfe) method for optimizing structured
nonconvex functions that are expressed as a difference of two convex functions.
This problem class subsumes smooth nonconvex minimization, positioning our
method as a promising alternative to the classical Frank-Wolfe algorithm. DC
decompositions are not unique; by carefully selecting a decomposition, we can
better exploit the problem structure, improve computational efficiency, and adapt
to the underlying problem geometry to find better local solutions. We prove that
the proposed method achieves a first-order stationary point in O(1/ϵ2 ) iterations,
matching the complexity of the standard Frank-Wolfe algorithm for smooth nonconvex minimization in general. Specific decompositions can, for instance, yield a
gradient-efficient variant that requires only O(1/ϵ) calls to the gradient oracle by
reusing computed gradients over multiple iterations. Finally, we present numerical
experiments demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed method compared to
other projection-free algorithms.

1

Introduction

We study projection-free (Frank-Wolfe) algorithms for nonconvex optimization problems of the form:
min
x∈D

ϕ(x) := f (x) − g(x),

(1)

where D ⊆ Rd is a convex, compact set, and the objective function ϕ : D → R is the difference of
two convex functions f : D → R and g : D → R. We assume that f is Lf -smooth on D (i.e., its
gradient is Lf -Lipschitz continuous) while g may be nonsmooth.
At first glance, the difference-of-convex (DC) structure may seem like a restriction for nonconvex
Frank-Wolfe (FW) methods; but the opposite is true. FW is primarily designed for smooth objectives
(Frank & Wolfe, 1956; Jaggi, 2013). Since any smooth function can be expressed as a DC decomposition, our problem template encompasses the minimization of nonconvex smooth functions and
extends beyond.
The significance of problem (1) lies in its generality. DC functions form a vector space and constitute
a rich subclass of locally Lipschitz nonconvex functions, a class that has received significant attention (Zhang et al., 2020; Kong & Lewis, 2023; Davis et al., 2022). As a result, this problem class
has broad applications, including nonconvex quadratic problems (An & Tao, 1997, 1998), convexconcave programming (Yuille & Rangarajan, 2003; Shen et al., 2016), kernel selection (Argyriou
et al., 2006), bilevel programming (Hoai An et al., 2009), linear contextual optimization (Bennouna
et al., 2024), discrepancy estimation in domain adaptation (Awasthi et al., 2024a), determinantal point
processes (Mariet & Sra, 2015), and robustness of neural networks (Awasthi et al., 2024b). We refer
to (Le Thi & Pham Dinh, 2018) for a recent survey on the history, development, and applications of
DC programming.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

