Unveiling Chain of Step Reasoning for
Vision-Language Models with Fine-grained Rewards

Honghao Chen1,2,3∗ Xingzhou Lou1,2∗ Xiaokun Feng1,2∗ Kaiqi Huang1,2† Xinlong Wang3†
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Chain of thought reasoning has demonstrated remarkable success in large language
models, yet its adaptation to vision-language reasoning remains an open challenge
with unclear best practices. Existing attempts typically employ reasoning chains
at a coarse-grained level, which struggles to perform fine-grained structured reasoning and, more importantly, are difficult to evaluate the reward and quality of
intermediate reasoning. In this work, we delve into chain of step reasoning for
vision-language models, enabling assessing reasoning step quality accurately and
leading to effective reinforcement learning and inference-time scaling with finegrained rewards. We present a simple, effective, and fully transparent framework,
including the step-level reasoning data, process reward model (PRM), and reinforcement learning training. With the proposed approaches, our models set strong
baselines with consistent improvements on challenging vision-language benchmarks. More importantly, we conduct a thorough empirical analysis and ablation
study, unveiling the impact of each component and several intriguing properties
of inference-time scaling. We believe this paper serves as a baseline for visionlanguage models and offers insights into more complex multimodal reasoning. Our
dataset, PRM, and code at https://github.com/baaivision/CoS.

1

Introduction

The complex reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have recently garnered
widespread attention [57, 8, 47, 68, 1]. By generating a detailed chain of thought (CoT) process before
producing the final answer, LLMs enable effective test-time scaling and significantly enhancing the
reasoning and logical capabilities. The integration of CoT reasoning with large-scale reinforcement
learning [43] has further led to revolutionary advancements, exemplified by groundbreaking models
such as OpenAI-o1 [17] and DeepSeek-R1 [12]. Inspired by the success of NLP, many studies focus
on exploring complex reasoning methods in vision-language models (VLMs), achieving various
advances [66, 58, 10, 55, 34, 38, 29]. Compared to LLMs, the presence of visual information in
VLMs introduces greater complexity and plays a more critical role, emphasizing the necessity of
leveraging visual cues for precise step-by-step reasoning and problem-solving.
Despite the advances, enabling VLMs to perform human-level reasoning remains a key challenge [61].
A fundamental difference is that humans typically engage in systematic and structured thinking [48],
whereas the CoT outputs of current VLMs are constrained to coarse-grained reasoning, making it
difficult to execute systematic and structured inference [58]. Specifically, current VLMs typically
output a lengthy thought without a unified structure or clear step-by-step progression. This form
∗
†

Equal contribution. Work done during Honghao’s internship at BAAI.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

