Convergence of Clipped SGD on Convex
(L0, L1)-Smooth Functions
Ofir Gaash∗

Kfir Yehuda Levy†

Yair Carmon∗

Abstract
We study stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with gradient clipping on convex
functions under a generalized smoothness assumption called (L0 , L1 )-smoothness.
Using gradient clipping, we establish a high probability convergence rate that
matches the SGD rate in the L smooth case up to polylogarithmic factors and
additive terms. We also propose a variation of adaptive SGD with gradient clipping,
which achieves the same guarantee. We perform empirical experiments to examine
our theory and algorithmic choices.

1

Introduction

Gradient clipping is a common method for stabilizing neural network training. Despite its wide use,
little thought is given to the choice of the clipping threshold, with many works fixing it at 1 without
attempting to tune it [3, 5, 34, 35, 2, 20, 21]. In pursuit of a theory-driven threshold choice, recent
research tries to better understand the benefits of gradient clipping.
Experiments suggest that clipping is effective in situations where small changes in input can lead
to significant variations in gradient norms [44, 43]. This observation has led Zhang et al. [44] to
formally define this behavior as the following “relaxed” smoothness property.
Definition 1. A twice-differentiable function f : Rd → R is (L0 , L1 )-smooth if for every x ∈ Rd it
holds that ∥∇2 f (x)∥ ≤ L0 + L1 ∥∇f (x)∥.
In words, (L0 , L1 )-smoothness allows the Hessian norm to increase linearly in the gradient norm.
This is opposed to the traditional smoothness property, which says that the Hessian norm is bounded
by a constant, coinciding with the new definition for L1 = 0. Building on this definition, Zhang
et al. [44] show instances where clipped SGD outperforms standard SGD. Specifically, they denote
M = sup{∥∇f (x)∥ | f (x) < f (x0 )}, and show that the complexity of SGD with a fixed stepsize
is larger than the complexity of SGD with gradient clipping by a factor of L1 M (assuming both
algorithms are initialized at x0 ). This factor can be very large: in particular, it may be exponential in
L1 R0 , where R0 is the initial distance from the optimum (see Appendix G).
The connection between (L0 , L1 )-smoothness and gradient clipping has led researchers to attempt to
characterize the complexity of (L0 , L1 )-smooth optimization, mainly in terms of the dependence on
L1 . The non-convex setting is well understood: the state-of-the-art rate of gradient norm convergence
comprises of the rate for L0 -smooth functions and additional low-order terms that depend on L1 .
This holds for both clipped GD [38] and clipped SGD [37] (see Section 2 for details).
Motivation for studying the convex setting. Despite being originally motivated by the behavior
of (non-convex) neural networks, generalized smoothness is also compelling to study in the convex
setting. There are several instances where convex analysis closely aligns with empirical behavior;
among them are AdaGrad-based algorithms and the momentum technique, in which theory preceded
∗
†

Tel Aviv University, ofirgaash@mail.tau.ac.il and ycarmon@gmail.com.
Technion, kfiryehud@gmail.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

