An Improved Algorithm for
Adversarial Linear Contextual Bandits via Reduction
Tim van Erven∗

Jack Mayo†

Julia Olkhovskaya‡

Chen-Yu Wei§

Abstract
We present an efficient algorithm for linear contextual bandits with adversarial losses and stochastic action sets. Our approach reduces this setting to
misspecification-robust adversarial linear bandits with fixed action sets. Without knowledge of the context√distribution
or access to a context simulator, the
p
2
3
e
algorithm achieves O(min{d T , d T log K}) regret and runs in poly(d, C, T )
time, where d is the feature dimension, C is an upper bound on the number of
linear constraints defining the action set in each round, K is an upper bound on
the number of actions in each round, and T is number of rounds. This √
resolves the
open question by Liu et al. (2023) on whether one can obtain poly(d) T regret
in polynomial time independent of the number of actions. For the important class
of combinatorial bandits with adversarial losses and stochastic action sets where
the action sets can be described by a polynomial
number of linear constraints, our
√
algorithm is the first to achieve poly(d) T regret in polynomial time, while no
prior algorithm achieves even o(T ) regret in polynomial time to our knowledge.
√
e
When a simulator is available, the regret bound can be improved to O(d
L⋆ ),
⋆
where L is the cumulative loss of the best policy.

1

Introduction

We consider the following linear contextual bandit problem: At each round t = 1, . . . , T , the
environment generates a hidden loss vector θt ∈ Rd and an action set At ⊂ Rd . The learner observes
At , selects an action at ∈ At , and incurs loss a⊤
t θt . The goal is to compete with the best fixed
policy—defined as a mapping from an action set to an element in it. This setting generalizes the
classical linear bandit model by allowing the action sets At to vary stochastically over time. Crucially,
each At encodes the context based on which the learner makes decisions. In this work, At is called
context or action set interchangeably.
This framework is applicable in settings such as healthcare and recommendation systems, where
decisions must be made conditional on context. Prior work on contextual bandits has studied a variety
of assumptions on how losses and contexts are generated. While much of the literature assumes
i.i.d. losses and arbitrarily chosen action sets (for which a well-known algorithm is LinUCB (Li
et al., 2010)), we focus on the complementary regime: the action sets are drawn i.i.d. from a fixed
distribution D, while the losses may be chosen adversarially.
A first computationally efficient algorithm for this setting was proposed by Neu and Olkhovskaya
(2020) under the assumption that the context (i.e., action set) distribution is known. Since an action
d
set is a subset of Rd (i.e., it lies in the space 2R ), the distribution over action sets is in the space
∗

University of Amsterdam. Email: tim@timvanerven.nl
University of Amsterdam; Kurtos.ai. Email: jackjamesmayo@gmail.com
‡
Delft University of Technology. Email: julia.olkhovskaya@gmail.com
§
University of Virginia. Email: chenyu.wei@virginia.edu
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

