Bridging Sign and Spoken Languages: Pseudo Gloss
Generation for Sign Language Translation

Jianyuan Guo1∗ Peike Li2
1

Trevor Cohn2

City University of Hong Kong

2

Google

Abstract
Sign Language Translation (SLT) aims to map sign language videos to spoken
language text. A common approach relies on gloss annotations as an intermediate
representation, decomposing SLT into two sub-tasks: video-to-gloss recognition
and gloss-to-text translation. While effective, this paradigm depends on expertannotated gloss labels, which are costly and rarely available in existing datasets,
limiting its scalability. To address this challenge, we propose a gloss-free pseudo
gloss generation framework that eliminates the need for human-annotated glosses
while preserving the structured intermediate representation. Specifically, we prompt
a Large Language Model (LLM) with a few example text-gloss pairs using incontext learning to produce draft sign glosses from spoken language text. To
enhance the correspondence between LLM-generated pseudo glosses and the
sign sequences in video, we correct the ordering in the pseudo glosses for better
alignment via a weakly supervised learning process. This reordering facilitates the
incorporation of auxiliary alignment objectives, and allows for the use of efficient
supervision via a Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss. We train our
SLT model—consisting of a vision encoder and a translator—through a three-stage
pipeline, which progressively narrows the modality gap between sign language and
spoken language. Despite its simplicity, our approach outperforms previous stateof-the-art gloss-free frameworks on two SLT benchmarks and achieves competitive
results compared to gloss-based methods.

1

Introduction

Sign languages are the primary means of communication for the deaf and hard-of-hearing communities [47], functioning as independent linguistic systems with unique lexicons, grammars and
syntax [4]. Unlike spoken languages, they convey meaning using a combination of manual gestures
such as hand shapes, movements, and positioning, and non-manual cues, including facial expression,
mouthing and eyebrow movements [33]. Despite their crucial role in communication, sign languages
often lack standardized written forms (so-called glossing, which we discuss shortly), creating significant challenges for both accessibility and automatic translation. Sign Language Translation (SLT)
has emerged as a key research area aimed at converting sign language videos into textual representation [32, 9, 8, 57, 10]. However, for many reasons, ranging from the complexity of the input (video)
to their linguistic complexity, SLT remains a challenging problem within the field of computer vision
and natural language processing.
The task of SLT is typically framed as a sequence-to-sequence problem, taking video input of a signer,
which is processed by vision encoder, and then generating a text output in written language (e.g.,
English) using a translation decoder, such as an LSTM or Transformer. These approaches can be
broadly categorized into gloss-based and gloss-free methods, based on whether they incorporate gloss
∗

Work done during an internship at Google. Correspondence to jianyguo@cityu.edu.hk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

