Blockwise Flow Matching: Improving Flow Matching
Models For Efficient High-Quality Generation

Dogyun Park
Korea University
gg933@korea.ac.kr

Taehoon Lee
KAIST
dlxogns183@kaist.ac.kr

Minseok Joo
Korea University
wlgkcjf87@korea.ac.kr

Hyunwoo J. Kim∗
KAIST
hyunwoojkim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, Flow Matching models have pushed the boundaries of high-fidelity
data generation across a wide range of domains. It typically employs a single
large network to learn the entire generative trajectory from noise to data. Despite
their effectiveness, this design struggles to capture distinct signal characteristics
across timesteps simultaneously and incurs substantial inference costs due to
the iterative evaluation of the entire model. To address these limitations, we
propose Blockwise Flow Matching (BFM), a novel framework that partitions the
generative trajectory into multiple temporal segments, each modeled by smaller
but specialized velocity blocks. This blockwise design enables each block to
specialize effectively in its designated interval, improving inference efficiency and
sample quality. To further enhance generation fidelity, we introduce a Semantic
Feature Guidance module that explicitly conditions velocity blocks on semantically
rich features aligned with pretrained representations. Additionally, we propose
a lightweight Feature Residual Approximation strategy that preserves semantic
quality while significantly reducing inference cost. Extensive experiments on
ImageNet 256×256 demonstrate that BFM establishes a substantially improved
Pareto frontier over existing Flow Matching methods, achieving 2.1× to 4.9×
accelerations in inference complexity at comparable generation performance. Code
is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/BFM.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative modeling have been driven by the success of diffusion and flowmatching frameworks [1–4], which learn to transform noise into high-quality data through a sequence
of denoising steps. Powered by advanced transformer architectures [5, 6], these approaches have
expanded the frontiers of high-fidelity data generation across many fields, including images [7–10],
3D data [11–14] and videos [15–19]. In particular, the Flow Matching (FM) framework [3, 20–22]
has emerged as a simple yet effective training paradigm, adopted by several state-of-the-art generative
models [23, 24].
A common design choice in FM models is to use a single large neural network to learn the entire
velocity field, from noise to data. While parameter-efficient, this monolithic design faces two key
limitations. First, the generative trajectory from noise to data inherently involves distinct signal
characteristics across time [4]: our frequency-domain analysis (Figure 3) shows that early timesteps
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

