Generalizable, real-time neural decoding with hybrid
state-space models

Avery Hee-Woon Ryoo1,2,∗,B Nanda H Krishna1,2,∗,B Ximeng Mao1,2,∗,B
Mehdi Azabou3 Eva L Dyer4 Matthew G Perich1,2,† Guillaume Lajoie1,2,5,†,B
1
Mila – Quebec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal 3 Columbia University
4
University of Pennsylvania 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair ∗ Co-first authors † Co-senior authors
B

{hee-woon.ryoo,nanda.harishankar-krishna,ximeng.mao,guillaume.lajoie}@mila.quebec
https://possm-brain.github.io

Abstract
Real-time decoding of neural activity is central to neuroscience and neurotechnology applications, from closed-loop experiments to brain-computer interfaces,
where models are subject to strict latency constraints. Traditional methods, including simple recurrent neural networks, are fast and lightweight but often struggle
to generalize to unseen data. In contrast, recent Transformer-based approaches
leverage large-scale pretraining for strong generalization performance, but typically
have much larger computational requirements and are not always suitable for lowresource or real-time settings. To address these shortcomings, we present POSSM, a
novel hybrid architecture that combines individual spike tokenization via a crossattention module with a recurrent state-space model (SSM) backbone to enable (1)
fast and causal online prediction on neural activity and (2) efficient generalization
to new sessions, individuals, and tasks through multi-dataset pretraining. We evaluate POSSM’s decoding performance and inference speed on intracortical decoding
of monkey motor tasks, and show that it extends to clinical applications, namely
handwriting and speech decoding in human subjects. Notably, we demonstrate that
pretraining on monkey motor-cortical recordings improves decoding performance
on the human handwriting task, highlighting the exciting potential for cross-species
transfer. In all of these tasks, we find that POSSM achieves decoding accuracy
comparable to state-of-the-art Transformers, at a fraction of the inference cost (up
to 9× faster on GPU). These results suggest that hybrid SSMs are a promising
approach to bridging the gap between accuracy, inference speed, and generalization
when training neural decoders for real-time, closed-loop applications.

1

Introduction

Neural decoding – the process of mapping neural activity to behavioural or cognitive variables – is
a core component of modern neuroscience and neurotechnology. As neural recording techniques
evolve and datasets grow in size, there is increasing interest in building generalist decoders that scale
and flexibly adapt across subjects and experiments. Several important downstream applications –
including closed-loop neuroscience experiments and brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) – require finegrained, low-latency decoding for real-time control [1]. Advances in these technologies would enable
next-generation clinical interventions in motor decoding [2], speech prostheses [3], and closed-loop
neuromodulation [4, 5]. Building towards these applications will require neural decoders that meet
three requirements: (1) robust and accurate predictions, (2) causal, low-latency inference that is
viable in an online setting, and (3) flexible generalization to new subjects, tasks, and experimental
settings. Although recent developments in machine learning (ML) have enabled significant strides in
each of these axes, building a neural decoder that achieves all three remains an open challenge.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

