Theoretical Beneﬁt and Limitation of Diffusion
Language Model

Guhao Feng1∗
Yihan Geng2∗
Jian Guan3
3
1,4
Wei Wu
Liwei Wang
Di He1†
1
State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Ant Group
4
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
{fenguhao,gengyihan}@stu.pku.edu.cn
{jianguanthu,wuwei19850318}@gmail.com
{wanglw,dihe}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion language models have emerged as a new approach for text generation. By enabling the parallel sampling of multiple tokens in each diffusion step,
they appear to offer a more efﬁcient alternative to auto-regressive models. However, our observations show that current open-sourced diffusion language models
require more sampling steps to achieve comparable accuracy on representative
tasks–resulting in even higher inference costs than their auto-regressive counterparts. To investigate whether this is an inherent limitation, we conduct a rigorous
theoretical analysis of a widely adopted variant: the Masked Diffusion Model
(MDM). Surprisingly, our analysis reveals that the conclusion is highly sensitive
to the choice of evaluation metric. Under mild conditions, we prove that when
the target is near-optimal perplexity, MDMs can achieve this goal in a constant
number of sampling steps, independent of sequence length. This result demonstrates that efﬁciency can, in principle, be attained without compromising generation quality. However, when targeting low sequence error rate–which is important
for assessing the “correctness" of a generated sequence, such as a reasoning chain–
we show that in the worst case, the required sampling steps must scale linearly
with sequence length, thereby eliminating the efﬁciency advantage. Our analysis establishes the ﬁrst theoretical foundation for understanding the comparative
strengths and limitations of MDMs, offering practical guidance on when to favor
MDMs over auto-regressive models and vice versa.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b) have emerged as a powerful paradigm in generative modeling, establishing state-of-the-art performance in image synthesis (Karras et al., 2022;
Song et al., 2021a). Their extension to discrete domains has opened new possibilities for generating
sequences, such as natural language (Campbell et al., 2022; Dieleman et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2023; Lou et al., 2024; Campbell et al., 2024; Lovelace et al., 2024) and biological sequences (Rastogi et al., 2022; Vignac et al., 2022; Sun & Yang, 2023; Avdeyev et al., 2023). Among various
discrete diffusion architectures, masked diffusion models (MDMs), which generate sequences by
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

