MIP against Agent: Malicious Image Patches
Hijacking Multimodal OS Agents

Lukas Aichberger 1,2 Alasdair Paren 2 Guohao Li 2 Philip Torr 2 Yarin Gal 2 Adel Bibi 2
1

Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
University of Oxford, United Kingdom

2

Abstract
Recent advances in operating system (OS) agents have enabled vision-language
models (VLMs) to directly control a user’s computer. Unlike conventional VLMs
that passively output text, OS agents autonomously perform computer-based tasks
in response to a single user prompt. OS agents do so by capturing, parsing, and
analysing screenshots and executing low-level actions via application programming
interfaces (APIs), such as mouse clicks and keyboard inputs. This direct interaction
with the OS significantly raises the stakes, as failures or manipulations can have
immediate and tangible consequences. In this work, we uncover a novel attack
vector against these OS agents: Malicious Image Patches (MIPs), adversarially
perturbed screen regions that, when captured by an OS agent, induce it to perform
harmful actions by exploiting specific APIs. For instance, a MIP can be embedded
in a desktop wallpaper or shared on social media to cause an OS agent to exfiltrate
sensitive user data. We show that MIPs generalise across user prompts and screen
configurations, and that they can hijack multiple OS agents even during the execution of benign instructions. These findings expose critical security vulnerabilities in
OS agents that have to be carefully addressed before their widespread deployment.
Let’s craft an image that tricks an
OS agent into sending me sensitive
data when captured on social media!

1

Let‘s use an OS agent to summarise
the latest content on social media!

2

OS Agent

3

OS Agent

4

The screen shows ...

5

```python
malicious program
```<|eot_id|>

Figure 1: Illustrating an attack with Malicious Image Patches (MIPs). (1) An adversary (left)
utilises an OS agent to craft a MIP that triggers malicious behaviour when captured. (2) The adversary
uploads the MIP to a social media platform. (3) A user (right) uses an OS agent to perform benign
tasks. The agent takes screenshots for navigation, thereby capturing the adversary’s MIP. (4) Upon
processing the MIP, the agent deviates from the benign task and outputs a malicious program instead.
(5) The malicious program triggers a series of API calls that exfiltrate sensitive data to the adversary.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

