On the Entropy Calibration of Language Models

Steven Cao
Stanford University
shcao@stanford.edu

Gregory Valiant
Stanford University
valiant@stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of entropy calibration, which asks whether a language
model’s entropy over generations matches its log loss on human text. Past work
found that models are miscalibrated, with entropy per step increasing as generations
grow longer, due to error accumulation. To calibrate the model and improve
text quality, it has become standard practice to truncate the distribution, but this
approach reduces output diversity, which we would like to avoid. Therefore, in
this paper, we ask: does miscalibration improve automatically with scale, and if
not, is it theoretically possible to calibrate without tradeoffs? To build intuition,
we first study a simplified theoretical setting to characterize the scaling behavior
of miscalibration with respect to dataset size. We find that the rate of scaling
depends on the power law exponent of the data distribution — in particular, for a
power law exponent close to 1, the scaling exponent is close to 0, meaning that
miscalibration improves very slowly with scale. Next, we measure miscalibration
empirically in language models ranging from 0.5B to 70B parameters. We find that
the observed scaling behavior is similar to what is predicted theoretically: our fitted
scaling exponents for text are close to 0, meaning that larger models accumulate
error at a similar rate as smaller ones. This scaling (or, lack thereof) provides
one explanation for why we sample from larger models with similar amounts of
truncation as smaller models, even though the larger models are of higher quality.
However, truncation is not a satisfying solution because it comes at the cost of
increased log loss. In theory, is it even possible to reduce entropy while preserving
log loss? We prove that it is possible, if we assume access to a black box which
can fit models to predict the future entropy of text.

1

Introduction

We study entropy calibration, which asks whether a language model’s entropy over generations
matches its log loss on human text. This definition is a natural notion of calibration for generative
tasks, and is more challenging than calibration for classification tasks because the output space is
exponentially large. Braverman et al. (2020) were the first to study entropy calibration in language
models, and they found that models are miscalibrated: entropy per step for model generations
increases with the length of the document, in contrast with log loss on human text which is roughly
flat over the length of the document (Genzel & Charniak, 2002; Verma et al., 2023). Entropy
calibration can be thought of as a quantitative formalization of the well-known “error accumulation”
or “teacher forcing” problem: entropy rises when the model generates erroneous tokens which are
fed back into the context, derailing the generation (Williams & Zipser, 1989; Ranzato et al., 2016;
Basu et al., 2021; Hewitt et al., 2022, also see Appendix E). Therefore, we study entropy calibration
to gain fundamental insights into improving generation quality.
To correct error accumulation and calibrate the model, it has become standard practice to truncate the
next token distribution (Fan et al., 2018; Holtzman et al., 2020; Hewitt et al., 2022), suppressing low
https://github.com/stevenxcao/entropy-calibration
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

