Task-Optimized Convolutional Recurrent Networks
Align with Tactile Processing in the Rodent Brain
Trinity Chung*,1 , Yuchen Shen*,2 , Nathan C. L. Kong4 , and Aran Nayebi2, 3, 1
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University; Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University; Pittsburgh, PA 15213
3
Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University; Pittsburgh, PA 15213
4
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PA 19104
*
Equal contribution.
{trinityc, yuchens3, anayebi}@cs.cmu.edu; nclkong@sas.upenn.edu

2

Abstract
Tactile sensing remains far less understood in neuroscience and less effective in
artificial systems compared to more mature modalities such as vision and language. We bridge these gaps by introducing an Encoder-Attender-Decoder (EAD)
framework to systematically explore the space of task-optimized temporal neural
networks trained on realistic tactile input sequences from a customized rodent
whisker-array simulator. We identify convolutional recurrent neural networks
(ConvRNNs) as superior encoders to purely feedforward and state-space architectures for tactile categorization. Crucially, these ConvRNN-encoder-based EAD
models achieve neural representations closely matching rodent somatosensory
cortex, saturating the explainable neural variability and revealing a clear linear
relationship between supervised categorization performance and neural alignment.
Furthermore, contrastive self-supervised ConvRNN-encoder-based EADs, trained
with tactile-specific augmentations, match supervised neural fits, serving as an
ethologically-relevant, label-free proxy.
For neuroscience, our findings highlight nonlinear recurrent processing as important
for general-purpose tactile representations in somatosensory cortex, providing
the first quantitative characterization of the underlying inductive biases in this
system. For embodied AI, our results emphasize the importance of recurrent EAD
architectures to handle realistic tactile inputs, along with tailored self-supervised
learning methods for achieving robust tactile perception with the same type of
sensors animals use to sense in unstructured environments.

1

Introduction

Tactile perception plays an essential role in the manipulation and interpretation of complex environments through active sensing [Lederman and Klatzky, 2009]. Animals effectively leverage
tactile sensors, such as whiskers, to precisely navigate, forage, and identify objects even in noisy
and unstructured conditions [Grant, 2025]; specifically, contact whiskers deliver critical sensory
input for navigation, foraging, and hunting in low-light environments [Ahl, 1986], while water-flow
whiskers enable seals to discriminate prey movements from general water currents in similar conditions [Dehnhardt et al., 2001], and specialized insect hairs respond to wind stimuli, providing
information essential for flight stability and agility [Sterbing-D’Angelo et al., 2011].
Rodents are a common model organism for studying tactile perception in the brain due to the fine
experimental control they offer and their ability to discriminate object location, shape, and texture
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

