Leaving No OOD Instance Behind: Instance-Level
OOD Fine-Tuning for Anomaly Segmentation

Yuxuan Zhang1 , Zhenbo Shi1,2∗ , Han Ye1 , Shuchang Wang1 , Zhidong Yu1,2 ,
Shaowei Wang4 , Wei Yang1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Hefei National Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain, Guangzhou University

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) fine-tuning has emerged as a promising approach for
anomaly segmentation. Current OOD fine-tuning strategies typically employ
global-level objectives, aiming to guide segmentation models to accurately predict
a large number of anomaly pixels. However, these strategies often perform poorly
on small anomalies. To address this issue, we propose an instance-level OOD
fine-tuning framework, dubbed LNOIB (Leaving No OOD Instance Behind). We
start by theoretically analyzing why global-level objectives fail to segment small
anomalies. Building on this analysis, we introduce a simple yet effective instancelevel objective. Moreover, we propose a feature separation objective to explicitly
constrain the representations of anomalies, which are prone to be smoothed by
their in-distribution (ID) surroundings. LNOIB integrates these objectives to
enhance the segmentation of small anomalies and serves as a paradigm adaptable to
existing OOD fine-tuning strategies, without introducing additional inference cost.
Experimental results show that integrating LNOIB into various OOD fine-tuning
strategies yields significant improvements, particularly in component-level results,
highlighting its strength in comprehensive anomaly segmentation.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable success in autonomous driving. However, traditional
segmentation approaches adhere to a closed-set training taxonomy [52, 44, 55]. When deployed in
real-world scenarios, these segmentation networks struggle to predict instances of previously unseen
categories (known as OOD instances or anomalies), inevitably leading to potential risks.
To identify OOD regions, great efforts have been made in anomaly segmentation (AS) [21, 48, 31, 62,
57, 35]. One promising solution is OOD fine-tuning [4, 47, 41], which uses mixed-content images
(containing ID and OOD regions) to enhance the generalization of segmentation models to previously
unseen instances. Current OOD fine-tuning strategies typically use global-level objectives, aiming
to accurately predict as many anomaly pixels as possible, rather than segmenting all anomalies.
As a result, these objectives lead to the neglect of small OOD instances. However, mispredicting
small anomalies (e.g., a small cow in Figure 1) can pose significant safety risks. Thus we argue that
detecting small anomalies is also critical for ensuring the safety of segmentation networks.
In this paper, we propose a novel OOD fine-tuning framework called LNOIB to ensure a comprehensive detection of all OOD instances by the segmentation model. We start by theoretically analyzing
∗

Zhenbo Shi and Wei Yang are corresponding authors. E-mail: {zbshi,qubit}@ustc.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

