Conformal Prediction for Ensembles:
Improving Efficiency via Score-Based Aggregation

Eduardo Ochoa Rivera∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
eochoa@umich.edu

Yash Patel∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
yppatel@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
Distribution-free uncertainty estimation for ensemble methods is increasingly desirable due to the widening deployment of multi-modal black-box predictive models.
Conformal prediction is one approach that avoids making strong distributional
assumptions. Methods for conformal aggregation have been proposed for ensembled prediction, where the prediction regions of individual models are merged to
retain coverage guarantees while minimizing conservatism. Merging the prediction
regions directly, however, can miss out on opportunities to further reduce conservatism by exploiting structures present in the conformal scores. We, therefore,
propose a novel framework that extends the standard scalar formulation of a score
function to a multivariate score that produces more efficient prediction regions. We
then demonstrate that such a framework can be efficiently leveraged in both classification and predict-then-optimize regression settings downstream and empirically
show the advantage over alternate conformal aggregation methods.

1

Introduction

Ensemble methods are an oft-used class of statistical modeling techniques due to their ability to
reduce variance or improve predictive accuracy [1, 2, 3]. Such methods are increasingly being coupled
with complex, black-box models, such as in multi-modal language models [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Couplings of
this sort are seeing ever-widening deployment in safety-critical settings, such as medicine [9, 10, 11]
and robotics [12, 13, 14].
Increasing interest is, therefore, now being placed on quantifying uncertainty for such models
[15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Towards this end, methods of uncertainty quantification have arisen, such as deep
ensembles and committee estimation [20, 21, 22]. Such methods, however, sacrifice generality with
the imposition of distributional assumptions, motivating the need for distribution-free uncertainty
quantification for ensemble methods.
One method for performing distribution-free uncertainty quantification is conformal prediction, which
provides a principled framework for producing distribution-free prediction regions with marginal
frequentist coverage guarantees [23, 24]. By using conformal prediction on a user-defined score
function, prediction regions attain marginal coverage guarantees. While calibration is guaranteed
from this procedure, predictive efficiency, i.e., the size of the resulting prediction regions, can be
large for poorly chosen score functions.
As a result, methods have arisen to perform conformal model aggregation, which both provide
uncertainty estimates of the ensembled predictions and do so in ways as to minimize the prediction
region size [25, 26, 27, 28, 29]. While such approaches succeed in reducing the prediction region
∗

Denotes alphabetic ordering indicating equal contributions.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

