BlurGuard: A Simple Approach for Robustifying
Image Protection Against AI-Powered Editing

Jinsu Kim1∗ Yunhun Nam1∗ Minseon Kim2 Sangpil Kim1 Jongheon Jeong1
1
Korea University 2 Microsoft Research Montréal
∗
{tonmmy222, yh0326}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image models have increased the exposure of powerful image editing techniques as a tool, raising concerns about their potential
for malicious use. An emerging line of research to address such threats focuses
on implanting (“protective”) adversarial noise into images before their public release, so future attempts to edit them using text-to-image models can be impeded.
However, subsequent works have shown that these adversarial noises are often
easily “reversed,” e.g., with techniques as simple as JPEG compression, casting
doubt on the practicality of the approach. In this paper, we argue that adversarial noise for image protection should not only be imperceptible, as has been a
primary focus of prior work, but also irreversible, viz., it should be difficult to
detect as noise provided that the original image is hidden. We propose a surprisingly simple method to enhance the robustness of image protection methods
against noise reversal techniques. Specifically, it applies an adaptive per-region
Gaussian blur on the noise to adjust the overall frequency spectrum. Through extensive experiments, we show that our method consistently improves the per-sample
worst-case protection performance of existing methods against a wide range of
reversal techniques on diverse image editing scenarios, while also reducing quality degradation due to noise in terms of perceptual metrics. Code is available at
https://github.com/jsu-kim/BlurGuard.

1

Introduction

Generative AI has been revolutionizing computer vision with its remarkable capabilities in visual
synthesis across complex domains, including images [4, 37, 67], 3D models [16, 52, 70], and
videos [8, 69]. Text-to-image models [23, 67, 75], powered by large-scale diffusion-based generative
models [33, 73, 85], are one of the representative examples of current generative AI, given the
significant interest they have garnered within the research community. For example, these models
have facilitated diverse application research, e.g., personalizing the models into specific artistic styles
[26, 74], inpainting or editing an image based on textual prompts [55, 58], and even following detailed
instructions [7], to name a few. Publicly available text-to-image models, such as Stable Diffusion
(SD) [23, 67], have further expanded the accessibility of these techniques to broader audiences.
Despite advancements, the broader accessibility of text-to-image models has also raised serious
concerns about their potential for misuse. Specifically, natural-looking manipulation of an image
can produce harmful or deceptive content, resulting in fake news, violations of copyright, publicity
or even portrait rights. For instance, current models can easily replicate an artist’s style without
permission or infringe on portrait rights by manipulating images of any victims. Such malicious
editing is particularly concerning as the quality of image generation approaches a level that is nearly
indistinguishable from reality; this “realism” of generative AI increases the risks of misinformation,
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

