MemSim: A Bayesian Simulator for Evaluating
Memory of LLM-based Personal Assistants

Zeyu Zhang1†∗♠♣ , Quanyu Dai2∗ , Luyu Chen1♠♣ , Zeren Jiang3 , Rui Li1♠♣ , Jieming Zhu2 ,
Xu Chen1§♠♣ , Yi Xie3 , Zhenhua Dong2 , Ji-Rong Wen1♠♣
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Huawei Technologies Ltd.
{zeyuzhang,xu.chen}@ruc.edu.cn, daiquanyu@huawei.com

Abstract
LLM-based agents have been widely applied as personal assistants, capable of
memorizing information from user messages and responding to personal queries.
However, there still lacks an objective and automatic evaluation on their memory capability, largely due to the challenges in constructing reliable questions
and answers (QAs) according to user messages. In this paper, we propose MemSim, a Bayesian simulator designed to automatically construct reliable QAs from
generated user messages, simultaneously keeping their diversity and scalability.
Specifically, we introduce the Bayesian Relation Network (BRNet) and a causal
generation mechanism to mitigate the impact of LLM hallucinations on factual
information, facilitating the automatic creation of an evaluation dataset. Based on
MemSim, we generate a dataset in the daily-life scenario, named MemDaily, and
conduct extensive experiments to assess the effectiveness of our approach. We also
provide a benchmark for evaluating different memory mechanisms in LLM-based
agents with the MemDaily dataset. To benefit the research community, we have
released our project at https://github.com/nuster1128/MemSim.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language model (LLM) based agents have been extensively deployed across
various fields [1–6]. One of their most significant applications is serving as personal assistants [7, 8],
where they engage in long-term interactions with users to address a wide range of issues [9, 10]. For
LLM-based personal assistants, memory is one of the most significant capability [11]. To perform
personal tasks effectively, these agents must be capable of storing factual information from previous
messages and recalling relevant details to generate appropriate responses. For example, a user Alice
might tell the agent, “I will watch a movie at City Cinema this Friday in Hall 3, Row 2, Seat 9." When
Friday arrives, she might ask the agent, “Where is my movie seat?" Then, the agent should recall the
relevant information (i.e., the seat number) to generate an appropriate response to Alice.
Previous research has proposed methods for constructing the memory of LLM-based agents [12,
13, 9, 14, 15]. However, there remains a lack of objective and automatic methods to evaluate how
well personal assistants can memorize and utilize factual information from previous messages. One
conventional solution is to collect messages from real-world users, and manually annotate answers to
human-designed questions based on these messages. However, it requires substantial human labor
†

Work under the internship in Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
Co-first authors.
§
Corresponding author.
♠
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance.
♣
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE.
∗

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

