MAP Estimation with Denoisers:
Convergence Rates and Guarantees

Scott Pesme
Giacomo Meanti
Michael Arbel
Julien Mairal
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Denoiser models have become powerful tools for inverse problems, enabling
the use of pretrained networks to approximate the score of a smoothed prior
distribution. These models are often used in heuristic iterative schemes aimed at
solving Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) optimisation problems, where the proximal
operator of the negative log-prior plays a central role. In practice, this operator is
intractable, and practitioners plug in a pretrained denoiser as a surrogate—despite
the lack of general theoretical justification for this substitution. In this work, we
show that a simple algorithm, closely related to several used in practice, provably
converges to the proximal operator under a log-concavity assumption on the prior p.
We show that this algorithm can be interpreted as a gradient descent on smoothed
proximal objectives. Our analysis thus provides a theoretical foundation for a class
of empirically successful but previously heuristic methods.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems are ubiquitous in scientific and engineering fields involving image acquisition. In
many such problems, the object of interest is not directly observed but instead undergoes a degradation
process—such as blurring, downsampling, or noise corruption. The goal is to reverse this degradation
and recover the original image.
A classical approach formulates this task as an optimisation problem balancing two terms: a data
fidelity term, modelling the observation process, and a regularisation term, encoding prior knowledge
about the solution. Historically, regularisers such as total variation or wavelet sparsity were handcrafted [Mallat, 1999]. While effective to some extent, recent approaches often rely on data-driven
priors, using pretrained denoisers and generative models. In particular diffusion and flow-based
models offer powerful ways to learn the true image distribution p from large datasets.
This opens the door to principled formulations like Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) estimation:
arg min λf (x) − ln p(x),
x∈Rd

(MAP)

which corresponds to the posterior mode under the likelihood p(y | x) ∝ exp(−λf (x)) and prior
p(x). In practice, however, this optimisation problem is extremely challenging to solve: evaluating
the score −∇ ln p(x) is often intractable, the term − ln p(x) can be severely ill-conditioned, and
the data fidelity term f (x) is frequently not strongly convex. A wide range of methods have been
proposed to address these problems, and many of them perform remarkably well empirically. Yet,
these methods do not come with the guarantee of actually minimising the MAP objective, making
their success difficult to interpret.
A natural class of algorithms for addressing the MAP optimisation problem are proximal splitting
methods [see, e.g., Beck and Teboulle, 2009, Figueiredo et al., 2007, Combettes and Pesquet, 2011],
which are particularly effective when dealing with objectives that combine smooth and non-smooth
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

