ShapeEmbed: a self-supervised learning framework
for 2D contour quantification
Anna Foix Romero 1 , Craig Russell 1 , Alexander Krull *2 , and Virginie Uhlmann *1,3
1

European Bioinformatics Institute, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Cambridge, UK,
{afoix, ctr26, uhlmann}@ebi.ac.uk
2
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK,
a.f.f.krull@bham.ac.uk
3
Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, CH,
virginie.uhlmann@mls.uzh.ch
*

Corresponding authors

Abstract
The shape of objects is an important source of visual information in a wide range
of applications. One of the core challenges of shape quantification is to ensure
that the extracted measurements remain invariant to transformations that preserve
an object’s intrinsic geometry, such as changing its size, orientation, and position
in the image. In this work, we introduce ShapeEmbed, a self-supervised representation learning framework designed to encode the contour of objects in 2D
images, represented as a Euclidean distance matrix, into a shape descriptor that is
invariant to translation, scaling, rotation, reflection, and point indexing. Our approach overcomes the limitations of traditional shape descriptors while improving
upon existing state-of-the-art autoencoder-based approaches. We demonstrate that
the descriptors learned by our framework outperform their competitors in shape
classification tasks on natural and biological images. We envision our approach to
be of particular relevance to biological imaging applications.

1

Introduction

The outline of objects in 2D images carries essential information about their shape. In natural
images, humans are often able to recognize objects purely based on their silhouette without relying
on texture or color [Wagemans et al., 2008]. Shape information is unaltered by many geometric
operations such as similarity transformations [Dryden and Mardia, 2016] and is also unaffected by
irrelevant and distracting imaging variables, such as lighting conditions or imaging setups. This
is particularly relevant in biological imaging, where the shapes of living systems extracted from
microscopy images serve as phenotypic fingerprints to reveal cell identity, cell states, and response
to chemical treatments across a wide range of imaging scales, settings, and modalities [Paluch and
Heisenberg, 2009, Rangamani et al., 2013, Grosser et al., 2021, Zinchenko et al., 2023]. All of
these aspects make shape a highly desirable abstraction from pixel-intensity based images, enabling
visualization, outlier detection, and unsupervised discovery of underlying patterns [Loo et al., 2007,
Sailem et al., 2015].
The standard way of describing objects in 2D images is with binary segmentation masks, where
pixels inside of an object’s outline are set to 1 and pixels outside to 0. However, while such a
representation is readily produced by segmentation algorithms and allows for abstracting from lighting
and imaging conditions, it is not invariant to transformations such as translation, rotation, reflection,
and scaling. As such, the same object appearing twice in an image at a different location or orientation
will yield segmentation masks that can only be recognized as equivalent after tedious processing.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

