Diffusion-Classifier Synergy: Reward-Aligned
Learning via Mutual Boosting Loop for FSCIL

Ruitao Wu1,2
1

Yifan Zhao1∗ Guangyao Chen3

Jia Li1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE & QRI, Beihang University
2
Zhongguancun Academy 3 Peking University
{ruitaowu, zhaoyf}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) challenges models to sequentially
learn new classes from minimal examples without forgetting prior knowledge, a
task complicated by the stability-plasticity dilemma and data scarcity. Current
FSCIL methods often struggle with generalization due to their reliance on limited datasets. While diffusion models offer a path for data augmentation, their
direct application can lead to semantic misalignment or ineffective guidance. This
paper introduces Diffusion-Classifier Synergy (DCS), a novel framework that establishes a mutual boosting loop between diffusion model and FSCIL classifier.
DCS utilizes a reward-aligned learning strategy, where a dynamic, multi-faceted
reward function derived from the classifier’s state directs the diffusion model. This
reward system operates at two levels: the feature level ensures semantic coherence and diversity using prototype-anchored maximum mean discrepancy and
dimension-wise variance matching, while the logits level promotes exploratory
image generation and enhances inter-class discriminability through confidence
recalibration and cross-session confusion-aware mechanisms. This co-evolutionary
process, where generated images refine the classifier and an improved classifier
state yields better reward signals, demonstrably achieves state-of-the-art performance on FSCIL benchmarks, significantly enhancing both knowledge retention
and new class learning.

1

Introduction

Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) [65, 74, 58, 81, 31, 78] endeavors to equip models with the
ability to learn new classes sequentially without forgetting previously acquired knowledge, a critical
capability for real-world, dynamic environments. Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) [53,
52, 77, 50, 76] intensifies this challenge by further constraining that new classes are introduced with
only a handful of training examples. This exacerbates the notorious stability-plasticity dilemma [34]
and introduces severe unreliable empirical risk minimization [61] for novel classes due to data scarcity.
The core of these issues lies the model’s restricted access to past data and the limited information
available for new concepts [32].
A common thread among mainstream FSCIL approaches is their reliance on the limited knowledge encapsulated within the initially provided datasets. This inherent limitation hinders their
ability to significantly enhance both intra-task generalization (robustness within a learned class) and
inter-task generalization (adaptability and discrimination across incrementally learned classes).
The advent of powerful generative models, especially diffusion models [10, 16, 44, 48], offers a promising avenue to overcome these data limitations by synthesizing additional training samples. By generating images for old classes, they can facilitate knowledge replay with∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

