Direct Numerical Layout Generation for 3D Indoor
Scene Synthesis via Spatial Reasoning

1

Xingjian Ran1,2 Yixuan Li3 Linning Xu3 Mulin Yu2 Bo Dai1∗
The University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://directlayout.github.io/

LayoutGPT

I-Design

Holodeck

Ours

A foosball table is at the center of a game room, with two gaming chairs positioned on its long sides. A large TV sits on a wooden stand against the wall,
behind the foosball table. To the left of the TV is a silver mini fridge. On the other wall, a tall bookshelf is filled with board games. Two posters are
displayed on the walls, one next to the bookshelf and one next to the TV.

Figure 1: Our method synthesizes 3D indoor scenes from text descriptions via direct numerical
layout generation, demonstrating strong performance in both instruction compliance and physical
plausibility. In contrast, existing methods often suffer from issues related to inappropriate placement
and size, as highlighted by the red circles. Furthermore, they struggle to identify all the entities in
fine-grained user instruction resulting in object omission, indicated by the yellow circles. All methods
share the same assets generated by 3D object generation method to ensure a fair comparison.

Abstract
Realistic 3D indoor scene synthesis is vital for embodied AI and digital content
creation. It can be naturally divided into two subtasks: object generation and layout
generation. While recent generative models have significantly advanced object-level
quality and controllability, layout generation remains challenging due to limited
datasets. Existing methods either overfit to these datasets or rely on predefined
constraints to optimize numerical layout that sacrifice flexibility. As a result, they
fail to generate scenes that are both open-vocabulary and aligned with fine-grained
user instructions. We introduce DirectLayout, a framework that directly generates
numerical 3D layouts from text descriptions using generalizable spatial reasoning of
large language models (LLMs). DirectLayout decomposes the generation into three
stages: producing a Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) layout, lifting it into 3D space, and
refining object placements. To enable explicit spatial reasoning and help the model
grasp basic principles of object placement, we employ Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
Activation based on the 3D-Front dataset. Additionally, we design CoT-Grounded
Generative Layout Reward to enhance generalization and spatial planning. During
inference, DirectLayout addresses asset-layout mismatches via Iterative AssetLayout Alignment through in-context learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that DirectLayout achieves impressive semantic consistency, generalization and
physical plausibility.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

