Unlocker: Disentangle the Deadlock of Learning from
Label-noisy and Long-tailed Data

Shu Chen1 , Hongjun Xu1 , Ruichi Zhang1 , Mengke Li2 , Yonggang Zhang3
Yang Lu1 ∗, Bo Han4 , Yiu-ming Cheung4 , Hanzi Wang1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Hong Kong Baptist University
{chenshu, xuhongjun}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, luyang@xmu.edu.cn, zhangyg@ust.hk

Abstract
In real world, the observed label distribution of a dataset often mismatches its true
distribution due to noisy labels. In this situation, noisy labels learning (NLL) methods directly integrated with long-tailed learning (LTL) methods tend to fail due to
a dilemma: NLL methods normally rely on unbiased model predictions to recover
true distribution by selecting and correcting noisy labels; while LTL methods like
logit adjustment depends on true distributions to adjust biased predictions, leading
to a deadlock of mutual dependency defined in this paper. To address this, we
propose Unlocker, a bilevel optimization framework that integrates NLL methods
and LTL methods to iteratively disentangle this deadlock. The inner optimization
leverages NLL to train the model, incorporating LTL methods to fairly select and
correct noisy labels. The outer optimization adaptively determines an adjustment
strength, mitigating model bias from over- or under-adjustment. We also theoretically prove that this bilevel optimization problem is convergent by transferring
the outer optimization target to an equivalent problem with a closed-form solution.
Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in alleviating model bias and handling long-tailed noisy
label data. Code is available at https://github.com/ChenShu248/Unlocker.

1

Introduction

Long-tailed noisy label learning (LTNLL) focuses on addressing the coexistence of long-tailed
distribution and noisy labels in datasets. Existing LTNLL methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] are commonly
under the potential assumption that the observed long-tailed distribution based on the noisy labels is
consistent with the true distribution of the clean labels. However, empirical observations from real
world reveal that noisy labels can alter the original true distribution, leading to a deviation between
the observed distribution and the true underlying distribution of the dataset [7, 8, 9]. Due to the
diverse real-world noise patterns, the deviations of the distribution are various, typically including
three situations: consistent, relieve, and aggravate, as illustrated in Figure 1a.
When addressing this issue of distribution deviation, neither noisy label learning (NLL) nor long tail
learning (LTL) can be effective due to a deadlock dilemma of mutaul dependency. A mainstream in
NLL highly rely on the model prediction to select and correct noisy labels to recover clean labels
[10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Yet in long-tailed scenarios, model predictions get biased towards head classes,
∗

Corresponding Author: Yang Lu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

