MOF-BFN: Metal-Organic Frameworks
Structure Prediction via Bayesian Flow Networks

Rui Jiao1,2,† Hanlin Wu2,† Wenbing Huang3,4,∗ Yuxuan Song2 Yawen Ouyang2
Yu Rong5 Tingyang Xu5 Pengju Wang5 Hao Zhou2,∗
Wei-Ying Ma2 Jingjing Liu2 Yang Liu1,2,∗

1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
5
Alibaba DAMO Lab

Abstract
Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) have attracted considerable attention due
to their unique properties including high surface area and tunable porosity, and
promising applications in catalysis, gas storage, and drug delivery. Structure
prediction for MOFs is a challenging task, as these frameworks are intrinsically
periodic and hierarchically organized, where the entire structure is assembled
from building blocks like metal nodes and organic linkers. To address this, we
introduce MOF-BFN, a novel generative model for MOF structure prediction
based on Bayesian Flow Networks (BFNs). Given the local geometry of building
blocks, MOF-BFN jointly predicts the lattice parameters, as well as the positions
and orientations of all building blocks within the unit cell. In particular, the
positions are modelled in the fractional coordinate system to naturally incorporate
the periodicity. Meanwhile, the orientations are modeled as unit quaternions
sampled from learned Bingham distributions via the proposed Bingham BFN,
enabling effective orientation generation on the 4D unit hypersphere. Experimental
results demonstrate that MOF-BFN achieves state-of-the-art performance across
multiple tasks, including structure prediction, geometric property evaluation, and de
novo generation, offering a promising tool for designing complex MOF materials.

1

Introduction

Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) have attracted significant interest in recent years due to their
unique structural properties and wide range of potential applications [1, 12]. These materials are
characterized by high surface areas, tunable porosities, and exceptional versatility, which make them
ideal candidates for use in catalysis [9], gas storage [16], drug delivery [14], and other fields [18, 3].
Structurally, MOFs are composed of metal ions or clusters coordinated with organic linkers, forming
periodic structures that can be tailored for specific functions [21]. This tunability has led to their
∗
Wenbing Huang, Hao Zhou and Yang Liu are corresponding authors. † indicates equal contribution.
This work is done when Rui Jiao works as an intern in Alibaba Group.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

