From Sequence to Structure: Uncovering Substructure
Reasoning in Transformers

Xinnan Dai1†∗, Kai Yang2† , Jay Revolinsky1 , Kai Guo1∗ ,
Aoran Wang3 , Bohang Zhang2 , Jiliang Tang1
1
Michigan State University, 2 Peking University, 3 University of Luxembourg
{daixinna, revolins, guokai1, tangjili}@msu.edu, yangkai@alumni.pku.edu.cn,
zhangbohang@pku.edu.cn, ralf.wong@outlook.com

Abstract
Recent studies suggest that large language models (LLMs) possess the capability
to solve graph reasoning tasks. Notably, even when graph structures are embedded
within textual descriptions, LLMs can still effectively answer related questions.
This raises a fundamental question: How can a decoder-only Transformer architecture understand underlying graph structures? To address this, we start
with the substructure extraction task, interpreting the inner mechanisms inside the
transformers and analyzing the impact of the input queries. Specifically, through
both empirical results and theoretical analysis, we present Induced Substructure
Filtration (ISF), a perspective that captures the substructure identification in the
multi-layer transformers. We further validate the ISF process in LLMs, revealing
consistent internal dynamics across layers. Building on these insights, we explore
the broader capabilities of Transformers in handling diverse graph types. Specifically, we introduce the concept of thinking in substructures to efficiently extract
complex composite patterns, and demonstrate that decoder-only Transformers can
successfully extract substructures from attributed graphs, such as molecular graphs.
Together, our findings offer a new insight on how sequence-based Transformers
perform the substructure extraction task over graph data.

1

Introduction

It is evident from recent studies that large language models (LLMs) are capable of understanding
structured data [31, 22, 15]. For example, when graph structures are presented in textual sequence,
LLMs can identify node connections [10, 21], detect graph patterns [3, 7], and compare common
subgraphs across a given set [20, 7]. However, transformers, which serve as the backbone of LLMs,
are inherently designed for sequential textual data, which does not naturally capture graph structures.
This gap raises a fundamental question: How can a sequence-based decoder-only transformer
comprehend structured data like graphs?
To answer this question, existing research focuses mainly on basic graph reasoning tasks to build the
concept of the mechanism by which transformers understand graph structures [17, 29]. The shortest
path is one of the basic tasks [21, 6, 1]. Based on the shortest path task, SLN [5] suggests that a form
of spectral navigation implicitly emerges within Transformer layers, enabling global coordination
across nodes. Meanwhile, Abulhair et al. [18] and ALPINE [25] argue that Transformers learn to find
paths by composing and merging multiple candidate paths based on the provided edge list. However,
these studies are limited to linear paths, while real-world graphs often contain more complex, nonlinear substructures such as cycles, trees, and other motifs. As a result, existing understandings drawn
∗

corresponding: {guokai1, daixinna}@msu.edu, † equal contribution, code is available at
https://github.com/DDigimon/From_Sequence_to_Structure
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

