LoRA vs Full Fine-tuning: An Illusion of Equivalence

Reece Shuttleworth

Jacob Andreas Antonio Torralba Pratyusha Sharma
MIT CSAIL
{rshuttle, jda, torralba, pratyusha}@mit.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning is a crucial paradigm for adapting pre-trained large language models
to downstream tasks. Recently, methods like Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) have
been shown to effectively fine-tune LLMs with an extreme reduction in trainable
parameters. But, are their learned solutions really equivalent? We study how
LoRA and full-finetuning change pre-trained models by analyzing the model’s
weight matrices through the lens of their spectral properties. We find that LoRA and
full fine-tuning yield weight matrices whose singular value decompositions exhibit
very different structure: weight matrices trained with LoRA have new, high-ranking
singular vectors, which we call intruder dimensions, while those trained with full
fine-tuning do not. Further, we extend the finding that LoRA forgets less than full
fine-tuning and find its forgetting is vastly localized to the intruder dimension –
by causally intervening on the intruder dimensions by changing their associated
singular values post-fine-tuning, we show that they cause forgetting. Moreover,
scaling them down significantly improves modeling of the pre-training distribution
with a minimal drop in downstream task performance. Given this, we should expect
accumulating intruder dimensions to be harmful and lead to more forgetting. This
will be amplified during continual learning because of sequentially fine-tuning,
and we show that LoRA models do accumulate intruder dimensions here tend to
perform worse in this setting, emphasizing the practicality of our findings.

1

Introduction

Adapting large, pre-trained models to downstream tasks via fine-tuning is a computationand data-efficient way to create domain-specific
models for a variety of tasks. The simplest approach is to fine-tune all parameters of the pretrained model on downstream task data [Devlin
et al., 2019, Ouyang et al., 2022]. However, as
pre-trained models grow larger, full fine-tuning
becomes increasingly challenging and expensive. Recently, parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods, especially low-rank adaptation
(LoRA; Hu et al., 2021), have been shown to
enable fine-tuning with only a fraction of the
trainable parameters. While LoRA can match
full fine-tuning performance, are the solutions learned by the two methods similar?

Figure 1: LoRA and full fine-tuning update the parameter space differently. Similarity matricies of preand post-fine-tuning singular vectors for LLaMA2-7B
that characterize the spectral differences introduced during fine-tuning. Full fine-tuning retains most of the
pre-training structure, while LoRA has a diagonal shift.
Color shows cosine similarity.

While full fine-tuning treats every parameter as
trainable, LoRA treats the learned update to a weight matrix as the product of two low-rank matrices
[Hu et al., 2021]. While this parameterization is empirically effective, a principled explanation of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

