Learning with Calibration: Exploring
Test-Time Computing of Spatio-Temporal Forecasting

Wei Chen, Yuxuan Liang∗
INTR & DSA Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
onedeanxxx@gmail.com, yuxliang@outlook.com

Abstract
Spatio-temporal forecasting is crucial in many domains, such as transportation,
meteorology, and energy. However, real-world scenarios frequently present challenges such as signal anomalies, noise, and distributional shifts. Existing solutions
primarily enhance robustness by modifying network architectures or training procedures. Nevertheless, these approaches are computationally intensive and resourcedemanding, especially for large-scale applications. In this paper, we explore a novel
test-time computing paradigm, namely learning with calibration, ST-TTC, for
spatio-temporal forecasting. Through learning with calibration, we aim to capture
periodic structural biases arising from non-stationarity during the testing phase and
perform real-time bias correction on predictions to improve accuracy. Specifically,
we first introduce a spectral-domain calibrator with phase-amplitude modulation
to mitigate periodic shift and then propose a flash updating mechanism with a
streaming memory queue for efficient test-time computation. ST-TTC effectively
bypasses complex training-stage techniques, offering an efficient and generalizable
paradigm. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness, universality, flexibility and efficiency of our proposed method. Our code
repository is available at https://github.com/Onedean/ST-TTC.

1

Introduction

Spatio-temporal forecasting (STF) aims to predict the future state of dynamic systems from historical spatio-temporal observations and underpins many real-world applications, such as traffic flow
forecasting [24], air quality forecasting [51], and energy consumption forecasting [76]. Although
spatio-temporal neural networks [32, 33, 61], which couple spatial neural operators with temporal
neural operators, have achieved remarkable progress on these tasks, their deployment in practical
environments remains fraught with challenges. These observations, typically collected by sensors, are
frequently corrupted by noise, outliers (e.g., spikes or dropouts due to hardware failure) [85], and more
commonly, non-stationary distribution shifts arising from sensor aging and seasonal patterns [74].
To enhance generalization and performance, prior work has focused primarily on out-of-distribution
(OOD) learning for ST data during the training phase: designing architectures that resist perturbations [31, 49, 68, 84], augmenting training data with noise or adversarial examples [3, 46, 97],
and introducing specialized loss functions or regularizers [43, 98] to counteract distribution drift.
However, these methods share fundamental limitations: they assume that the training data sufficiently
captures all future target domain invariance, a premise that is rarely valid in real-world settings.
Concurrently, an emerging paradigm of continual fine-tuning [10, 11, 35, 38, 69, 70, 71] has become
popular in spatio-temporal learning by continuously tuning the model to adapt to dynamic changes.
Though promising, it still divides the target domain into multiple periods of training and testing and
relies on period-specific training data to optimize model, thereby failing in data-scarse scenarios.
∗

Y. Liang is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

