InstructRestore: Region-Customized Image
Restoration with Human Instructions
Shuaizheng Liu1,2 , Jianqi Ma1 , Lingchen Sun1,2 , Xiangtao Kong1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2,†
1
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute
shuaizhengliu21@gmail.com, {jianqi.ma, ling-chen.sun, xiangtao.kong}@connect.polyu.hk
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Despite the significant progress in diffusion prior-based image restoration for realworld scenarios, most existing methods apply uniform processing to the entire
image, lacking the capability to perform region-customized image restoration according to user preferences. In this work, we propose a new framework, namely
InstructRestore, to perform region-adjustable image restoration following human
instructions. To achieve this, we first develop a data generation engine to produce training triplets, each consisting of a high-quality image, the target region
description, and the corresponding region mask. With this engine and careful data
screening, we construct a comprehensive dataset comprising 536,945 triplets to support the training and evaluation of this task. We then examine how to integrate the
low-quality image features under the ControlNet architecture to adjust the degree
of image details enhancement. Consequently, we develop a ControlNet-like model
to identify the target region and allocate different integration scales to the target
and surrounding regions, enabling region-customized image restoration that aligns
with user instructions. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed InstructRestore approach enables effective human-instructed image restoration, including
restoration with controllable bokeh blur effects and region-specific restoration with
continuous intensity control. Our work advances the investigation of interactive image restoration and enhancement techniques. Data, code, and models are publicly
available at https://github.com/shuaizhengliu/InstructRestore.git.

1

Introduction

Image restoration (IR) is a fundamental problem in computer vision to recover high-quality images
from degraded inputs. Early works have achieved significant progress on individual IR tasks based
on specific simulated degradation assumptions, including denoising [59, 60], deblurring [28, 36], and
super-resolution [9, 24]. While demonstrating strong performance within their target domains, these
approaches exhibit inherent limitations when generalizing to real-world scenarios characterized by
unknown and composite degradations. This has motivated the emerging paradigm of real-world image
restoration, which aims to handle complex degradation in practical imaging scenarios, particularly for
challenging cases like real-world super-resolution [5, 43]. To address this challenge, recent advances
have developed sophisticated degradation models to better approximate real-world conditions [57, 39].
Building upon these advanced degradation models, and with the advent of pretrained text-to-image
(T2I) generation models such as Stable Diffusion (SD) [33], which can more effectively model the
complex distribution of natural images, researchers have started to explore the use of powerful SD
priors to produce realistic IR outcomes [38, 25, 50, 46, 52, 45, 35, 41, 2, 8, 51].
† Corresponding author. This work is supported by the PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovative Research Center.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

