Learning Robust Vision-Language Models from
Natural Latent Spaces

Zhangyun Wang∗
School of Computer Science
University of Auckland
zwna875@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Ni Ding
School of Computer Science
University of Auckland
ni.ding@auckland.ac.nz

Aniket Mahanti
School of Computer Science
University of Auckland
a.mahanti@auckland.ac.nz

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) exhibit significant vulnerability to
imperceptible adversarial perturbations. Current advanced defense strategies typically employ adversarial prompt tuning to improve the adversarial robustness
of VLMs, which struggle to simultaneously maintain generalization across both
natural and adversarial examples under different benchmarks and downstream tasks.
We propose a collaborative adversarial prompt tuning (CoAPT) approach from
pre-trained VLMs to target robust VLMs. Inspired by the image mask modeling,
we adopt an improved real-time total variation algorithm to suppress and eliminate
high-frequency details from images while preserving edge structures, thereby disrupting the adversarial perturbation space. Subsequently, guided by the high-level
image and text representations in the latent space of the pre-trained VLMs, the
corrupted natural features are restored while inheriting the superior generalization
capability. Experiments on four benchmarks demonstrate that CoAPT achieves
an excellent trade-off among natural generalization, adversarial robustness, and
task-specific adaptation compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP[1] and ALBEF[2] have shown significant potential
for application in multiple industry ecosystems in recent years. However, recent studies [3, 4]
have revealed that VLMs exhibit a range of concerning vulnerabilities in real-world deployment.
When confronted with distributional biases, adversarial samples, or semantic ambiguities, they often
display reasoning biases that deviate from human cognition. As an increasing number of downstream
applications built upon VLMs as foundational models emerge, the chain reactions triggered by the
vulnerability of VLMs pose serious threats to the security and reliability of multimodal downstream
tasks. In this paper, we holistically investigate the vulnerabilities of VLMs and their adversarial
robustness, with a particular focus on the typical base model CLIP.
Current adversarial robustness strategies for VLMs primarily include model fine-tuning and adversarial prompt tuning. During adversarial training, model fine-tuning [5, 6] relearns the entire set of
model parameters to adapt to adversarial examples. This process disrupts the natural data distribution
captured by the pre-trained model, leading to a contradiction between robustness and generalization.
∗

Corresponding author: Zhangyun Wang (zwna875@aucklanduni.ac.nz)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

