Scaling Laws for Optimal Data Mixtures
Mustafa Shukor

Louis Bethune

Sorbonne University

Dan Busbridge

Apple

Enrico Fini

David Grangier

Apple

Apple

Alaaeldin El-Nouby

Apple

Pierre Ablin

Apple

Apple

Abstract
Large foundation models are typically trained on data from multiple domains, with
the data mixture–the proportion of each domain used–playing a critical role in
model performance. The standard approach to selecting this mixture relies on trial
and error, which becomes impractical for large-scale pretraining. We propose a
systematic method to determine the optimal data mixture for any target domain
using scaling laws. Our approach accurately predicts the loss of a model of size
N trained with D tokens and a specific domain weight vector h. We validate the
universality of these scaling laws by demonstrating their predictive power in three
distinct and large-scale settings: large language model (LLM), native multimodal
model (NMM), and large vision models (LVM) pretraining. We further show that
these scaling laws can extrapolate to new data mixtures and across scales: their
parameters can be accurately estimated using a few small-scale training runs, and
used to estimate the performance at larger scales and unseen domain weights. The
scaling laws allow to derive the optimal domain weights for any target domain
under a given training budget (N ,D), providing a principled alternative to costly
trial-and-error methods.
Model sizes:

275M

3.2

2.3B

8B

h∗Add
h∗Joint

3.4

Loss

3.4

616M

3.6

Training runs
Evaluation runs
Scaling law prediction

3.6

Loss

106M

Extrapolation

3.2
3.0

3.0

2.8

2.8
10

20

10

21

FLOPs

1020

FLOPs

1021

Figure 1: Scaling Laws for Optimal Data Mixtures. Left: We derive scaling laws that predict
the loss of a model as a function of model size N, number of training tokens D, and the domain
weights used to train the model (represented by the color of each point). The scaling law is fitted with
small-scale runs with different domain weights, and used to predict accurately the loss of large-scale
models trained with new, unseen domain weights. Right: We find the data mixture scaling law based
on small-scale experiments (e.g., below 1B parameters) and use it to predict the optimal data mixture
at larger scales (e.g., 8B parameters). Both our additive (eq. (4)) and joint (eq. (5)) laws lead to
similar performance, and better than other mixtures (in the gray area). FLOPs are computed as 6ND.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

