Who Reasons in the Large Language Models?

Jie Shao
Jianxin Wu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
shaoj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the impressive performance of large language models (LLMs), the process of endowing them with new capabilities—such as mathematical reasoning—
remains largely empirical and opaque. A critical open question is whether reasoning
abilities stem from the entire model, specific modules, or are merely artifacts of
overfitting. In this work, we hypothesize that the reasoning capabilities in welltrained LLMs are primarily attributed to the output projection module (o_proj)
in the Transformer’s multi-head self-attention (MHSA) module. To support this
hypothesis, we introduce Stethoscope for Networks (SfN), a suite of diagnostic
tools designed to probe and analyze the internal behaviors of LLMs. Using SfN,
we provide both circumstantial and empirical evidence suggesting that o_proj
plays a central role in enabling reasoning, whereas other modules contribute more
to fluent dialogue. These findings offer a new perspective on LLM interpretability
and open avenues for more targeted training strategies, potentially enabling more
efficient and specialized LLMs.

1

Introduction

Although large language models (LLMs) [29, 6, 42, 5] have exhibited great success and potential
in various aspects, developing new capabilities for LLMs [54, 17, 38, 14] is still a trial and error
experimentation process in most cases. For example, one of the most exciting milestones is LLMs
that can reason [18, 13, 40], e.g., solving complicated mathematical problems using a reasoning
sequence that is agreeable by human experts.
This success, however, is still in the black-box style. Currently, there are two primary approaches
to inspiring reasoning capabilities in LLMs. For the most advanced models [13, 52], reinforcement
learning method (for example, PPO [37], DPO [30], or GRPO [38]) is commonly adopted to enhance
the model’s ability to solve complex mathematical or programming problems in a step-by-step
manner [49]. A more efficient alternative involves supervised fine-tuning (SFT): by providing the
backbone LLM with well-prepared, diverse, and step-by-step reasoning traces—often generated
through handcrafted examples or existing reasoning models [55, 25, 13, 52]—the model surprisingly
acquires reasoning abilities after training. However, despite the practical success of this method,
the underlying mechanism remains largely unexplained. It is still unclear why or how this ability
emerges. Several potential explanations may account for this phenomenon:
Case 1 Is it the LLM in its entirety (i.e., the union of all its weights) that leads to this capability,
such that this miracle is not explainable?
Case 2 Or, is there certain module(s) in it that should be praised for this success, such that we can
advance our understanding of LLMs?
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

