PolyJuice Makes It Real: Black-Box, Universal Red
Teaming for Synthetic Image Detectors
Sepehr Dehdashtian1∗†
1

Mashrur M. Morshed1∗ Jacob H. Seidman2
Vishnu Naresh Boddeti1
Michigan State University

{sepehr,morshedm,vishnu}@msu.edu

2

Gaurav Bharaj2

Reality Defender

{jacob,gaurav}@realitydefender.ai

Abstract
Synthetic image detectors (SIDs) are a key defense against the risks posed by
the growing realism of images from text-to-image (T2I) models. Red teaming
improves SID’s effectiveness by identifying and exploiting their failure modes via
misclassified synthetic images. However, existing red-teaming solutions (i) require
white-box access to SIDs, which is infeasible for proprietary state-of-the-art detectors, and (ii) generate image-specific attacks through expensive online optimization.
To address these limitations, we propose PolyJuice, the first black-box, imageagnostic red-teaming method for SIDs, based on an observed distribution shift in
the T2I latent space between samples correctly and incorrectly classified by the
SID. PolyJuice generates attacks by (i) identifying the direction of this shift through
a lightweight offline process that only requires black-box access to the SID, and (ii)
exploiting this direction by universally steering all generated images towards the
SID’s failure modes. PolyJuice-steered T2I models are significantly more effective
at deceiving SIDs (up to 84%) compared to their unsteered counterparts. We also
show that the steering directions can be estimated efficiently at lower resolutions
and transferred to higher resolutions using simple interpolation, reducing computational overhead. Finally, tuning SID models on PolyJuice-augmented datasets
notably enhances the performance of the detectors (up to 30%).
“A child next
to a cake
with balloons."

T2I

ŶSID
Predictions
by SID

PolyJuice

Synthetic
Image
Detector

Real

Ŷ

Fake
Real

,
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) PolyJuice steers text-to-image (T2I) models to generate images that deceive a synthetic image
detection (SID) model. (b) There exists a clearly observable shift between the distribution of the samples
predicted as real versus those identified as fake, in the latent space of T2I models.

1

Introduction

Importance of synthetic image detection (SID) and red teaming. Creating artificial content
has never been easier. In recent years, rapid advances in text-to-image (T2I) generative models
*

Equal contribution. †This work was done during an internship at Reality Defender.
Project webpage: https://sepehrdehdashtian.github.io/Papers/PolyJuice

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

