Improving Retrieval-Augmented Generation through
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Yiqun Chen1 Lingyong Yan2 Weiwei Sun3 Xinyu Ma2 Yi Zhang2
Shuaiqiang Wang2 Dawei Yin2 Yiming Yang3 Jiaxin Mao1∗
1
Renmin University of China 2 Baidu Inc.
3
Carnegie Mellon University
chenyiqun990321@ruc.edu.cn, maojiaxin@gmail.com

Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is widely utilized to incorporate external
knowledge into large language models, thereby enhancing factuality and reducing
hallucinations in question-answering (QA) tasks. A standard RAG pipeline consists of several components, such as query rewriting, document retrieval, document
filtering, and answer generation. However, these components are typically optimized separately through supervised fine-tuning, which can lead to misalignments
between the objectives of individual components and the overarching aim of generating accurate answers. Although recent efforts have explored using reinforcement
learning (RL) to optimize specific RAG components, these approaches often focus
on simple pipelines with only two components or do not adequately address the
complex interdependencies and collaborative interactions among the modules. To
overcome these limitations, we propose treating the complex RAG pipeline with
multiple components as a multi-agent cooperative task, in which each component can be regarded as an RL agent. Specifically, we present MMOA-RAG2 ,
Multi-Module joint Optimization Algorithm for RAG, which employs multi-agent
reinforcement learning to harmonize all agents’ goals toward a unified reward, such
as the F1 score of the final answer. Experiments conducted on various QA benchmarks demonstrate that MMOA-RAG effectively boost the overall performance of
the pipeline and outperforms existing baselines. Furthermore, comprehensive ablation studies validate the contributions of individual components and demonstrate
MMOA-RAG can be adapted to different RAG pipelines and benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have been widely applied to tasks such as question answering
[1, 23], information retrieval [45, 2], various forms of reasoning [15, 13], and evaluation [11, 8].
However, since LLMs cannot promptly update their internal knowledge after pre-training, they
are still prone to generating outdated or fabricated responses [58]. To address these challenges,
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) enhances the generative capabilities of LLMs by retrieving
relevant information from external knowledge sources. Recent RAG systems are often built as
complex pipelines comprising multiple interconnected modules [10], including query rewriting
[30, 19], first-stage retrieval [25, 40], re-ranking [36, 37], document preprocessing [22, 27], and
answer generation [40, 44].
The complexity of RAG systems makes their optimization particularly challenging. Standard supervised fine-tuning (SFT) optimizes each module independently using human-annotated data. However,
∗
2

Corresponding author.
The code of MMOA-RAG is on https://github.com/chenyiqun/MMOA-RAG.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

