MIX: A Multi-view Time-Frequency Interactive
Explanation Framework for Time Series Classification

Viet-Hung Tran1∗, Ngoc Phu Doan1∗, Zichi Zhang1∗, Tuan Dung Pham1 , Phi Hung Nguyen1 ,
Xuan Hoang Nguyen2 , Hans Vandierendonck1 , Ira Assent3 , Thai Son Mai1∗
1

Queen’s University Belfast, UK
{h.tran, h.vandierendonck, thaison.mai}@qub.ac.uk
2
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
{xuan-hoang.nguyen}@ip-paris.fr
3
Aarhus University, Denmark
{ira}@cs.au.dk

Abstract
Deep learning models for time series classification (TSC) have achieved impressive performance, but explaining their decisions remains a significant challenge.
Existing post-hoc explanation methods typically operate solely in the time domain
and from a single-view perspective, limiting both faithfulness and robustness. In
this work, we propose MIX (Multi-view Time-Frequency Interactive EXplanation
Framework), a novel framework that helps to explain deep learning models in
a multi-view setting by leveraging multi-resolution, time-frequency views constructed using the Haar Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). MIX introduces an
interactive cross-view refinement scheme, where explanation’s information from
one view is propagated across views to enhance overall interpretability. To align
with user-preferred perspectives, we propose a greedy selection strategy that traverses the multi-view space to identify the most informative features. Additionally,
we present OSIGV, a user-aligned segment-level attribution mechanism based on
overlapping windows for each view, and introduce keystone-first IG, a method that
refines explanations in each view using additional information from another view.
Extensive experiments across multiple TSC benchmarks and model architectures
demonstrate that MIX significantly outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
in terms of explanation faithfulness and robustness.

1

Introduction

Time series classification (TSC) is an important task in many domains, such as healthcare [46],
finance [44], and supply chain [38]. In recent years, deep learning (DL) models have become
increasingly popular in TSC thanks to their ability to capture complex temporal patterns and achieve
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on a wide range of datasets [59]. However, DL models are
considered as black boxes due to their lack of transparency. This makes it difficult to understand
or trust their predictions, which is especially critical in sensitive applications such as medical and
financial, where interpretability, accountability, and error analysis are essential.
To mitigate this issue, explainable AI (XAI) has emerged as an important direction for improving
the interpretability of DL models. XAI methods help users to understand model decisions, which
in turn help to increase trust, supports accountability, and enables model debugging. In the context
∗

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

