Vinci: Deep Thinking in Text-to-Image Generation
using Unified Model with Reinforcement Learning

Wang Lin1,∗ , Wentao Hu2,∗ , Liyu Jia2 , Kaihang Pan1 , Majun Zhang1 ,
Zhou Zhao1 , Fei Wu1 ,Jingyuan Chen1,† , Hanwang Zhang2
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Nanyang Technological University
linwanglw@zju.edu.cn, jingyuanchen@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
With the continuous development of large language models and reasoning chain
technologies, the potential of deep reasoning based on reinforcement learning
has shown remarkable promise in multi-task scenarios. However, existing unified models have yet to achieve end-to-end integration in image generation and
understanding tasks, limiting the model’s self-reflection ability and the realization of cross-modal reasoning chains. To address this, we propose Vinci, a novel
framework designed to enable interleaved image generation and understanding
through deep reasoning capabilities. We leverage a small amount of multimodal
chain-of-thought (MCoT) data for cold-start and employ reinforcement learning to
guide the integration of image generation and understanding tasks. Additionally,
we introduce a momentum-based reward function, which dynamically adjusts the
reward distribution by considering historical improvements, ensuring the stability of the model across multiple generations. Experimental results demonstrate
that integrating MCoT can achieve a +22% improvement over the base model
on Geneval, effectively enhancing both image generation quality and instruction
alignment capabilities.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of large language models [1, 9, 82, 61] and Chain of Thought [49, 37, 75,
32] (CoT) techniques, deep thinking through reinforcement learning has become a key research focus
in artificial intelligence. It has shown exceptional reasoning capabilities in tasks like mathematical
problem-solving [62, 18] and code generation [29, 28, 61], significantly improving both model
performance and interpretability by providing clear, step-by-step deduction and decision-making.
This step-by-step reasoning ability is being applied to cross-modal tasks, particularly in image
generation and understanding. In image understanding, many structured reasoning mechanisms [85,
79] have been proposed to enhance controllability and interpretability. In image generation, [10,
14, 57] focuses on refining the input prompts or employing text-based layout construction prior to
synthesis. Recently, breakthroughs in unified models have enabled a single model to simultaneously
perform image generation and understanding. However, the potential of Chain of Thought techniques
in existing unified models has yet to be fully explored.
The main challenge lies in the lack of end-to-end integration between image generation and understanding. For example, in models like Janus-Pro [5] and Show-o [78], images are represented in two
ways within the model (i.e., the model cannot directly understand the representations of the images it
generates), thus limiting the model’s ability to reflect on and optimize the generated results. Furthermore, while there have been attempts [89, 31, 22] to introduce CoT into these models, they are mostly
limited to unimodal reasoning chains. For instance, in the T2I-R1 [31] model, semantic-level CoT
is applied only to enhance text prompts, while token-level CoT is optimized only on image tokens.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

