A Closer Look at TabPFN v2: Understanding Its
Strengths and Extending Its Capabilities

Han-Jia Ye & Si-Yang Liu
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{yehj, liusy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University
chao.209@osu.edu

Abstract
Tabular datasets are inherently heterogeneous, presenting significant challenges for
developing pre-trained foundation models. The recently introduced transformerbased Tabular Prior-data Fitted Network v2 (TabPFN v2) achieves unprecedented
in-context learning performance across diverse downstream datasets, marking a
pivotal advancement in tabular foundation models. In this paper, we take a closer
look at TabPFN v2 to examine how it effectively handles heterogeneity and achieves
high predictive accuracy, and to explore how its limitations in high-dimensional,
many-category, and large-scale tasks can be mitigated. We find that TabPFN v2 can
infer attribute relationships even when provided with randomized attribute token
inputs, eliminating the need to explicitly learn dataset-specific attribute embeddings
to address heterogeneity. We further show that TabPFN v2 can be transformed into
a feature extractor, revealing its ability to construct a highly separable feature space
for accurate predictions. Lastly, we demonstrate that TabPFN v2’s limitations can
be addressed through a test-time divide-and-conquer strategy, enabling scalable
inference without requiring re-training. By uncovering the mechanisms behind
TabPFN v2’s success and introducing strategies to extend its applicability, this
study offers key insights into the design of future tabular foundation models.

1

Introduction

Tabular data is ubiquitous across a wide range of applications, including healthcare [32], finance [43],
and scientific research [33, 32]. In this format, each instance (e.g., a patient’s record) is represented
as a vector of attributes, and the goal of a machine learning model is to map these vectors to their
corresponding labels [7]. Traditionally, tree-based models [56, 12] have dominated this domain, but
recent advances in deep tabular models are increasingly closing the performance gap [22, 29, 76].
However, unlike vision and language domains, where pre-trained foundation models have driven
significant progress [40, 81], tabular data is still desperately awaiting a similar breakthrough [63,
27, 54, 82, 77, 66]. A primary challenge arises from the inherent heterogeneity of tabular datasets,
which often vary in dimensionality and attribute meanings, making the development of effective
and versatile foundation models difficult. Additionally, there is an urgent need for such models, as
many tabular datasets are small-scale—such as medical data with limited patient numbers. Training
individual models from scratch for these datasets is highly sensitive to hyperparameter choices and
often fails to generalize due to limited data [18, 24, 25].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

