Co-Regularization Enhances Knowledge Transfer
in High Dimensions

Shuo Shuo Liu1∗ Haotian Lin1, 2∗ Matthew Reimherr1, 2
1

The Pennsylvania State University

2

Runze Li1

Amazon

Abstract
Most existing transfer learning algorithms for high-dimensional models employ a
two-step regularization framework, whose success heavily hinges on the assumption
that the pre-trained model closely resembles the target. To relax this assumption, we
propose a co-regularization process to directly exploit beneficial knowledge from
the source domain for high-dimensional generalized linear models. The proposed
method learns the target parameter by constraining the source parameters to be close
to the target one, thereby preventing fine-tuning failures caused by significantly
deviated pre-trained parameters. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that the
proposed method accommodates a broader range of sources than existing two-step
frameworks, thus being more robust to less similar sources. Its effectiveness is
validated through extensive empirical studies.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning (TL) is a technique that leverages knowledge from source domains to improve
learning performance in a related but not necessarily identical target domain (Torrey and Shavlik,
2010). The success of TL usually relies on the philosophy that the pre-trained models over source
domains carry informative knowledge and thus can benefit the target domain learning by fine-tuning
the pre-trained models. This “model-based” two-step transfer framework is referred to as hypothesis
transfer learning (HTL) in the community.
Recently, HTL has also drawn great attention and been studied in various high-dimensional models
(Bastani, 2021; Li et al., 2022; Tian and Feng, 2023). These algorithms are usually established in
the well-recognized pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm. Specifically, these algorithms pool the
source datasets and obtain the pre-trained parameters via classical sparse learning techniques, such as
Lasso regression (Tibshirani, 1996). The target parameter is then learned by minimizing regularized
empirical risk minimization over the target data, with the regularization as the distance between
the pre-trained parameter and the target parameter. The underlying assumption in these works to
show provable learning gain is that the distance between pre-trained and target parameters is small.
Later, Gu et al. (2024); Lin and Reimherr (2024b) revealed that the transfer learning gain dynamic of
HTL further relies on the geometric angles and signal strength between source and target parameters,
which thus raises the demand for obtaining a “good” pre-trained parameter as the lever.
Most of the aforementioned multi-source transfer learning methods indiscriminately fuse all source
and/or target domains to obtain a pre-trained estimator for the target domain. However, this approach
overlooks the fact that different source domains may vary in their relevance and contribution to the
target task. Besides, since pre-trained parameters are optimized to perform well over the source
∗

Co-first author.
This work does not relate to the authors’ positions at Amazon.
Correspondence to Shuo Shuo Liu (shuoliu.academic@gmail.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

