Computational Algebra with Attention:
Transformer Oracles for Border Basis Algorithms

1

Hiroshi Kera∗123 Nico Pelleriti∗3 Yuki Ishihara4 Max Zimmer3 Sebastian Pokutta3
Chiba University 2 National Institute of Informatics 3 Zuse Institute Berlin 4 Nihon University

Abstract
Solving systems of polynomial equations, particularly those with finitely many
solutions, is a crucial challenge across many scientific fields. Traditional methods
like Gröbner and Border bases are fundamental but suffer from high computational costs, which have motivated recent Deep Learning approaches to improve
efficiency, albeit at the expense of output correctness. In this work, we introduce
the O RACLE B ORDER BASIS A LGORITHM, the first Deep Learning approach
that accelerates Border basis computation while maintaining output guarantees.
To this end, we design and train a Transformer-based oracle that identifies and
eliminates computationally expensive reduction steps, which we find to dominate
the algorithm’s runtime. By selectively invoking this oracle during critical phases
of computation, we achieve substantial speedup factors of up to 3.5x compared to
the base algorithm, without compromising the correctness of results. To generate
the training data, we develop a sampling method and provide the first sampling
theorem for border bases. We construct a tokenization and embedding scheme
tailored to monomial-centered algebraic computations, resulting in a compact and
expressive input representation, which reduces the number of tokens to encode an
n-variate polynomial by a factor of O(n). Our learning approach is data efficient,
stable, and a practical enhancement to traditional computer algebra algorithms and
symbolic computation.

1

Introduction

Polynomial equation systems serve as a fundamental model in a wide range of fields, including
dynamical systems (such as those arising from the Lorenz attractor [48] or from digitalized generegulatory networks [43, 44]), cryptography where multivariate systems [27, 38] form the basis
of signature schemes [67], in data-manifold representation [55], camera-pose estimation [58], or
optimization [3, 42]. Solving these systems, even with a small probability of success, reveals
critical properties such as stationary points [14] and optimal control strategies [53], highlighting the
fundamental importance of polynomial system solving. Many of these applications involve so-called
zero-dimensional systems with finitely many solutions, which are the focus of this work.
However, solving polynomial systems is notoriously hard: Even for zero-dimensional systems with
finitely many solutions, the worst-case complexity is exponential in the number of variates [15, 50]
and becomes practically intractable with as few as five variables. A most fundamental tool for their
solution is the computation of Gröbner bases [10, 13] or Border bases [28, 29, 40], the former being
interpretable as a nonlinear analogue of Gaussian elimination and the latter being a generalization of
the former in the zero-dimensional case.
This work focuses on border basis computation, which is essentially an iterative process that extends
a polynomial basis set: at each step, new candidate polynomials are generated from the current basis
and reduced to determine whether they extend the basis span. Crucially, reducing candidates that
∗

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to kera@chiba-u.jp or pelleriti@zib.de.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

