Training-free Online Video Step Grounding

Luca Zanella1 Massimiliano Mancini1 Yiming Wang2
Alessio Tonioni3 Elisa Ricci1,2
1
University of Trento 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler 3 Google
https://lucazanella.github.io/baglm/

Abstract
Given a task and a set of steps composing it, Video Step Grounding (VSG) aims
to detect which steps are performed in a video. Standard approaches for this task
require a labeled training set (e.g., with step-level annotations or narrations), which
may be costly to collect. Moreover, they process the full video offline, limiting their
applications for scenarios requiring online decisions. Thus, in this work, we explore
how to perform VSG online and without training. We achieve this by exploiting the
zero-shot capabilities of recent Large Multimodal Models (LMMs). In particular,
we use LMMs to predict the step associated with a restricted set of frames, without
access to the whole video. We show that this online strategy without task-specific
tuning outperforms offline and training-based models. Motivated by this finding,
we develop Bayesian Grounding with Large Multimodal Models (BAGLM), further
injecting knowledge of past frames into the LMM-based predictions. BAGLM
exploits Bayesian filtering principles, modeling step transitions via (i) a dependency
matrix extracted through large language models and (ii) an estimation of step
progress. Experiments on three datasets show superior performance of BAGLM
over state-of-the-art training-based offline methods.

1

Introduction

Grounding procedural steps in videos is crucial for enabling machines to follow along and assist
humans in complex tasks like cooking a recipe, assembling furniture, or performing maintenance
work. This ability is particularly valuable for real-time procedural guidance in AR/XR applications,
where recognizing task progress allows users wearing headsets or smart glasses to receive timely,
step-specific instructions. Specifically, the task of Video Step Grounding (VSG) takes as input a list
of procedural steps extracted from an instructional article (e.g., a recipe or how-to guide), and a video
performing the same task, with the goal of identifying which of the steps are performed in the video.
Existing VSG approaches align procedural steps descriptions with their corresponding video frames [4,
9, 14, 18]. However, these strategies face two key limitations. First, they need a training set, entailing
the cost of collecting (and potentially annotating) it. Moreover, a training set could bias models toward
the specific videos and procedural tasks that are depicted, limiting their generalization capability.
Second, they assume offline processing, where the entire video is available ahead of time. This makes
them unsuitable for real-world applications processing a live video stream.
To overcome these limitations, we explore how to address VSG online and without training, i.e.,
operating on a streaming video (Fig. 1). This objective is challenging as it requires performing
predictions with partial evidence (i.e., having access to only a subset of the video frames) and without
the possibility of extracting task-specific representations that would be typically learned from a
dedicated training set. In this scenario, we explore the zero-shot capabilities of powerful Large
Multimodal Models (LMMs) [2, 13, 6] for VSG. Specifically, given the set of steps, we prompt
LMMs to predict the step corresponding to the current video segment. Surprisingly, models such
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

