RankSEG-RMA: An Efficient Segmentation
Algorithm via Reciprocal Moment Approximation

Zixun Wang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1155225012@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Ben Dai
Department of Statistics and Data Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
bendai@cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Semantic segmentation labels each pixel in an image with its corresponding class,
and is typically evaluated using the Intersection over Union (IoU) and Dice metrics
to quantify the overlap between predicted and ground-truth segmentation masks.
In the literature, most existing methods estimate pixel-wise class probabilities,
then apply argmax or thresholding to obtain the final prediction. These methods
have been shown to generally lead to inconsistent or suboptimal results, as they
do not directly maximize segmentation metrics. To address this issue, a novel
consistent segmentation framework, RankSEG, has been proposed, which includes
RankDice and RankIoU specifically designed to optimize the Dice and IoU metrics,
respectively. Although RankSEG almost guarantees improved performance, it suffers from two major drawbacks. First, it is its computational expense—RankDice
has a complexity of O(d log d) with a substantial constant factor (where d represents the number of pixels), while RankIoU exhibits even higher complexity
O(d2 ), thus limiting its practical application. For instance, in LiTS, prediction
with RankSEG takes 16.33 seconds compared to just 0.01 seconds with the argmax
rule. Second, RankSEG is only applicable to overlapping segmentation settings,
where multiple classes can occupy the same pixel, which contrasts with standard
benchmarks that typically assume non-overlapping segmentation. In this paper, we
overcome these two drawbacks via a reciprocal moment approximation (RMA)
of RankSEG with the following contributions: (i) we improve RankSEG using
RMA, namely RankSEG-RMA, reduces the complexity of both algorithms to O(d)
while maintaining comparable performance; (ii) inspired by RMA, we develop a
pixel-wise score function that allows efficient implementation for non-overlapping
segmentation settings. We illustrate the effectiveness of our method across various datasets and state-of-the-art models. The code of our method is available in:
https://github.com/ZixunWang/RankSEG-RMA.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision that assigns each pixel in an image
to a specific class, serving as a cornerstone for applications such as autonomous driving [Cordts
et al., 2016, Feng et al., 2020], medical image analysis [Heller et al., 2019, Bilic et al., 2023], and
augmented reality [Ko and Lee, 2020].
Evaluating the performance of segmentation models naturally requires appropriate metrics that
accurately reflect segmentation quality. Specifically, pixel-wise accuracy (Acc) is often biased
toward classes that occupy large image regions and fails to account for false positives [Everingham
et al., 2010, Wang et al., 2023a]. Consequently, the Intersection over Union (IoU) and Dice metrics
have emerged as the standard evaluation measures for semantic segmentation [Cordts et al., 2016,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

