Neural Tangent Knowledge Distillation for Optical
Convolutional Networks
Jinlin Xiang∗‡

Minho Choi∗‡¶

Yubo Zhang‡

Zhihao Zhou‡

Arka Majumdar‡§∥

Eli Shlizerman†‡∥

Abstract
Hybrid Optical Neural Networks (ONNs, typically consisting of an optical frontend
and a digital backend) offer an energy-efficient alternative to fully digital deep networks for real-time, power-constrained systems. However, their adoption is limited
by two main challenges: the accuracy gap compared to large-scale networks during
training, and discrepancies between simulated and fabricated systems that further
degrade accuracy. While previous work has proposed end-to-end optimizations
for specific datasets (e.g., MNIST) and optical systems, these approaches typically
lack generalization across tasks and hardware designs. To address these limitations,
we propose a task-agnostic and hardware-agnostic pipeline that supports image
classification and segmentation across diverse optical systems. To assist optical
system design before training, we design the metasurface layout based on fabrication constraints. For training, we introduce Neural Tangent Knowledge Distillation
(NTKD), which aligns optical models with electronic teacher networks, thereby
narrowing the accuracy gap. After fabrication, NTKD also guides fine-tuning of the
digital backend to compensate for implementation errors. Experiments on multiple
datasets (e.g., MNIST, CIFAR, Carvana Image Masking Dataset) and hardware
configurations show that our pipeline consistently improves ONN performance
and enables practical deployment in both pre-fabrication simulations and physical
implementations.

1

Introduction

Optical Neural Networks (ONNs) offer a promising approach to achieve efficient computation and
energy use compared to digital implementations such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
Vision Transformers (ViTs), making them well-suited for resource-constrained, real-time physical
systems [1]. For example, ONNs have been proposed for power-limited applications (illustrated in
Figure 1.a), including satellites [2], unmanned aerial vehicles [3], smart home devices [4], autonomous
driving systems [5], wearable electronics [6], and medical devices [7].
Among different ONN implementations, hybrid optical-electronic architectures are practical options
under current hardware constraints [8]. In such systems, the optical frontend accelerates computation
at the speed of light, while the digital backend refines predictions to improve robustness [9]. The
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
§
Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
¶
Department of Electrical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan 44919,
South Korea
||
Corresponding authors: arka@uw.edu, shlizee@uw.edu
‡

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

