SoPo: Text-to-Motion Generation Using Semi-Online
Preference Optimization

Xiaofeng Tan1,2
Hongsong Wang 1,2∗
Xin Geng1,2
Pan Zhou3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China
3
Singapore Management University
{xiaofengtan, hongsongwang, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn, panzhou@smu.edu.sg,
1

Abstract
Text-to-motion generation is essential for advancing the creative industry but
often presents challenges in producing consistent, realistic motions. To address
this, we focus on fine-tuning text-to-motion models to consistently favor highquality, human-preferred motions—a critical yet largely unexplored problem. In
this work, we theoretically investigate the DPO under both online and offline
settings, and reveal their respective limitation: overfitting in offline DPO, and
biased sampling in online DPO. Building on our theoretical insights, we introduce
Semi-online Preference Optimization (SoPo), a DPO-based method for training
text-to-motion models using “semi-online” data pair, consisting of unpreferred
motion from online distribution and preferred motion in offline datasets. This
method leverages both online and offline DPO, allowing each to compensate for
the other’s limitations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SoPo outperforms
other preference alignment methods, with an MM-Dist of 3.25% (vs e.g. 0.76% of
MoDiPO) on the MLD model, 2.91% (vs e.g. 0.66% of MoDiPO) on MDM model,
respectively. Additionally, the MLD model fine-tuned by our SoPo surpasses the
SoTA model in terms of R-precision and MM Dist. Visualization results also
show the efficacy of our SoPo in preference alignment. Project page: https:
//xiaofeng-tan.github.io/projects/SoPo/.

1

Introduction

Text-to-motion generation aims to synthesize realistic 3D human motions based on textual descriptions, unlocking numerous applications in gaming, filmmaking, virtual and augmented reality, and
robotics [1–4]. Recent advances in generative models [5–7], particularly diffusion models [1, 2, 8–
14], have significantly improved text-to-video generation. However, text-to-motion models often
encounter challenges in generating consistent and realistic motions due to several key factors.
Firstly, models are often trained on diverse text-motion pairs where descriptions vary widely in style,
detail, and purpose. This variance can cause inconsistencies, producing motions that do not always
meet realism or accuracy standards [15–17]. Secondly, text-to-motion models are probabilistic,
allowing diverse outputs for each description. While this promotes variety, it also increases the
chances of generating undesirable variations [4]. Lastly, the complexity of coordinating multiple
flexible human joints results in unpredictable outcomes, increasing the difficulty of achieving smooth
and realistic motion [16]. Together, these factors limit the quality and reliability of current methods
of text-to-motion generation.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

