Improved Scaling Laws in Linear Regression via
Data Reuse
Licong Lin
UC Berkeley
liconglin@berkeley.edu

Jingfeng Wu
UC Berkeley
uuujf@berkeley.edu

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley and Google DeepMind
peter@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Neural scaling laws suggest that the test error of large language models trained
online decreases polynomially as the model size and data size increase. However,
such scaling can be unsustainable when running out of new data. In this work,
we show that data reuse can improve existing scaling laws in linear regression.
Specifically, we derive sharp test error bounds on M -dimensional linear models
trained by multi-pass stochastic gradient descent (multi-pass SGD) on N data with
sketched features. Assuming that the data covariance has a power-law spectrum
of degree a, and that the true parameter follows a prior with an aligned power-law
spectrum of degree b ´ a (with a ą b ą 1), we show that multi-pass SGD achieves
a test error of ΘpM 1´b ` Lp1´bq{a q, where L À N a{b is the number of iterations.
In the same setting, one-pass SGD only attains a test error of ΘpM 1´b ` N p1´bq{a q
(see, e.g., Lin et al., 2024). This suggests an improved scaling law via data reuse
(i.e., choosing L ą N ) in data-constrained regimes. Numerical simulations are
also provided to verify our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Empirical studies reveal that the performance of large-scale models often improves in a predictable
manner as both model size (denoted by M ) and sample size (denoted by N ) increase (see, e.g.,
Hoffmann et al., 2022; Besiroglu et al., 2024). These observations, known as neural scaling laws,
suggest that the population risk (denoted by R) of large models decreases following a power-law
formula, namely,
RpM, N q « R˚ ` c1 M ´a1 ` c2 N ´a2 ,
where R˚ ą 0 denotes the irreducible error—such as the intrinsic entropy of natural language in the
case of language modeling (Kaplan et al., 2020)—and a1 , a2 , c1 , c2 are positive constants. Neural
scaling laws predict a path for improving the state-of-the-art models via scaling model and data size.
A line of recent work establishes provable scaling laws in simplified settings such as linear regression
(see, e.g., Lin et al., 2024; Paquette et al., 2024, other related works will be discussed later in
Section 6). Specifically, they consider an infinite-dimensional linear regression problem, where
an M -dimensional linear model is trained by one-pass stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on N
Gaussian-sketched samples. Under power-law assumptions on the spectra of the data covariance and
the prior covariance, they show power-law type scaling laws in linear regression. However, their
results are limited to one-pass SGD, where each sample is used once. In particular, Lin et al. (2024)
attributed the nice, power-law type scaling laws to the implicit regularization effect of one-pass SGD
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

