SPARKE: Scalable Prompt-Aware Diversity and
Novelty Guidance in Diffusion Models via RKE Score

1

Mohammad Jalali1∗ Haoyu Lei1∗ Amin Gohari2 Farzan Farnia1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{mjalali24, hylei22, farnia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, agohari@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable success in high-fidelity image
synthesis and prompt-guided generative modeling. However, ensuring adequate
diversity in generated samples of prompt-guided diffusion models remains a challenge, particularly when the prompts span a broad semantic spectrum and the
diversity of generated data needs to be evaluated in a prompt-aware fashion across
semantically similar prompts. Recent methods have introduced guidance via diversity measures to encourage more varied generations. In this work, we extend
the diversity measure-based approaches by proposing the Scalable Prompt-Aware
Rény Kernel Entropy Diversity Guidance (SPARKE) method for prompt-aware
diversity guidance. SPARKE utilizes conditional entropy for diversity guidance,
which dynamically conditions diversity measurement on similar prompts and
enables prompt-aware diversity control. While the entropy-based guidance approach enhances prompt-aware diversity, its reliance on the matrix-based entropy
scores poses computational challenges in large-scale generation settings. To address this, we focus on the special case of Conditional latent RKE Score Guidance, reducing entropy computation and gradient-based optimization complexity
from the O(n3 ) of general entropy measures to O(n). The reduced computational complexity allows for diversity-guided sampling over potentially thousands
of generation rounds on different prompts. We numerically test the SPARKE
method on several text-to-image diffusion models, demonstrating that the proposed
method improves the prompt-aware diversity of the generated data without incurring significant computational costs. We release our code on the project page:
https://mjalali.github.io/SPARKE.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1, 2, 3] have rapidly become a prominent class of generative models, achieving
state-of-the-art results in several generative modeling tasks [2, 4, 5]. Notably, their ability to produce
intricate and realistic image and video data has significantly advanced various content creation
pipelines [6, 7, 8, 9]. Despite these successes, ensuring sufficient diversity in generated outputs
remains an area of active research, particularly in prompt-guided diffusion models, where the diversity
of generated samples needs to be evaluated and optimized while considering the variability of the
input prompts.
Diversity in prompt-guided sample generation also plays a critical role in ensuring fairness and
lack of mode collapse in response to a certain prompt category, implying that the outputs do not
collapse in response to a group of prompts with similar components. Therefore, an adequately diverse
∗

Contributed Equally

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

