Masked Gated Linear Unit
Yukito Tajima1
1

Nakamasa Inoue1

Yusuke Sekikawa2

Institute of Science Tokyo, Japan

2

Ikuro Sato1,2

Rio Yokota1

Denso IT Laboratory, Japan

yukito@rio.scrc.iir.isct.ac.jp

Abstract
Gated Linear Units (GLUs) have become essential components in the feed-forward
networks of state-of-the-art Large Language Models (LLMs). However, they require twice as many memory reads compared to feed-forward layers without gating,
due to the use of separate weight matrices for the gate and value streams. To address
this bottleneck, we introduce Masked Gated Linear Units (MGLUs), a novel family
of GLUs with an efficient kernel implementation. The core contribution of MGLUs
include: (1) the Mixture of Element-wise Gating (MoEG) architecture that learns
multiple binary masks, each determining gate or value assignments at the element
level on a single shared weight matrix resulting in reduced memory transfer, and (2)
FlashMGLU, a hardware-friendly kernel that yields up to a 19.7× inference-time
speed-up over a naïve PyTorch MGLU and is 47% more memory-efficient and 34%
faster than standard GLUs despite added architectural complexity on an RTX5090
GPU. In LLM experiments, the Swish-activated variant SwiMGLU preserves
its memory advantages while matching—or even surpassing—the downstream
accuracy of the SwiGLU baseline.

1

Introduction

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have revolutionized deep learning and given rise to largescale language models (LLMs) that achieve remarkable results across a wide spectrum of natural
language processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Grattafiori
et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024; Gemma Team, 2025). Yet the explosive growth in parameter count and
inference scaling translates directly into substantial inference cost and latency. The decode latency is
fundamentally dominated by communication between high-bandwidth memory (HBM) and SRAM
due to transferring model weights for computation, therefore memory reduction being crucial in
real-world applications (Gholami et al., 2024).
Modern LLMs predominantly adopt a decoder-only architecture (Radford et al., 2018), with each
decoder layer typically consisting of two modules: a self-attention module and a feed-forward network
(FFN). Recent successful optimizations for attention mechanisms, such as FlashAttention (Dao et al.,
2022; Dao, 2024; Shah et al., 2024) and alternative approaches like the Mamba (Gu and Dao,
2025; Dao and Gu, 2024), have significantly improved the computational efficiency by reducing
glboal memory reads/writes. Nevertheless, kernel-level optimization of the FFN remains particularly
challenging, as its simple architecture provides fewer opportunities for efficiency improvements
compared to attention.
The activation function within the FFN plays a crucial role in determining the decoder output.
Traditional nonlinearities such as ReLU (Nair and Hinton, 2010) and GELU (Hendrycks and Gimpel,
2016) laid the groundwork for deep learning, but the Gated Linear Unit (GLU) variants (Dauphin
et al., 2017a; Shazeer, 2020) introduce multiplicative interactions that markedly boost expressivity.
For example, SwiGLU, which swaps the sigmoid gate in the original GLU for the smoother Swish
function (Ramachandran et al., 2017), has become a primary choice in modern LLMs because it
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

