Stabilizing LTI Systems under Partial Observability:
Sample Complexity and Fundamental Limits

Ziyi Zhang, Yorie Nakahira, Guannan Qu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ziyizhan,yorie,gqu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of stabilizing an unknown partially observable linear timeinvariant (LTI) system. For fully observable systems, the state-of-the-art approaches
leverage an unstable/stable subspace decomposition to achieve sample complexity
that depends only on the number of unstable modes, independent of the dimension
of the system state. However, it remains open whether such sample complexity
can be achieved for partially observable systems because such systems do not
admit a uniquely identifiable unstable subspace. In this paper, we propose LTS-P, a
novel technique that leverages compressed singular value decomposition (SVD) on
the ”lifted” Hankel matrix to estimate the unstable subsystem up to an unknown
transformation. Then, we design a stabilizing controller that integrates a robust
stabilizing controller for the unstable mode and a small-gain-type assumption on
the stable subspace. We show that LTS-P achieves state-of-the-art, dimension-free
sample complexity that scales only with the number of unstable modes. This
substantially reduces data requirements for stabilizing high-dimensional systems,
particularly those dominated by stable dynamics.

1

Introduction

Learning-based control of unknown dynamical systems is of critical importance for many autonomous
control systems [3, 30, 6, 24, 12]. Despite recent advances, many existing methods make strong
assumptions such as open-loop stability, availability of an initial stabilizing controller, and fully
observable systems [15, 41]. However, these assumptions may not hold in practice. Motivated by
this gap, this paper studies the problem of stabilizing an unknown, partially-observable, unstable
system without access to an initial stabilizing controller. In particular, we consider the following
linear time-invariant (LTI) system:
xt+1 = Axt + But
(1)
yt = Cxt + Dut + vt ,
where xt ∈ Rn and ut ∈ Rdu , yt ∈ Rdy are the state, control input, and observed output at
time step t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, respectively. The system also has additive observation noise vt ∼
N (0, σv2 I). While there are works studying system identification for partially observable LTI
systems [15, 43, 41, 34, 51], they do not address the problem of stabilization, and many assume
the system is open-loop stable [15, 41, 34]. Other adaptive control approaches can address the
learn-to-stabilize problem for fully observable systems based on Lyapunov methods [35, 37], but
there are few systematic approaches to construct a Lyapunov function in a way that optimizes sample
complexities or transient performance during learning.
In the special case of fully-observable LTI system (C = I), Chen and Hazan [9] reveals that the
transient performance during the learn-to-stabilize process suffers from exponential blow-up, i.e. the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

