SORTeD Rashomon Sets of Sparse Decision Trees:
Anytime Enumeration

Elif Arslan
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
E.Arslan-1@tudelft.nl

Jacobus G. M. van der Linden
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
J.G.M.vanderLinden@tudelft.nl

Serge Hoogendoorn
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
S.P.Hoogendoorn@tudelft.nl

Marco Rinaldi
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
M.Rinaldi@tudelft.nl

Emir Demirović
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
E.Demirovic@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Sparse decision tree learning provides accurate and interpretable predictive models
that are ideal for high-stakes applications by finding the single most accurate tree
within a (soft) size limit. Rather than relying on a single “best” tree, Rashomon
sets—trees with similar performance but varying structures—can be used to enhance variable importance analysis, enrich explanations, and enable users to choose
simpler trees or those that satisfy stakeholder preferences (e.g., fairness) without
hard-coding such criteria into the objective function. However, because finding the
optimal tree is NP-hard, enumerating the Rashomon set is inherently challenging.
Therefore, we introduce SORTD, a novel framework that improves scalability and
enumerates trees in the Rashomon set in order of the objective value, thus offering
anytime behavior. Our experiments show that SORTD reduces runtime by up to
two orders of magnitude compared with the state of the art. Moreover, SORTD
can compute Rashomon sets for any separable and totally ordered objective and
supports post-evaluating the set using other separable (and partially ordered) objectives. Together, these advances make exploring Rashomon sets more practical in
real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are widely regarded as one of the most interpretable models, as their decision paths
are easy to follow and understand. While it is commonly believed that interpretability comes at the
cost of accuracy, recent findings suggest that in some applications this trade-off may be negligible [1].
This makes decision trees even more appealing in practice, specifically for high-stakes domains.
Decision trees have been extensively studied, with early popular approaches such as CART [2]
and C4.5 [3] focusing on greedy top-down induction. Because the size of a tree correlates with
its comprehensibility [4], recent research has also examined optimal or sparse decision trees that
maximise performance for a given size limit, thereby obtaining a better accuracy–interpretability
trade-off [5, 6]. Consequently, the literature presents a variety of approaches to compute such
optimal trees, including mixed-integer programming [7–9], Boolean satisfiability [10–12], constraint
programming [13], branch-and-bound [14], and dynamic programming [15–18].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

