Topology-aware Graph Diffusion Model with
Persistent Homology

Joonhyuk Park1∗, Donghyun Lee2∗, Yujee Song2 , Guorong Wu3 , Won Hwa Kim1
1
POSTECH 2 Samsung Eletronics 3 UNC-Chapel Hill
{pjh1023, wonhwa}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Generating realistic graphs faces challenges in estimating accurate distribution of
graphs in an embedding space while preserving structural characteristics. However,
existing graph generation methods primarily focus on approximating the joint
distribution of nodes and edges, often overlooking topological properties such
as connected components and loops, hindering accurate representation of global
structures. To address this issue, we propose a Topology-Aware diffusion-based
Graph Generation (TAGG), which aims to sample synthetic graphs that closely
resemble the structural characteristics of the original graph based on persistent
homology. Specifically, we suggest two core components: 1) Persistence Diagram
Matching (PDM) loss which ensures high topological fidelity of generated graphs,
and 2) Topology-aware Attention Module (TAM) which induces the denoising
network to capture the homological characteristics of the original graphs. Extensive
experiments on conventional graph benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach indicating high generation performance across various metrics, while
achieving closer alignment with the distribution of topological features observed in
the original graphs. Furthermore, application to real brain network data showcases
its potential for complex and real graph applications.

1

Introduction

The major goal of graph generation is to achieve high resemblance between generated graphs and
their reference counterparts. To achieve this goal, various graph generation approaches have been
studied based on conventional generative models, e.g., recurrent neural networks [47], variational
autoencoders [38] and diffusion models [23, 43], and each exhibited promising results. Despite the
achievement in the context of the quantitative measures, e.g., similarity in distributions of graph
characteristics such as degree and clustering coefficients, there remains a limitation on generating
graphs coherent to the graph structure via the lens of graph topology.
Brain network is perhaps a suitable example to demonstrate the challenges above. A brain network
characterizes intricate wiring system of the brain, which is represented as a graph with anatomical
regions of interest (ROIs) defining its nodes and the connectivity between different ROIs serving
as edges [7, 16]. It is often large and dense, and its topological properties are well-known critical
biomarkers [35, 39]. Moreover, brain networks are expensive; acquiring diffusion magnetic resonance
images (dMRI) and processing them via tractography [42] to obtain structural brain connectome is
costly in both cost and labor. In this regime, generating realistic graphs (e.g., brain networks) that
preserve their inherent connectivity as well as global structures is highly demanding.
In recent years, various graph generative models have been heavily studied, but they often fall short in
capturing essential topological features crucial for modeling interconnected brain regions with high
∗

J. Park and D. Lee contributed equally. Work done while D. Lee2 and Y. Song2 were at POSTECH.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

