To Distill or Decide? The Algorithmic Trade-off in
Partially Observable Reinforcement Learning

Yuda Song
CMU
yudas@cs.cmu.edu

Dhruv Rohatgi
MIT
drohatgi@mit.edu

Aarti Singh
CMU
aarti@cs.cmu.edu

J. Andrew Bagnell
Aurora Innovation, CMU
dbagnell@aurora.tech

Abstract
Partial observability is a notorious challenge in reinforcement learning (RL), due to
the need to learn complex, history-dependent policies. Recent empirical successes
have used privileged expert distillation — which leverages availability of latent
state information during training (e.g., from a simulator) to learn and imitate the optimal latent, Markovian policy — to disentangle the task of “learning to see” from
“learning to act” [56, 12, 9]. While expert distillation is more computationally efficient than RL without latent state information, it also has well-documented failure
modes. In this paper — through a simple but instructive theoretical model called
the perturbed Block MDP, and controlled experiments on challenging simulated
locomotion tasks — we investigate the algorithmic trade-off between privileged
expert distillation and standard RL without privileged information. Our main
findings are: (1) The trade-off empirically hinges on the stochasticity of the latent
dynamics, as theoretically predicted by contrasting approximate decodability with
belief contraction in the perturbed Block MDP; and (2) The optimal latent policy
is not always the best latent policy to distill. Our results suggest new guidelines for
effectively exploiting privileged information, potentially advancing the efficiency
of policy learning across many practical partially observable domains.

1

Introduction

Partial observability is a common challenge in applied reinforcement learning: the decision-making
agent may not see the true state of the environment at all time-steps, whose information might only
be probabilistically inferred from the history of observations. An illustrative task is robot learning
for robots with image-based perception [58, 68]. A single image of the robot (or, in first-person
perspective, of the environment) will not capture important elements of the state such as the robot’s
velocity, and may miss other features due to e.g. occlusion or limited view.
The canonical theoretical model for such tasks is Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP). Unfortunately, there are well-documented computational [57] and statistical [28] barriers
to planning and learning in POMDPs, which have motivated many theoretical works that seek to
bypass these barriers by making additional structural assumptions [28, 33, 19, 24, 23, 42]. On
the empirical side, the standard technique for mitigating partial observability is frame-stacking,
which enabled notable successes for learning to play Atari games [50, 51]. The idea is to treat the
“state” of the environment as the concatenation of a short window of L recent observations, and
apply a standard algorithm for fully-observed reinforcement learning (RL). This technique inspired
theoretical developments such as L-step decodability [19], and has some theoretical underpinnings
for γ-observable POMDPs [24]. Yet frame-stacking is not a silver bullet for partially observable
decision-making: sometimes effective planning requires long memory [18]. Also, high-dimensional
observations (such as stacks of images) can confound learning complex behaviors [58, 78].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

