Beyond Least Squares: Uniform Approximation and
the Hidden Cost of Misspecification

Davide Maran
Politecnico di Milano
davide.maran@polimi.it

Csaba Szepesvári
Google DeepMind and University of Alberta
szepi@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of controlling worst-case errors in misspecified linear regression under the random design setting, where the regression function is estimated
via (penalized) least-squares. This setting arises naturally in value function approximation for bandit algorithms and reinforcement learning (RL). Our first main
contribution is the observation that the amplification of the misspecification error when using least-squares is governed by the Lebesgue constant, a classical
quantity from approximation theory that depends on the choice of the feature
subspace and the covariate distribution. We also show that this dependence on the
misspecification error is tight for least-squares regression: in general, no method
minimizing the empirical squared loss, including regularized least-squares, can
improve it substantially. We argue this explains the empirical observation that
some feature-maps (e.g., those derived from the Fourier bases) “work better in RL”
than others (e.g., polynomials): given some covariate distribution, the Lebesgue
constant is known to be highly sensitive to choice of the feature-map. As a second
contribution, we propose a method that augments the original feature set with
auxiliary features designed to reduce the error amplification. We then prove that
the method successfully competes with an “oracle” that knows the best way of
using the auxiliary features to reduce this amplification. For example, when the
domain is a real interval and the features are monomials, our method reduces the
amplification factor to O(1) as d → ∞, while without our method, least-squares
with the monomials (and in fact polynomials) will suffer a worst-case error amplification of order Ω(d). It follows that there are functions and feature maps for which
our method is consistent, while least-squares is inconsistent.

1

Introduction

Value function approximation plays a central role in modern reinforcement learning (RL) and
contextual bandit algorithms [Sutton and Barto, 2018, Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020]. In many
such settings, policies are evaluated or selected based on value estimates obtained by regressing
observed returns. To this end, (penalized) linear regression—based on empirical squared loss—serves
as a core subroutine due to its simplicity and favorable computational properties [Ernst et al., 2005,
Antos et al., 2008]. A fundamental challenge arises, however, when the true value function or reward
model lies outside the span of the chosen features—a situation referred to as model misspecification.
Recent work by Du et al. [2020] highlighted that in this setting for any d, there are
√ feature maps so
that the worst-case prediction error incurred by least-squares regression can be d larger than the
misspecification error, even if the learner can control the covariate distribution.1 This amplification is
concerning because it implies that adding more features may not improve the learner’s performance if
1
Du et al. [2020] prove the stronger result that any learner that has access to a polynomially sized sample is
ought to suffer a “large” worst-case prediction error no matter the method they use.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

