DartQuant: Efficient Rotational Distribution
Calibration for LLM Quantization

Yuantian Shao1,2∗ Yuanteng Chen2,3,4∗ Peisong Wang2,3† Jianlin Yu5
Jing Lin5 Yiwu Yao5 Zhihui Wei1 Jian Cheng2,3
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
2 2
C DL, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
4
Zhongguancun Academy,
5
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

Abstract
Quantization plays a crucial role in accelerating the inference of large-scale models, and rotational matrices have been shown to effectively improve quantization
performance by smoothing outliers. However, end-to-end fine-tuning of rotational optimization algorithms incurs high computational costs and is prone to
overfitting. To address this challenge, we propose an efficient distribution-aware
rotational calibration method, DartQuant, which reduces the complexity of rotational optimization by constraining the distribution of the activations after rotation.
This approach also effectively reduces reliance on task-specific losses, thereby
mitigating the risk of overfitting. Additionally, we introduce the QR-Orth optimization scheme, which replaces expensive alternating optimization with a more
efficient solution. In a variety of model quantization experiments, DartQuant
demonstrates superior performance. Compared to existing methods, it achieves
47× acceleration and 10× memory savings for rotational optimization on a 70B
model. Furthermore, it is the first to successfully complete rotational calibration for a 70B model on a single 3090 GPU, making quantization of large language models feasible in resource-constrained environments. Code is available at
https://github.com/CAS-CLab/DartQuant.git.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3] have been a key breakthrough in natural language processing,
demonstrating exceptional language understanding and generation capabilities through training on
vast datasets with numerous parameters. These models perform exceptionally well on multiple
tasks, including text generation, translation, and question-answering systems [4, 5]. However, the
high computational and memory demands of LLM inference severely limit their deployment in
resource-constrained environments [6, 7, 8, 9].
Current methods for reducing computational cost and improving the inference efficiency of deep
learning models and LLMs include model pruning, knowledge distillation, parameter sharing, and
quantization [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. Among these, post-training quantization (PTQ) stands out as a
crucial technique to reduce computational costs due to its advantage of bypassing complex training
processes, making it highly practical for real-world deployment [16, 17, 18, 19, 20].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

