User-Instructed Disparity-aware Defocus Control

Yudong Han1 Yan Yang2 Hao Yang1 Liyuan Pan1,3B
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
BDSI, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
3
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institude of Technology, Jiaxing, China
hanyudong.sdu@gmail.com, yan.yang@anu.edu.au, {hao.yang, liyuan.pan}@bit.edu.cn

Figure 1: An example of refocusing using our method. The input and refocused images are on the left and right.
Two regions are highlighted with red and blue boxes, and their zoomed-in views are displayed in the center.

Abstract
In photography, an All-in-Focus (AiF) image may not always effectively convey
the creator’s intent. Professional photographers manipulate Depth of Field (DoF)
to control which regions appear sharp or blurred, achieving compelling artistic
effects. For general users, the ability to flexibly adjust DoF enhances creative
expression and image quality. In this paper, we propose UiD, a User-Instructed
DoF control framework, that allows users to specify refocusing regions using
text, box, or point prompts, and our UiD automatically simulates in-focus and
out-of-focus (OoF) regions in the given images. However, controlling defocus
blur in a single-lens camera remains challenging due to the difficulty in estimating
depth-aware aberrations and the suboptimal quality of reconstructed AiF images.
To address this, we leverage dual-pixel (DP) sensors, commonly found in DSLRstyle and mobile cameras. DP sensors provide a small-baseline stereo pair in a
single snapshot, enabling depth-aware aberration estimation. Our approach first
establishes an invertible mapping between OoF and AiF images to learn spatially
varying defocus kernels and the disparity features. These depth-aware kernels
enable bidirectional image transformation—deblurring out-of-focus (OoF) images
into all-in-focus (AiF) representations, and conversely reblurring AiF images
into OoF outputs—by seamlessly switching between the kernel and its inverse
form. For user-guided refocusing, we first generate masks based on user prompts
using SAM, which modulates disparity features in closed form, allowing dynamic
kernel re-estimation for reblurring. This achieves user-controlled refocusing effects.
Extensive experiments on both common datasets and the self-collected dataset
demonstrate that UiD offers superior flexibility and quality in DoF manipulation
imaging.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

