Local-Global Coupling Spiking Graph Transformer
for Brain Disorders Diagnosis from Two Perspectives

Geng Zhang1,2,3 , Jiangrong Shen1,2,4∗, Kaizhong Zheng1,2,3 ,
Liangjun Chen1,2,3 , Badong Chen1,2,3∗
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
2
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University

Abstract
Brain disorders have been consistently associated with abnormalities in specific
brain regions or neural circuits. Identifying key brain regional activities and functional connectivity patterns is essential for discovering more precise neurobiological
biomarkers. However, previous studies have primarily emphasized alterations in
functional connectivity while overlooking abnormal neuronal population activity
within brain regions. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel Local-Global Coupling
Spiking Graph Transformer (LGC-SGT) that jointly models both inter-regional
connectivity differences and deviations in neuronal population firing rates within
brain regions, enabling a dual-perspective neuropathological analysis. The global
pathway leverages spike-based computation in LGC-SGT to model biologically
plausible aberrant neural firing dynamics, while the local pathway adaptively captures abnormal graph-based representations of brain connectivity learned by local
plasticity in the liquid state machine module. Furthermore, we design a shortcutenhanced output strategy in LGC-SGT with the hybrid loss function to suppress
outlier interference caused by inter-individual and inter-center variability, enabling
a more robust decision boundary. Extensive experiments on three brain disorder
datasets demonstrate that our model consistently outperforms state-of-the-art graph
methods in brain disorder diagnosis. Moreover, it facilitates the extraction of interpretable neurobiological biomarkers by jointly analyzing regional neural activity
and functional connectivity, offering a more comprehensive framework for brain
disorder understanding and diagnosis.

1

Introduction

Brain disorders are complex, multi-level conditions characterized by alterations at both the neuronal
and network levels [1]. Evidence suggests that excessive neuronal activity in the hippocampus and
amygdala, along with reorganization of functional connections within the prefrontal cortex and
the default mode network, likely contributes to cognitive impairments [2]. Connectivity patterns
within these regions are particularly crucial, as they mediate the integration of neural circuits that
underpin cognitive function [3]. Moreover, stress-related disorders, such as major depressive disorder
(MDD) and schizophrenia, have been shown to be associated with neural activity in the amygdala
[4]. Thus, abnormal activity in specific neuronal populations can disrupt neural oscillations, also
leading to cognitive dysfunction [5]. Spiking neural networks (SNNs), which biologically model
neuronal firing behaviors in a biologically plausible manner, offer a unique opportunity to integrate
∗

Corresponding author: jrshen@zju.edu.cn, chenbd@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

