SAGE: A Unified Framework for Generalizable Object
State Recognition with State-Action Graph Embedding

Yuan Zang1

Zitian Tang1 Junho Cho2 Jaewook Yoo2
1
Brown University 2 Samsung Electronics
https://brown-palm.github.io/SAGE

Chen Sun1

Abstract
Recognizing the physical states of objects and their transformations within videos
is crucial for structured video understanding and enabling robust real-world applications, such as robotic manipulation. However, pretrained vision-language models
often struggle to capture these nuanced dynamics and their temporal context, and
specialized object state recognition frameworks may not generalize to unseen actions or objects. We introduce SAGE (State-Action Graph Embeddings), a novel
framework that offers a unified model of physical state transitions by decomposing states into fine-grained, language-described visual concepts that are sharable
across different objects and actions. SAGE initially leverages Large Language
Models to construct a State-Action Graph, which is then multimodally refined
using Vision-Language Models. Extensive experiments show that our method
significantly outperforms baselines, generalizes effectively to unseen objects and
actions in open-world settings. SAGE improves the prior state-of-the-art by as
much as 14.6% on novel state recognition with less than 5% of its inference time.

1

Introduction

If we turn the recipe book 100 Ways of Cooking Eggs (Filippini, 1892) into videos, can a modern
computer vision algorithm successfully understand all of them? The answer to this question is not as
straightforward as it might appear. On one hand, the same objects can exhibit a vast range of visual
appearances and physical states (e.g., a whole egg versus a scrambled egg), especially when human
actors interact with them. On the other hand, off-the-shelf detection and segmentation systems tend
to focus on high-level object categories, largely overlooking their underlying physical states and
dynamic transformations. We aim to develop a unified framework to jointly recognize object physical
states and their temporal evolutions from visual cues, by learning from unlabeled instructional videos.
We believe that understanding object states offers a powerful, object-centric abstraction for modeling
world dynamics. This understanding is essential for structured video comprehension of objects,
actions, and skills, and for enabling robots to perceive, predict, and plan when interacting with the
physical world, thus providing a promising pathway for robots to learn from human behaviors.
A natural initial approach to achieve fine-grained understanding of object states might be to leverage
vision-language models (VLMs), which provide detailed language descriptions for visual data
from which object states could potentially be extracted. However, Newman et al. (2024) recently
demonstrated that a naive application of state-of-the-art VLMs often fails to adequately recognize
object physical states. Alternatively, prior work has explored the use of instructional videos, which
are rich in object state transformations, to enhance model training. However, these approaches often
model object states as discrete categories (Souček et al., 2024), or train specialist models conditioned
on actions (Souček et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2024), making it challenging for them to generalize to
novel states belonging to unseen objects or actions. This highlights a critical need for models that can
learn a more flexible and generalizable representation of object states and their dynamics.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

