Understanding and Improving Fast Adversarial
Training against l0 Bounded Perturbations

Xuyang Zhong
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
xuyang.zhong@my.cityu.edu.hk

Yixiao Huang
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
yixiao.huang@my.cityu.edu.hk

Chen Liu ∗
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
chen.liu@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This work studies fast adversarial training against sparse adversarial perturbations
bounded by l0 norm. We first demonstrate the unique challenges of employing
1-step attacks on l0 bounded perturbations, especially catastrophic overfitting
(CO) that cannnot be properly addressed by existing fast adversarial training
method for other lp norms (p ≥ 1). We highlight that CO in l0 adversarial
training arises from sub-optimal perturbation locations of 1-step attack. Some
strategies like multi- can mitigate this sub-optimality to some extent, they lead
to unstable training in turn. Theoretical and numerical analyses also reveal that
the loss landscape of l0 adversarial training is more craggy than its l∞ , l2 and l1
counterparts, which exaggerates CO. To address this issue, we adopt soft labels
and the trade-off loss function to smooth the adversarial loss landscape. Extensive
experiments demonstrate our method can overcome the challenge of CO, achieve
state-of-the-art performance, and narrow the performance gap between 1-step
and multi-step adversarial training against sparse attacks. Codes are available at
https://github.com/CityU-MLO/sPGD.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been shown vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [1]. To achieve robust
models, comprehensive evaluations [2, 3, 4] have demonstrated that adversarial training [5] and
its variants [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] are the most effective methods. However, adversarial training is
generally computationally expensive because generating adversarial perturbations in each training
step needs multiple forward and backward passes of the model. Such efficiency issues hinder the
scalability of adversarial training.
Improving the efficiency of adversarial training is tricky. Some works [13, 14, 15, 16] employ
faster but weaker 1-step attacks to generate adversarial perturbations for training. However, such
methods may suffer from catastrophic overfitting (CO) [17]: the model overfits these weak attacks
instead of achieving true robustness against adaptive and stronger attacks. On the other hand, most
existing works [5, 18, 19] focus on studying adversarial perturbations bounded by l∞ , l2 or l1
norms. In these scenarios, the set of allowable perturbations is convex, which facilitates optimizing
adversarial perturbations and thus adversarial training. However, there are many scenarios in real∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

