Bridging Brains and Concepts: Interpretable Visual
Decoding from fMRI with Semantic Bottlenecks

Sara Cammarota∗
Department of Biomedicine and Prevention
University of Rome, Tor Vergata
Viale Montpellier, 1 – Rome (IT)
sara.cammarota@uniroma2.eu

Matteo Ferrante∗
Tether Evo
Department of Biomedicine and Prevention
University of Rome, Tor Vergata
matteo.ferrante@tether.io

Nicola Toschi
Department of Biomedicine and Prevention
University of Rome, Tor Vergata
Martinos Center For Biomedical Imaging
MGH and Harvard Medical School (USA)
toschi@med.uniroma2.it

Abstract
Decoding of visual stimuli from noninvasive neuroimaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) has advanced rapidly in the last years; yet, most
high-performing brain decoding models rely on complicated, non-interpretable
latent spaces. In this study we present an interpretable brain decoding framework
that inserts a semantic bottleneck into BrainDiffuser, a well established, simple
and linear decoding pipeline. We firstly produce a 214 − dimensional binary interpretable space L for images, in which each dimension answers to a specific
question about the image (e.g., "Is there a person?", "Is it outdoors?"). A first ridge
regression maps voxel activity to this semantic space. Because this mapping is
linear, its weight matrix can be visualized as maps of voxel importance for each
dimension of L, revealing which cortical regions influence mostly each semantic
dimension. A second regression then transforms these concept vectors into CLIP
embeddings required to produce the final decoded image, conditioning the BrainDiffuser model. We found that voxel-wise weight maps for individual questions
are highly consistent with canonical category-selective regions in the visual cortex
(face, bodies, places, words), simultaneously revealing that activation distributions,
not merely location, bear semantic meaning in the brain. Visual brain decoding
performance are only slightly lower compared to the original BrainDiffuser metrics
(e.g., the CLIP similarity is decreased by ≤ 4% for the four subjects), yet offering
substantial gains in interpretability and neuroscientific insights. These results
show that our interpretable brain decoding pipeline enables voxel-level analysis of
semantic representations in the human brain without sacrificing decoding accuracy.

1

Introduction

Decoding the contents of the human mind from neural activity is one of the main challenges of
contemporary neuroscience. Brain decoding refers to the attempt to classify, retrieve or reconstruct
the stimuli that elicited a certain neural response, in an effort to translate the language of the human
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

