List-Level Distribution Coupling with Applications to
Speculative Decoding and Lossy Compression
Joseph Rowan1 Buu Phan1 Ashish Khisti1
1
University of Toronto
{joseph.rowan,truong.phan}@mail.utoronto.ca, akhisti@ece.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We study a relaxation of the problem of coupling probability distributions — a list
of samples is generated from one distribution and an accept is declared if any one
of these samples is identical to the sample generated from the other distribution.
We propose a novel method for generating samples, which extends the Gumbelmax sampling suggested in Daliri et al. [9] for coupling probability distributions.
We also establish a corresponding lower bound on the acceptance probability,
which we call the list matching lemma. We next discuss two applications of our
setup. First, we develop a new mechanism for multi-draft speculative sampling
that is simple to implement and achieves performance competitive with baselines
such as SpecTr [38] and SpecInfer [34] across a range of language tasks. Our
method also guarantees a certain degree of drafter invariance with respect to the
output tokens which is not supported by existing schemes. We also provide a
theoretical lower bound on the token level acceptance probability. As our second
application, we consider distributed lossy compression with side information in a
setting where a source sample is compressed and available to multiple decoders,
each with independent side information. We propose a compression technique
that is based on our generalization of Gumbel-max sampling and show that it
provides significant gains in experiments involving synthetic Gaussian sources and
the MNIST image dataset.

1

Introduction

Coordinated sampling, where samples are drawn from two distributions in such a way that the
probability of the samples being equal is maximized, is a fundamental problem in probability
[17, 18, 37, 40] with applications to machine learning [9, 25, 38], data compression [12, 39] and
information theory [8, 26]. The general problem is as follows. Consider two parties, Alice and Bob,
who wish to generate samples X and Y from distributions pX and qY respectively. For now, we
limit our attention to the case where pX and qY are discrete; importance sampling will later allow
us to extend the discussion to approximate sampling from continuous distributions as well. A first
goal is to construct a scheme that Alice and Bob can follow to maximize the matching or acceptance
probability Pr[X = Y ] while ensuring each sample follows the appropriate marginal distribution. If
they both have access to pX and qY , the problem reduces to that of finding the best joint distribution
for X and Y subject to the marginal constraints, which is called a maximal coupling between pX and
qY [40]. For discrete distributions, such an coupling can be found and the resulting optimal matching
probability is Pr[X = Y ] = 1 − dTV (pX , qY ), where dTV is the total variation distance [17, 37, 40].
However, the requirement that both parties can access pX and qY precludes the use of maximal
couplings in many settings where it is desirable to limit communication between Alice and Bob,
meaning each can no longer sample with full knowledge of the other’s distribution. Sampling methods
based on common randomness offer a convenient solution, and have been shown to achieve matching
probabilities close to that of the maximal coupling despite their relative simplicity [9]. In particular,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

