Universal Causal Inference in a Topos

Sridhar Mahadevan∗
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA
smahadev@adobe.com

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the universal properties underlying causal inference by formulating it in terms of a topos. More concretely, we introduce
topos causal models (TCMs), a strict generalization of the popular structural
causal models (SCMs). A topos category has several properties that make
it attractive: a general theory for how to combine local functions that
define “independent causal mechanisms" into a consistent global function
building on the theory of sheaves in a topos; a generic way to define causal
interventions using a subobject classifier in a topos category; and finally,
an internal logical language for causal and counterfactual reasoning that
emerges from the topos itself. A striking characteristic of subobject classifiers is that they induce an intuitionistic logic, whose semantics is based
on the partially ordered lattice of subobjects. We show that the underlying
subobject classifier for causal inference is not Boolean in general, but forms
a Heyting algebra. We define the internal Mitchell-Bénabou language, a
typed local set theory, associated with causal models, and its associated
Kripke-Joyal intuitionistic semantics. We prove a universal property of
TCM, namely that any causal functor mapping decomposable structure to
probabilistic semantics factors uniquely through a TCM representation.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been significant interest in categorical models of causality, based on
symmetric monoidal categories [Fong, 2012, Fritz and Klingler, 2023, Cho and Jacobs, 2019,
Jacobs et al., 2018], as well as simplicial sets and higher-order categories [Mahadevan, 2023].
Markov categories [Fritz, 2020] define a broad unifying framework for probabilistic inference
and statistics using symmetric monoidal categories, where each object is additionally
equipped with a comonoidal “copy-delete" operation. It enables carrying out rigorous
proofs using an elegant string diagrammatic language [Selinger, 2010]. Any causal model
based on graphs [Pearl, 2009, Forré and Mooij, 2017, Spirtes et al., 2000] or other algebraic
formalisms, such as integer-valued multisets [Studeny, 2010], can be translated into a string
diagram over a symmetric monoidal category, or a simplicial set. Operations on causal
models, such as interventions, can be modeled as functors on the objects of the associated
symmetric monoidal category or simplicial set. Categorical approaches to causality also
extend to the potential outcomes counterfactual framework [Imbens and Rubin, 2015].
Categorical approaches fundamentally differ from past work in causality in their focus on
the elucidation of universal properties. In our previous work [Mahadevan, 2023, 2025c], we
introduced the framework of universal causality based on the notion of universal properties
∗
Academic affiliation: Research Professor, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; See webpage at
https://people.cs.umass.edu/~mahadeva/Site/About_Me.html

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

