CHPO: Constrained Hybrid-action Policy
Optimization for Reinforcement Learning

Ao Zhou1,2

Jiayi Guan1 Li Shen3 Fan Lu1 Sanqing Qu1 Junqiao Zhao1
Ziqiao Wang1 Ya Wu4 Guang Chen1,2∗
1
Tongji University
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute
3
Sun Yat-Sen University
4
CNNC Equipment Technology Research (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.
{2211107, guanjiayi, lufan, sanqingqu}@tongji.edu.cn
{Zhaojunqiao, ziqiaowang, guangchen}@tongji.edu.cn
mathshenli@gmail.com
qpo144@163.com

Abstract
Constrained hybrid-action reinforcement learning (RL) promises to learn a safe
policy within a parameterized action space, which is particularly valuable for
safety-critical applications involving discrete-continuous hybrid action spaces.
However, existing hybrid-action RL algorithms primarily focus on reward maximization, which faces significant challenges for tasks involving both cost constraints and hybrid action spaces. In this work, we propose a novel Constrained
Hybrid-action Policy Optimization algorithm (CHPO) to address the problems
of constrained hybrid-action RL. Concretely, we rethink the limitations of hybridaction RL in handling safe tasks with parameterized action spaces and reframe
the objective of constrained hybrid-action RL by introducing the concept of Constrained Parameterized-action Markov Decision Process (CPMDP). Subsequently,
we present a constrained hybrid-action policy optimization algorithm to confront
the constrained hybrid-action problems and conduct theoretical analyses demonstrating that the CHPO converges to the optimal solution while satisfying safety
constraints. Finally, extensive experiments demonstrate that the CHPO achieves
competitive performance across multiple experimental tasks. Our code is available
at github.CHPO.

1

Introduction

Hybrid-action reinforcement learning (RL) aims to handle tasks with parameterized action spaces,
combining discrete and continuous actions to enable effective decision-making in complex scenarios [1–3]. Recent works of hybrid-action RL have achieved remarkable achievements in the domains
of policy games [4, 5], robotics [6–9], resource allocation [10–12], and autonomous driving [13, 14].
However, safety concerns remain a primary challenge to the real-world deployment of hybrid-action
RL, particularly in scenarios with high safety requirements [15–17]. For instance, in the context of
autonomous driving, agents need to learn a reward-maximizing policy within parameterized action
spaces while simultaneously ensuring collision avoidance [18–20]. Constrained hybrid-action RL is
a promising and potentially effective approach to address the aforementioned issues. It learns policies
that satisfy safety constraints in tasks with parameterized action spaces.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

