Gene Regulatory Network Inference in the Presence of
Selection Bias and Latent Confounders
Gongxu Luo1 , Haoyue Dai2 , Loka Li1 , Chengqian Gao1 , Boyang Sun1 , Kun Zhang1,2
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{gongxu.luo, kun.zhang}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Gene regulatory network inference (GRNI) aims to discover how genes causally
regulate each other from gene expression data. It is well-known that statistical
dependencies in observed data do not necessarily imply causation, as spurious
dependencies may arise from latent confounders, such as non-coding RNAs. Numerous GRNI methods have thus been proposed to address this confounding issue.
However, dependencies may also result from selection–only cells satisfying certain
survival or inclusion criteria are observed–while these selection-induced spurious
dependencies are frequently overlooked in gene expression data analyses. In this
work, we show that such selection is ubiquitous and, when ignored or conflated
with true regulations, can lead to flawed causal interpretation and misguided intervention recommendations. To address this challenge, a fundamental question arises:
can we distinguish dependencies due to regulation, confounding, and crucially,
selection? We show that gene perturbations offer a simple yet effective answer:
selection-induced dependencies are symmetric under perturbation, while those from
regulation or confounding are not. Building on this motivation, we propose GISL
(Gene regulatory network Inference in the presence of Selection bias and Latent
confounders), a principled algorithm that leverages perturbation data to uncover
both true gene regulatory relations and non-regulatory mechanisms of selection and
confounding up to the equivalence class. Experiments on synthetic and real-world
gene expression data demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Gene regulatory network inference (GRNI [1, 2]) is fundamentally a problem of causal discovery, that
is, identifying causal regulatory relationships from observational and experimental gene expression
data [3, 4]. Existing GRNI studies include dependence-based methods using correlation [5, 6],
regression [7, 8, 9], and mutual information [10, 11]; dynamic modeling using pseudotemporal
trajectories [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]; and perturbation modeling using differential analysis [17, 18, 19, 20].
Central to these efforts is a fundamental question: can a statistical dependence observed in gene
expression data be interpreted as a regulatory relationship? It is well-known that the answer is not
always yes—dependencies do not imply causation, as spurious dependencies may arise from latent
confounding such as non-coding RNAs or environmental stimuli [21, 22, 23]. Numerous GRNI
methods have thus been proposed to address this confounding issue [24, 25, 26, 27].
Yet another important source of spurious dependencies remains underexplored: selection bias—the
preferential inclusion of data points based on specific criteria [28]. In gene expression data, this
arises when only cells meeting certain survival inclusion criteria are observed. As a result, two
genes may appear statistically associated not because one regulates the other or they share a common
regulator, but because only cells in which both genes satisfy the survival criteria persist and are
sequenced. Dynamic proliferation studies support this mechanism: perturbations selectively eliminate
cells that fail to meet the survival criteria, yielding the differential proliferation rates before and after
perturbation [29, 30]. We show that such selection is pervasive and, if ignored or conflated with
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

