HermesFlow: Seamlessly Closing the Gap in
Multimodal Understanding and Generation

Ling Yang1∗ † Xinchen Zhang2∗ Ye Tian3 Shiyi Zhang2 Chenming Shang2
Minghao Xu3 Wentao Zhang3† Bin Cui3†
1
Princeton University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Peking University
https://github.com/Gen-Verse/HermesFlow

Abstract
The remarkable success of the autoregressive paradigm has made significant advancement in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), with powerful models like Show-o, Transfusion and Emu3 achieving notable progress in unified
image understanding and generation. For the first time, we uncover a common
phenomenon: the understanding capabilities of MLLMs are typically stronger than
their generative capabilities, with a significant gap between the two. Building on
this insight, we propose HermesFlow, a simple yet general framework designed
to seamlessly bridge the gap between understanding and generation in MLLMs.
Specifically, we take the homologous data as input to curate homologous preference data of both understanding and generation. Through Pair-DPO and self-play
iterative optimization, HermesFlow effectively aligns multimodal understanding
and generation using homologous preference data. Extensive experiments demonstrate the significant superiority of our approach over prior methods, particularly
in narrowing the gap between multimodal understanding and generation. These
findings highlight the potential of HermesFlow as a general alignment framework
for next-generation multimodal foundation models.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of Large Language Mod(b)
els (LLMs) [24, 9, 55, 53, 74] has driven sig- (a)
Text1 Text2
Image1 Image2
nificant development in both multimodal unUnd
Gen
Preference
Preference
MLLM
MLLM
data
data
derstanding [22, 72, 19] and autoregressive imDPO
DPO
Training
Training
Caption
age generation [34, 38, 4]. Recent studies Image Text
Text1 Text2
[36, 18, 45, 44, 23] focused on developing a
Iterative Optimization
Und
unified system capable of both multimodal unMLLM
Gen&Und
Pair
derstanding and generation. Powerful Multi- (Image, Caption)
MLLM
preference data
Gen
modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) like
Pair-DPO
Training
MLLM
Selfcritic
Show-o [48], Transfusion [69], and Emu3 [41], (c)
Image1 Image2
employ a single transformer to unify these tasks,
demonstrating remarkable performance across Figure 1: Architecture comparison between (a)
DPO training improve multimodal understanding
both domains.
[71, 11], (b) DPO training improve multimodal
Recently, there has been growing interest in ex- generation [41] and (c) our HermesFlow.
ploring the synergy between multimodal understanding and generation [45, 40, 3]. Liquid [45] demonstrates that these two tasks are mutually
∗
†

Contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

