Solver-Free Decision-Focused Learning
for Linear Optimization Problems

Senne Berden, Ali İrfan Mahmutoğulları, Dimos Tsouros, Tias Guns
Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven
{senne.berden,irfan.mahmutogullari,dimos.tsouros,tias.guns}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
Mathematical optimization is a fundamental tool for decision-making in a wide
range of applications. However, in many real-world scenarios, the parameters of the
optimization problem are not known a priori and must be predicted from contextual
features. This gives rise to predict-then-optimize problems, where a machine
learning model predicts problem parameters that are then used to make decisions
via optimization. A growing body of work on decision-focused learning (DFL)
addresses this setting by training models specifically to produce predictions that
maximize downstream decision quality, rather than accuracy. While effective, DFL
is computationally expensive, because it requires solving the optimization problem
with the predicted parameters at each loss evaluation. In this work, we address
this computational bottleneck for linear optimization problems, a common class of
problems in both DFL literature and real-world applications. We propose a solverfree training method that exploits the geometric structure of linear optimization
to enable efficient training with minimal degradation in solution quality. Our
method is based on the insight that a solution is optimal if and only if it achieves an
objective value that is at least as good as that of its adjacent vertices on the feasible
polytope. Building on this, our method compares the estimated quality of the
ground-truth optimal solution with that of its precomputed adjacent vertices, and
uses this as loss function. Experiments demonstrate that our method significantly
reduces computational cost while maintaining high decision quality.

1

Introduction

Linear optimization is widely used to model decision-making problems across many domains [5, 18,
20, 41]. Given a linear objective function and a set of linear constraints, an optimization solver can
compute the optimal decisions. However, in many real-world scenarios, the cost coefficients that
define the objective function are not known at solving time. For example, a delivery company may
need to plan delivery routes without knowing the future traffic conditions. In such cases, the problem
parameters must first be predicted from available contextual information (e.g., the weather conditions
or temporal features). This gives rise to predict-then-optimize problems [26], where the predictions
of a machine learning model serve as inputs to an optimization problem. The quality of the produced
solutions thus hinges on the parameters predicted by the machine learning model, making the loss
function used to train this model highly important.
Traditionally, the machine learning model is trained to maximize accuracy (e.g., by minimizing the
mean squared error over all its predictions). However, this may lead to suboptimal decisions. This is
because, while perfect predictions lead to perfect decisions, different kinds of imperfect predictions
affect downstream decision-making in different ways. Decision-focused learning (DFL) addresses
this by training models specifically to make predictions that lead to good decisions. As numerous
works have shown, this generally improves decision quality [2, 9, 10, 24, 28, 33, 40].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

