Improve Temporal Reasoning in Multimodal Large
Language Models via Video Contrastive Decoding

Daiqing Qi1

Dongliang Guo1
Mengxuan Hu1
1

Hanzhang Yuan1

Lehan Yang1

University of Virginia

2

Handong Zhao2

Sheng Li1

Adobe Research

Abstract
A major distinction between video and image understanding is that the former
requires reasoning over time. Existing Video Large Language Models (VLLMs)
demonstrate promising performance in general video understanding, such as brief
captioning or object recognition within individual frames. However, they often
struggle with temporal reasoning such as understanding continuous actions or tracking object transformations over time—which typically demands the integration
of multiple frames in a temporally coherent manner. We first explore and explain
such failures in Video LLMs from the perspective of language and “image” priors.
While existing research has attempted to enhance the temporal understanding of
VLLMs through various training strategies, the demand for expensive computational resources and training data often presents significant barriers. To this end,
we further propose a simple yet novel idea for improving temporal reasoning in
videos at no additional training cost. Specifically, to better capture the temporal
structure across multiple frames—the key to effective temporal reasoning—we
distort the temporal consistency in key frames during the decoding phase. Such
corruption induces time-insensitive wrong responses from the model, which are
then contrastively avoided when generating the final correct output. In this way, the
model is encouraged to perform more temporally coherent reasoning. Our method
yields consistent improvements across both temporal-specific and general video
understanding benchmarks, demonstrating its effectiveness and generalizability.

1

Introduction

Benefiting from the significant advancements in Large Language Models in recent years, Video
LLMs [14, 34, 35, 16, 30] have also experienced rapid development, exhibiting strong capabilities in
general video understanding. A key distinction between video understanding and image understanding
is that the former requires models to comprehend not only individual input frames but also the
temporal relationships among them. Consequently, temporal perception is crucial for Video LLMs.
However, recent studies [11, 21] have shown that even for simple and straightforward temporal
reasoning questions that humans can easily answer, Video LLMs, such as LLaVA-Video [35], VideoLLaVA [14] and VILA [16, 22], often make mistakes that are clearly inconsistent with the ground
truth. Recent studies [28, 8, 29, 11] have investigated the limitations of temporal reasoning in Video
LLMs from a model-centric perspective. Given that a typical Video-LLM is composed of a vision
encoder and an LLM backbone, a common analytical approach is to disentangle and examine the
contributions of each component to temporal reasoning. While some works [28, 8, 29] attribute the
temporal reasoning deficiencies of Video LLMs to ineffective video embeddings and accordingly
focus on improving temporal information aggregation, others [11] leave aside the vision modules and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

