Personalized Visual Content Generation in
Conversational Systems

Xianquan Wang1* ,

Zhaocheng Du2* , Huibo Xu1* ,
Jieming Zhu2 , Kai Zhang1† ,
1

Shukang Yin1 ,
Qi Liu1

Yupeng Han1 ,

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{xqwang, xhbxhb, xjtupanda, yupenghan}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
zhaochengdu@huawei.com jiemingzhu@ieee.org
{kkzhang08, qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rapid progress of large language models (LLMs) and diffusion models,
there has been growing interest in personalized content generation. However,
current conversational systems often present the same recommended content to
all users, falling into the dilemma of "one-size-fits-all." To break this limitation
and boost user engagement, in this paper, we introduce PCG (Personalized Visual
Content Generation), a unified framework for personalizing item images within
conversational systems. We tackle two key bottlenecks: the depth of personalization and the fidelity of generated images. Specifially, an LLM-powered Inclinations
Analyzer is adopted to capture user likes and dislikes from context to construct personalized prompts. Moreover, we design a dual-stage LoRA mechanism—Global
LoRA for understanding task-specific visual style, and Local LoRA for capturing
preferred visual elements from conversation history. During training, we introduce
the visual content condition method to ensure LoRA learns both historical visual
context and maintains fidelity to the original item images. Extensive experiments
on benchmark conversational datasets—including objective metrics and GPT-based
evaluations—demonstrate that our framework outperforms strong baselines, which
highlight its potential to redefine personalization in visual content generation for
conversational scenarios like e-commerce and real-world recommendation.

1

Introduction

The rise of large language models (LLMs) [34, 35] has sparked conversational systems across
industries. For instance, e-commerce platforms can recommend preferred items through multi-turn
conversations [30, 5], while music apps interactively suggest album cover [3]. They operate by
dynamically analyzing users’ inclinations (likes or dislikes) during interactions [14]: when users
show strong interest in specific item categories, or strongly advocate for a specific item, the dialog
prioritizes related content; conversely, explicit rejections reduce recommendations about those
items [12, 21]. Usually, the systems also include the item image to attract users, as shown in Figure 1.
A picture is worth a thousand words; images are the most intuitive and vivid representation of
items. Unfortunately, current conversational systems presented identical item representations
to all users, even though different users prefer different points of the same item. For example, the
*
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: Kai Zhang (kkzhang08@ustc.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

