Flick: Empowering Federated Learning with
Commonsense Knowledge

Ran Zhu1 , Mingkun Yang1 , Shiqiang Wang2 , Jie Yang1 , Qing Wang1
1
Delft University of Technology, 2 IBM Research
{r.zhu-1, m.yang-3, j.yang-3, qing.wang}@tudelft.nl
shiqiang.wang@ieee.org

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a privacy-preserving framework for training models on data generated at the edge. However, the heterogeneity of data silos
(e.g., label skew and domain shift) often leads to inconsistent learning objectives
and suboptimal model performance. Inspired by the data-driven approach, we
propose Flick, a novel data generation framework for heterogeneous Federated
Learning with Commonsense Knowledge from Large Language Models (LLMs).
In Flick, the client performs the local data summary to capture client-specific
knowledge in textual form. The central server then distills task-relevant, highquality knowledge from the out-of-the-box LLM – guided by cross-client-specific
insights – to generate informative text prompts. These prompts direct a generative
model in producing synthetic data, enabling global model fine-tuning and local
data compensation. This process gradually aligns the label and feature distributions
across clients. Extensive results on three datasets demonstrate that Flick improves
the global model accuracy by up to 11.43%, and accelerates convergence by up to
12.9×, validating its effectiveness in addressing data heterogeneity. The code can
be found at https://github.com/Ran-ZHU/Flick.

1

Introduction

With the proliferation of mobile devices equipped with sensing capabilities, edge-generated data
has unlocked new opportunities for cyber-physical services. Meanwhile, advances in computing
and networking at the edge have driven the adoption of edge computing, where deploying deep
learning models near data sources enables agile and efficient AI applications within distributed
systems [1–3]. In this context, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a key paradigm that enables
collaborative model training on decentralized data while preserving data privacy [4–6]. FL proceeds
in communication rounds, where participating devices (clients) perform several steps of Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) on local data and send the updated models to a central server for aggregation
into a global model. A commonly used algorithm is FedAvg [5], which alternates between local
updates on clients and global parameter aggregation among clients by a central server. However, the
performance of the global model is often hindered by the non-identically and/or non-independently
distributed (non-IID) nature of data silos across clients. Specifically, when data distributions are
heterogeneous – due to class imbalance or domain shifts (e.g, sketch vs. photo) – clients may learn
inconsistent objectives. This leads to slower convergence and reduced generalization in the resulting
global model (Figure 1(left)).
To solve this problem, previous works proposed solutions such as 1) modifying loss functions for local
models [7–10], 2) re-weighting central aggregation for the global model [11–13], or 3) using adaptive
hyper-parameters for local training [14–16]. However, since the local objective is only computable on
clients, those model-driven methods that align the global optimum with local (surrogate) objectives
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

