Rao-Blackwellised Reparameterisation Gradients

Kevin H. Lam
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Thang D. Bui
School of Computing
Australian National University

George Deligiannidis
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Yee Whye Teh
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

{lam,deligian,y.w.teh}@stats.ox.ac.uk, thang.bui@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Latent Gaussian variables have been popularised in probabilistic machine learning.
In turn, gradient estimators are the machinery that facilitates gradient-based optimisation for models with latent Gaussian variables. The reparameterisation trick
is often used as the default estimator as it is simple to implement and yields lowvariance gradients for variational inference. In this work, we propose the R2-G2
estimator as the Rao-Blackwellisation of the reparameterisation gradient estimator.
Interestingly, we show that the local reparameterisation gradient estimator for
Bayesian MLPs is an instance of the R2-G2 estimator and Rao-Blackwellisation.
This lets us extend benefits of Rao-Blackwellised gradients to a suite of probabilistic models. We show that initial training with R2-G2 consistently yields better
performance in models with multiple applications of the reparameterisation trick.

1

Introduction

Latent random variables are ubiquitous in probabilistic machine learning (ML) as they enable us to
embed prior assumptions into models, such as uncertainty in model parameters and low-dimensional
latent representations of observed data structures. Thus, latent random variables appear in a range of
modelling tasks, including variational inference, generative modelling, and density estimation. A wide
variety of modern models with latent random variables, particularly those that parameterise a neural
network (NN), are trained with gradient-based optimisation. This presents a non-trivial problem on
how analytical derivatives can incorporate stochasticity, and has led to substantial interest in gradient
estimators. These estimators enable gradient-based optimisation by computing approximations of
gradients that are compatible with automatic differentiation software. For comprehensive reviews
of gradient estimators with latent continuous and discrete random variables, we refer the reader to
Mohamed et al. (2020) and Huijben et al. (2023) respectively.
We revisit the class of gradient estimators for latent Gaussian variables (Kingma and Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014; Titsias and Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014), as Gaussian variables often serve as the
default distribution for the noise or prior in probabilistic machine learning tasks. These estimators,
known as pathwise estimators or the reparameterisation trick, have been popularised as they produce
low-variance gradients for variational inference. In particular, it has been shown in Xu et al. (2019) that
the reparameterisation gradient estimator has lower variance than a Rao-Blackwellised REINFORCE
estimator (Williams, 1992) for variational inference. These estimators are also attractive as they are
single-sample estimators since training models with them only requires sampling operations be done
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

