CCL: Causal-aware In-context Learning for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Hoyoon Byun, Gyeongdeok Seo, Joonseong Kang, Taero Kim, Jihee Kim, Kyungwoo Song∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University
{hoyun.byun, gd.seo, doongsae, taero.kim, jihee_sta, kyungwoo.song}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL), a nonparametric learning method based on the knowledge
of demonstration sets, has become a de facto standard for large language models
(LLMs). The primary goal of ICL is to select valuable demonstration sets to
enhance the performance of LLMs. Traditional ICL methods choose demonstration
sets that share similar features with a given query. However, our experiments
reveal that these traditional ICL approaches perform poorly on out-of-distribution
(OOD) datasets, where the demonstration set and the query originate from different
distributions. To ensure robust performance in OOD datasets, it is essential to
learn causal representations that remain invariant between the source and target
datasets. Inspired by causal representation learning, we propose causal-aware
in-context learning (CCL). CCL captures the causal representations of a given
dataset and selects demonstration sets that share similar causal features with the
query. To achieve this, CCL employs a novel VAE-based causal representation
learning technique. We demonstrate that CCL improves the OOD generalization
performance of LLMs both theoretically and empirically. Code is available at:
https://github.com/MLAI-Yonsei/causal-context-learning

1

Introduction

While large language models (LLMs) excel as general-purpose pre-trained models, in-context learning
(ICL) has become a key approach for aligning them to target tasks. ICL [1] enables LLMs to adapt
to new tasks with a few demonstrations and without parameter updates, making it applicable in
various fields. While ICL has shown significant promise, it still faces difficulties in achieving robust
generalization [2]. A primary challenge is that LLMs rely on superficial patterns in demonstration sets,
which restrict their capability in unseen environments [3]. Recent studies indicate that distribution
shifts between demonstration sets and target queries in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios impede
the ability of LLMs to generalize effectively [4, 5, 6]. To fully unlock the potential of LLMs and
enable reliable deployment in real-world applications, ensuring robustness in OOD scenarios plays a
pivotal role.
The pursuit of ensuring generalization beyond observed data naturally leads to the question of how
the data was generated. Drawing on insights from causality [7], the structural knowledge of data
is expressed using causal language. In causal representation learning (CRL) [8], observed data
reflect underlying latent causal variables that drive the data-generating process (DGP). CRL aims to
model the causal mechanisms among these variables [9]. For example, if two causal variables are
independent, one remains invariant even when the other, acting as an environmental factor, changes
[10, 11]. The assumption about causal mechanisms suggests that learning invariant causal variables is
an effective approach for models robust to distribution shifts. Consequently, CRL lays the groundwork
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

