Improving Regret Approximation for Unsupervised
Dynamic Environment Generation

Harry Mead
University of Oxford

Bruno Lacerda
University of Oxford

Jakob Foerster
University of Oxford

Nick Hawes
University of Oxford

Abstract
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) seeks to automatically generate training curricula for reinforcement learning (RL) agents, with the goal of improving
generalisation and zero-shot performance. However, designing effective curricula remains a difficult problem, particularly in settings where small subsets of
environment parameterisations result in significant increases in the complexity of
the required policy. Current methods struggle with a difficult credit assignment
problem and rely on regret approximations that fail to identify challenging levels,
both of which are compounded as the size of the environment grows. We propose
Dynamic Environment Generation for UED (DEGen) to enable a denser level generator reward signal, reducing the difficulty of credit assignment and allowing for
UED to scale to larger environment sizes. We also introduce a new regret approximation, Maximised Negative Advantage (MNA), as a significantly improved metric
to optimise for, that better identifies more challenging levels. We show empirically
that MNA outperforms current regret approximations and when combined with
DEGen, consistently outperforms existing methods, especially as the size of the
environment grows. We have made all our code available here: https://github.
com/HarryMJMead/Dynamic-Environment-Generation-for-UED.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been effective in training highly-capable agents in a number
of different challenging settings, such as in real-world robotics applications [1, 2, 48, 28], or games
such as Go [52], Chess [53], Starcraft [58] and Dota [5]. However, these deep-RL agents tend to
exhibit poor generalisation when transferred to tasks or environments with only small changes to
those used to train on [62, 9].
In order to address this lack of robustness, domain-randomisation (DR), training over a diversity
of environment parameterisations, has proven successful in a number of applications. However,
DR relies on random parameterisations resulting in useful training examples, and in complex environments this may not be the case. Automated Curriculum Learning (ACL) [16, 42] methods aim
to produce adaptive curricula for training that ensure the generation of useful training examples
whilst maintaining a sufficiently diverse distribution over these environment parameterisations. These
methods have shown success over naive domain-randomisation approaches [43, 38].
However, manually designing a suitable curriculum for learning may in itself be a challenge, whilst
also limiting the capacity for open-ended learning [59, 60]. Recent work has focused on Unsupervised
Environment Design (UED) [11], which has emerged as a widely applicable curriculum design method
as no prior environment knowledge is required. In the UED literature, each parameterisation of
the environment is referred to as a level, and so UED frames the curriculum design problem as the
interaction between a teacher agent designing levels and a student agent training on these levels. The
majority of existing work focuses on maximising student regret [11, 27, 40, 8], as prior work [11]
has shown that if the student and teacher reach a Nash equilibrium of a minimax regret game, the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

