AgentAuditor: Human-Level Safety and Security
Evaluation for LLM Agents

Hanjun Luo1∗ , Shenyu Dai3∗ , Chiming Ni5 , Xinfeng Li2† , Guibin Zhang6 , Kun Wang2 ,

Tongliang Liu4,7 , Hanan Salam1
New York University Abu Dhabi, 2 Nanyang Technological University,
3
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 4 University of Sydney,
5
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
6
National University of Singapore, 7 Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI
1

Abstract
Despite the rapid advancement of LLM-based agents, the reliable evaluation of
their safety and security remains a significant challenge. Existing rule-based or
LLM-based evaluators often miss dangers in agents’ step-by-step actions, overlook
subtle meanings, fail to see how small issues compound, and get confused by
unclear safety or security rules. To overcome this evaluation crisis, we introduce
AgentAuditor, a universal, training-free, memory-augmented reasoning framework
that empowers LLM evaluators to emulate human expert evaluators. AgentAuditor
constructs an experiential memory by having an LLM adaptively extract structured semantic features (e.g., scenario, risk, behavior) and generate associated
chain-of-thought reasoning traces for past interactions. A multi-stage, contextaware retrieval-augmented generation process then dynamically retrieves the most
relevant reasoning experiences to guide the LLM evaluator’s assessment of new
cases. Moreover, we develop ASSEBench, the first benchmark designed to check
how well LLM-based evaluators can spot both safety risks and security threats.
ASSEBench comprises 2293 meticulously annotated interaction records, covering 15 risk types across 29 application scenarios. A key feature of ASSEBench
is its nuanced approach to ambiguous risk situations, employing “Strict” and
“Lenient” judgment standards. Experiments demonstrate that AgentAuditor not
only consistently improves the evaluation performance of LLMs across all benchmarks but also sets a new state-of-the-art in LLM-as-a-judge for agent safety
and security, achieving human-level accuracy. Our work is openly accessible at
https://github.com/Astarojth/AgentAuditor-ASSEBench.

1

Introduction

Large language model (LLM)-based agents are rapidly evolving from passive text generators into
autonomous decision-makers capable of complex, goal-driven behaviors [48]. By leveraging the
general reasoning abilities of LLMs and extending them with tool use and real-time environment
interaction, these agents are moving closer to the vision of artificial general intelligence (AGI) [49,
58, 9, 95, 91, 1, 88]. However, this expanded agency introduces a new class of risks: agents may
exhibit unsafe or insecure behaviors during autonomous interactions, especially in high-stakes or
dynamic scenarios [29, 13, 89, 45, 44]. Traditional LLM safety evaluation focuses mainly on the
generated content [104, 100, 43, 18, 62, 80], but agentic systems require a much deeper assessment
of their interactive behaviors and decision-making processes. Reliable evaluation of these dynamic
∗
†

Co-first Author (hl6266@nyu.edu)
Corresponding Author (lxfmakeit@gmail.com)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

