MPMAvatar: Learning 3D Gaussian Avatars with
Accurate and Robust Physics-Based Dynamics

Changmin Lee

Jihyun Lee
KAIST

Tae-Kyun Kim

{lcm914, jyun.lee, kimtaekyun}@kaist.ac.kr

Multi-view video input

Novel pose driving

Zero-shot scene interactions

Figure 1. 3D Gaussian avatars with accurate and robust physics-based animation. We present MPMAvatar,
a framework for creating 3D Gaussian avatars from multi-view videos, that support physically accurate and
robust animations, especially for loose garments. Ours is also zero-shot generalizable to novel scene interactions.

Abstract
While there has been significant progress in the field of 3D avatar creation from
visual observations, modeling physically plausible dynamics of humans with loose
garments remains a challenging problem. Although a few existing works address
this problem by leveraging physical simulation, they suffer from limited accuracy
or robustness to novel animation inputs. In this work, we present MPMAvatar, a
framework for creating 3D human avatars from multi-view videos that supports
highly realistic, robust animation, as well as photorealistic rendering from free
viewpoints. For accurate and robust dynamics modeling, our key idea is to use
a Material Point Method-based simulator, which we carefully tailor to model
garments with complex deformations and contact with the underlying body by
incorporating an anisotropic constitutive model and a novel collision handling
algorithm. We combine this dynamics modeling scheme with our canonical avatar
that can be rendered using 3D Gaussian Splatting with quasi-shadowing, enabling
high-fidelity rendering for physically realistic animations. In our experiments,
we demonstrate that MPMAvatar significantly outperforms the existing state-ofthe-art physics-based avatar in terms of (1) dynamics modeling accuracy, (2)
rendering accuracy, and (3) robustness and efficiency. Additionally, we present a
novel application in which our avatar generalizes to unseen interactions in a zeroshot manner—which was not achievable with previous learning-based methods
due to their limited simulation generalizability. Our project page is at: https:
//KAISTChangmin.github.io/MPMAvatar/.

1

Introduction

Creating 3D human avatars has been an important research problem due to their broad range of
applications, including virtual and augmented reality, computer games, and content creation. The
key goals of this field include modeling and learning avatars that support (1) photorealistic rendering
from free viewpoints and (2) realistic animation driven by sparse motion inputs (e.g., SMPL-X [51]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

