IPFormer: Visual 3D Panoptic Scene Completion
with Context-Adaptive Instance Proposals
∗

Markus Gross1,2,3,
Aya Fahmy1
Danit Niwattananan2
2,3
4
Dominik Muhle
Rui Song
Daniel Cremers2,3
Henri Meeß1
1

Fraunhofer Institute IVI
Technical University of Munich
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning
4
University of California, Los Angeles
2

Abstract
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has emerged as a pivotal approach for jointly
learning scene geometry and semantics, enabling downstream applications such as
navigation in mobile robotics. The recent generalization to Panoptic Scene Completion (PSC) advances the SSC domain by integrating instance-level information,
thereby enhancing object-level sensitivity in scene understanding. While PSC was
introduced using LiDAR modality, methods based on camera images remain largely
unexplored. Moreover, recent Transformer-based approaches utilize a fixed set of
learned queries to reconstruct objects within the scene volume. Although these
queries are typically updated with image context during training, they remain static
at test time, limiting their ability to dynamically adapt specifically to the observed
scene. To overcome these limitations, we propose IPFormer, the first method
that leverages context-adaptive instance proposals at train and test time to address
vision-based 3D Panoptic Scene Completion. Specifically, IPFormer adaptively initializes these queries as panoptic instance proposals derived from image context and
further refines them through attention-based encoding and decoding to reason about
semantic instance-voxel relationships. Extensive experimental results show that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art in-domain performance, exhibits superior zeroshot generalization on out-of-domain data, and achieves a runtime reduction exceeding 14×. These results highlight our introduction of context-adaptive instance
proposals as a pioneering effort in addressing vision-based 3D Panoptic Scene
Completion. Code available at https://github.com/markus-42/ipformer.

1

Introduction

Panoptic Scene Completion provides a holistic scene understanding that can serve applications like
autonomous driving and robotics by reconstructing volumetric geometry from sparse sensor data
and assigning meaning to objects in the scene. Such holistic scene understanding requires both
accurate geometry and semantic information about a scene. Historically, these tasks have been treated
separately and evolved independently due to the distinct nature of geometric reconstruction and
semantic interpretation, each requiring specialized algorithms and data representations. Despite the
inherent interconnection between geometry and semantics, their separation hindered unified scene
understanding. Classical structure-from-motion evolved into simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) systems for accurate reconstructions [38, 12, 25], while deep learning facilitated monocular
depth estimation (MDE) methods [14, 15, 53], which are restricted to visible surfaces. In contrast,
∗

Corresponding author: markus.gross@tum.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

