Generative property enhancer: implicit guided
generation through conditional density estimation

Pedro O. Pinheiro1 Pan Kessel1 Aya A. Ismail2,∗ Sai Pooja Mahajan1
Kyunghyun Cho1,3 Saeed Saremi1 Nataša Tagasovska1
1

Prescient Design, Genentech, 2 Guide Labs, 3 New York University

Abstract
Generative modeling is increasingly important for data-driven computational design.
Conventional approaches pair a generative model with a discriminative model to
select or guide samples toward optimized designs. Yet discriminative models often
struggle in data-scarce settings, common in scientific applications, and are unreliable
in the tails of the distribution where optimal designs typically lie. We introduce
generative property enhancer (GPE), an approach that implicitly guides generation
by matching samples with lower property values to higher-value ones. Formulated
as conditional density estimation, our framework defines a target distribution
with improved properties, compelling the generative model to produce enhanced,
diverse designs without auxiliary predictors. GPE is simple, scalable, end-to-end,
modality-agnostic, and integrates seamlessly with diverse generative model
architectures and losses. We demonstrate competitive empirical results on standard
in silico offline (non-sequential) protein fitness optimization benchmarks. Finally,
we propose iterative training on a combination of limited real data and self-generated
synthetic data, enabling extrapolation beyond the original property ranges.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling has become an essential component to tackle computational design problems
in scientific applications such as protein engineering, synthetic biology, material sciences or molecular
design. An important application—the one we explore in this work—is the problem of design optimization1 , where the goal is to produce optimized samples (designs) according to some desired property(ies).
Conventional data-driven approaches are usually composed of two modules: (i) a generative model
to propose design candidates, and (ii) a discriminative model to select optimized designs. The
discriminative models are trained on available data to approximate the unknown objective landscape
of the data. They are used to either rank and select generated samples or to guide the generation process
toward samples with desired properties [1–18]. However, when data is scarce (usually the case in
scientific applications), training a reliable discriminative model is often not feasible. To make the
matter worse, we usually seek designs that lie in the tail of the distribution of the property which is
typically very challenging to learn, making predictions even less reliable.
In this work, we challenge this paradigm by casting the problem of design optimization as a conditional
generative modeling problem. We leverage the implicit guidance mechanism proposed by Tagasovska et
al. [19] and take it a step further by going from an optimization perspective to a sampling-based
one. This transition allows us to move beyond generating single point estimates and instead estimate
∗

This work was done while the author was at Genentech.
Here, “design optimization” is taken in its broader, applied meaning common in science and engineering,
different from its formal mathematical definition.
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

