DevFD: Developmental Face Forgery Detection by
Learning Shared and Orthogonal LoRA Subspaces

1

Tianshuo Zhang1,2 Li Gao3 Siran Peng 1,2 Xiangyu Zhu1,2∗ Zhen Lei1,2,4,5∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
China Mobile Financial Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China
4
CAIR, HKSIS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hong Kong, China
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, the Faculty of Innovation Engineering,
M.U.S.T, Macau, China
tianshuo.zhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, gaolids@chinamobile.com
pengsiran2023@ia.ac.cn, xiangyu.zhu@ia.ac.cn, zhen.lei@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The rise of realistic digital face generation and manipulation poses significant social
risks. The primary challenge lies in the rapid and diverse evolution of generation
techniques, which often outstrip the detection capabilities of existing models. To
defend against the ever-evolving new types of forgery, we need to enable our model
to quickly adapt to new domains with limited computation and data while avoiding
forgetting previously learned forgery types. In this work, we posit that genuine
facial samples are abundant and relatively stable in acquisition methods, while
forgery faces continuously evolve with the iteration of manipulation techniques.
Given the practical infeasibility of exhaustively collecting all forgery variants, we
frame face forgery detection as a continual learning problem and allow the model
to develop as new forgery types emerge. Specifically, we employ a Developmental
Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture that uses LoRA models as its individual
experts. These experts are organized into two groups: a Real-LoRA to learn and
refine knowledge of real faces, and multiple Fake-LoRAs to capture incremental
information from different forgery types. To prevent catastrophic forgetting, we
ensure that the learning direction of Fake-LoRAs is orthogonal to the established
subspace. Moreover, we integrate orthogonal gradients into the orthogonal loss of
Fake-LoRAs, preventing gradient interference throughout the training process of
each task. Experimental results under both the datasets and manipulation types
incremental protocols demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

The swift evolution of generative models, including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[2, 38, 62] and Diffusion models [17, 18, 61], along with the rise of large models [4, 25, 50, 63, 71],
propels the rapid advancement of face forgery technology, which introduces significant security risks
and contributes to a crisis of public trust. These manipulation methods leave unique traces of forgery.
Existing detectors perform well with known forgery types but struggle to identify novel ones. When
new manipulation types arise, a trivial method is to add new forgery data to the primary dataset
and retrain a binary model. However, the rapid evolution of forgery techniques necessitates a new
learning strategy that can quickly adapt to new forgeries using limited computation and data.
∗

Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

