Bridging the Gap to Real-World Language-Grounded
Visual Concept Learning

Whie Jung

Semin Kim
Junee Kim
Seunghoon Hong
School of Computing, KAIST
{whieya, seminkim, kje0312, seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Human intelligence effortlessly interprets visual scenes along a rich spectrum
of semantic dimensions. However, existing approaches to language-grounded
visual concept learning are limited to a few predefined primitive axes, such as
color and shape, and are typically explored in synthetic datasets. In this work, we
propose a scalable framework that adaptively identifies image-related concept axes
and grounds visual concepts along these axes in real-world scenes. Leveraging
a pretrained vision-language model and our universal prompting strategy, our
framework identifies a diverse image-related axes without any prior knowledge.
Our universal concept encoder adaptively binds visual features to the discovered
axes without introducing additional model parameters for each concept. To ground
visual concepts along the discovered axes, we optimize a compositional anchoring
objective, which ensures that each axis can be independently manipulated without
affecting others. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework on subsets of
ImageNet, CelebA-HQ, and AFHQ, showcasing superior editing capabilities across
diverse real-world concepts that are too varied to be manually predefined. Our
method also exhibits strong compositional generalization, outperforming existing
visual concept learning and text-based editing methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/whieya/Language-grounded-VCL.

1

Introduction

Perceiving the world through visual concepts such as color, shape, and texture, as human intelligence
does, has long been a goal in computer vision. Representing an image as a composition of these
concepts not only improves compositional generalization [8, 25, 36, 37], but also offers interpretable
explanations [14] and enhances visual reasoning tasks [9, 38]. Early work primarily used discrete
language descriptors, ranging from object labels in classification and detection [7, 15, 20, 31] to
sentence-level captions [1, 34]. A recent method [16] shows that continuous concept embeddings,
grounded along language-informed axes, can capture subtle visual nuances, e.g., slight color variations,
beyond the reach of purely text-based approaches. Thanks to the visual nuances embedded in
continuous representations, this method enables the transfer of subtle, image-dependent details in
downstream tasks such as image-editing tasks, where discrete text descriptor-based approaches [3, 24]
often struggle due to limited linguistic expressiveness.
Despite this promise, extending the recent approach [16] to learn diverse visual concepts in real-world
scenes remains underexplored. A central challenge is the reliance on predefined concept axes, such
as color or shape, for visual grounding, which fails to capture the rich diversity of real images
and limits extension to datasets where relevant factors are unknown in advance. Moreover, since
each image consists of a wide variety of concept axes, relying on a specialized concept encoder for
every axis quickly becomes infeasible, substantially increasing model complexity. Constraining each
concept embedding to contain information relevant only to a specific concept axis presents another
significant challenge. Although directly matching concept embeddings to textual descriptors—already
a disentangled term in nature—offers a simple remedy for disentanglement [16], it compromises
instance-specific details, as textual descriptors are image-agnostic.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

