Fast Data Attribution for Text-to-Image Models

Sheng-Yu Wang1 Aaron Hertzmann2 Alexei A. Efros3 Richard Zhang2 Jun-Yan Zhu1
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Data attribution for text-to-image models aims to identify the training images that
most significantly influenced a generated output. Existing attribution methods
involve considerable computational resources for each query, making them impractical for real-world applications. We propose a novel approach for scalable and
efficient data attribution. Our key idea is to distill a slow, unlearning-based attribution method to a feature embedding space for efficient retrieval of highly influential
training images. During deployment, combined with efficient indexing and search
methods, our method successfully finds highly influential images without running
expensive attribution algorithms. We show extensive results on both medium-scale
models trained on MSCOCO and large-scale Stable Diffusion models trained on
LAION, demonstrating that our method can achieve better or competitive performance in a few seconds, faster than existing methods by 2,500× ∼ 400,000×.
Our work represents a meaningful step towards the large-scale application of data
attribution methods on real-world models such as Stable Diffusion.

1

Introduction
~437,000x speedup

Data attribution for text-to-image models [3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] aims to identify training images that most significantly influence generated
images. For a given output, influence is defined counterfactually: if influential images were
removed from the training dataset, the model
would lose its ability to generate the output.
However, directly identifying influential images
by retraining models with all possible training
subsets is computationally infeasible.

~2,500x speedup

To make attribution more tractable, researchers
have proposed several approaches to approxi- Figure 1: Attribution performance vs. throughmate this process. One common strategy is put. Previous methods (AbU [1], D-TRAK [2])
to estimate individual influence scores by ex- offer high attribution performance but are computaamining the effect of removing single training tionally expensive for deployment. Fast image simimages. Gradient-based methods, such as in- ilarity using off-the-shelf features (DINO) lacks
fluence functions [11, 12, 13], approximate this attribution accuracy. We distill slower attribution
removal process by calculating the inner product methods into a feature space that retains attribution
of the training and test images’ model gradients, performance while enabling fast deployment.
reweighted by the inverse Hessian. Unfortunately, computing and storing these gradients per training image is costly. Projecting gradients into
lower dimensions reduces accuracy further [14], while still being computationally prohibitive for models with billions of parameters [15]. Another approach approximates influence by directly “unlearning”
individual images, which improves accuracy but significantly increases runtime [1, 16, 17]. None of
the above methods is practical for applications requiring fast test time performance. Furthermore,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

