Ground-Compose-Reinforce: Grounding Language in
Agentic Behaviours using Limited Data

Andrew C. Li, Toryn Q. Klassen† , Andrew Wang, Parand A. Alamdari† , Sheila A. McIlraith†
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
†
Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society
Toronto, Canada
{andrewli,toryn,andrewwang,parand,sheila}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Grounding language in perception and action is a key challenge when building
situated agents that can interact with humans, or other agents, via language. In
the past, addressing this challenge has required manually designing the language
grounding or curating massive datasets that associate language with the environment. We propose Ground-Compose-Reinforce, an end-to-end, neurosymbolic
framework for training RL agents directly from high-level task specifications—
without manually designed reward functions or other domain-specific oracles,
and without massive datasets. These task specifications take the form of Reward
Machines, automata-based representations that capture high-level task structure
and are in some cases autoformalizable from natural language. Critically, we
show that Reward Machines can be grounded using limited data by exploiting
compositionality. Experiments in a custom Meta-World domain with only 350
labelled pretraining trajectories show that our framework faithfully elicits complex
behaviours from high-level specifications—including behaviours that never appear
in pretraining—while non-compositional approaches fail.

1

Introduction

Grounding language—connecting language with perception and action within an environment—is a
fundamental challenge when building robots and other agents that are interfaced through language.
One popular approach to addressing this challenge is to employ a manually-designed domain-specific
interpretation of language, such as a language-conditional reward function or success detector (e.g.
[1–4]). For instance, in the BabyAI benchmark [1], successful execution of instructions like “go to
the red ball” can be evaluated programmatically in the environment simulator, providing a reward
signal for learning language-conditioned behaviours. Such instances of grounded language generalize
to arbitrary scenarios and controlled subsets of language by design, but are hard to hand-engineer in
complex, non-simulated settings based on raw perceptual inputs like pixels.
The recent advent of large language models (LLMs) has inspired an alternative pathway to grounding
language: training on diverse datasets that pair language descriptions with environment trajectories
(e.g., π0 [5], RT-2 [6], LIV [7], VPT [8]). While this obviates the need for manually designed
language groundings, it typically requires enormous datasets in order to capture the broad scope of
language usage within an environment [1, 9, 10]. For agentic applications that are data-intensive (e.g.
robotics) or where access to trajectory data is limited, such data-driven language models are prone to
failure on complex or out-of-distribution tasks [11–14].
We propose Ground-Compose-Reinforce, an end-to-end framework for training reinforcement
learning (RL) agents directly from high-level task specifications, without relying on manually
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

