Representation Consistency for Accurate
and Coherent LLM Answer Aggregation

Junqi Jiang1 Tom Bewley2 Salim I. Amoukou2
Francesco Leofante1 Antonio Rago3 Saumitra Mishra2 Francesca Toni1
1
Imperial College London 2 J.P. Morgan AI Research 3 King’s College London
{junqi.jiang,f.leofante,f.toni}@imperial.ac.uk
{firstname.surname}@jpmorgan.com, antonio.rago@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Test-time scaling improves large language models’ (LLMs) performance by allocating more compute budget during inference. To achieve this, existing methods often
require intricate modifications to prompting and sampling strategies. In this work,
we introduce representation consistency (RC), a test-time scaling method for aggregating answers drawn from multiple candidate responses of an LLM regardless
of how they were generated, including variations in prompt phrasing and sampling
strategy. RC enhances answer aggregation by not only considering the number of
occurrences of each answer in the candidate response set, but also the consistency
of the model’s internal activations while generating the set of responses leading
to each answer. These activations can be either dense (raw model activations) or
sparse (encoded via pretrained sparse autoencoders). Our rationale is that if the
model’s representations of multiple responses converging on the same answer are
highly variable, this answer is more likely to be the result of incoherent reasoning
and should be down-weighted during aggregation. Importantly, our method only
uses cached activations and lightweight similarity computations and requires no
additional model queries. Through experiments with four open-source LLMs and
four reasoning datasets, we validate the effectiveness of RC for improving task
performance during inference, with consistent accuracy improvements (up to 4%)
over strong test-time scaling baselines. We also show that consistency in the sparse
activation signals aligns well with the common notion of coherent reasoning.

I know that Australia has...
What is the capital of Australia?

Okay, so the options are...

...the answer is Sydney.

People commonly think...
Low consistency: rejected
The largest city in that country...
What's the Australian capital?

The nation of Australia...
Australia is famous for...

...the answer is Canberra.

High consistency: chosen

Figure 1: An illustrative example of representation consistency. When aggregating an answer from
multiple LLM responses (in the blue boxes on the middle left) sampled from semantically equivalent
rephrasings of the same question (in the pink box on the left), we take into account the consistency of
model internal activations within each response group (points in the blue circle). In this case, the
answer “Canberra” is chosen (on the right) because the activations of its corresponding responses are
more similar (the area covered by the orange points is smaller than that of the violet points).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

