Adaptive Context Length Optimization with
Low-Frequency Truncation for Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Wenchang Duan1 , Yaoliang Yu2 , Jiwan He1 , Yi Shi1∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Waterloo
{duanwenchang, kih020429, yishi}@sjtu.edu.cn
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

1

Abstract
Recently, deep multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has demonstrated
promising performance for solving challenging tasks, such as long-term dependencies and non-Markovian environments. Its success is partly attributed to conditioning policies on large fixed context length. However, such large fixed context
lengths may lead to limited exploration efficiency and redundant information. In
this paper, we propose a novel MARL framework to obtain adaptive and effective
contextual information. Specifically, we design a central agent that dynamically
optimizes context length via temporal gradient analysis, enhancing exploration to
facilitate convergence to global optima in MARL. Furthermore, to enhance the
adaptive optimization capability of the context length, we present an efficient input
representation for the central agent, which effectively filters redundant information.
By leveraging a Fourier-based low-frequency truncation method, we extract global
temporal trends across decentralized agents, providing an effective and efficient
representation of the MARL environment. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on long-term
dependency tasks, including PettingZoo, MiniGrid, Google Research Football
(GRF), and StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge v2 (SMACv2).

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has drawn increasing interest in recent years, which
provides a promise for facing many complex real-world challenging problems such as transportation
management [1], robot control [2], and finance [3]. However, due to the long-term dependencies
and non-rigorous Markovianity of complex tasks, contextual information is introduced to assist
policy making [4, 5, 6]. Accordingly, this places a substantial demand on how to leverage contextual
information and to what extent [7, 8].
Existing methods are mostly applied to single-agent reinforcement learning (RL), where contextual
information performs reasonably well in simple tasks [9, 10, 11]. In comparison, multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) involves significantly more complex tasks [12, 13], where relying
solely on short context lengths or individual observations often results in suboptimal performance.
To address this, one natural approach is to extend the context length. However, the expansion of the
context length leads to two significant challenges: the first is an increase in necessary computation,
and the second is the difficulty of high dimensionality of the input representation and generalization
[14].
* Corresponding author: Yi Shi (yishi@sjtu.edu.cn).
†

Project code is available at: https://github.com/duanwenchang/ACL-LFT.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

