LocDiff: Identifying Locations on Earth by Diffusing
in the Hilbert Space

Zhangyu Wang1,7,2 , Zeping Liu2 , Jielu Zhang7,3 , Zhongliang Zhou3 , Qian Cao3 ,
Nemin Wu3 , Lan Mu3 , Yang Song6 , Yiqun Xie4 , Ni Lao5,2† , Gengchen Mai2†
1

3

University of Maine, 2 SEAI Lab, University of Texas at Austin,
University of Georgia, 4 University of Maryland, 5 Google LLC, 6 Open AI, 7 Harvard University
†
Corresponding author.

Abstract
Image geolocalization is a fundamental yet challenging task, aiming at inferring
the geolocation on Earth where an image is taken. State-of-the-art methods employ
either grid-based classification or gallery-based image-location retrieval, whose
spatial generalizability significantly suffers if the spatial distribution of test images does not align with the choices of grids and galleries. Recently emerging
generative approaches, while getting rid of grids and galleries, use raw geographical
coordinates and suffer quality losses due to their lack of multi-scale information.
To address these limitations, we propose a multi-scale latent diffusion model called
LocDiff for image geolocalization. We developed a novel positional encodingdecoding framework called Spherical Harmonics Dirac Delta (SHDD) Representations, which encodes points on a spherical surface (e.g., geolocations on Earth)
into a Hilbert space of Spherical Harmonics coefficients and decodes points (geolocations) by mode-seeking on spherical probability distributions. We also propose a
novel SirenNet-based architecture (CS-UNet) to learn an image-based conditional
backward process in the latent SHDD space by minimizing a latent KL-divergence
loss. To the best of our knowledge, LocDiff is the first image geolocalization model
that performs latent diffusion in a multi-scale location encoding space and generates
geolocations under the guidance of images. Experimental results show that LocDiff
can outperform all state-of-the-art grid-based, retrieval-based, and diffusion-based
baselines across 5 challenging global-scale image geolocalization datasets, and
demonstrates significantly stronger generalizability to unseen geolocations.

1

Introduction

Location decoding, i.e., predicting geolocations from given context, remains a challenging and
rarely studied problem which has potential applications in numerous tasks including trajectory
synthesis [35], building footprint segmentation [14], and the widely studied image geolocalization
tasks [38, 45]. As one of the representative tasks for location decoding, image geolocalization
aims at predicting locations on Earth based on a given image, which potentially ranges from many
types such as wild life photos, street views, and remote sensing images. However, unlike image
classification, solutions to image geolocalization are less mature because their ground-truths are
locations represented by real-valued coordinates on the spherical surface. While regression models
are commonly used to predict real-valued labels, they are proven to be tricky to train and perform
especially poorly on the global-scale image geolocalization problem due to the highly complex and
non-linear mapping between the image space and the geospatial space [46, 17]. As an alternative
transductive solution, researchers employ pre-defined geographical classes (e.g. divide Earth into
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

