Relaxing partition admissibility in Cluster-DAGs:
a causal calculus with arbitrary variable clustering

Clément Yvernes
Univ Grenoble Alpes, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LIG

Emilie Devijver
Univ Grenoble Alpes, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LIG

Adèle H. Ribeiro
University of Münster,
Institute of Medical Informatics

Marianne Clausel
Université de Lorraine, CNRS,
CRAN, 54000 Nancy

Eric Gaussier
Univ Grenoble Alpes, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LIG

Abstract
Cluster DAGs (C-DAGs) provide an abstraction of causal graphs in which nodes
represent clusters of variables, and edges encode both cluster-level causal relationships and dependencies arisen from unobserved confounding. C-DAGs define an
equivalence class of acyclic causal graphs that agree on cluster-level relationships,
enabling causal reasoning at a higher level of abstraction. However, when the
chosen clustering induces cycles in the resulting C-DAG, the partition is deemed
inadmissible under conventional C-DAG semantics. In this work, we extend the
C-DAG framework to support arbitrary variable clusterings by relaxing the partition admissibility constraint, thereby allowing cyclic C-DAG representations. We
extend the notions of d-separation and causal calculus to this setting, significantly
broadening the scope of causal reasoning across clusters and enabling the application of C-DAGs in previously intractable scenarios. Our calculus is both sound
and atomically complete with respect to the do-calculus: all valid interventional
queries at the cluster level can be derived using our rules, each corresponding to a
primitive do-calculus step.
Knowing the effect of a treatment X on an outcome Y, encoded by an intervention do(X) in the interventional distribution P(Y|do(X)), is crucial in many applications. However, performing interventions
is often impractical due to ethical concerns, potential harm or prohibitive costs. In such cases, one
can instead aim to identify do-free formulas that estimate the effects of interventions using only
observational (non-experimental) data and a causal graph (Pearl, 2009). Solving the identifiability
problem typically involves establishing graphical criteria under which the total effect is identifiable,
and providing a do-free formula for estimating it from observational data. However, specifying a
causal diagram requires prior knowledge of the causal relationships between all observed variables,
a requirement that is often unmet in real-world applications. This challenge is particularly acute in
complex, high-dimensional settings, limiting the practical applicability of causal inference methods.
One way to circumvent this difficulty is to rely on abstract representations which group several variables, a mapping usually referred to as causal representation learning (Schölkopf et al., 2021), which
are connected through causal relationships and dependencies arisen from unobserved confounding.
Several studies have been devoted to causal discovery of and causal inference in specific abstract
representations, both for static and dynamic (time series) variables, as Assaad et al. (2022); Ferreira
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

