Combinatorial Ski Rental Problem:
Robust and Learning-Augmented Algorithms

Ziwei Li
Nanjing University
ziwei.li@smail.nju.edu.cn

Bo Sun
University of Ottawa, Vector Institute
bo.sun@uwaterloo.ca

Zhiqiu Zhang
Nanjing University
221900399@smail.nju.edu.cn

Mohammad Hajiesmaili
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
hajiesmaili@cs.umass.edu

Binghan Wu
AsiaInfo Technologies Limited
wubh3@asiainfo.com

Lin Yang∗
Nanjing University
linyang@nju.edu.cn

Yang Gao
Nanjing University
gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce and study the Combinatorial Ski Rental (CSR) problem, which involves multiple items that can be rented or purchased, either individually or in
combination. At each time step, a decision-maker must make an irrevocable buy-orrent decision for items that have not yet been purchased, without knowing the end
of the time horizon. We propose a randomized online algorithm, Sorted Optimal
Amortized Cost (SOAC), that achieves the optimal competitive ratio. Moreover,
SOAC can be extended to address various well-known ski rental variants, including
the multi-slope, multi-shop, multi-commodity ski rental and CSR with upgrading
problems. Building on the proposed SOAC algorithm, we further develop a learningaugmented algorithm that leverages machine-learned predictions to improve the
performance of CSR. This algorithm is capable of recovering or improving upon
existing results of learning-augmented algorithms in both the classic ski rental
and multi-shop ski rental problems. Experimental results validate our theoretical
analysis and demonstrate the advantages of our algorithms over baseline methods
for ski rental problems.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making under uncertainty is ubiquitous yet challenging in the digital transformation of society. We study the ski rental problem [17, 8], a classic online decision-making problem that
addresses the rent-or-buy dilemma. In its basic form [1, 19, 16, 20], the problem involves repeatedly
deciding whether to rent or buy an item without knowing its future usage duration. This paper
introduces and studies a more general variant, the Combinatorial Ski Rental (CSR) problem, which
extends the rent-or-buy decisions from one item to multiple items.
In the CSR problem, a player participates in a skiing season of unknown duration. Skiing requires
multiple essential items, such as skis, boots, helmets, and goggles. Each day, the player must
decide whether to buy or rent items that have not yet been purchased, with the goal of minimizing
the total rent and purchase cost over the entire season. The combinatorics of CSR stems from the
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

