Towards Multi-Table Learning: A Novel Paradigm for
Complementarity Quantification and Integration

Junyu Zhang† Lizhong Ding†∗ Minghong Zhang Ye Yuan Xingcan Li
Pengqi Li Tihang Xi Guoren Wang Changsheng Li
Beijing Institute of Technology
{zhangjunyu, lxc, pengqi.li, tihangxi, yuan-ye, lcs}@bit.edu.cn
lizhong.ding@outlook.com, zhangmh02@126.com, wanggrbit@126.com

Abstract
Multi-table data integrate various entities and attributes, with potential interconnections between them. However, existing tabular learning methods often struggle to
describe and leverage the underlying complementarity across distinct tables. To
address this limitation, we propose the first unified paradigm for multi-table learning that systematically quantifies and integrates complementary information across
tables. Specifically, we introduce a metric called complementarity strength (CS),
which captures inter-table complementarity by incorporating relevance, similarity,
and informativeness. For the first time, we systematically formulate the paradigm
towards multi-table learning by establishing formal definitions of tasks and loss
functions. Correspondingly, we present a network for multi-table learning that
combines Adaptive Table encoder and Cross table Attention mechanism (ATCANet), achieving the simultaneous integration of complementary information from
distinct tables. Experiments show that ATCA-Net effectively leverages complementary information and that the CS metric accurately quantifies the richness of
complementarity across multiple tables. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to establish theoretical and practical foundations for multi-table learning.

1

Introduction

Multiple tables often exhibit inherent connections due to the interrelated nature of the entities they
describe, which can yield valuable complementary information when such associations exist [15, 36].
These data have widespread applications across various domains, such as finance [19, 37], healthcare
[29, 26] and geography [32, 39]. However, most existing table learning methods [38, 20, 21, 4]
are limited to utilizing information from single or pairwise tables to accomplish tasks such as table
completion [21, 26] or entity matching [23, 28]. There is a notable lack of methodologies to analysis
and learn from multiple tables [18, 42].
Current approaches for analyzing inter-table relationships predominantly depend on similarity metrics
[15, 36, 25, 16, 30]. However, these methods face significant challenges in quantifying meaningful
complementary information between tables: (1) High similarity scores may originate from redundant
tables (i.e., duplicated schemas) that provide negligible complementary value, while (2) completely
unrelated tables inherently lack meaningful information complementarity. This distinction highlights
the need for a new metric that quantifies complementarity by effectively balancing table similarity
and relevance, thereby enabling a more comprehensive evaluation for multiple tables. On the other
hand, to effectively harness the complementary information across multiple tables, two critical
†
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

