Exploring Tradeoffs through Mode Connectivity for
Multi-Task Learning

Zhipeng Zhou1 ,

Ziqiao Meng2 , Pengcheng Wu1 , Peilin Zhao3 , Chunyan Miao1∗
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
National University of Singapore
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

zzpustcml@gmail.com, zq-meng@nus.edu.sg, peilinzhao@sjtu.edu.cn,
{pengchengwu, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Nowadays deep models are required to be versatile due to the increasing realistic
needs. Multi-task learning (MTL) offers an efficient way for this purpose to learn
multiple tasks simultaneously with a single model. However, prior MTL solutions
often focus on resolving conflicts and imbalances during optimization, which may
not outperform simple linear scalarization strategies [Xin et al., 2022]. Instead
of altering the optimization trajectory, this paper leverages mode connectivity to
efficiently approach the Pareto front and identify the desired trade-off point. Unlike
Pareto Front Learning (PFL), which aims to align with the entire Pareto front, we
focus on effectively and efficiently exploring optimal trade-offs. However, three
challenges persist: (1) the low-loss path can neither fully traverse trade-offs nor
align with user preference due to its randomness, (2) commonly adopted Bézier
curves in mode connectivity are ill-suited to navigating the complex loss landscapes
of deep models, and (3) poor scalability to large-scale task scenarios. To address
these challenges, we adopt non-uniform rational B-Splines (NURBS) to model
mode connectivity, allowing for more flexible and precise curve optimization.
Additionally, we introduce an order-aware objective to explore task loss tradeoffs and employ a task grouping strategy to enhance scalability under massive
task scenarios. Extensive experiments on key MTL datasets demonstrate that our
proposed method, EXTRA (EXplore TRAde-offs), effectively identifies the desired
point on the Pareto front and achieves state-of-the-art performance. EXTRA is also
validated as a plug-and-play solution for mainstream MTL approaches. Code is
avaliable at https://github.com/zzpustc/EXTRA.

1

Introduction

Deep models are widely deployed across various scenarios, with an increasing demand for efficiency,
such as reducing computational and storage costs. This growing need necessitates that deep models
be versatile. In this context, multi-task learning (MTL) has been extensively explored [Zhang and
Yang, 2018, Wang et al., 2013, Zhang et al., 2018]. MTL aims to achieve strong performance across
multiple tasks using a single model, in contrast to traditional deep learning approaches where the
number of parameters or models often scales with the number of tasks.
In recent years, significant attention has been devoted to optimization-based MTL [Sener and Koltun,
2018, Liu et al., 2021a, Zhou et al., 2025a], which assumes a fixed model architecture comprising
a task-shared backbone and multiple task-specific branches. The primary goal in this setting is to
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

