Incentive-Aware Dynamic Resource Allocation
under Long-Term Cost Constraints

Yan Dai
Operations Research Center
MIT
yandai20@mit.edu

Negin Golrezaei
Sloan School of Management
MIT
golrezae@mit.edu

Patrick Jaillet
Department of EECS
MIT
jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
Motivated by applications such as cloud platforms allocating GPUs to users or
governments deploying mobile health units across competing regions, we study the
constrained dynamic allocation of a reusable resource to a group of strategic agents.
Our objective is to simultaneously (i) maximize social welfare, (ii) satisfy multidimensional long-term cost constraints, and (iii) incentivize truthful reporting. We
begin by numerically evaluating primal-dual methods widely used in constrained
online optimization and find them to be highly fragile in strategic settings – agents
can easily manipulate their reports to distort future dual updates for future gain. To
address this vulnerability, we develop an incentive-aware framework that makes
primal-dual methods robust to strategic behavior. Our primal-side design combines
epoch-based lazy updates – discouraging agents from distorting dual updates
– with dual-adjust pricing and randomized exploration techniques that extract
approximately truthful signals for learning. On the dual side, we design a novel
online learning subroutine to resolve a circular dependency
between actions and
√
predictions; this makes our mechanism achieve e
O( T ) social welfare regret (where
T is the number of allocation rounds),
satisfies all cost constraints, and ensures
√
e T ) performance matches that of non-strategic
incentive alignment. This O(
allocation approaches while additionally exhibiting robustness to strategic agents.

1

Introduction

Modern platforms and public agencies often face the challenge of allocating limited, reusable
resources over time to self-interested agents, who may hide their true desire in sake of more favorable
allocations. For example, cloud providers must decide how to distribute scarce GPUs to competing
jobs under compute and energy constraints (Buyya et al., 2008; Nejad et al., 2014). Governments may
deploy mobile health units or medical devices such as ventilators across regions, where needs vary
over time and access is constrained by staffing or capacity (Stummer et al., 2004; Adan et al., 2009).
In these settings, a same unit of resource is reallocated across time, and the allocation must respect
some multi-dimensional long-term cost constraints – such as energy or staffing – while accounting
for the strategic behavior of agents with private information.
A central challenge in these dynamic environments is being both efficient – i.e., maximizing social
welfare subject to constraints – and robust to agents’ strategic manipulation. Focusing on efficiency,
primal-dual methods serve as a powerful tool in online resource allocation, offering principled ways
to handle constraints while adapting to changing demand (Devanur and Hayes, 2009; Golrezaei et al.,
2014; Molinaro and Ravi, 2014; Balseiro et al., 2023). These methods maintain dual variables that
act as shadow prices on resource usage, guiding allocations based on both values and costs. However,
these approaches typically assume truthful agents and ignore any strategic responses agents make.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

