Prompt-guided Disentangled Representation for
Action Recognition

Tianci Wu, Guangming Zhu∗, Jiang Lu, Siyuan Wang, Ning Wang,
Nuoye Xiong, Zhang Liang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
{tianciwu, lujiang, siyuanwang, ningwang, nyx}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
{gmzhu, liangzhang}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Action recognition is a fundamental task in video understanding. Existing methods
typically extract unified features to process all actions in one video, which makes
it challenging to model the interactions between different objects in multi-action
scenarios. To alleviate this issue, we explore disentangling any specified actions
from complex scenes as an effective solution. In this paper, we propose Promptguided Disentangled Representation for Action Recognition (ProDA), a novel
framework that disentangles any specified actions from a multi-action scene. ProDA
leverages Spatio-temporal Scene Graphs (SSGs) and introduces Dynamic Prompt
Module (DPM) to guide a Graph Parsing Neural Network (GPNN) in generating
action-specific representations. Furthermore, we design a video-adapted GPNN
that aggregates information using dynamic weights. Extensive experiments on
two complex video action datasets, Charades and SportsHHI, demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach against state-of-the-art methods. Our code can be
found in https://github.com/iamsnaping/ProDA.git.

1

Introduction

Action recognition is one of the fundamental tasks in the field of video understanding [16], and
it remains an active topic in the vision research community. Current mainstream methods can be
categorized into two types based on their data processing approach. The first type is based on
complete video data. These methods typically input the untrimmed video into 2D Convolution Neural
Network (CNN), 3D CNN, or Vision Transformer (ViT) [7], using the network to extract features and
then performing classification using the extracted features [10, 42, 4, 45, 27, 30, 27]. The second type
is object-centric, where object detectors first crop objects from the video and then input them into
ViT or Graph Neural Network (GNN) [53, 33, 57, 48, 54, 55, 48, 53]. Some methods [59, 20, 47, 35]
also construct Spatio-temporal Scene Graph (SSG) from these objects and then feed them into
the network. However, these methods are essentially information extraction processes that handle
all actions in the video at once, making it difficult to model the interactions between objects in
complex scenes [48, 55]. In this paper, we aim to analyze actions with a disentangled approach. For
instance, in a video with multiple actions, we want the network to focus on analyzing some specified
action(s). Moreover, we construct SSGs for this video and aim to disentangle the subgraph, which
consist of the specified action-relevant nodes, enabling better understanding of the actions (as shown
in Figure 1). Existing Disentangled Representaion Learning (DRL) methods typically approach
disentanglement from different perspectives. Some methods focus on attribute disentanglement,
aiming to separate content from background [22, 52, 17]. Others adopt an information perspective by
disentangling representations into structural invariants and local variations (e.g., shared information
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

