Exploration from a Primal-Dual Lens:
Value-Incentivized Actor-Critic Methods for
Sample-Efﬁcient Online RL
Tong Yang∗
CMU

Bo Dai†
Georgia Tech

Lin Xiao‡
Meta

Yuejie Chi§
Meta & Yale

Abstract
Online reinforcement learning (RL) with complex function approximations such
as transformers and deep neural networks plays a signiﬁcant role in the modern
practice of artiﬁcial intelligence. Despite its popularity and importance, balancing
the fundamental trade-off between exploration and exploitation remains a longstanding challenge; in particular, we are still in lack of efﬁcient and practical
schemes that are backed by theoretical performance guarantees. Motivated by
recent developments in exploration via optimistic regularization, this paper provides an interpretation of the principle of optimism through the lens of primal-dual
optimization. From this fresh perspective, we set forth a new value-incentivized
actor-critic (VAC) method, which optimizes a single easy-to-optimize objective
integrating exploration and exploitation — it promotes state-action and policy estimates that are both consistent with collected data transitions and result in higher
value functions. Theoretically, the proposed VAC method has near-optimal regret
guarantees under linear Markov decision processes (MDPs) in both ﬁnite-horizon
and inﬁnite-horizon settings, which can be extended to the general function approximation setting under appropriate assumptions.

1

Introduction

In online reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton et al., 1998], an agent learns to update their policy in
an adaptive manner while interacting with an unknown environment to maximize long-term cumulative rewards. In conjunction with complex function approximation such as large neural networks
and foundation models to reduce dimensionality, online RL has achieved remarkable performance in
a wide variety of applications such as game playing [Silver et al., 2017], control [Mnih et al., 2015],
language model post-training [OpenAI, 2023, Team et al., 2023] and reasoning [Guo et al., 2025],
and many others.
Despite its popularity, advancing beyond current successes is severely bottlenecked by the cost and
constraints associated with data collection. While simulators can subsidize data acquisition in certain domains, many real-world applications—such as clinical trials, recommendation systems and
autonomous driving—operate under conditions where gathering interaction data is expensive, timeconsuming or potentially risky. In these high-stake scenarios, managing the fundamental yet delicate
trade-off between exploration (gathering new information about the environment) and exploitation
(leveraging existing knowledge to maximize rewards) requires paramount care. Naive exploration
schemes, such as the ϵ-greedy method, are known to be sample-inefﬁcient as they explore randomly
∗

Carnegie Mellon University; Emails: tongyang@andrew.cmu.edu.
Georgia Institute of Technology; Email: bodai@cc.gatech.edu.
‡
Fundamental AI Research, Meta; Email: linx@meta.com.
§
Yale University; Emails: yuejie.chi@yale.edu.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

