Cameras as Relative Positional Encoding

Ruilong Li1,2∗ Brent Yi1∗ Junchen Liu1∗ Hang Gao1
1

UC Berkeley

2

NVIDIA

Yi Ma1,3
3

Angjoo Kanazawa1

HKU

Abstract
Transformers are increasingly prevalent for multiview computer vision tasks, where
geometric relationships between viewpoints are critical for 3D perception. To
leverage these relationships, multiview transformers must use camera geometry
to ground visual tokens in 3D space. In this work, we compare techniques for
conditioning transformers on cameras: token-level raymap encodings, attentionlevel relative pose encodings, and a new relative encoding—Projective Positional
Encoding (PRoPE)—that captures complete camera frustums, both intrinsics and
extrinsics, as a relative positional encoding. Our experiments begin by showing
how relative conditioning methods improve performance in feedforward novel
view synthesis, with further gains from PRoPE. This holds across settings: scenes
with both shared and varying intrinsics, when combining token- and attention-level
conditioning, and for generalization to inputs with out-of-distribution sequence
lengths and camera intrinsics. We then verify that these benefits persist for different
tasks, stereo depth estimation and discriminative spatial cognition, as well as larger
model sizes. Code is available on our project webpage2 .

1

Introduction

Images of our world exist in the context of the viewpoints they were captured from. The geometry
of these viewpoints—intrinsic and extrinsic parameters that give pixel coordinates their physical
meaning—ground visual observations in 3D space. This spatial grounding is increasingly important
in deep learning, especially as advances in 3D vision and embodied intelligence make multiview
tasks more ubiquitous.
To solve multiview tasks with transformers, models must bind viewpoint information to patch
tokens from each input image. This binding requires special care: just as naive positional encoding
techniques for 1D sequences hinder performance for learning in language models [1], naive encodings
of camera geometry may also be suboptimal for multiview vision models [2–4]. Advances in both
settings can be summarized as transitions from absolute [5] to relative [6] encodings.
In this work, we study the problem of conditioning vision transformers on the camera geometry of
input images. We survey existing techniques for addressing this, which include (i) absolute encodings
in the form of pixel-aligned, token-level raymaps—these are the most common in recent state-of-theart models [7–10]—and (ii) attention-level relative encodings based on SE(3) pose relationships [3, 4].
We then present a new camera conditioning technique, Projective Positional Encoding (PRoPE), that
is designed to capture the complete geometry of cameras as a relative positional encoding. PRoPE
models viewing frustum relationships that describe both intrinsics and extrinsics, while remaining
easy to incorporate with standard transformer architectures and fused attention kernels [11].
Our experiments are on three tasks, which span six datasets. We begin with a series of studies comparing camera conditioning techniques for feedforward novel view synthesis using RealEstate10K [12]
and Objaverse [13]. Our results highlight the advantages of relative encodings—particularly PRoPE—
compared to absolute ones. We then verify that these benefits extend to other settings: we demonstrate
improvements when integrating PRoPE into UniMatch [14] for stereo depth estimation across three
∗
2

Equal contribution
https://www.liruilong.cn/prope/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

