PlanU: Large Language Model Reasoning through
Planning under Uncertainty
Ziwei Dengab∗, Mian Dengab∗, Chenjing Liangab , Zeming Gaoab , Chennan Maab , Chenxing Linab ,
Haipeng Zhangab , Songzhu Meic , Cheng Wangab , Siqi Shenab†
a
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University (XMU), China
b
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, XMU, China
c
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
{dengziwei,miandeng,liangcj,zeminggao,chennanma,lincx1123,zhanghaipeng}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{siqishen,cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, {sz.mei}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being explored across a range
of reasoning tasks. However, LLMs sometimes struggle with reasoning tasks
under uncertainty that are relatively easy for humans, such as planning actions
in stochastic environments. The adoption of LLMs for reasoning is impeded by
uncertainty challenges, such as LLM uncertainty and environmental uncertainty.
LLM uncertainty arises from the stochastic sampling process inherent to LLMs.
Most LLM-based Decision-Making (LDM) approaches address LLM uncertainty
through multiple reasoning chains or search trees. However, these approaches
overlook environmental uncertainty, which leads to poor performance in environments with stochastic state transitions. Some recent LDM approaches deal with
uncertainty by forecasting the probability of unknown variables. However, they
are not designed for multi-step reasoning tasks that require interaction with the
environment. To address uncertainty in LLM decision-making, we introduce PlanU,
an LLM-based planning method that captures uncertainty within Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS). PlanU models the return of each node in the MCTS as a quantile
distribution, which uses a set of quantiles to represent the return distribution. To
balance exploration and exploitation during tree search, PlanU introduces an Upper
Confidence Bounds with Curiosity (UCC) score which estimates the uncertainty of
MCTS nodes. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
PlanU in LLM-based reasoning tasks under uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in various domains, such
as reasoning and coding [1, 2, 3]. The success of LLMs in various domains has motivated researchers
to apply them to decision-making tasks [4, 5, 6], where an agent selects actions based on the current
state in order to achieve specific goals.
Prior work has explored leveraging LLMs for decision-making in three ways: (1) LLMs are used as
policies [4, 7], where the LLM is provided with necessary prompts to generate actions. (2) LLMs are
used as world models [5], where the LLM is repurposed with appropriate prompts to generate the
next state and reward based on a given action. (3) LLMs are used as both the policy and the world
model [8, 6, 9], our work belongs to such category as it mimics human decision-making process,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

