Can Multi-Modal LLMs Provide Live Step-by-Step
Task Guidance?
Apratim Bhattacharyya1∗ Bicheng Xu2∗† Sanjay Haresh1 Reza Pourreza1
Litian Liu1 Sunny Panchal1 Pulkit Madan1 Leonid Sigal2 Roland Memisevic1
1
Qualcomm AI Research‡ 2 University of British Columbia

Abstract
Multi-modal Large Language Models (LLM) have advanced conversational abilities
but struggle with providing live, interactive step-by-step guidance, a key capability
for future AI assistants. Effective guidance requires not only delivering instructions
but also detecting their successful execution, as well as identifying and alerting
users to mistakes, all of which has to happen in real-time. This requires models
that are not turn-based, but that can react asynchronously to a video stream, as
well as video data showing users performing tasks including mistakes and their
corrections. To this end, we introduce Qualcomm Interactive Cooking, a new
benchmark and dataset built upon CaptainCook4D, which contains user mistakes
during task execution. Our dataset and benchmark features densely annotated,
timed instructions and feedback messages, specifically including mistake alerts
precisely timestamped to their visual occurrence in the video. We evaluate state-ofthe-art multi-modal LLMs on the Qualcomm Interactive Cooking benchmark and
introduce L IVE M AMBA, a streaming multi-modal LLM designed for interactive
instructional guidance. This work provides the first dedicated benchmark and a
strong baseline for developing and evaluating on live, situated coaching.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently advanced, enabling AI systems to interact
with users more naturally, fluently, and in real-time by processing audio, speech, and visual inputs for
conversations about images or videos.
However, to be useful as an AI assistant, multi-modal LLMs should be able to guide a user through a
task – “live” – by providing interactive step-by-step instructions. This encompasses three key abilities,
i) to provide the next instruction, ii) detect if the instruction has been successfully accomplished by
the user, iii) if not, then detect any mistakes made by the user and alert the user as soon as possible.
Consider an example where a multi-modal LLM guides a user while making, e.g., Bruschetta in
Fig. 1. At the stage where the tomatoes are being sliced, an instruction with the desired thickness
the tomatoes needs to be provided. Then the model needs to detect whether the user has sliced the
tomatoes to the desired thickness, and in the case of a mistake, the model needs to alert the user as
soon as it observes the mistake. This calls for the multi-modal LLM to be able to react interactively
to events in the video streams. However, current state-of-the-art multi-modal LLMs are still largely
limited to turn based interactions [26, 40, 55, 56, 64] – they only produce responses when prompted
by the user – or to narration tasks [8, 35].
To address the challenge of live, step-by-step coaching, we introduce the Qualcomm Interactive
Cooking dataset and benchmark, as currently available large-scale vision-language datasets and
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done while employed at Qualcomm AI Research.
‡
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

