Overcoming Sparsity Artifacts in Crosscoders to
Interpret Chat-Tuning

@

EPFL

Julian Minder∗@A Clément Dumas∗†‡
Caden JuangD Bilal Chughtai Neel Nanda
A
ETHZ † Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris-Saclay ‡ Université Paris-Saclay
D
Northeastern University
julian.minder@epfl.ch, clement.dumas@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract
Model diffing is the study of how fine-tuning changes a model’s representations and
internal algorithms. Many behaviors of interest are introduced during fine-tuning,
and model diffing offers a promising lens to interpret such behaviors. Crosscoders
are a recent model diffing method that learns a shared dictionary of interpretable
concepts represented as latent directions in both the base and fine-tuned models,
allowing us to track how concepts shift or emerge during fine-tuning. Notably,
prior work has observed concepts with no direction in the base model, and it was
hypothesized that these model-specific latents were concepts introduced during
fine-tuning. However, we identify two issues which stem from the crosscoders L1
training loss that can misattribute concepts as unique to the fine-tuned model, when
they really exist in both models. We develop Latent Scaling to flag these issues by
more accurately measuring each latent’s presence across models. In experiments
comparing Gemma 2 2B base and chat models, we observe that the standard
crosscoder suffers heavily from these issues. Building on these insights, we train
a crosscoder with BatchTopK loss and show that it substantially mitigates these
issues, finding more genuinely chat-specific and highly interpretable concepts.
We recommend practitioners adopt similar techniques. Using the BatchTopK
crosscoder, we successfully identify a set of chat-specific latents that are both
interpretable and causally effective, representing concepts such as false information
and personal question, along with multiple refusal-related latents that show nuanced
preferences for different refusal triggers. Overall, our work advances best practices
for the crosscoder-based methodology for model diffing and demonstrates that it
can provide concrete insights into how chat-tuning modifies model behavior. 1

1

Introduction

Classically, mechanistic interpretability [Sharkey et al., 2025, Mueller et al., 2024, Ferrando et al.,
2024, Elhage et al., 2021, Olah et al., 2020] aims to reverse engineer an entire model [Huben et al.,
2024, Elhage et al., 2022], or circuits implemented by the model to solve particular tasks [Wang et al.,
2023a]. Model diffing offers an alternative method by focusing on changes induced by fine-tuning.
Since fine-tuning typically involves far less compute than the pre-training phase that establishes
general knowledge and generic circuitry, its resulting modifications are expected to be limited in
scope. This targeted nature suggests model diffing could be a more tractable approach to mechanistic
interpretability than the full model analysis, while still providing valuable insights into core features
of a model’s behavior.
*
1

Equal contribution. Order randomized.
We open-source our code, training library, models, wandb runs and a demo notebook to explore latents.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

