Harnessing Feature Resonance under Arbitrary Target
Alignment for Out-of-Distribution Node Detection

Shenzhi Yang1,2,5

Junbo Zhao1 Sharon Li3 Shouqing Yang1,2,5 Dingyu Yang1,2
Xiaofang Zhang4 Haobo Wang1,2,5
1
Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
5
Innovation and Management Center, School of Software Technology(Ningbo), Zhejiang University
Corresponding to: wanghaobo@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) node detection in graphs is a critical yet challenging task.
Most existing approaches rely heavily on fine-grained labeled data to obtain a pretrained supervised classifier, inherently assuming the existence of a well-defined
pretext classification task. However, when such a task is ill-defined or absent, their
applicability becomes severely limited. To overcome this limitation, there is an
urgent need to propose a more scalable OOD detection method that is independent
of both pretext tasks and label supervision. We harness a new phenomenon called
Feature Resonance, focusing on the feature space rather than the label space.
We observe that, ideally, during the optimization of known ID samples, unknown
ID samples undergo more significant representation changes than OOD samples,
even when the model is trained to align arbitrary targets. The rationale behind
it is that even without gold labels, the local manifold may still exhibit smooth
resonance. Based on this, we further develop a novel graph OOD framework,
dubbed Resonance-based Separation and Learning (RSL), which comprises two
core modules: (i)-a more practical micro-level proxy of feature resonance that
measures the movement of feature vectors in one training step. (ii)-integrate with a
synthetic OOD node strategy to train an effective OOD classifier. Theoretically,
we derive an error bound showing the superior separability of OOD nodes during
the resonance period. Extensive experiments on a total of thirteen real-world graph
datasets empirically demonstrate that RSL achieves state-of-the-art performance.
The code is available via https://github.com/ShenzhiYang2000/RSL.

1

Introduction

Graph-based machine learning models like Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [Kipf and Welling, 2016a,
Xu et al., 2018, Abu-El-Haija et al., 2019, Zhou et al., 2024] have become increasingly prevalent
in applications such as social network analysis [Fan et al., 2019], knowledge graphs [Baek et al.,
2020], and biological networks [De Cao and Kipf, 2018]. Despite the success of GNNs, detecting
out-of-distribution (OOD) nodes remains an under-explored challenge. These OOD nodes differ
significantly from the in-distribution (ID) nodes used during training, and their presence can severely
undermine the performance and robustness of graph models. As deploying GNNs in real-world
environments becomes more common, the ability to identify and handle OOD nodes is crucial for
ensuring the reliability of using these models.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

