Posterior Contraction for Sparse Neural Networks
in Besov Spaces with Intrinsic Dimensionality

Kyeongwon Lee1 Lizhen Lin1 Jaewoo Park2 Seonghyun Jeong2∗
1
Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland
2
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University
{kwlee,lizhen01}@umd.edu
{jwpark88,sjeong}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
This work establishes that sparse Bayesian neural networks achieve optimal posterior contraction rates over anisotropic Besov spaces and their hierarchical compositions. These structures reﬂect the intrinsic dimensionality of the underlying
function, thereby mitigating the curse of dimensionality. Our analysis shows that
Bayesian neural networks equipped with either sparse or continuous shrinkage
priors attain the optimal rates which are dependent on the intrinsic dimension of
the true structures. Moreover, we show that these priors enable rate adaptation,
allowing the posterior to contract at the optimal rate even when the smoothness
level of the true function is unknown. The proposed framework accommodates
a broad class of functions, including additive and multiplicative Besov functions
as special cases. These results advance the theoretical foundations of Bayesian
neural networks and provide rigorous justiﬁcation for their practical effectiveness
in high-dimensional, structured estimation problems.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) have been widely used to extract features from complex datasets, such as
visual recognition and language modeling [1]. Due to their approximation ability [2–7], NNs exhibit
remarkable ﬂexibility in representing complex multivariate functions. Given their network structure,
NNs are trained by minimizing empirical risk deﬁned through a suitable loss function, which can
be viewed as maximum likelihood estimation from a statistical perspective [8]. However, such a frequentist approach may lead to miscalibration and overconﬁdence [9], particularly when the model
is trained on out-of-distribution samples [10]. On the other hand, the Bayesian approach quantiﬁes
predictive uncertainty via the posterior distribution [11, 12] and can improve calibration and robustness in many cases [13, 14]. Another key advantage of the Bayesian perspective is that, unlike their
frequentist counterparts, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) can easily achieve the optimal rate of
convergence without knowledge of the smoothness of the function. This property, known as rate
adaptation, is inherently attained by the nature of Bayesian inference.
To capture the ﬂexibility of NNs, it is desirable to consider function classes that are richer than
the intuitively smooth ones, such as Hölder or Sobolev spaces. In particular, Besov spaces, which
encompass non-smooth or even discontinuous functions, are well suited for this purpose. For example, images often exhibit local inhomogeneities and sharp edges naturally represented within Besov
spaces [15]. Moreover, additional ﬂexibility arises from accounting for intrinsic dimensionality,
which helps explain the robustness of NNs to the curse of dimensionality. For instance, images
frequently possess low intrinsic dimensionality [16]. Such an intrinsic dimensional structure can be
implicitly modeled through anisotropy or composite function constructions. Although frequentist
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

