CDFlow: Building Invertible Layers with Circulant
and Diagonal Matrices

Siyu Liao∗
School of Integrated Circuits
Sun Yat-sen University
liaosy36@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Xuchen Feng
School of Integrated Circuits
Sun Yat-sen University
fengxch@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Normalizing flows are deep generative models that achieve efficient likelihood
estimation and sampling through invertible transformations. A key challenge is
designing linear layers that enhance expressiveness while enabling efficient computation of the Jacobian determinant and inverse. In this work, we introduce a novel
invertible linear layer based on the product of circulant and diagonal matrices. This
decomposition provides a parameter- and computation-efficient formulation, reducing the parameter complexity from O(n2 ) to O(mn) by using m diagonal matrices
together with m − 1 circulant matrices, while approximating arbitrary linear transformations. Furthermore, leveraging the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), our method
reduces the time complexity of matrix inversion from O(n3 ) to O(mn log n) and
matrix log-determinant from O(n3 ) to O(mn), where n is the input dimension.
Building upon this, we introduce a novel normalizing flow model called CirculantDiagonal Flow (CDFlow). Empirical results demonstrate that CDFlow excels in
density estimation for natural image datasets and effectively models data with
inherent periodicity. In terms of computational efficiency, our method speeds up
the matrix inverse and log-determinant computations by 1.17× and 4.31×, respectively, compared to the general dense matrix, when the number of channels is set to
96.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models have gained significant attention due to their potential applications across
various domains, including natural language processing [Dong et al., 2024], image restoration and
generation [Yao et al., 2023], robot learning [Chao et al., 2024], and autonomous driving [Guan et al.,
2024]. Among these models, normalizing flows hold a distinctive position because of their ability to
provide accurate likelihood estimation and efficient sampling.
Flow-based models enable the probabilistic modeling of complex distributions by transforming
them into simpler ones through a series of invertible mappings. Their uniqueness lies in the strict
requirements for the construction of these functions: on one hand, the functions must be invertible;
on the other hand, the determinant of the corresponding Jacobian matrix should be easy to compute.
However, these constraints may limit the expressive power of the models.
To address this challenge, NICE [Dinh et al., 2014] introduced additive coupling layers, which were
later extended by RealNVP [Dinh et al., 2016] to affine coupling layers. These coupling layers
have since become a fundamental component of most flow-based models. However, the design
of these non-linear layers, which only transform a subset of variables, requires coordination with
linear layers to effectively capture dependencies across arbitrary dimensions. As a result, recent
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

