Towards Pre-trained Graph Condensation
via Optimal Transport

Yeyu Yan1,2 , Shuai Zheng1,2 , Wenjun Hui1,2 , Xiangkai Zhu3 , Dong Chen1,2 ,
Zhenfeng Zhu1,2∗ , Yao Zhao1,2 , Kunlun He4
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Visual Intelligence + X International Cooperation Joint Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, China
3
Jinan University, China 4 Chinese PLA General Hospital, China
yanyeyu-work@foxmail.com, zs1997@bjtu.edu.cn,
22110090@bjtu.edu.cn, 18063597830@163.com, dchen2001@bjtu.edu.cn,
zhfzhu@bjtu.edu.cn, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn, kunlunhe@plagh.org

Abstract
Graph condensation (GC) aims to distill the original graph into a small-scale graph,
mitigating redundancy and accelerating GNN training. However, conventional
GC approaches heavily rely on rigid GNNs and task-specific supervision. Such a
dependency severely restricts their reusability and generalization across various
tasks and architectures. In this work, we revisit the goal of ideal GC from the
perspective of GNN optimization consistency, and then a generalized GC optimization objective is derived, by which those traditional GC methods can be viewed
nicely as special cases of this optimization paradigm. Based on this, Pre-trained
Graph Condensation (PreGC) via optimal transport is proposed to transcend
the limitations of task- and architecture-dependent GC methods. Specifically, a
hybrid-interval graph diffusion augmentation is presented to suppress the weak
generalization ability of the condensed graph on particular architectures by enhancing the uncertainty of node states. Meanwhile, the matching between optimal
graph transport plan and representation transport plan is tactfully established to
maintain semantic consistencies across source graph and condensed graph spaces,
thereby freeing graph condensation from task dependencies. To further facilitate the
adaptation of condensed graphs to various downstream tasks, a traceable semantic
harmonizer from source nodes to condensed nodes is proposed to bridge semantic
associations through the optimized representation transport plan in pre-training. Extensive experiments verify the superiority and versatility of PreGC, demonstrating
its task-independent nature and seamless compatibility with arbitrary GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful approach to graph data analysis, showing
excellent efficacy in a variety of domains, such as recommender systems [5], text analysis [56, 53],
social network analysis [52], and so on. However, the dual challenges of exponentially growing
graph data volumes [58] and increasingly sophisticated GNN architectures [63] present significant
obstacles for GNN training. These challenges become particularly acute in scenarios that require
multiple GNN training, such as continual graph learning [21] and federated graph learning [30].
In response to the above issues, graph condensation (GC) [25, 64] is proposed to optimize and
synthesize a small-scale condensed graph from the real graph. The core objective is to ensure that
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

