Track, Inpaint, Resplat: Subject-driven 3D and 4D
Generation with Progressive Texture Infilling

Shuhong Zheng1,2
1

Ashkan Mirzaei3∗

University of Toronto

2

Vector Institute

Igor Gilitschenski1,2
3

Snap Inc.

{shuhong, ashkan, gilitschenski}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Current 3D/4D generation methods are usually optimized for photorealism, efficiency, and aesthetics. However, they often fail to preserve the semantic identity of the subject across different viewpoints. Adapting generation methods
with one or few images of a specific subject (also known as Personalization
or Subject-driven generation) allows generating visual content that aligns with
the identity of the subject. However, personalized 3D/4D generation is still
largely underexplored. In this work, we introduce TIRE (Track, Inpaint, REsplat), a novel method for subject-driven 3D/4D generation. It takes an initial 3D asset produced by an existing 3D generative model as input and uses
video tracking to identify the regions that need to be modified. Then, we adopt
a subject-driven 2D inpainting model for progressively infilling the identified
regions. Finally, we resplat the modified 2D multi-view observations back
to 3D while still maintaining consistency. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our approach significantly improves identity preservation in 3D/4D generation compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our project website is available at
https://zsh2000.github.io/track-inpaint-resplat.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Improving on the personalization quality of 3D/4D generation is a core challenge to enable impact
and improve user experience. Current generation methods, however, are mostly guided by text
prompts [11, 46, 68, 79, 96, 107, 119] or single images/videos [51, 88, 123, 129] to determine
the front-facing appearance of the generated assets. Although these methods provide users with
a certain amount of control on the content of the generated scene, they fall short in delivering
identity-preserving outputs that are desired for personalized generation. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the
state-of-the-art 4D generation model L4GM [73] fails to preserve the identity for the side and back
views in the generated 4D asset. In the given example, it results in a blueish tone on the originally
occluded regions of the cat. These limitations highlight the need for methods to enable subject-driven,
identity-preserving 3D/4D generation for personalized applications.
Identity preservation in 3D/4D generation, though tempting, is challenging to accomplish. In single
image- or video-guided 3D/4D generation, the model has few cues to infer the appearance of
unobserved viewpoints and is forced to hallucinate. One line of research adopts score distillation
sampling [1, 5, 12, 26, 29, 59, 68, 91] to optimize the appearance of the novel viewpoints. However,
the time-consuming optimization process prevents the paradigm from being widely used in real-world
applications. Moreover, during optimization, the appearance and motions of the 3D/4D assets often
become averaged out [2, 132], which can reduce the quality of the generated content. More recently,
* Work done while at University of Toronto and Vector Institute.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

