EasySpec: Layer-Parallel Speculative Decoding for
Efficient Multi-GPU Utilization

1

Yize Wu1,2
Ke Gao1
Ling Li1,2
Yanjun Wu1∗
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{wuyize2021,gaoke,liling,yanjun}@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
Speculative decoding is an effective and lossless method for Large Language Model
(LLM) inference acceleration. It employs a smaller model to generate a draft token
sequence, which is then verified by the original base model. In multi-GPU systems,
inference latency can be further reduced through tensor parallelism (TP), while the
optimal TP size of the draft model is typically smaller than that of the base model,
leading to GPU idling during the drafting stage. We observe that such inefficiency
stems from the sequential execution of layers, which is seemingly natural but
actually unnecessary. Therefore, we propose EasySpec, a layer-parallel speculation
strategy that optimizes the efficiency of multi-GPU utilization. EasySpec breaks
the inter-layer data dependency in the draft model, enabling multiple layers to
run simultaneously across multiple devices as “fuzzy” speculation. After each
drafting-and-verification iteration, the draft model’s key-value cache is calibrated
in a single forward pass, preventing long-term fuzzy-error accumulation at minimal
additional latency. EasySpec is a training-free and plug-in method. We evaluated
EasySpec on several mainstream open-source LLMs, using smaller versions of
models from the same series as drafters. The results demonstrate that EasySpec can
achieve a peak speedup of 4.17x compared to vanilla decoding, while preserving
the original distributions of the base LLMs. Specifically, the drafting stage can be
accelerated by up to 1.62x with a maximum speculation accuracy drop of only 7%.
The code is available at https://github.com/Yize-Wu/EasySpec.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable problem-solving
abilities across various domains [1–5]. However, as the parameter size continues to grow, the timeconsuming process of auto-regressive decoding poses a significant barrier to deploying large models
in latency-sensitive applications [6, 7].
Various effective approaches [8–10] have been proposed to reduce inference latency, including
speculative decoding [11, 12] and tensor-parallel (TP) distribution [13]. Speculative decoding employs
a smaller model to generate a draft token sequence, and uses token-level parallelism to conduct
non-autoregressive verification, ensuring no shifting of the original model’s output distribution. In
contrast, TP distribution leverages cross-device parallelism by partitioning computational workloads
across multiple devices (usually GPUs) and synchronizing the results subsequently, which is also
lossless.
Combining speculative decoding with TP distribution achieves even greater acceleration ratio. However, integrating a draft model into a distributed system is not trivial [7]. Since the parameter size of
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

