BecomingLit: Relightable Gaussian Avatars with
Hybrid Neural Shading

Jonathan Schmidt
Simon Giebenhain
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich
jonathsch.github.io/becominglit

Multi-View
OLAT Dataset

Intrinsically Decomposed
Avatar

Relighting & Animation

Figure 1: BecomingLit: Our approach effectively reconstructs detailed human head avatars that
can be animated from videos and relighted in real-time using our hybrid neural shading approach.
Besides our method, we introduce a new high-quality, multi-view OLAT dataset of faces.

Abstract
We introduce BecomingLit, a novel method for reconstructing relightable, highresolution head avatars that can be rendered from novel viewpoints at interactive
rates. Therefore, we propose a new low-cost light stage capture setup, tailored
specifically towards capturing faces. Using this setup, we collect a novel dataset
consisting of diverse multi-view sequences of numerous subjects under varying
illumination conditions and facial expressions. By leveraging our new dataset, we
introduce a new relightable avatar representation based on 3D Gaussian primitives
that we animate with a parametric head model and an expression-dependent dynamics module. We propose a new hybrid neural shading approach, combining a
neural diffuse BRDF with an analytical specular term. Our method reconstructs
disentangled materials from our dynamic light stage recordings and enables allfrequency relighting of our avatars with both point lights and environment maps. In
addition, our avatars can easily be animated and controlled from monocular videos.
We validate our approach in extensive experiments on our dataset, where we consistently outperform existing state-of-the-art methods in relighting and reenactment
by a significant margin.

1

Introduction

The creation of photorealistic, relightable 3D head avatars from real-world data is a core problem of
computer vision with applications across a wide range of graphics tasks, such as cinematography,
virtual reality, or the metaverse in general. Traditionally, this requires professional, room-scale
capture setups that only a handful of institutions can afford [34, 4, 23, 24], as the joint estimation of
geometry, intrinsic material parameters, and lighting is an extremely under-constrained problem.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

