Image Super-Resolution with Guarantees
via Conformalized Generative Models
Daniel Csillag
School of Applied Mathematics
Getulio Vargas Foundation
daniel.csillag@fgv.br

Eduardo Adame
School of Applied Mathematics
Getulio Vargas Foundation
eduardo.salles@fgv.br

Guilherme Tegoni Goedert
School of Applied Mathematics
Getulio Vargas Foundation
guilherme.goedert@fgv.br

Abstract
The increasing use of generative ML foundation models for image restoration tasks
such as super-resolution calls for robust and interpretable uncertainty quantification
methods. We address this need by presenting a novel approach based on conformal prediction techniques to create a ‘confidence mask’ capable of reliably and
intuitively communicating where the generated image can be trusted. Our method
is adaptable to any black-box generative model, including those locked behind
an opaque API, requires only easily attainable data for calibration, and is highly
customizable via the choice of a local image similarity metric. We prove strong
theoretical guarantees for our method that span fidelity error control (according
to our local image similarity metric), reconstruction quality, and robustness in the
face of data leakage. Finally, we empirically evaluate these results and establish
our method’s solid performance.

1

Introduction

Generative ML foundation models led to massive leaps in the capabilities of modern image synthesis
and processing, spanning domains such as image generation, inpainting, and super-resolution. Particularly in the case of image super-resolution, recent methods have become considerably adept at
leveraging patterns in images to better recover complex textures, geometries, lighting and more.
In testament to these improvements, leading manufacturers are constantly improving and deploying
tools based on these frameworks in every new generation of consumer devices. These widespread
applications highlight an important question: How trustworthy are the predictions of these models?
When a model does some particular inpainting or super-resolution infill, what guarantees do we have
that its predictions are truly accurate to reality, and not mere hallucinations? Therefore, it would be
most desirable to have a proper uncertainty quantification over the predicted image.
However, most of the previous contributions to this endeavor have suffered from a lack of interpretability. In order to be widely adopted, a new framework should clearly communicate its uncertainty
estimates to the public in a way that reflects how they will be used. This demand for interpretability
fundamentally guides the properties and theoretical guarantees we seek to establish for our predictions,
and thus on the underlying procedure. Of course, all of this is compounded by the usual challenges
of having to do trustworthy uncertainty quantification that is model agnostic and can be employed
effectively atop any “black-box" foundation model.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

