One Subgoal at a Time: Zero-Shot Generalization to
Arbitrary Linear Temporal Logic Requirements in
Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning

Zijian Guo1 , İlker Işık2 , H. M. Sabbir Ahmad1 , Wenchao Li1,2
1
Division of Systems Engineering, Boston University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University
{zjguo, iilker, sabbir92, wenchao}@bu.edu

Abstract
Generalizing to complex and temporally extended task objectives and safety constraints remains a critical challenge in reinforcement learning (RL). Linear temporal
logic (LTL) offers a unified formalism to specify such requirements, yet existing
methods are limited in their abilities to handle nested long-horizon tasks and safety
constraints, and cannot identify situations when a subgoal is not satisfiable and
an alternative should be sought. In this paper, we introduce GenZ-LTL, a method
that enables zero-shot generalization to arbitrary LTL specifications. GenZ-LTL
leverages the structure of Büchi automata to decompose an LTL task specification
into sequences of reach-avoid subgoals. Contrary to the current state-of-the-art
method that conditions on subgoal sequences, we show that it is more effective
to achieve zero-shot generalization by solving these reach-avoid problems one
subgoal at a time through proper safe RL formulations. In addition, we introduce
a novel subgoal-induced observation reduction technique that can mitigate the
exponential complexity of subgoal-state combinations under realistic assumptions.
Empirical results show that GenZ-LTL substantially outperforms existing methods
in zero-shot generalization to unseen LTL specifications. The code is available at
https://github.com/BU-DEPEND-Lab/GenZ-LTL.

1

Introduction

Generalization is a critical aspect of reinforcement learning (RL), which aims to develop policies that
are capable of adapting to novel and unseen tasks [38, 48, 21] and varying safety constraints [7, 17].
Various methods have been proposed and show promising results in applications such as autonomous
driving [49, 36], robotics [27, 33, 28], and healthcare [8, 41]. However, most existing approaches
fall short in handling complex and temporally extended task objectives and safety constraints. For
example, an autonomous vehicle may be instructed to reach a sequence of destinations for passenger
pick-up and drop-off while adhering to traffic rules such as speed limits and yielding at intersections.
Temporal logic provides a principled framework for specifying system behaviors over time. Linear
temporal logic (LTL) [39], in particular, has been considered extensively in single-task and multitask RL settings [20, 29, 51]. LTL has well-defined semantics and a compositional syntax, which
facilitates the unambiguous specification of task objectives and safety constraints. However, existing
methods often fail to account for the potential conflicting objectives within a specification [50, 40, 23].
For example, an autonomous vehicle navigating between multiple destinations aims to minimize
travel time, but adhering to speed limits and other safety constraints may slow the vehicle down. In
such cases, the vehicle must prioritize satisfying safety requirements over optimizing for travel time.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

