Feature Distillation is the Better Choice for
Model-Heterogeneous Federated Learning

Yichen Li1,2 , Xiuying Wang3 , Wenchao Xu4 Haozhao Wang1 ,
Yining Qi1 , Jiahua Dong2 , Ruixuan Li1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
3
International School, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
{ycli0204,hz_wang}@hust.edu.cn, leowang980@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Model-Heterogeneous Federated Learning (Hetero-FL) has attracted growing attention for its ability to aggregate knowledge from heterogeneous models while
keeping private data locally. To better aggregate knowledge from clients, ensemble
distillation, as a widely used and effective technique, is often employed after global
aggregation to enhance the performance of the global model. However, simply
combining Hetero-FL and ensemble distillation does not always yield promising
results and can make the training process unstable. The reason is that existing
methods primarily focus on logit distillation, which, while being model-agnostic
with softmax predictions, fails to compensate for the knowledge bias arising from
heterogeneous models. To tackle this challenge, we propose a stable and efficient Feature Distillation for model-heterogeneous Federated learning, dubbed
FedFD, that can incorporate aligned feature information via orthogonal projection
to integrate knowledge from heterogeneous models better. Specifically, a new
feature-based ensemble federated knowledge distillation paradigm is proposed.
The global model on the server needs to maintain a projection layer for each clientside model architecture to align the features separately. Orthogonal techniques
are employed to re-parameterize the projection layer to mitigate knowledge bias
from heterogeneous models and thus maximize the distilled knowledge. Extensive experiments show that FedFD achieves superior performance compared to
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has become a core method for collaboratively training neural networks across
distributed clients while ensuring data privacy is protected [34, 50, 29]. Recently, this framework has
attracted considerable attention and is being applied in various domains, such as autonomous driving
systems [32, 37], recommender systems [27, 26], and intelligent healthcare solutions [7, 40].
Typically, FL has been actively studied with a homogeneous model setting. With the development of
IoT products, different devices often possess varying computing resources, namely different model
training capabilities [39, 31]. In such a scenario, it is essential to explore model-heterogeneous
federated learning (Hetero-FL) to maximize the utilization of distributed computing resources. The
key challenge here lies in how to aggregate the shared knowledge from different models.
∗

Ruixuan Li is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

