Pinpointing Attention-Causal Communication in
Language Models

Gabriel Franco
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
gvfranco@bu.edu

Mark Crovella
Department of Computer Science and
Faculty of Computing & Data Sciences
Boston University
crovella@bu.edu

Abstract
The attention mechanism plays a central role in the computations performed by
transformer-based models, and understanding the reasons why heads attend to specific tokens can aid in interpretability of language models. Although considerable
work has shown that models construct low-dimensional feature representations,
little work has explicitly tied low-dimensional features to the attention mechanism
itself. In this paper we work to bridge this gap by presenting methods for identifying attention-causal communication, meaning low-dimensional features that are
written into and read from tokens, and that have a provable causal relationship to
attention patterns. The starting point for our method is prior work [1–3] showing
that model components make use of low dimensional communication channels
that can be exposed by the singular vectors of QK matrices. Our contribution is to
provide a rigorous and principled approach to finding those channels and isolating
the attention-causal signals they contain. We show that by identifying those signals, we can perform prompt-specific circuit discovery in a single forward pass.
Further, we show that signals can uncover unexplored mechanisms at work in
the model, including a surprising degree of global coordination across attention
heads.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based language models exhibit remarkable abilities [4–6] and consequently have been
very widely deployed. However, it is quite challenging to explain how language models are able
to accomplish such sophisticated tasks [7]. Nonetheless, progress on interpretability for language
models is critical, e.g., to build a foundation for improving model safety and alignment [8].
A meaningful explanation for model behavior should capture causal, rather than merely correlative,
relationships. Elucidating causal relationships within language models has been largely approached
using interventions during model execution [9–15], a method termed causal mediation analysis [16].
However, in this paper we treat the model itself as a structural causal model [13, 17] and thereby
exactly identify the impact of a given counterfactual on the model’s computation.
We focus on causal analysis of a key model computation: attention. In the attention mechanism a
head uses its QK matrix to compute an attention weight for each token pair, and when the weight is
large, we say the head attends to the token pair, resulting in a significant movement of information
within the model. The attention mechanism has been celebrated for its ability to respond to precise
features in activations and enable sophisticated behaviors [18–20]. From the standpoint of causal
analysis, the attention mechanism raises a basic question: when a head attends to a token pair, what
is the most useful counterfactual? That is, what are the most informative features present in the
tokens that explain the head’s attention to the token pair [16]? Answering this question has potential
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

