Off-policy Reinforcement Learning with Model-based
Exploration Augmentation

Likun Wang1
Wenxuan Wang1
2

Xiangteng Zhang1 Yinuo Wang1
Haoyu Gao1
Jingliang Duan1,2∗

Guojian Zhan1
Shengbo Eben Li1∗

1
School of Vehicle and Mobility & College of AI, Tsinghua University
School of Mechanical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing

Abstract
Exploration is fundamental to reinforcement learning (RL), as it determines how
effectively an agent discovers and exploits the underlying structure of its environment to achieve optimal performance. Existing exploration methods generally fall
into two categories: active exploration and passive exploration. The former introduces stochasticity into the policy but struggles in high-dimensional environments,
while the latter adaptively prioritizes transitions in the replay buffer to enhance
exploration, yet remains constrained by limited sample diversity. To address the
limitation in passive exploration, we propose Modelic Generative Exploration
(MoGE), which augments exploration through the generation of under-explored
critical states and synthesis of dynamics-consistent experiences through transition
models. MoGE is composed of two components: (1) a diffusion-based generator
that synthesizes critical states under the guidance of a utility function evaluating
each state’s potential influence on policy exploration, and (2) a one-step imagination world model for constructing critical transitions based on the critical states
for agent learning. Our method adopts a modular formulation that aligns with
the principles of off-policy learning, allowing seamless integration with existing
algorithms to improve exploration without altering their core structures. Empirical
results on OpenAI Gym and DeepMind Control Suite reveal that MoGE effectively
bridges exploration and policy learning, leading to remarkable gains in both sample
efficiency and performance across complex control tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has demonstrated remarkable potential across various tasks, including
autonomous driving, large language models, game playing, and embodied artificial intelligence
[68, 11, 65, 49, 19, 66, 67]. It optimizes policies through trial and error, with policy performance
fundamentally relying on the diversity and coverage of samples collected during interaction with
environments. [18, 69, 21]. Similar to imitation learning (IL), RL algorithms face out-of-distribution
(OOD) challenges due to limited diversity in training data. However, RL mitigates this issue by
leveraging its exploration capabilities to reach unvisited regions of the state space. In this context,
enhancing exploration strategies to collect diverse samples and achieve broader state space coverage
becomes crucial for improving the effectiveness and generalization of RL algorithms [25, 3].
Conventional exploration strategies can be broadly classified into two categories: active exploration
purely based on policy, and passive exploration based on states. Existing approaches achieve active
exploration by introducing randomness into the policy [46, 16] or adding exploration bonuses, which
help prevent the policy from converging prematurely to a narrow subset of actions [2]. Specifically,
∗

Corresponding author <duanjl@ustb.edu.cn> <lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

