When Are Concepts Erased From Diffusion Models?

Kevin Lu1

Nicky Kriplani2

Rohit Gandikota1

Chinmay Hegde2
1

Minh Pham2

David Bau1

Niv Cohen2

Northeastern University
2
New York University

Abstract
In concept erasure, a model is modified to selectively prevent it from generating a
target concept. Despite the rapid development of new methods, it remains unclear
how thoroughly these approaches remove the target concept from the model. We
begin by proposing two conceptual models for the erasure mechanism in diffusion
models: (i) interfering with the model’s internal guidance processes, and (ii) reducing the unconditional likelihood of generating the target concept, potentially
removing it entirely. To assess whether a concept has been truly erased from the
model, we introduce a comprehensive suite of independent probing techniques:
supplying visual context, modifying the diffusion trajectory, applying classifier
guidance, and analyzing the model’s alternative generations that emerge in place
of the erased concept. Our results shed light on the value of exploring concept erasure robustness outside of adversarial text inputs, and emphasize the importance
of comprehensive evaluations for erasure in diffusion models1 .

1

Introduction
Original Model
Target
Concept

Guidance Based Erased Model

Destruction Based Erased Model

Diverting away
from Target
Concept

Knowledge traces present

Suppressing
Target Concept
Likelihood

Knowledge removed

Figure 1: We suggest that diffusion model concept erasure methods can be broadly categorized
into two types: (1) Guidance-Based Avoidance, which avoids a concept by redirecting the model
to different concept locations. (2) Destruction-Based Removal, which reduces the unconditional
likelihood of the target concept while keeping guidance intact, forcing the model to another concept
when prompted with the target concept. The height represents the unconditional likelihood P (X).
When a concept is supposedly erased from a diffusion model, is its knowledge truly removed?
Or is the model merely avoiding the concept, with the underlying knowledge still intact? This
fundamental question is at the heart of understanding erasure in diffusion models.
1

Source code and datasets can be found at kevinlu4588/WhenAreConceptsErased.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

