Distilled Decoding 2: One-step Sampling of Image
Auto-regressive Models with Conditional Score
Distillation
Enshu Liu
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Qian Chen
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Guohao Dai
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Shanghai, China

Xuefei Ning
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Zinan Lin∗†
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Shengen Yan
Infinigence-AI
Beijing, China

Yu Wang†
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Abstract
Image Auto-regressive (AR) models have emerged as a powerful paradigm of visual
generative models. Despite their promising performance, they suffer from slow
generation speed due to the large number of sampling steps required. Although
Distilled Decoding 1 (DD1) was recently proposed to enable few-step sampling
for image AR models, it still incurs significant performance degradation in the
one-step setting, and relies on a pre-defined mapping that limits its flexibility. In
this work, we propose a new method, Distilled Decoding 2 (DD2), to further
advance the feasibility of one-step sampling for image AR models. Unlike DD1,
DD2 does not without rely on a pre-defined mapping. We view the original AR
model as a teacher model that provides the ground truth conditional score in
the latent embedding space at each token position. Based on this, we propose a
novel conditional score distillation loss to train a one-step generator. Specifically,
we train a separate network to predict the conditional score of the generated
distribution and apply score distillation at every token position conditioned on
previous tokens. Experimental results show that DD2 enables one-step sampling
for image AR models with a minimal FID increase from 3.40 to 5.43 and 4.11
to 7.58 on ImageNet-256, while achieving 8.0× and 238× speedup with VAR
and LlamaGen models, respectively. Compared to the strongest baseline DD1,
DD2 reduces the gap between the one-step sampling and original AR model by
67%, with up to 12.3× training speed-up simultaneously. DD2 takes a significant
step toward the goal of one-step AR generation, opening up new possibilities for
fast and high-quality AR modeling. Code is available at https://github.com/
imagination-research/Distilled-Decoding-2.

1

Introduction

Image autoregressive (AR) models have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance in high-fidelity
image synthesis, surpassing other generative approaches such as VAEs, GANs, and diffusion models
[38, 3, 6, 27, 15, 45, 2, 16, 37, 35, 17, 9, 14, 8, 31, 10, 34].
∗

Project Advisor: Zinan Lin.
Correspondence to Zinan Lin (zinanlin@microsoft.com) and Yu Wang (yu-wang@mail.tsinghua.
edu.cn).
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

