A Temporal Difference Method
for Stochastic Continuous Dynamics

Haruki Settai

Naoya Takeishi

Takehisa Yairi

The University of Tokyo
{sharuki,ntake,yairi}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
For continuous systems modeled by dynamical equations such as ODEs and SDEs,
Bellman’s principle of optimality takes the form of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
(HJB) equation, which provides the theoretical target of reinforcement learning
(RL). Although recent advances in RL successfully leverage this formulation, the
existing methods typically assume the underlying dynamics are known a priori
because they need explicit access to the drift and diffusion coefficients to update the
value function following the HJB equation. We address this inherent limitation of
HJB-based RL; we propose a model-free approach still targeting the HJB equation
and the corresponding temporal difference method. We prove exponential stability
of the induced continuous-time dynamics, and we empirically demonstrate the
resulting advantages over transition–kernel–based formulations. The proposed
formulation paves the way toward bridging stochastic control and model-free
reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied in various domains, ranging from discrete
systems like board games (Silver et al., 2018) to systems that are continuous in both state and time
such as robotic control (Kober et al., 2013). RL research has been advancing through a variety of
approaches, and much of the work has focused on improving methods by refining objective functions
(Schulman et al., 2015, 2017), balancing exploration and exploitation (Haarnoja et al., 2018), and
developing more effective architectures (Hafner et al., 2019). These efforts have significantly
advanced the field, leading to the development of various successful algorithms.
In contrast to the studies primarily targeting algorithmic components or optimization techniques, we
focus on the continuity of time and explore what we call continuous RL, where the dynamics of
systems are described by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or stochastic differential equations
(SDEs), which is a relatively underexplored aspect of RL. Although many RL methods have been
applied, sometimes heuristically, to both discrete and continuous systems, the continuity of the system
has not necessarily been fully exploited, even when it is known in advance. Laying a foundation
for utilizing prior knowledge of continuity is important toward more effective learning and decisionmaking methods, particularly for practical applications such as robot control and autonomous driving,
which typically fall into the target of continuous RL.
A way to incorporate prior knowledge of the system’s continuity into the learning process is to use
the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation. In the Bellman equation, continuity is encoded in the
transition kernel. However, in model-free RL, where transitions are approximated using samples, this
continuity information is lost because the transition kernel is not explicitly modeled. On the other
hand, the HJB equation retains the continuity information in the argument of the expectation rather
than in the transition kernel. This property allows the HJB equation to keep taking continuity into
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

