Sparse Autoencoders Learn Monosemantic Features in
Vision-Language Models

Mateusz Pach1,2,3,4 Shyamgopal Karthik1,2,3,4,5 Quentin Bouniot1,2,3,4
Serge Belongie6
Zeynep Akata1,2,3,4
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Helmholtz Munich 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning
4
Munich Data Science Institute 5 University of Tübingen 6 University of Copenhagen
mateusz.pach@tum.de

Abstract
Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) have recently gained attention as a means to improve
the interpretability and steerability of Large Language Models (LLMs), both of
which are essential for AI safety. In this work, we extend the application of SAEs
to Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP, and introduce a comprehensive
framework for evaluating monosemanticity at the neuron-level in visual representations. To ensure that our evaluation aligns with human perception, we propose
a benchmark derived from a large-scale user study. Our experimental results
reveal that SAEs trained on VLMs significantly enhance the monosemanticity
of individual neurons, with sparsity and wide latents being the most influential
factors. Further, we demonstrate that applying SAE interventions on CLIP’s vision encoder directly steers multimodal LLM outputs (e.g., LLaVA), without any
modifications to the underlying language model. These findings emphasize the
practicality and efficacy of SAEs as an unsupervised tool for enhancing both interpretability and control of VLMs. Code and benchmark data are available at
https://github.com/ExplainableML/sae-for-vlm.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP [47] and SigLIP [61] have gained
widespread adoption, owing to their capacity for simultaneous reasoning over visual and textual
modalities. They have found a surge of applications in various modalities, such as in audio [14, 57]
and medicine [62], transferring to new tasks with minimal supervision. Yet our current understanding
of VLM internals remains limited, necessitating methods that can systematically probe their representations. Sparse AutoEncoders (SAEs) [37] are an effective approach to probing the internal
representations of such models. They efficiently discover concepts (abstract features shared between
data points) through their simple architecture learned as a post-hoc reconstruction task. Although
analysis with SAEs is popular for Large Language Models (LLMs) [7, 23, 48], for VLMs it has been
limited to interpretable classification [35, 49], or the discovery of concepts shared across models [53].
Intuitively, SAEs reconstruct activations via a higher-dimensional space to disentangle distinct
concepts from their overlapping representations in neural activations [7]. Neurons at different layers
within deep neural networks are known to be naturally polysemantic [41], meaning that they can
be strongly activated for multiple unrelated concepts such as cellphones and rulers. One common
explanation for this behavior is the superposition hypothesis [3, 17], stating that concepts are encoded
as linear combination of neurons. SAEs explicitly attempt to solve this issue by separating the
entangled concepts into distinct representations. Despite their widespread use in research, the absence
of a metric to evaluate SAEs at the neuron-level still hinders their practicality as an interpretation tool.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

