A Computationally Viable Numerical Gradient-based
Technique for Optimal Covering Problems

Gokul Rajaraman
Department of Mechanical Engineering
IIT Bombay
Mumbai 400076, India
22b4517@iitb.ac.in

Debasish Chatterjee
Centre for Systems and Control
IIT Bombay
Mumbai 400076, India
dchatter@iitb.ac.in

Abstract
The problem of optimally covering a given compact subset of RN with a preassigned number n of Euclidean metric balls has a long-standing history and it is
well-recognized to be computationally hard. This article establishes a numerically viable algorithm for obtaining optimal covers of compact sets via two key
contributions. The first is a foundational result establishing Lipschitz continuity
of the marginal function of a certain parametric non-convex maximization problem in the optimal covering problem, and it provides the substrate for numerical
gradient algorithms to be employed in this context. The second is an adaptation
of a stochastically smoothed numerical gradient-based (zeroth-order) algorithm
for a non-convex minimization problem, that, equipped with randomized restarts,
spurs global convergence to an optimal cover. Several numerical experiments with
complicated nonconvex compact sets demonstrate the excellent performance of our
techniques.

1

Introduction

Optimal covering of sets is an important problem that arises naturally in several fields of science
and technology, including learning and approximation theory, computer science, signal processing,
information theory, combinatorics, communication, sensor networks, multi-agent systems, cyberphysical systems, etc. In a sensor network, for instance, given a collection of sensors having preassigned
sensing radius and a set that must be enveloped by the sensors, an important engineering question
is to find an optimal collection of points for placing the sensors to ensure complete coverage of the
given set. An identical problem arises for the coverage of a given geographical region with cell-phone
towers in order to maximize network availability in the region. In information theory, assuming that
one can accurately decode messages from a certain set within a preassigned maximal error tolerance
for each, it is important to determine the number of ‘signals’ that are necessary for accurate decoding
of all the messages; this is once again a problem of optimal covering of the set of messages with a
collection of ‘signals’.
The covering problem appears in various forms, and perhaps its most common variant is captured by
the following situation. For a given non-empty (and possibly uncountable) compact set M ⊂ RN
and a preassigned ε > 0, one finds a finite set F ⊂ RN that is at most ε-distant from any point in
M. Such a minimal set is an ε-net and its cardinality is the so-called ε-covering number of the set
M; see, e.g., (Kolmogorov and Tihomirov, 1961) for an early detailed exposé of related topics and
(Alimov and Tsar’kov, 2021, Chapters 15 and 16) for a more recent treatment. A closely related and
equally relevant variant of covering is its resource-constrained or budgeted version: Given a number
n of metric balls, one must find the minimal radius and a placement of the n centers of the balls such
that their union covers M. Such a collection of the centers is commonly known as a Chebyshev net
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

