What Happens During the Loss Plateau?
Understanding Abrupt Learning in Transformers

Pulkit Gopalani
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
gopalani@umich.edu

Wei Hu
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
vvh@umich.edu

Abstract
Training Transformers on algorithmic tasks frequently demonstrates an intriguing
abrupt learning phenomenon: an extended performance plateau followed by a
sudden, sharp improvement. This work investigates the underlying mechanisms
for such dynamics, primarily in shallow Transformers. We reveal that during the
plateau, the model often develops an interpretable partial solution while simultaneously exhibiting a strong repetition bias in their outputs. This output degeneracy
is accompanied by internal representation collapse, where hidden states across
different tokens become nearly parallel. We further identify the slow learning of
optimal attention maps as a key bottleneck. Hidden progress in attention configuration during the plateau precedes the eventual rapid convergence, and directly
intervening on attention significantly alters plateau duration and the severity of
repetition bias and representational collapse. We validate that these identified
phenomena—repetition bias and representation collapse—are not artifacts of toy
setups but also manifest in the early pre-training stage of large language models
like Pythia and OLMo.

1

Introduction

Training Transformers on mathematical or algorithmic tasks often exhibits an intriguing “abrupt
learning” phenomenon in their training dynamics, where the model’s performance plateaus at a
suboptimal level for an extended period before suddenly and rapidly converging to the optimal solution
[3, 36, 44, 47, 54] (Figures 1 and 2). This is often considered an example of the broader phenomenon
of “emergence,” where model capabilities appear to arise discontinuously and unpredictably with
increasing amount of parameters, training data, or training steps [49]. Understanding these sharp
phase transitions in learning trajectories is crucial for gaining deeper insights into how Transformer
models learn and develop their sophisticated capabilities.
Despite recent progress in understanding such abrupt learning dynamics in Transformers for specific
tasks like in-context learning [10, 15, 41, 44, 47, 54], parity learning [3], Markov chains [15],
grammar learning [9, 32], and matrix completion [18], a unifying account of the model evolution
during loss plateau is still missing. Further, many of these works require specific assumptions on
model and data that limit their generality.
The goal of this paper is to uncover universal characteristics and underlying mechanisms that define
these training dynamics that are broadly applicable to a wide range of setups and tasks. Specifically,
what common patterns manifest in the model’s input-output behavior and internal representations
during the extended plateau phase, and what critical changes precede the sudden shift towards
higher performance? Is there hidden progress accumulating beneath the surface of the loss plateau?
Answering these questions is pivotal for building a comprehensive picture of the nature of phase
transitions in Transformer training dynamics.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

