RadarQA: Multi-modal Quality Analysis of
Weather Radar Forecasts
Xuming He1,2∗§, Zhiyuan You3∗, Junchao Gong1 , Couhua Liu4 , Xiaoyu Yue1 ,
Peiqin Zhuang1 , Wenlong Zhang1†, Lei Bai1†
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
ZheJiang University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Center for Earth System Modeling and Prediction of China Meteorological Administration
zhangwenlong@pjlab.org.cn, bailei@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Quality analysis of weather forecasts is an essential topic in meteorology.
Although traditional score-based evaluation metrics can quantify certain forecast
errors, they are still far from meteorological experts in terms of descriptive
capability, interpretability, and understanding of dynamic evolution. With the
rapid development of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs), these
models become potential tools to overcome the above challenges. In this work, we
introduce an MLLM-based weather forecast analysis method, RadarQA, integrating
key physical attributes with detailed assessment reports. We introduce a novel and
comprehensive task paradigm for multi-modal quality analysis, encompassing both
single frame and sequence, under both rating and assessment scenarios. To support
training and benchmarking, we design a hybrid annotation pipeline that combines
human expert labeling with automated heuristics. With such an annotation method,
we construct RQA-70K, a large-scale dataset with varying difficulty levels for radar
forecast quality evaluation. We further design a multi-stage training strategy that
iteratively improves model performance at each stage. Extensive experiments show
that RadarQA outperforms existing general MLLMs across all evaluation settings,
highlighting its potential for advancing quality analysis in weather prediction. The
code and dataset are publicly available at https://github.com/hexmSeeU/RadarQA.

1

Introduction

Quality analysis of weather forecasts is an essential topic in the field of meteorology [21, 81, 87, 88],
playing a critical role in downstream applications such as disaster prevention, risk mitigation, and
early warning systems [5, 8, 16]. This analysis evaluates the consistency between predicted and
actual weather states, both in single frames and over temporal sequences, aiming to align with the
assessment of meteorological experts. Previous methods usually adopt score-based metrics for quality
evaluation, which is still far from matching expert-level judgments. First, some descriptive properties
(e.g., shape like “scattered and block-like” and movement direction like “moves to the northeast” in
Fig. 1) are vital for weather forecasting, but cannot be captured by a simple score. Second, existing
methods fail to provide detailed interpretations of the evaluation results, making them less explainable
and less convincing. For instance, in Fig. 1, human experts can first observe that “discrepancies arise
in shape changes”, and then conclude that the forecast’s reliability is limited. However, previous
score-based metrics lack such interpretive capabilities. Third, human experts can assess the dynamic
evolution of weather systems (e.g., “newly formed convective cells are smaller” in Fig. 1), while
score-based metrics are primarily limited to pixel-level evaluations of single frames [11, 12, 48],
lacking both temporal awareness and global understanding of large-scale weather systems.
* Equal Contribution.
†
§

Corresponding Author.
This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

