Let Me Think! A Long Chain-of-Thought Can Be
Worth Exponentially Many Short Ones

Parsa Mirtaheri∗
UC San Diego
parsa@ucsd.edu

Ezra Edelman∗
University of Pennsylvania
ezrae@seas.upenn.edu

Eran Malach
Harvard University†
emalach@g.harvard.edu

Samy Jelassi
Harvard University
sjelassi@fas.harvard.edu

Enric Boix-Adserà
University of Pennsylvania
eboix@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
Inference-time computation has emerged as a promising scaling axis for improving
large language model reasoning. However, despite yielding impressive performance, the optimal allocation of inference-time computation remains poorly understood. A central question is whether to prioritize sequential scaling (e.g., longer
chains of thought) or parallel scaling (e.g., majority voting across multiple short
chains of thought). In this work, we seek to illuminate the landscape of test-time
scaling by demonstrating the existence of reasoning settings where sequential
scaling offers an exponential advantage over parallel scaling. These settings are
based on graph connectivity problems in challenging distributions of graphs. We
validate our theoretical findings with comprehensive experiments across a range
of language models, including models trained from scratch for graph connectivity
with different chain of thought strategies as well as large reasoning models.‡

1

Introduction

Large Language Model (LLM) scaling has recently undergone a paradigm shift toward increasing
the amount of compute used during inference [1, 2], moving beyond traditional axes such as model
size, training data, and pretraining compute [3, 4]. Scaling inference-time compute is particularly
important for reasoning tasks, and is a key ingredient in OpenAI’s o-series models [5], DeepSeek-R1
[6] among other frontier models [7, 8, 9, 10].
Despite the impressive performance of these systems, the central question of how to optimally allocate
inference-time compute is not yet settled. The main challenge is that the space of strategies that use
compute at test time is large and diverse: a wide variety of methods exist [2, 11, 12], each with its
own empirical scaling law [1, 2]. Additionally, different methods can sometimes be combined, which
further complicates any analysis.
In this paper, we seek fundamental and general principles that help clarify the landscape of inferencetime compute. Since there is a large range of inference-time methods, in order to make progress we
categorize methods into two classes [7]: (1) parallel scaling and (2) sequential scaling. We review
these notions below.
∗

Equal contribution.
Currently at Apple.
‡
Code is available at https://github.com/seyedparsa/let-me-think.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

