Identifying interactions across brain areas while
accounting for individual-neuron dynamics with a
Transformer-based variational autoencoder
Qi Xin
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
xinqi0511@gmail.com

Robert E. Kass
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kass@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
Advances in large-scale recording technologies now enable simultaneous measurements from multiple brain areas, offering new opportunities to study signal
transmission across interacting components of neural circuits. However, neural
responses exhibit substantial trial-to-trial variability, often driven by unobserved
factors such as subtle changes in animal behavior or internal states. To prevent
evolving background dynamics from contaminating identification of functional
coupling, we developed a hybrid neural spike train model, GLM-Transformer, that
incorporates flexible, deep latent variable models into a point process generalized
linear model (GLM) having an interpretable component for cross-population interactions. A Transformer-based variational autoencoder captures nonstationary
individual-neuron dynamics that vary across trials, while standard nonparametric regression GLM coupling terms provide estimates of directed interactions
between neural populations. We incorporate a low-rank structure on population-topopulation coupling effects to improve scalability. Across synthetic datasets and
mechanistic simulations, GLM-Transformer recovers known coupling structure
and remains robust to shared background fluctuations. When applied to the Allen
Institute Visual Coding dataset, it identifies feedforward pathways consistent with
established visual hierarchy. This work offers a step toward improved identification of neural population interactions, and contributes to ongoing efforts aimed at
achieving interpretable results while harvesting the benefits of deep learning.

1

Introduction

A central goal of systems neuroscience is to understand how multiple populations of neurons, across
different brain areas, interact as a coordinated circuit to produce perception and behavior. Recent
advances in electrophysiological recording technologies, which have enabled simultaneous recordings
from thousands of neurons across anatomically distinct parts of the brain, have offered exciting new
opportunities for progress [1, 2, 3, 4]. Because neural action potentials, or spikes, are the dominant
sources of information transmission, much of modern neurophysiology has focused on sequences
of spikes, that is, neural spike trains. Neural networks in living animals, however, also exhibit
continually evolving dynamics. Thus, a major contemporary challenge is to develop methods for
identifying interactions among spike trains from large populations of neurons while accounting for
changing background dynamics.
One of the main collections of methodologies for analyzing neural spike trains has come under the
heading of generalized linear models (GLMs). These models are based on Poisson nonparametric
regression and often incorporate latent variables. They have been remarkably adept at identifying
functional interactions between neurons due to their flexibility, interpretability, and rigorous statistical
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

