Zero-Shot Performance Prediction for
Probabilistic Scaling Laws

Viktoria Schram1 Markus Hiller1 Daniel Beck2 Trevor Cohn∗ 1
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
2
School of Computing Technologies, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
{v.schram, m.hiller, trevor.cohn}@unimelb.edu.au
daniel.beck@rmit.edu.au
1

Abstract
The prediction of learning curves for Natural Language Processing (NLP) models
enables informed decision-making to meet specific performance objectives, while
reducing computational overhead and lowering the costs associated with dataset
acquisition and curation. In this work, we formulate the prediction task as a multitask learning problem, where each task’s data is modelled as being organized
within a two-layer hierarchy. To model the shared information and dependencies
across tasks and hierarchical levels, we employ latent variable multi-output Gaussian Processes, enabling to account for task correlations and supporting zero-shot
prediction of learning curves (LCs). We demonstrate that this approach facilitates
the development of probabilistic scaling laws at lower costs. Applying an active
learning strategy, LCs can be queried to reduce predictive uncertainty and provide
predictions close to ground truth scaling laws. We validate our framework on three
small-scale NLP datasets with up to 30 LCs. These are obtained from nanoGPT
models, from bilingual translation using mBART and Transformer models, and
from multilingual translation using M2M100 models of varying sizes.

1

Introduction

Large language models are increasingly being employed across various research domains and
industrial applications, requiring substantial computational resources not only for the training, finetuning, and testing of these models but also for their deployment, prompting, and generation processes.
As model complexity and the number of processed tokens increase, energy demands and processing
times grow extensively, resulting in high costs and significant environmental impact [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
In this context, performance prediction has emerged as a promising research direction, aiming to
alleviate these costs by providing informed guidance for model selection, data acquisition strategies,
and computational requirements [6, 7, 8].
One important task in this field of research is learning and training curve prediction. The former
evaluates the generalization ability of machine learning models as a function of a resource of interest,
such as dataset size or model complexity, while the latter models the evolution of the loss over training
iterations, epochs, or steps [9, 10, 11]. Early approaches to learning and training curve prediction
relied on fitting parametric functional forms to observed performance metrics and extrapolating future
outcomes [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Since then, particularly within the context of Bayesian optimization,
various surrogate models, such as Gaussian processes [17], Bayesian neural networks [18, 19], and
ensemble methods [20], have been employed for curve extrapolation tasks, providing uncertainty
estimates alongside point predictions.
∗

Also at Google Australia

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

