Flatten Graphs as Sequences:
Transformers are Scalable Graph Generators

Dexiong Chen
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Martinsried, Germany
dchen@biochem.mpg.de

Markus Krimmel
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Martinsried, Germany
krimmel@biochem.mpg.de

Karsten Borgwardt
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Martinsried, Germany
borgwardt@biochem.mpg.de

Abstract
We introduce AUTO G RAPH, a scalable autoregressive model for attributed graph
generation using decoder-only transformers. By flattening graphs into random
sequences of tokens through a reversible process, AUTO G RAPH enables modeling
graphs as sequences without relying on additional node features that are expensive
to compute, in contrast to diffusion-based approaches. This results in sampling
complexity and sequence lengths that scale optimally linearly with the number of
edges, making it scalable and efficient for large, sparse graphs. A key success factor
of AUTO G RAPH is that its sequence prefixes represent induced subgraphs, creating
a direct link to sub-sentences in language modeling. Empirically, AUTO G RAPH
achieves state-of-the-art performance on synthetic and molecular benchmarks, with
up to 100x faster generation and 3x faster training than leading diffusion models.
It also supports substructure-conditioned generation without fine-tuning and shows
promising transferability, bridging language modeling and graph generation to lay
the groundwork for graph foundation models.
Our code is available at https://github.com/BorgwardtLab/AutoGraph.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in deep generative models have revolutionized various domains of artificial intelligence, demonstrating remarkable capabilities in generating complex data types such as images [55],
natural language [7, 63, 64], and audio [17, 28]. These achievements have been primarily driven by
the development of advanced architectures or methods such as transformers and diffusion models,
alongside increasingly large-scale data resources. However, the generation of graph-structured data,
which is fundamental to numerous scientific applications including drug discovery [66, 44], protein
design [29], and program synthesis [5], remains a significant challenge. This disparity primarily
stems from the inherent complexity of preserving structural validity, maintaining invariance properties
within graphs, and achieving scalability in real-world graph generation tasks.
To this end, diffusion-based models have emerged as a promising direction for graph generation,
demonstrating effectiveness in synthesizing both classic unattributed graphs and molecules [34, 66].
These approaches typically implement a denoising process in discrete graph space, simultaneously
predicting edge connectivity and attributes. Yet, their practical applications are constrained by
fundamental scalability limitations. The requirement for full adjacency matrix operations imposes
quadratic memory complexity with respect to the number of nodes. Moreover, computing additional
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

