Discovering Important Experts for Mixture-of-Experts
Models Pruning Through a Theoretical Perspective

Weizhong Huang1,2
1

Yuxin Zhang1 Xiawu Zheng1,2,3
Rongrong Ji1,2 Liujuan Cao1,2∗

Fei Chao1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures enable efficient scaling of large language
models but face prohibitive memory demands due to massive parameterization.
Existing pruning methods rely on heuristic metrics or impractical enumeration of
expert subsets, leading to suboptimal performance or scalability. In this paper, we
propose Shapley-MoE, an efficient pruning method for MoE models inspired by
cooperative game theory. By quantifying each expert’s contribution via Shapley
value, our method identifies important experts without exhaustive combination
evaluations. To overcome the NP-hard complexity of exact Shapley computation,
we introduce a Monte Carlo sampling strategy for efficient approximation that
reduces complexity to quadratic time. However, vanilla Monte Carlo sampling still
faces issues of insufficient estimation accuracy and low sampling efficiency. To
address these issues, we further propose two novel methods to improve sampling
accuracy and efficiency: (1) Early Truncation, which early terminates unstable
sampling steps caused by overly small expert subsets, and (2) Router-Guided Importance Sampling, which prioritize sampling important expert subsets using gating
activation probabilities. Both theoretical and experimental analyses show that both
methods can accelerate Shapley value estimation and improve accuracy. Extensive
empirical evaluations demonstrate that our pruned MoE models outperform existing
expert pruning methods. Notably, when applied to the Qwen2-57B-A14B model,
our method reduces the number of experts by 25% with only a 0.92 increase in
perplexity and over 96.4% of the average zero-shot accuracy is maintained.

1

Introduction

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) [40, 16, 79] architectures have emerged as a popular architecture for large
language models (LLMs) [67, 13, 74], enabling efficient scaling and superior performance on complex
tasks [22, 5, 36]. However, its sparse activation paradigm introduces massive parameterization, posing
prohibitive memory demands. To address the above issues, various MoE model compression strategies
have been developed, including pruning [56, 6, 24, 10], quantization [17, 30, 41], and knowledge
distillation [37, 72, 65].
Among these methods, network pruning [51, 75, 66, 49, 33, 31, 70, 32, 52] can remove less important
parameters from MoE models, allowing reducing the memory footprint and computational complexity
of MoE models without significantly sacrificing performance. Recent studies have shown that there
is significant redundancy among experts in MoE models [9, 49], and MoE models can still maintain
∗

Corresponding author: caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

