RvLLM: LLM Runtime Verification with Domain
Knowledge

Yedi Zhang∗
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Sun Yi Emma
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Annabelle Lee Jia En
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Jin Song Dong
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as a dominant AI paradigm due
to their exceptional text understanding and generation capabilities. However,
their tendency to generate inconsistent or erroneous outputs challenges their reliability, especially in high-stakes domains requiring accuracy and trustworthiness.
Existing research primarily focuses on detecting and mitigating model misbehavior in general-purpose scenarios, often overlooking the potential of integrating
domain-specific knowledge. In this work, we advance misbehavior detection by
incorporating domain knowledge. The core idea is to design a general specification
language that enables domain experts to customize domain-specific constraints in
a lightweight and intuitive manner, supporting later runtime monitoring of LLM
outputs. To achieve this, we design a novel specification language ESL and introduce a runtime verification framework RvLLM to validate LLM output against
domain-specific constraints defined in ESL. RvLLM operates in two main stages:
interpretation and reasoning. During interpretation, it derives interpretations of the
specification based on the context, which then guide the reasoning process to identify inconsistencies. When new knowledge is derived, RvLLM issues a follow-up
query to the LLM to further verify the consistency. We evaluate RvLLM on three
representative tasks: violation detection against Singapore Rapid Transit Systems
Act, numerical comparison, and inequality solving. Experimental results show that
RvLLM effectively detects erroneous outputs across various LLMs in a lightweight
and flexible manner. The results reveal that despite their impressive capabilities,
LLMs remain prone to low-level errors due to a lack of formal guarantees during
inference, and our framework offers a potential long-term solution by leveraging
expert domain knowledge to rigorously and efficiently verify LLM outputs.

1

Introduction

Unlike rule-based systems [52] operating on predefined and deterministic rules, large language
models (LLMs) [1, 23, 62, 43] learn data representation and processing automatically from the
training datasets, achieving human-like or even superhuman performance, and have driven significant
advancements in various practical applications [10, 33, 55, 44, 24]. However, their non-deterministic
and unpredictable nature sometimes leads to inconsistent or erroneous outputs [3, 49], posing
significant risks in safety-critical or knowledge-intensive domains. Recent studies [61, 5] have shown
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

