Mozart: Modularized and Efficient MoE Training on
3.5D Wafer-Scale Chiplet Architectures

Shuqing Luo†1 , Han Ye†2 , Pingzhi Li†1 , Jiayin Qin†2
Jie Peng1 , Yang (Katie) Zhao2 , Yu (Kevin) Cao2 , Tianlong Chen∗ 1
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

2

University of Minnesota - Twin Cities

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture offers enhanced efficiency for Large Language Models (LLMs) with modularized computation, yet its inherent sparsity
poses significant hardware deployment challenges, including memory locality
issues, communication overhead, and inefficient computing resource utilization.
Inspired by the modular organization of the human brain, we propose Mozart, a
novel algorithm-hardware co-design framework tailored for efficient training of
MoE-based LLMs on 3.5D wafer-scale chiplet architectures. On the algorithm side,
Mozart exploits the inherent modularity of chiplets and introduces: (1) an expert allocation strategy that enables efficient on-package all-to-all communication, and (2)
a fine-grained scheduling mechanism that improves communication-computation
overlap through streaming tokens and experts. On the architecture side, Mozart
adaptively co-locates heterogeneous modules on specialized chiplets with a 2.5D
NoP-Tree topology and hierarchical memory structure. Evaluation across three popular MoE models demonstrates significant efficiency gains, enabling more effective
parallelization and resource utilization for large-scale modularized MoE-LLMs.

1

Introduction

The human brain, known for its cognitive efficiency and modular organization, has long inspired the
design of large-scale computational systems [9, 14, 27]. It comprises specialized modules that handle
distinct tasks, ranging from memory-intensive to computation-heavy operations, while maintaining
low-latency coordination with adjacent regions [1, 3, 13]. This modularity enables efficient, scalable,
and flexible processing [2, 17], which is a principle increasingly adopted in deep learning systems
such as Large Language Models (LLMs) [21, 35].
Meanwhile, recent advances in LLMs, particularly Mixture-of-Experts (MoEs), reflect similar modular principles by dynamically activating specialized sub-networks based on input. However, the scale
and heterogeneity of MoE-LLMs pose significant challenges for conventional hardware platforms [21]
(e.g., traditional GPUs or CPUs), including photoreticle-limited scalability [18] and transistor scaling
limits [36], as well as poor memory locality [12], high inter-module communication overhead [15],
and inefficient resource utilization [25] due to dynamic and uneven computational workloads.
2.5D/3.5D heterogeneous chiplet-based architectures have gained popularity due to their scalability
and modularity to meet the demands of the aforementioned LLM-related workloads, including
MoEs [32, 46, 8, 20]. Typically in 2.5D designs, multiple chiplets are interconnected via a Networkon-Package (NoP) through an interposer [7, 34, 26, 37], reducing the area and cost overhead of
monolithic integration. To further boost inter-chiplet bandwidth, 3D integration techniques such
∗
†

Correspondence to: Tianlong Chen <tianlong@cs.unc.edu>.
Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

