Let Them Talk: Audio-Driven Multi-Person
Conversational Video Generation
Zhe Kong1,2,3∗, Feng Gao2∗ , Yong Zhang2†, Zhuoliang Kang2 , Xiaoming Wei2 ,
Xunliang Cai2 , Guanying Chen1 , Wenhan Luo3†
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Meituan
3
Division of AMC and Department of ECE, HKUST
https://meigen-ai.github.io/multi-talk/
🤖

🤖

🤖

Prompt: A man and a woman
were talking, and then they
kissed each other

Conversation Audio

🤖
🤖

🤖

🤖

🤖
🤖 🤖

🤖

🤖

Prompt: The fox picked up
the cup and then touched
the rabbit's head.

Figure 1: We propose MultiTalk, a novel framework for audio-driven multi-person conversational
video generation. Given a multi-stream audio input and a prompt, MultiTalk generates a video
containing interactions following the prompt, with consistent lip motions aligned with the audio.

Abstract
Audio-driven human animation methods, such as talking head and talking body
generation, have made remarkable progress in generating synchronized facial movements and appealing visual quality videos. However, existing methods primarily
focus on single human animation and struggle with multi-stream audio inputs,
facing incorrect binding problems between audio and persons. Additionally, they
exhibit limitations in instruction-following capabilities. To solve this problem, in
this paper, we propose a novel task: Multi-Person Conversational Video Generation, and introduce a new framework, MultiTalk, to address the challenges during
multi-person generation. Specifically, for audio injection, we investigate several
schemes and propose the Label Rotary Position Embedding (L-RoPE) method
to resolve the audio and person binding problem. Furthermore, during training,
we observe that partial parameter training and multi-task training are crucial for
preserving the instruction-following ability of the base model. MultiTalk achieves
superior performance compared to other methods on several datasets, including
talking head, talking body, and multi-person datasets, demonstrating the powerful
generation capabilities of our approach.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

