Chain-of-Action: Trajectory Autoregressive Modeling
for Robotic Manipulation

Wenbo Zhang1,2 Tianrun Hu3 Hanbo Zhang3 Yanyuan Qiao2 Yuchu Qin4
Yang Li5 Jiajun Liu5,6 Tao Kong1 Lingqiao Liu2,† Xiao Ma1,†
1

ByteDance Seed 2 The University of Adelaide 3 National University of Singapore
4
Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 CSIRO 6 The University of Queensland

wenbo.zhang01@adelaide.edu.au, xiaoma@bytedance.com, lingqiao.liu@adelaide.edu.au
†Corresponding authors
Project page: https://chain-of-action.github.io/
Code: https://github.com/ByteDance-Seed/Chain-of-Action

Abstract
We present Chain-of-Action (CoA), a novel visuomotor policy paradigm built
upon Trajectory Autoregressive Modeling. Unlike conventional approaches that
predict next step action(s) forward, CoA generates an entire trajectory by explicit
backward reasoning with task-specific goals through an action-level Chain-ofThought (CoT) process. This process is unified within a single autoregressive
structure: (1) the first token corresponds to a stable keyframe action that encodes
the task-specific goals; and (2) subsequent action tokens are generated autoregressively, conditioned on the initial keyframe and previously predicted actions. This
backward action reasoning enforces a global-to-local structure, allowing each local
action to be tightly constrained by the final goal. To further realize the action reasoning structure, CoA incorporates four complementary designs: continuous action
token representation; dynamic stopping for variable-length trajectory generation;
reverse temporal ensemble; and multi-token prediction to balance action chunk
modeling with global structure. As a result, CoA gives strong spatial generalization
capabilities while preserving the flexibility and simplicity of a visuomotor policy.
Empirically, we observe that CoA outperforms representative imitation learning
algorithms such as ACT and Diffusion Policy across 60 RLBench tasks and 8
real-world tasks.

1

Introduction

visuomotor policies have made substantial progress in enabling robots to perform complex manipulation tasks from raw sensory observations. With the rise of large-scale demonstrations [5, 19, 37]
and powerful neural architectures [36, 11], recent methods have increasingly focused on end-to-end
learning from visual inputs to low-level control[15, 2].
To better model multi-modal action distributions and mitigate compounding errors, various modeling
paradigms have been proposed [3, 45]. For instance, ACT [45] employs a conditional variational
autoencoder to learn action distributions and introduces action chunking to reduce compounding errors.
Diffusion Policy [3] formulates action generation as a denoising process, capturing complex, multimodal behaviors more effectively. Many subsequent developments have explored enhancements in
multiple directions, including enriched sensory inputs [41, 40], improved network architecture [4, 24],
expanded datasets[5], and scaled model capacity, represented by trend of VLA (vision-languageaction) model [21, 28, 25, 1].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

