From Black-box to Causal-box:
Towards Building More Interpretable Models

Inwoo Hwang
Yushu Pan
Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Lab
Columbia University
inwoo.hwang@columbia.edu
{yushupan, eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Understanding the predictions made by deep learning models remains a central
challenge, especially in high-stakes applications. A promising approach is to
equip models with the ability to answer counterfactual questions – hypothetical
“what if?” scenarios that go beyond the observed data and provide insight into a
model reasoning. In this work, we introduce the notion of causal interpretability,
which formalizes when counterfactual queries can be evaluated from a specific
class of models and observational data. We analyze two common model classes
– blackbox and concept-based predictors – and show that neither is causally interpretable in general. To address this gap, we develop a framework for building
models that are causally interpretable by design. Specifically, we derive a complete
graphical criterion that determines whether a given model architecture supports a
given counterfactual query. This leads to a fundamental tradeoff between causal
interpretability and predictive accuracy, which we characterize by identifying the
unique maximal set of features that yields an interpretable model with maximal
predictive expressiveness. Experiments corroborate the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable success of deep learning models across a wide range of tasks – including
image recognition [7, 16], natural language processing [3, 35], and reinforcement learning [32, 34] –
these models remain fundamentally opaque. Although they are highly effective at predicting labels
based on statistical correlations in the data, they lack the capacity to explain the reasoning behind their
predictions, earning them the colloquial label of “black boxes.” In other words, current models are
difficult to interpret: they lack the ability to justify why a particular decision was made, identify which
input factors were most influential, or reason about how outcomes might differ under alternative,
counterfactual conditions. This interpretability gap raises concerns in high-stakes domains such as
healthcare, law, and scientific discovery, where understanding how and why a model makes a decision
is as important as the decision itself.
A rich body of research on explainable AI (XAI) has been developed to better understand the behavior
of learned models. For instance, post-hoc explanation methods such as LIME [30], SHAP [20], and
Grad-CAM [31] generate local or visual attributions in terms of pixels or extracted features to help
interpret predictions. Other approaches aim to build intrinsically interpretable models, such as those
that impose sparsity constraints [22], restrict final layers [38], or leverage decision tree structures [37],
often trading off model complexity for greater transparency. While these techniques offer useful
insights, they fail to bridge the gap between low-level features and high-level, human-understandable
features that might explain the behavior of a model.
One promising avenue for bridging this gap is counterfactual reasoning. Answering what if questions
– such as “Would the diagnosis have changed if a different treatment had been administered?” or
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

