Building 3D Representations and Generating Motions
From a Single Image via Video-Generation

Weiming Zhi 1,2,3

Ziyong Ma 3

Tianyi Zhang 3,4

Matthew Johnson-Roberson 2,3
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia.
2
College of Connected Computing, Vanderbilt University, TN, USA.
3
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA.
4
Aurora, USA.
Correspondence to W. Zhi (Weiming.zhi@sydney.edu.au).
1

Abstract
Autonomous robots typically need to construct representations of their surroundings and adapt their motions to the geometry of their environment. Here, we tackle
the problem of constructing a policy model for collision-free motion generation,
consistent with the environment, from a single input RGB image. Extracting 3D
structures from a single image often involves monocular depth estimation. Developments in depth estimation have given rise to large pre-trained models such
as DepthAnything. However, using outputs of these models for downstream motion generation is challenging due to frustum-shaped errors that arise. Instead, we
propose a framework known as Video-Generation Environment Representation
(VGER), which leverages the advances of large-scale video generation models to
generate a moving camera video conditioned on the input image. Frames of this
video, which form a multiview dataset, are then input into a pre-trained 3D foundation model to produce a dense point cloud. We then introduce a multi-scale
noise approach to train an implicit representation of the environment structure and
build a motion generation model that complies with the geometry of the representation. We extensively evaluate VGER over a diverse set of indoor and outdoor
environments. We demonstrate its ability to produce smooth motions that account
for the captured geometry of a scene, all from a single RGB input image.

1

Introduction

Autonomous robots operating in unstructured environments maintain a representation of their surroundings to enable reliable motion planning. Building complex environment representations generally requires large sets of images [1–3], and often depth measurements [4, 5]. In this work, we push
the boundaries of data efficiency by constructing both a scene representation for collision avoidance and a downstream motion generation model from a single RGB image, by leveraging recent
advances in pre-trained video generation and 3D foundation models.
A common strategy for recovering 3D structure from a single image is to estimate per-pixel depth.
Recent advances have yielded powerful monocular depth estimators, most notably DepthAnything.
However, the depth maps they produce often exhibit frustum-shaped artifacts at object boundaries,
rendering them unsuitable for collision avoidance. To overcome these limitations, we introduce
Video-generation Environment Representation (VGER), which sidesteps direct monocular depth
prediction by conditioning a large, pre-trained video model on the input image to generate a se39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

