HMARL-CBF – Hierarchical Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning with Control Barrier
Functions for Safety-Critical Autonomous Systems
H. M. Sabbir Ahmad1 , Ehsan Sabouni1 , Alexander Wasilkoff1 , Param Budhraja1 ,
Zijian Guo1 Songyuan Zhang2 , Chuchu Fan2 , Christos Cassandras1 , Wenchao Li1
1
Boston University, 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{sabbir92,esabouni,awasilkoff,paramb,zjguo,cgc,wenchao}@bu.edu
{szhang21,chuchu}@mit.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of safe policy learning in multi-agent safety-critical autonomous systems. In such systems, it is necessary for each agent to meet the safety
requirements at all times while also cooperating with other agents to accomplish the
task. Toward this end, we propose a safe Hierarchical Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning (HMARL) approach based on Control Barrier Functions (CBFs). Our
proposed hierarchical approach decomposes the overall reinforcement learning
problem into two levels — learning joint cooperative behavior at the higher level
and learning safe individual behavior at the lower or agent level, conditioned on the
high-level policy. Specifically, we propose a skill-based HMARL-CBF algorithm
in which the higher-level problem involves learning a joint policy over the skills for
all the agents, and the lower-level problem involves learning policies to execute the
skills safely with CBFs. We validate our approach in challenging environment scenarios, whereby a large number of agents have to safely navigate through conflicting
road networks. Compared with existing state-of-the-art methods, our approach
significantly improves the safety, achieving a near-perfect (≥ 95%) success/safety
rate while improving performance across all the environments 1 .

1

Introduction

Safety-critical multi-agent systems are rapidly expanding across diverse domains, including selfdriving cars [37, 90], unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) [84, 54], swarm robotics [41], soft robotics
[53, 72, 31], and autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) [55]. As these systems operate in complex
and often unpredictable environments, failures can lead to catastrophic consequences—endangering
human lives, causing environmental damage, or resulting in severe economic losses. Hence, it is
crucial to design cooperative control policies that enable agents to achieve their objectives while
ensuring safety with respect to both other agents and the environment [83, 70].
Learning a flat policy using existing Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [40, 57, 64]
algorithms by adjoining the safety constraints to the reward function provides one possible approach.
However, these approaches suffer from scalability and high sample complexity as the number of agents
grows, and most importantly, they lack formal safety guarantees. The problem is further exacerbated
in partially observable settings. Safety in both single- and multi-agent reinforcement learning has
been studied within the constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) framework [89, 2, 22]. In
this setting, constraints are typically expressed as expectations of cumulative (discounted) costs
over entire trajectories, thereby ensuring safety only in an average or statistical sense on trajectories.
1

Project website: https://bu-depend-lab.github.io/HMARL-CBF/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

