HPSERec: A Hierarchical Partitioning and Stepwise
Enhancement Framework for Long-tailed Sequential
Recommendation
Xiaolong Xu1 , Xudong Zhao1 , Haolong Xiang1∗, Xuyun Zhang2 , Wei Shen3 , Hongsheng Hu4 ,
Lianyong Qi5
1
School of Software, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
2
School of computing, Macquarie University, Australia
3
Independent Researcher, China
4
School of Information and Physical Sciences, University of Newcastle, Australia
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China), China

Abstract
The long-tail problem in sequential recommender systems stems from imbalanced
interaction data, resulting in suboptimal model performance for tail users and
items. Recent studies have leveraged head data to enhance tail data for diminish
the impact of the long-tail problem. However, these methods often adopt ad-hoc
strategies to distinguish between head and tail data, which fails to capture the
underlying distributional characteristics and structural properties of each category.
Moreover, due to a substantial representational gap exists between head and tail
data, head-to-tail enhancement strategies are susceptible to negative transfer, often
leading to a decline in overall model performance. To address these issues, we
propose a hierarchical partitioning and stepwise enhancement framework, called
HPSERec, for long-tailed sequential recommendation. HPSERec partitions the
item set into subsets based on a data imbalance metric, assigning an expert network
to each subset to capture user-specific local features. Subsequently, we apply
knowledge distillation to progressively improve long-tail interest representation,
followed by a Sinkhorn optimal transport-based feedback module, which aligns
user representations across expert levels through a globally optimal and softly
matched mapping. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets demonstrate
that HPSERec consistently outperforms all baseline methods. The implementation
code is available at https://github.com/bolunxier123/HPSERec.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been widely adopted across various online platforms to suggest items
that users are likely to engage with. Despite their remarkable success in numerous applications, the
long-tail problem associated with both users and items remains a significant challenge, hindering
the further development of recommender systems. On the user side, a small number of head users
dominate interactions, far surpassing the engagement levels of the majority of tail users (1). As a
result, models tend to focus disproportionately on head users, which ultimately reduces the platform’s
ability to retain new users. On the item side, most user interactions are concentrated on a limited
number of popular items (2), leaving the majority of less popular items with minimal engagement.
This concentration on popular items narrows the diversity of recommendations and fosters the
emergence of filter bubbles (3; 4).
∗

Corresponding author. Email: hlxiang@nuist.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

