Minimal Semantic Sufficiency
Meets Unsupervised Domain Generalization

Tan Pan1,2∗, Kaiyu Guo3,2∗, Dongli Xu2 , Zhaorui Tan2 , Chen Jiang1,2†, Deshu Chen1
Xin Guo1,2 , Brian C. Lovell3 , Limei Han1,2 , Yuan Cheng1,2†, Mahsa Baktashmotlagh3
1
AI3 , Fudan University 2 Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science
3
The University of Queensland
pant23@m.fudan.edu.cn, jiangchen@sais.org.cn, cheng_yuan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The generalization ability of deep learning has been extensively studied in supervised settings, yet it remains less explored in unsupervised scenarios. Recently, the
Unsupervised Domain Generalization (UDG) task has been proposed to enhance the
generalization of models trained with prevalent unsupervised learning techniques,
such as Self-Supervised Learning (SSL). UDG confronts the challenge of distinguishing semantics from variations without category labels. Although some recent
methods have employed domain labels to tackle this issue, such domain labels are
often unavailable in real-world contexts. In this paper, we address these limitations by formalizing UDG as the task of learning a Minimal Sufficient Semantic
Representation: a representation that (i) preserves all semantic information shared
across augmented views (sufficiency), and (ii) maximally removes information
irrelevant to semantics (minimality). We theoretically ground these objectives from
the perspective of information theory, demonstrating that optimizing representations to achieve sufficiency and minimality directly reduces out-of-distribution risk.
Practically, we implement this optimization through Minimal-Sufficient UDG (MSUDG), a learnable model by integrating (a) an InfoNCE-based objective to achieve
sufficiency; (b) two complementary components to promote minimality: a novel
semantic-variation disentanglement loss and a reconstruction-based mechanism
for capturing adequate variation. Empirically, MS-UDG sets a new state-of-the-art
on popular unsupervised domain-generalization benchmarks, consistently outperforming existing SSL and UDG methods, without category or domain labels during
representation learning.

1

Introduction

Generalization ability is a critical yet challenging problem in deep learning. This challenge leads to
the emergence of the task of Domain Generalization (DG) [55, 53, 42], which focuses on generalizing
deep learning models to unseen distributions. Many works have been proposed on this topic under the
supervised settings [47, 25]. However, for the scenario of unsupervised learning, e.g., self-supervised
learning (SSL), which is more prevalent and practical in the real world [33, 13, 41], limited works have
been proposed to address the generalization ability of the model. Recently, the task of Unsupervised
Domain Generalization (UDG) [56] has been proposed to handle the generalization issue in selfsupervised learning (SSL), and some methods have been proposed to improve the generalization
ability by learning or disentangling the domain-invariant representations [54, 56, 51]
∗
Equal contribution. This research was conducted during an internship at the Shanghai Academy of Artificial
Intelligence for Science.
†
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

