ReinFlow: Fine-tuning Flow Matching Policy
with Online Reinforcement Learning

Chao Yu∗
Shenzhen International Graduate School
Tsinghua University
zoeyuchao@gmail.com

Tonghe Zhang
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
tonghez@andrew.cmu.edu
Sichang Su
Department of Aerospace Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
sichang_su@utexas.edu

Yu Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University
yu-wang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose ReinFlow, a simple yet effective online reinforcement learning (RL)
framework that fine-tunes a family of flow matching policies for continuous robotic
control. Derived from rigorous RL theory, ReinFlow injects learnable noise into a
flow policy’s deterministic path, converting the flow into a discrete-time Markov
Process for exact and straightforward likelihood computation. This conversion
facilitates exploration and ensures training stability, enabling ReinFlow to fine-tune
diverse flow model variants stably, including Rectified Flow [34] and Shortcut
Models [18], particularly at very few or even one denoising step. We benchmark
ReinFlow in representative locomotion and manipulation tasks, including longhorizon planning with visual input and sparse reward. The episode reward of
Rectified Flow policies obtained an average net growth of 135.36% after fine-tuning
in challenging legged locomotion tasks while saving denoising steps and 82.63% of
wall time compared to state-of-the-art diffusion RL fine-tuning method DPPO [42].
The success rate of the Shortcut Model policies in state and visual manipulation
tasks achieved an average net increase of 40.34% after fine-tuning with ReinFlow
at four or even one denoising step, whose performance is comparable to fine-tuned
DDIM policies while saving computation time for an average of 23.20% . Code,
model, and checkpoints available on the project website: https://reinflow.github.io/

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen rapid progress in the training of robotic models via imitation learning. Flow
matching models, which combine the trifecta of precise modeling, fast inference, and minimal
implementation, have emerged as a robust alternative to diffusion policies and a popular choice for
robot action generation [8, 6, 57].
However, due to the scarcity of robot data and the embodiment gap, flow policies and many other imitation learning policies are often trained from datasets with mixed quality [13], incurring suboptimal
success rates even after supervised fine-tuning [6]. Although collecting more data may alleviate this
problem, recent work [31] suggests that scaling the quantity of data may not be a panacea because,
in a given environment, the success rate quickly plateaus when we only increase the number of
demonstrations. Worse still, as an imitation learning method, flow policies lack a built-in exploration
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

