Efficient Algorithms for Robust and Partial
Semi-Discrete Optimal Transport

Pankaj K. Agarwal
Department of Computer Science
Duke University

Sharath Raghvendra
Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University

Pouyan Shirzadian
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech

Keegan Yao
Department of Computer Science
Duke University

Abstract
The sensitivity of optimal transport (OT) to noise has motivated the study of robust
variants. In this paper, we study two such formulations of semi-discrete OT in Rd :
(i) the α-optimal partial transport, which minimizes the cost of transporting a mass
of α; and (ii) the λ-robust optimal transport, which regularizes the OT problem
using the total variation (TV) distance. First, we provide a novel characterization
of the optimal solutions in these settings, showing they can be represented as a
restricted Laguerre diagram. Second, we exploit this characterization to establish a
strong algorithmic connection between the two problems, showing that any solver
for one can be adapted to solve the other with comparable precision. Third, we
overcome key challenges posed in extending the cost-scaling paradigm to compute
these variants of OT and present an algorithm that computes the exact solution up
to log(1/ε) bits of precision in nO(d) log(1/ε) time, where n is the support size of
the discrete distribution. Finally, we present an n1+o(1) ε−O(d) time approximation
algorithm for the above variants of OT.

1

Introduction

Given two distributions µ and ν supported on sets A and B in Rd and a parameter p ≥ 1, the cost of
transporting m units of mass from a ∈ A to b ∈ B is m∥a − b∥p . The optimal transport cost (also
called the p-Wasserstein distance) quantifies the minimum total effort required to move mass from
µ to ν. In many machine learning applications, one wishes to compute the OT cost between model
and target distributions that are continuous. Due to lack of efficient algorithms that work directly on
continuous distributions, practitioners often approximate the OT cost by computing it between two
discrete empirical distributions formed by n samples [5, 17, 18, 39]. This OT between two discrete
distributions can be computed by using a minimum-cost flow algorithm [38].
A more computationally feasible variant is the semi-discrete optimal transport (SDOT) problem,
where one distribution is continuous and the other is discrete. In this case, the OT cost and plan can be
characterized by a set of weights y : B → R≥0 such that, for any point b ∈ B, the additively weighted
Voronoi cell Vy (b) of b (also called the Laguerre cell) has the same probability mass as b. The OT
plan assigns all mass in Vy (b) to b [8]. The semi-discrete OT has found numerous applications in
machine learning [6, 20, 27, 31, 41].
Despite its usefulness, OT cost may be unduly influenced by outliers in either distribution. Two robust
variants help reduce the impact of noise. The first variant, called the α-optimal partial transport
(α-OPT), minimizes the cost of transporting a mass of α ∈ [0, 1] from µ to ν, potentially discarding
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

