QiMeng-MuPa: Mutual-Supervised Learning for
Sequential-to-Parallel Code Translation
Changxin Ke1,2 Rui Zhang1 Shuo Wang1,2 Li Ding2,3 Guangli Li1 Yuanbo Wen1
Shuoming Zhang1,2 Ruiyuan Xu1,2 Jin Qin1,2 Jiaming Guo1 Chenxi Wang1 Ling Li2,4
Qi Guo1 Yunji Chen1,2∗
1

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Microelectronics, CAS
4
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS

Abstract
The rise of GPU-based high-performance computing (HPC) has driven the
widespread adoption of parallel programming models such as CUDA. Yet, the
inherent complexity of parallel programming creates a demand for the automated
sequential-to-parallel approaches. However, data scarcity poses a significant challenge for machine learning-based sequential-to-parallel code translation. Although
recent back-translation methods show promise, they still fail to ensure functional
equivalence in the translated code. In this paper, we propose QiMeng-MuPa,
a novel Mutual-Supervised Learning framework for Sequential-to-Parallel code
translation, to address the functional equivalence issue. QiMeng-MuPa consists
of two models, a Translator and a Tester. Through an iterative loop consisting of
Co-verify and Co-evolve steps, the Translator and the Tester mutually generate data
for each other and improve collectively. The Tester generates unit tests to verify and
filter functionally equivalent translated code, thereby evolving the Translator, while
the Translator generates translated code as augmented input to evolve the Tester. Experimental results demonstrate that QiMeng-MuPa significantly enhances the performance of the base models: when applied to Qwen2.5-Coder, it not only improves
Pass@1 by up to 28.91% and boosts Tester performance by 68.90%, but also outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method CodeRosetta by 1.56 and 6.92 in BLEU
and CodeBLEU scores, while achieving performance comparable to DeepSeek-R1
and GPT-4.1. Our code is available at https://github.com/kcxain/mupa.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of high-performance computing (HPC) on GPUs, parallel programming
models like CUDA have become a critical tool for implementing computationally intensive tasks.
Different from the simplicity and familiarity of sequential programming languages such as C, the
parallel programming paradigm of CUDA is fundamentally more complex, requiring expertise in both
parallel logic and hardware-specific concepts, including threads, blocks, and memory hierarchy. This
complexity makes manual sequential-to-parallel translation and optimization a highly challenging task.
Consequently, developing automated methods for sequential-to-parallel translation holds immense
potential to accelerate computations, reduce development effort, and fully harness the power of GPU
platforms.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

