Deep Gaussian from Motion: Exploring 3D Geometric
Foundation Models for Gaussian Splatting

Yu Chen1

Rolandos Alexandros Potamias2 Evangelos Ververas2
Jifei Song3 Jiankang Deng2 Gim Hee Lee1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Imperial College London 3 University of Surrey

MipNeRF360 - Garden

LLFF - Horns

COLMAP

Ours

Seq Tanks-and-Temples - Horse

ACE0

MipNeRF360 - Counter

Tanks-and-Temples - Family

Ours

7scenes - Fire

COLMAP

LLFF - Room

Seq Tanks-and-Temples - Church

Ours

ACE0

Ours

Tanks-and-Temple - Ignatius

Figure 1: Reconstruction results of DeepGfM. Our method reconstructs scenes from unordered
image collections without COLMAP poses. Top row: Reconstructed camera poses and point clouds.
Bottom row: Rendered novel views compared with COLMAP and ACE0.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) are popular
techniques to reconstruct and render photorealistic images. However, the prerequisite of running Structure-from-Motion (SfM) to get camera poses limits their
completeness. Although previous methods can reconstruct a few unposed images,
they are not applicable when images are unordered or densely captured. In this
work, we propose a method to train 3DGS from unposed images. Our method
leverages a pre-trained 3D geometric foundation model as the neural scene representation. Since the accuracy of the predicted pointmaps does not suffice for
accurate image registration and high-fidelity image rendering, we propose to mitigate the issue by initializing and fine-tuning the pre-trained model from a seed
image. The images are then progressively registered and added to the training
buffer, which is used to train the model further. We also propose to refine the
camera poses and pointmaps by minimizing a point-to-camera ray consistency
loss across multiple views. When evaluated on diverse challenging datasets, our
method outperforms state-of-the-art pose-free NeRF/3DGS methods in terms of
both camera pose accuracy and novel view synthesis, and even renders higher
fidelity images than 3DGS trained with COLMAP poses. Our project page is
available at https://aibluefisher.github.io/DeepGfM.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the rapid advancement of 3D reconstruction techniques has enabled diverse applications for digitizing real-world scenes. Travelers and tourists routinely capture photographs and videos
of landmarks, which online platforms now process using neural radiance fields (NeRF) [42] or 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26] to generate photorealistic 3D models.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

