E X G RA -M ED: Extended Context Graph Alignment
for Medical Vision-Language Models

Duy M. H. Nguyen 1,2,3 Nghiem T. Diep 1∗ Trung Q. Nguyen 1∗ Hoang-Bao Le 1
Tai Nguyen 1 Tien Nguyen 4,5 TrungTin Nguyen 6,7 Nhat Ho 9 Pengtao Xie 10, 11
Roger Wattenhofer 12 James Zou 13 Daniel Sonntag 1,8† Mathias Niepert 2,3†
1

German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI),
Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS), 3 University of Stuttgart,
4
University Medical Center Gottingen, 5 Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences,
6
ARC Centre of Excellence for the Mathematical Analysis of Cellular Systems,
7
School of Mathematical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology,
8
University of Oldenburg, 9 University of Texas at Austin,
10
University of California San Diego, 11 MBZUAI, 12 ETH Zurich, 13 Stanford University
* Co-second contribution † Co-senior authors.
Exgra-Med
2

Abstract
State-of-the-art medical multi-modal LLMs (med-MLLMs), such as LL AVA-M ED
and B IO M ED GPT, primarily depend on scaling model size and data volume, with
training driven largely by autoregressive objectives. However, we reveal that this
approach can lead to weak vision-language alignment, making these models overly
dependent on costly instruction-following data. To address this, we introduce
E X G RA -M ED, a novel multi-graph alignment framework that jointly aligns images, instruction responses, and extended captions in the latent space, advancing
semantic grounding and cross-modal coherence. To scale to large LLMs (e.g.,
LLaMa-7B), we develop an efficient end-to-end training scheme using black-box
gradient estimation, enabling fast and scalable optimization. Empirically, E X G RA M ED matches LL AVA-M ED’s performance using just 10% of pre-training data,
achieving a 20.13% gain on VQA-RAD and approaching full-data performance.
It also outperforms strong baselines like B IO M ED GPT and R AD FM on visual
chatbot and zero-shot classification tasks, demonstrating its promise for efficient,
high-quality vision-language integration in medical AI.

1

Introduction

Generic Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) such as GPT-4V [7], LLaVa [57], and
Next-GPT [97] unify text, image, and audio processing for tasks like captioning and visual reasoning.
A key component in training MLLMs is instruction-following (IF) data [60], which involves complex,
often multi-turn interactions grounded in image content [88]. In the medical domain, specialized IF
datasets, including medical images, clinical notes, and diagnostic criteria, have been curated to adapt
general-purpose MLLMs while leveraging their pre-learned knowledge and minimizing training costs
[98]. For example, LLaVA-Med [50] samples 600K image-text pairs from PMC-15M [106], using
GPT-4 to generate around 60K multi-modal IF examples. The training involves two pretraining steps:
(i) aligning vision encoders and language decoders via projection layers, and (ii) jointly training the
model (excluding the vision encoder) on medical IF data using an auto-regressive objective. The
resulting model is then fine-tuned for downstream medical tasks.
Following the above approach, most later works have focused on scaling up the amount of medical IF
data [98, 104, 30] or increasing the model size by incorporating larger vision encoders or language
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

