Uncertainty Estimation on Graphs with Structure
Informed Stochastic Partial Differential Equations

Fred Xu
Block Inc
University of California, Los Angeles
fredxu@squareup.com,

Thomas Markovich
Block Inc
tmarkovich@squareup.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved impressive results across diverse
network modeling tasks, but accurately estimating uncertainty on graphs remains
difficult—especially under distributional shifts. Unlike traditional uncertainty
estimation, graph-based uncertainty must account for randomness arising from both
the graph’s structure and its label distribution, which adds complexity. In this paper,
making an analogy between the evolution of a stochastic partial differential equation
(SPDE) driven by Matérn Gaussian Process and message passing using GNN
layers, we present a principled way to design a novel message passing scheme that
incorporates spatial-temporal noises motivated by the Gaussian Process approach to
SPDE. Our method simultaneously captures uncertainty across space and time and
allows explicit control over the covariance kernel’s smoothness, thereby enhancing
uncertainty estimates on graphs with both low and high label informativeness. Our
extensive experiments on Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection on graph datasets
with varying label informativeness demonstrate the soundness and superiority of
our model to existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty Estimation is crucial to developing reliable machine learning systems, now deployed in
safety-critical fields such as healthcare [15], medicine [2], and financial modeling [14]. This task
usually handles uncertainty from the lack of data samples and the inherent randomness in the data
generating process [13] and has traditionally been addressed for i.i.d data using energy based models
[44], Bayesian learning framework [6], or stochastic process to inject random noise into model
learning [22, 47]. Already a challenging problem, Uncertainty Estimation when applied to graph data,
requires even more consideration on the dependency between nodes and even substructures on a graph.
For graph data, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been the standard model, leading state-of-art
performance on many graph related learning tasks. By aggregating information from neighbors,
GNNs are able to learn meaningful representations of nodes efficiently [21, 50]. Despite their superior
performance, GNNs can generate overly confident predictions on tasks even when making the wrong
predictions [45]. Recently many works have attempted to address uncertainty estimation for graph
data in the similar manners as i.i.d data, using the Bayesian framework [45], energy based model
[12, 55], or through injecting noise in model training using a stochastic process [26, 3]. Despite some
remarkable progresses, these models assume that nodes that are close-by in the graph should share
similar uncertainty, which often connects to the concept of graph homophily[55, 26]. However, in
cases such as low label informativeness [35], nodes that are close to each other often have different
labels distribution patterns, resulting in the phenomenon that knowing the neighborhood labels doesn’t
decrease uncertainty of center node’s label. [31, 32]. When graphs exhibit low label informativeness,
tasks like node classification become more difficult for traditional GNNs, and so is uncertainty
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

