Long-tailed Recognition with Model Rebalancing

Jiaan Luo1,4∗ Feng Hong1∗ Qiang Hu1 Xiaofeng Cao2 Feng Liu3 Jiangchao Yao1†
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{luojiaan, feng.hong, qiang.hu, Sunarker}@sjtu.edu.cn
xiaofengcao@tongji.edu.cn
feng.liu1@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Long-tailed recognition is ubiquitous and challenging in deep learning and even in
the downstream finetuning of foundation models, since the skew class distribution
generally prevents the model generalization to the tail classes. Despite the promise
of previous methods from the perspectives of data augmentation, loss rebalancing
and decoupled training etc., consistent improvement in the broad scenarios like
multi-label long-tailed recognition is difficult. In this study, we dive into the
essential model capacity impact under long-tailed context, and propose a novel
framework, MOdel REbalancing (MORE), which mitigates imbalance by directly
rebalancing the model’s parameter space. Specifically, MORE introduces a lowrank parameter component to mediate the parameter space allocation guided by a
tailored loss and sinusoidal reweighting schedule, but without increasing the overall
model complexity or inference costs. Extensive experiments on diverse long-tailed
benchmarks, spanning multi-class and multi-label tasks, demonstrate that MORE
significantly improves generalization, particularly for tail classes, and effectively
complements existing imbalance mitigation methods. These results highlight
MORE’s potential as a robust plug-and-play module in long-tailed settings. The
code is available here.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has revolutionized numerous domains, from computer vision to large language models,
with unprecedented performance largely fueled by large-scale well-curated datasets [Russakovsky
et al., 2015]. However, many real-world uncurated data in diverse scenarios like medical diagnosis
follows long-tailed distributions, where a small subset of dominant classes comprises the majority
of samples, while numerous minority classes remain severely underrepresented [Krizhevsky et al.,
2009]. Such ubiquitous imbalance presents a fundamental challenge for modern deep learning models
that easily overfit high-frequency classes while exhibiting degraded performance w.r.t. low-frequency
classes [Zhang et al., 2023]. It thus has been critical to explore robust methods against long-tailed
challenges under multi-label, multi-class and even finetuning scenarios [Chen et al., 2025].
There are a range of methods developed to address the long-tailed recognition challenge from the
perspectives of data augmentation, decoupled training [Kang et al., 2020b], loss rebalancing [Ma
et al., 2023], and contrastive learning [Zhu et al., 2022, Du et al., 2024]. Despite promise in specific
contexts, they struggle to deliver consistent improvements in broader and more complex scenarios.
∗
†

The first two authors contribute equally.
The corresponding author is Jiangchao Yao (Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

