Block-Diagonal LoRA for Eliminating Communication
Overhead in Tensor Parallel LoRA Serving

Xinyu Wang ∗
University of Warwick
Coventry, UK

Jonas M. Kübler
Amazon Web Services
Tübingen, Germany

Kailash Budhathoki
Amazon Web Services
Tübingen, Germany

Matthäus Kleindessner †
Amazon Web Services
Tübingen, Germany

Yida Wang
Amazon Web Services
Santa Clara, USA

Abstract
When serving a single base LLM with several different LoRA adapters simultaneously, the adapters cannot simply be merged with the base model’s weights as
the adapter swapping would create overhead and requests using different adapters
could not be batched. Rather, the LoRA computations have to be separated from
the base LLM computations, and in a multi-device setup the LoRA adapters can be
sharded in a way that is well aligned with the base model’s tensor parallel execution, as proposed in S-LoRA. However, the S-LoRA sharding strategy encounters
some communication overhead, which may be small in theory, but can be large in
practice. In this paper, we propose to constrain certain LoRA factors to be blockdiagonal, which allows for an alternative way of sharding LoRA adapters that does
not require any additional communication for the LoRA computations. We demonstrate in extensive experiments that our block-diagonal LoRA approach is similarly
parameter efficient as standard LoRA (i.e., for a similar number of parameters it
achieves similar downstream performance) and that it leads to significant end-toend speed-up over S-LoRA. For example, when serving on eight A100 GPUs, we
observe up to 1.79x (1.23x) end-to-end speed-up with 0.87x (1.74x) the number of
adapter parameters for Llama-3.1-70B, and up to 1.63x (1.3x) end-to-end speed-up
with 0.86x (1.73x) the number of adapter parameters for Llama-3.1-8B.

1

Introduction

Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [10] is one of the most prominent methods for parameter-efficient
fine-tuning: rather than fine-tuning all of a model’s weights, we only tune a small number of
parameters in low-rank factorizations to be added to the model’s weight matrices. Concretely, if
W ∈ Rdin ×dout denotes a weight matrix in the model to be fine-tuned, we replace W by W + AB,
where A ∈ Rdin ×r , B ∈ Rr×dout with r ≪ min{din , dout } are the low-rank factors that are finetuned, while the parameters in W are frozen. If there is only one LoRA adapter (i.e., one A and B
per weight matrix W ) trained for one task, after fine-tuning A and B we can actually replace W by
W + AB and thus merge the adapter with the base model’s weights. This has the nice effect that the
LoRA adapter does not introduce any additional inference latency compared to the base model (or any
fully fine-tuned variant of it). However, if we want to serve the same base model with various different
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
∗
†

Work done during an internship at AWS Tübingen.
Correspondence to matkle@amazon.com.

