How Memory in Optimization Algorithms Implicitly
Modifies the Loss
Matias D. Cattaneo∗
Princeton University
cattaneo@princeton.edu
Boris Shigida∗
Princeton University
bs1624@princeton.edu

Abstract
In modern optimization methods used in deep learning, each update depends on
the history of previous iterations, often referred to as memory, and this dependence
decays fast as the iterates go further into the past. For example, gradient descent
with momentum has exponentially decaying memory through exponentially averaged past gradients. We introduce a general technique for identifying a memoryless
algorithm that approximates an optimization algorithm with memory. It is obtained
by replacing all past iterates in the update by the current one, and then adding a
correction term arising from memory (also a function of the current iterate). This
correction term can be interpreted as a perturbation of the loss, and the nature of this
perturbation can inform how memory implicitly (anti-)regularizes the optimization
dynamics. As an application of our theory, we find that Lion does not have the kind
of implicit anti-regularization induced by memory that AdamW does, providing
a theory-based explanation for Lion’s better generalization performance recently
documented [13]. Empirical evaluations confirm our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Many optimization methods used in deep learning are first-order methods with exponentially decaying
memory. For example, adding “momentum” to gradient descent (GD) is a well-established practice to
make training smoother and convergence faster (e. g. Krizhevsky et al. [39]). Adaptive methods such
as Adam [36], RMSProp [61], AdamW [46], and AdaFactor [57], which are commonly used to train
large language models [27, 21, 15], all have exponentially decaying memory. Despite the popularity
of such optimization methods, there is little theoretical knowledge about the implicit bias memory
introduces to them (potentially informing what regions of the loss space the method takes the iterates
to, what minima they converge to, how such minima influence the generalization of the trained model,
and so on). In this article, we introduce a general framework for identifying such biases.
We study a general class of optimization algorithms described by the following iteration
θ (n+1) = θ (n) − hF (n) (θ (n) , . . . , θ (0) ),
(n)

(1)
(0)

where θ ∈ Rd are the (evolving) parameters of the machine learning model, θ is some initial
condition, h is the step size or learning rate, and the functions F (n) map from (some subset of)
(Rd )n+1 to Rd and are allowed to be different at each iteration. The right-hand side in Equation (1)
depends on the whole history of previous iterates, which means the algorithm has memory.
∗

Authors are listed alphabetically by last name.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

