A Little Depth Goes a Long Way:
The Expressive Power of Log-Depth Transformers

William Merrill∗
Allen Institute for AI
willm@allenai.org

Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for AI
ashishs@allenai.org

Abstract
Recent theoretical results show transformers cannot express sequential reasoning
problems over long inputs, intuitively because their computational depth is bounded.
However, prior work treats the depth as a constant, leaving it unclear to what
degree bounded depth may suffice for solving problems over short inputs, or how
increasing the transformer’s depth affects its expressive power. We address these
questions by analyzing transformers whose depth can grow minimally with context
length n. We show even highly uniform transformers with depth Θ(log n) can
express two important problems: recognizing regular languages, which captures
state tracking abilities and was known to be expressible only by an unconventional,
non-uniform model of transformers, and graph connectivity, which underlies multistep reasoning. Notably, both of these problems cannot be expressed by fixed-depth
transformers under standard complexity conjectures, demonstrating the expressivity
benefit of growing depth. Moreover, our theory quantitatively predicts how depth
must grow with input length to express these problems, showing that depth scaling
is more efficient than scaling width or chain-of-thought steps. Empirically, our
detailed experiments designed to bridge the expressivity vs. learnability gap reveal
that our theoretical depth requirements for regular language recognition closely
match the practical depth requirements for successfully training transformers. Thus,
our results clarify how depth affects a transformer’s reasoning capabilities, and
provide practical guidance for effective depth selection for sequential reasoning.

1

Introduction

A line of recent work analyzing the intrinsic computational power of transformers, the neural
architecture behind today’s immensely successful large language models (LLMs), has established
that, with fixed depth, transformers cannot express many simple problems outside the complexity
class TC0 , including recognizing regular languages and resolving connectivity of nodes in a graph
(Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a; Chiang et al., 2023). These problems conceivably underlie many
natural forms of sequential reasoning, such as state tracking (Liu et al., 2023; Merrill et al., 2024)
and resolving logical inferences across long chains (Wei et al., 2022). Thus, these results suggest
inherent limitations on the types of reasoning transformer classifiers can perform. Yet, these findings
come with an important caveat: even if transformers cannot solve such problems exactly for inputs of
arbitrary lengths, they may still be able to solve them over inputs up to some bounded length. This
perspective, coupled with the fact that treating depth as fixed is crucial to prior analyses placing
transformers in TC0 , motivates two related questions about depth as an important resource for a
transformer, in relation to the context length over which it reasons:
1. Bounded Context: If fixed-depth transformers cannot theoretically express certain problems
over unbounded context lengths, can they still express them over bounded but still practically
∗

Work partially conducted as a PhD student at New York University.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

