One Stone with Two Birds: A Null-Text-Null
Frequency-Aware Diffusion Models for Text-Guided
Image Inpainting

Haipeng Liu† Yang Wang† ∗ Meng Wang
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering
Hefei University of Technology, China
hpliu_hfut@hotmail.com yangwang@hfut.edu.cn eric.mengwang@gmail.com

Abstract
Text-guided image inpainting aims at reconstructing the masked regions as per
text prompts, where the longstanding challenges lie in the preservation for unmasked regions, while achieving the semantics consistency between unmasked and
inpainted masked regions. Previous arts failed to address both of them, always with
either of them to be remedied. Such facts, as we observed, stem from the entanglement of the hybrid (e.g., mid-and-low) frequency bands that encode varied image
properties, which exhibit different robustness to text prompts during the denoising process. In this paper, we propose a null-text-null frequency-aware diffusion
models, dubbed NTN-Diff, for text-guided image inpainting, by decomposing the
semantics consistency across masked and unmasked regions into the consistencies
as per each frequency band, while preserving the unmasked regions, to circumvent
two challenges in a row. Based on the diffusion process, we further divide the
denoising process into early (high-level noise) and late (low-level noise) stages,
where the mid-and-low frequency bands are disentangled during the denoising
process. As observed, the stable mid-frequency band is progressively denoised to
be semantically aligned during text-guided denoising process, which, meanwhile,
serves as the guidance to the null-text denoising process to denoise low-frequency
band for the masked regions, followed by a subsequent text-guided denoising process at late stage, to achieve the semantics consistency for mid-and-low frequency
bands across masked and unmasked regions, while preserve the unmasked regions.
Extensive experiments validate the superiority of NTN-Diff over the state-of-the-art
diffusion models to text-guided diffusion models. Our code can be accessed from
https://github.com/htyjers/NTN-Diff.

1

Introduction

Traditional image inpainting methods [23, 24, 3, 41, 46, 16, 19] primarily rely on unmasked regions
as guidance to recover masked areas, which are widely applied to object removal [18, 45, 28] and
photo restoration [21, 2, 27]. Based on that, text-guided image inpainting [1, 35, 47, 4, 36, 17] has
achieved remarkable progress, offering a more flexible and diverse approach. These methods focus
on reconstructing user-specified objects within masked regions given text prompts.
The success of text-guided image inpainting is largely attributed to the powerful generative capabilities
of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [9], e.g., Stable Diffusion [33]. As a critical
† Equal contribution
* Yang Wang is the corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

