Exponential Dynamic Energy Network for High
Capacity Sequence Memory

Arjun Karuvally
Salk Institute for Biological Studies
akaruvally@salk.edu

Pichsinee Lertsaroj
University of Massachusetts Amherst

Terrence J. Sejnowski
Salk Institute for Biological Studies
terry@salk.edu

Hava T. Siegelmann
University of Massachusetts Amherst
hava@umass.edu

Abstract
The energy paradigm, exemplified by Hopfield networks, offers a principled framework for memory in neural systems by interpreting dynamics as descent on an
energy surface. While powerful for static associative memories, it falls short in
modeling sequential memory, where transitions between memories are essential.
We introduce the Exponential Dynamic Energy Network (EDEN), a novel architecture that extends the energy paradigm to temporal domains by evolving the energy
function over multiple timescales. EDEN combines a static high-capacity energy
network with a slow, asymmetrically interacting modulatory population, enabling
robust and controlled memory transitions. We formally derive short-timescale
energy functions that govern local dynamics and use them to analytically compute
memory escape times, revealing a phase transition between static and dynamic
regimes. The analysis of capacity, defined as the number of memories that can
be stored with minimal error rate as a function of the dimensions of the state
space (number of feature neurons), for EDEN shows that it achieves exponential
sequence memory capacity O(γ N ), outperforming the linear capacity O(N ) of
conventional models. Furthermore, EDEN’s dynamics resemble the activity of
time and ramping cells observed in the human brain during episodic memory tasks,
grounding its biological relevance. By unifying static and sequential memory
within a dynamic energy framework, EDEN offers a scalable and interpretable
model for high-capacity temporal memory in both artificial and biological systems.

1

Introduction

Memory is a crucial element of cognition that is essential for learning, reasoning, and decision-making.
Understanding and replicating the human ability to store and recall information is a long-term challenge in both biological and artificial intelligence (AI). The energy paradigm, introduced by Hopfield
and Amari 40 years ago, revolutionized memory modeling by characterizing the dynamical behavior
of neural networks using an energy landscape [1, 2]. According to the energy paradigm, a stimulus
instantiates a network state on an energy landscape. The neurons then interact with each other such
that the state travels down the landscape until a minimum is reached. This minimum state is defined
as the memory of the network. The energy approach to memory modeling represented a significant
advancement of our scientific understanding of memory by offering an intuitive understanding of
network dynamics, with added theoretical guarantees of stability. The disadvantage was that the
number of memories that can be reliably stored was only a small fraction of the number of neurons
[3, 4, 5] and scaled linearly with the increase in neurons. This limited the applicability of energy
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

