Exploiting Task Relationships in Continual Learning
via Transferability-Aware Task Embeddings

Yanru Wu1

Jianning Wang2
Hanbing Liu1

Xiangyu Chen1
Yang Tan2

Enming Zhang1

Yang Li1∗

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University†
2
Independent Researcher
{wu-yr21, xy-c21, zem24, liuhb24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jianning.wang@outlook.com tanyang1231@163.com
yangli@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) has been a critical topic in contemporary deep neural
network applications, where higher levels of both forward and backward transfer
are desirable for an effective CL performance. Existing CL strategies primarily
focus on task models — either by regularizing model updates or by separating
task-specific and shared components — while often overlooking the potential
of leveraging inter-task relationships to enhance transfer. To address this gap,
we propose a transferability-aware task embedding, termed H-embedding, and
construct a hypernet framework under its guidance to learn task-conditioned model
weights for CL tasks. Specifically, H-embedding is derived from an information
theoretic measure of transferability and is designed to be online and easy to compute.
Our method is also characterized by notable practicality, requiring only the storage
of a low-dimensional task embedding per task and supporting efficient end-to-end
training. Extensive evaluations on benchmarks including CIFAR-100, ImageNetR, and DomainNet show that our framework performs prominently compared to
various baseline and SOTA approaches, demonstrating strong potential in capturing
and utilizing intrinsic task relationships. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/viki760/Hembedding_Guided_Hypernet.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL), also referred to as incremental learning or life-long learning, has become
an essential topic in the modern application of deep neural networks. In CL settings, a model is
expected to sequentially learn a series of tasks (typically involving either category shifts or data
distribution changes [Qu et al., 2021]) to progressively enhance its capabilities [Wang et al., 2024].
A key practical challenge in this process is catastrophic forgetting (CF) [Kirkpatrick et al., 2017], a
phenomenon where learning a new task undermines the knowledge acquired from previous ones.
The mitigation of CF has long been a primary focus in CL research [Wang et al., 2024] due to its
severe hindrance to the overall accumulation of model capacity. Existing approaches can be broadly
categorized into three classes: rehearsal-based methods (e.g., ER [Robins, 1995], DER [Buzzega
et al., 2020]) maintain a memory buffer of previous samples for later replay; regularization-based
∗

Corresponding Author
Yanru Wu, Xiangyu Chen, Enming Zhang, Hanbing Liu, and Yang Li are affiliated with the Shenzhen Key
Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, SIGS, Tsinghua.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

