Low-degree evidence for computational transition
of recovery rate in stochastic block model

Jingqiu Ding
ETH Zürich
jingqiu.ding@inf.ethz.ch

Yiding Hua
ETH Zürich
yiding.hua@inf.ethz.ch

Lucas Slot
ETH Zürich
lucas.slot@inf.ethz.ch

David Steurer
ETH Zürich
david.steurer@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We investigate implications of the (extended) low-degree conjecture (recently
formalized in [MW23]) in the context of the symmetric stochastic block
model. Assuming the conjecture holds, we establish that no polynomial-time
algorithm can weakly recover community labels below the Kesten-Stigum (KS)
threshold. In particular, we rule out polynomial-time estimators that, with
constant probability, achieve 𝑛 −0.49 correlation with the true communities.
Whereas, above the KS threshold, polynomial-time algorithms are known to
achieve constant correlation with the true communities with high probability
[Mas14, AS15].
To our knowledge, we provide the first rigorous evidence for such a sharp
transition in recovery rate for polynomial-time algorithms at the KS threshold. Notably, under a stronger version of the low-degree conjecture, our
lower bound remains valid even when the number of blocks diverges.
Furthermore, our results provide evidence of a computational-to-statistical
gap in learning the parameters of stochastic block models.
In contrast, prior work either (i) rules out polynomial-time algorithms
with 1 − 𝑜(1) success probability [Hop18, BBK+ 21a] under the low-degree
conjecture, or (ii) degree-poly(𝑘) polynomials for learning the stochastic
block model [LG24].
For this, we design a hypothesis test which succeeeds with constant probability under symmetric stochastic block model, and 1 − 𝑜(1) probability
under the distribution of Erdős Rényi random graphs. Our proof combines
low-degree lower bounds from [Hop18, BBK+ 21a] with graph splitting
and cross-validation techniques. In order to rule out general recovery algorithms, we employ the correlation preserving projection method developed
in [HS17].

1

Introduction

The stochastic block model (SBM) is among the most fundamental models in (social)
network analysis and information theory, and has been intensively studied for decades
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

