Optimizing Chain-of-Thought Reasoners via Gradient
Variance Minimization in Rejection Sampling and RL

Jiarui Yao1∗ Yifan Hao1
Hanze Dong2 Wei Xiong1 Nan Jiang1

1

Hanning Zhang

1

Tong Zhang1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning in large language models (LLMs) can be formalized as a latent variable problem, where the model needs to generate intermediate
reasoning steps. While prior approaches such as iterative reward-ranked fine-tuning
(RAFT) have relied on such formulations, they typically apply uniform inference
budgets across prompts, which fails to account for variability in difficulty and
convergence behavior. This work identifies the main bottleneck in CoT training
as inefficient stochastic gradient estimation due to static sampling strategies. We
propose GVM-RAFT, a prompt-specific Dynamic Sample Allocation Strategy
designed to minimize stochastic gradient variance under a computational budget
constraint. The method dynamically allocates computational resources by monitoring prompt acceptance rates and stochastic gradient norms, ensuring that the
resulting gradient variance is minimized. Our theoretical analysis shows that the
proposed dynamic sampling strategy leads to accelerated convergence guarantees
under suitable conditions. Experiments on mathematical reasoning show that
GVM-RAFT achieves a 2-4× speedup and considerable accuracy improvements
over vanilla RAFT. The proposed dynamic sampling strategy is general and can be
incorporated into other reinforcement learning algorithms, such as GRPO, leading
to similar improvements in convergence and test accuracy.

1

Introduction

We consider mathematical reasoning with large language models (LLMs): given a prompt x ∈ X ,
and aims to produce a correct final answer z ∈ Z. A prevalent approach in this area is the chain-ofthought (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al., 2022), in which the model generates a step-by-step rationale
y ∈ Y before outputting the final answer z. In practice, we are typically given a pre-trained and
instruction fine-tuned LLM parameterized by θ0 and training samples {(xi , zi )} of prompt-answer
pairs. Additionally, we assume access to a verifier r⋆ (x, z) → {0, 1} that indicates whether a
predicted answer is correct or not. This is standard in practice and is particularly popular by the recent
DeepSeek-R1 project (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), which suggests using only a symbolic verifier
rather than training a neural reward model. The goal is to improve model performance by training it
to generate high-quality CoT rationales that improve the final answer accuracy on unseen prompts.
We formalize CoT reasoning as a latent variable problem, treating the rationale y as hidden. From this
perspective, we propose a new algorithmic framework based on the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm, which we formalize in Section 2. Prior works such as Sordoni et al. (2023); Singh et al.
∗
The first two authors contributed equally with random author order, detailed contributions deferred to Appendix A. Emails: {jiarui14, yifanh12, hanning5, wx13, nanjiang, tozhang}@illinois.edu,
hanzedong@microsoft.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

