State Entropy Regularization for Robust
Reinforcement Learning

Yonatan Ashlag∗
Technion
Esther Derman
MILA Institute

Uri Koren∗
Technion

Mirco Mutti
Technion

Pierre-Luc Bacon
MILA Institute

Shie Mannor
Technion, NVIDIA Research

Abstract
State entropy regularization has empirically shown better exploration and sample
complexity in reinforcement learning (RL). However, its theoretical guarantees
have not been studied. In this paper, we show that state entropy regularization
improves robustness to structured and spatially correlated perturbations. These
types of variation are common in transfer learning but often overlooked by standard
robust RL methods, which typically focus on small, uncorrelated changes. We
provide a comprehensive characterization of these robustness properties, including
formal guarantees under reward and transition uncertainty, as well as settings where
the method performs poorly. Much of our analysis contrasts state entropy with
the widely used policy entropy regularization, highlighting their different benefits.
Finally, from a practical standpoint, we illustrate that compared with policy entropy,
the robustness advantages of state entropy are more sensitive to the number of
rollouts used for policy evaluation.

1

Introduction

Despite the impressive success of RL across various synthetic domains [29, 37, 51, 6], challenging
issues still need to be addressed before RL methods can be deployed in the real world. Some of these
challenges involve imperfect models, noisy observations, and limited data. In such settings, policies
trained on nominal environments may perform poorly when faced with deviations from the assumed
dynamics or reward structure at deployment [34]. This issue has led to a growing interest in robust
RL, which aims to ensure reliable performance despite model misspecification or uncertainty [38, 46,
59, 31, 47]. Over the years, the well-established connection between regularization and robustness
in machine learning has been extended to the RL setting [61, 19, 21, 11], where regularization has
been shown to induce robustness to adversarial perturbations of the reward function [12, 5] and the
transition kernel [10]. This duality has particularly been studied for policy entropy regularization
[13].
Recent works [23, 50, 65, 25, 4] proposed to regularize the standard RL objective with the entropy of
the distribution over states induced by a policy [18], either alone or in combination with policy entropy.
This has empirically shown better exploration and consequently, improved sample efficiency [50].
However, to our knowledge, formal studies on the effect of state entropy regularization and its
connection with robustness do not exist in the literature yet. Thus, an open question is whether
robustness is a by-product of state entropy regularization just like it is for policy entropy, and if it is,
what type of robustness results from state entropy regularization?
∗
Equal
contribution.
uri.koren@campus.technion.ac.il

Correspondence

to:

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

yonatan.ashlag@gmail.com,

