Understanding Contrastive Learning via Gaussian
Mixture Models
Parikshit Bansal
UT Austin
pbansal@utexas.edu

Ali Kavis
UT Austin
kavis@austin.utexas.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
UT Austin
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning involves learning representations via a loss function that encourages each (unlabeled) sample to be far from other samples, but close to its own
augmentation. In this paper, we aim to understand why this simple idea performs
remarkably well, by theoretically analyzing it for a simple, natural problem setting:
dimensionality reduction in Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs). Note that the
standard GMM setup lacks the concept of augmentations. We study an intuitive
extension: we define the pair of data sample and its augmentation as a coupled
random draw from the GMM such that the marginal over the "noisy" augmentation
is biased towards the component of the data sample. For this setup, we show that
vanilla contrastive loss, e.g., InfoNCE, is able to find the optimal lower-dimensional
subspace even when the Gaussian components are non-isotropic. In particular, we
show that InfoNCE can match the performance of a fully supervised algorithm,
e.g., LDA, (where each data point is labeled with the mixture component it comes
from) even when the augmentations are "noisy". We further extend our setup to the
multi-modal case, and develop a GMM-like setting to study the contrastive CLIP
loss. We corroborate our theory with experiments on CIFAR100; representations
learned by InfoNCE loss match the performance of LDA on clustering metrics.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning (CL) is now a gold-standard paradigm for learning representations with popular
examples such as vision models like SimCLR [6] and MoCo [8] , text models like Dense Passage
Retrieval (DPR) [18], and vision-language models like CLIP [20]. Once learned, these representations
both demonstrate commendable zero-shot performance, and could easily be adapted to achieve SoTA
performance on various tasks like classification [6] and retrieval [13].
Contrastive learning is a self-supervised strategy that aims to learn coherent representations given
an unlabeled dataset. The core idea is to relate similar (positive) data samples to each other while
contrasting unrelated (negative) points. To formalize, consider a pair of points (x, x̂), where x
is a sample from the dataset and x̂ is a “similar”, positive example. Contrastive methods learn
representations so that the embedding of the sample x is close to that of its partner x̂, while being far
away from other points. Sometimes, these pairs are naturally present. For instance, in CLIP, each
training data comes as a pair of an image and the corresponding text caption. In other scenarios, they
can be manually obtained via data augmentation that preserves the underlying semantics, e.g., we can
define an image and its resized/cropped/rotated version as a pair.
It is fundamentally important to understand why this simple idea of relating/contrasting pairs
works so well. In this paper, we aim to answer this question with a theoretical study of contrastive
learning by casting is as dimensionality reduction for Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs). We
motivate our study through the lens of representation learning which aims at finding a mapping
between the high-dimensional input space, e.g., images of 1 million pixels, and a lower dimensional
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

