Controlling Thinking Speed in Reasoning Models
Zhengkai Lin1 , Zhihang Fu2∗, Ze Chen2 , Chao Chen2 , Liang Xie3 ,
Wenxiao Wang4∗, Deng Cai1 , Zheng Wang2 , Jieping Ye2
1

3

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Cloud
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Human cognition is theorized to operate in two modes: fast, intuitive System 1
thinking and slow, deliberate System 2 thinking. While current Large Reasoning
Models (LRMs) excel at System 2 thinking, their inability to perform fast thinking
leads to high computational overhead and latency. In this work, we enable LRMs
to approximate human intelligence through dynamic thinking speed adjustment,
optimizing accuracy-efficiency trade-offs. Our approach addresses two key questions: (1) how to control thinking speed in LRMs, and (2) when to adjust it for
optimal performance. For the first question, we identify the steering vector that
governs slow-fast thinking transitions in LRMs’ representation space. Using this
vector, we achieve the first representation editing-based test-time scaling effect,
outperforming existing prompt-based scaling methods. For the second question,
we apply real-time difficulty estimation to signal reasoning segments of varying
complexity. Combining these techniques, we propose the first reasoning strategy
that enables fast processing of easy steps and deeper analysis for complex reasoning.
Without any training or additional cost, our plug-in module delivers an average
+1.3% accuracy with -8.6% token usage across leading LRMs and advanced reasoning benchmarks. All of our algorithms are implemented based on vLLM and
are expected to support broader applications and inspire future research.1

1

Introduction

Cognitive theory categorizes human thinking into two systems: the fast, intuitive System 1 and the
slower, deliberate System 2 [39, 13]. Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit similar specialization.
The chain-of-thought (CoT) [26, 40] generated by models like GPT-4o [10] and DeepSeek-V3 [6]
exhibits fast, intuitive thinking that is ideal for routine tasks but limited in advanced reasoning. In
contrast, the slower, more deliberate long thinking utilized by Large Reasoning Models (LRMs), such
as DeepSeek-R1 [7] and OpenAI’s o1 series [11], demonstrates superior performance on advanced
tasks. However, this advantage comes at the cost of largely increased computational overhead. This
contrast motivates our core research question: How can we combine the advantages of both System 1
and System 2 thinking within one model, thus simultaneously achieving both efficiency and accuracy?
Prior work integrates System 1 and System 2 thinking into one model by fine-tuning on both fast
and slow reasoning traces [28, 33]. Alternatively, we argue that even without training, some LRMs
intrinsically possess both slow- and fast-thinking abilities. Through statistical analysis of LRMs’
responses, we notice that the slow and fast outputs consistently start with distinct opening words.
This built-in feature provides a natural switch for activating different thinking modes within a single
LRM. However, achieving human-level cognition requires not only the possession of both System 1
and System 2 thinking modes, but also the capacity for dynamic transitions between the 2 modes
during thinking. Building on these insights, we refine our core research focus into two key issues:
* Corresponding authors. Email: zhihang.fzh@alibaba-inc.com, wenxiaowang@zju.edu.cn.
1

Code available at: https://github.com/D2I-ai/thinking-speed-control

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

