Least squares variational inference

Yvann Le Fay1 , Nicolas Chopin1, ,∗ Simon Barthelmé2
1
ENSAE, CREST, IP Paris
2
GIPSA-Lab, CNRS
{yvann.lefay,nicolas.chopin}@ensae.fr
simon.barthelme@gipsa-lab.fr

Abstract
Variational inference seeks the best approximation of a target distribution within
a chosen family, where "best" means minimising Kullback-Leibler divergence.
When the approximation family is exponential, the optimal approximation satisfies a fixed-point equation. We introduce LSVI (Least Squares Variational Inference), a gradient-free, Monte Carlo-based scheme for the fixed-point recursion,
where each iteration boils down to performing ordinary least squares regression
on tempered log-target evaluations under the variational approximation. We show
that LSVI is equivalent to biased stochastic natural gradient descent and use this
to derive convergence rates with respect to the numbers of samples and iterations.
When the approximation family is Gaussian, LSVI involves inverting the Fisher
information matrix, whose size grows quadratically with dimension d. We exploit
the regression formulation to eliminate the need for this inversion, yielding O(d3 )
complexity in the full-covariance case and O(d) in the mean-field case. Finally,
we numerically demonstrate LSVI’s performance on various tasks, including logistic regression, discrete variable selection, and Bayesian synthetic likelihood,
showing results competitive with state-of-the-art methods, even when gradients
are unavailable.

1

Introduction

This paper focuses on parametric variational inference (VI, [1–3]). Given an (unnormalised) target
density π, we aim at finding the distribution that minimises the (reverse) Kullback-Leibler divergence:
Z
arg min KL (q | π̄) := q log (q/π̄)
(1)
q∈Q
R
where Q is a user-chosen parametric family (e.g., Gaussians), and π̄ = π/ π. This approach has
become a de facto standard in probabilistic machine learning in recent years and is implemented
in various software packages, such as STAN, NumPyro, PyMC3, and Blackjax [4–7]. The minimisation is typically carried out through gradient-based procedures using automatic differentiation,
either stochastic gradient descent (SGD, [8])—often applied after reparameterising the target distribution [9, 10]—or its faster alternative natural gradient descent (NGD, [11–14]). This is convenient
for users, as they only have to provide the function f := log π to the software.
These procedures use different gradient estimators; some require log π to be amenable to automatic
differentiation, which is the case when using a reparameterisation, while others only require gradient
estimators of expectations under the variational distribution via the log-derivative trick [15]. The
gradient estimator for expectations usually suffers from high variance, and practical implementations
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

