Optimal Rates in Continual Linear Regression
via Increasing Regularization

Ran Levinstein∗ †
Tomer Koren §

Amit Attia∗ ‡

Matan Schliserman∗ ‡

Daniel Soudry ¶

Uri Sherman∗ ‡
Itay Evron ¶

Abstract
We study realizable continual linear regression under random task orderings, a
common setting for developing continual learning theory. In this setup, the worstcase expected loss after k learning iterations admits a lower bound of Ω(1/k).
However, prior work using an unregularized scheme has only established an upper
bound of O(1/k 1/4 ), leaving a significant gap. Our paper proves that this gap can
be narrowed, or even closed, using two frequently used regularization schemes:
(1) explicit isotropic ℓ2 regularization, and (2) implicit regularization via finite step
budgets. We show that these approaches, which are used in practice to mitigate
forgetting, reduce to stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on carefully defined surrogate losses. Through this lens, we identify a fixed regularization strength that
yields a near-optimal rate of O(log k/k). Moreover, formalizing and analyzing a
generalized variant of SGD for time-varying functions, we derive an increasing
regularization strength schedule that provably achieves an optimal rate of O(1/k).
This suggests that schedules that increase the regularization coefficient or decrease
the number of steps per task are beneficial, at least in the worst case.

1

Introduction

In continual learning, a learner encounters a sequence of tasks and aims to acquire new knowledge
without “forgetting” what was learned in earlier tasks. Many algorithmic approaches have been proposed to address this challenge [see surveys in 45, 42]. However, a deeper theoretical understanding
is still needed to clarify the principles governing continual learning and is essential for the practical
and reliable deployment of such methods.
We study standard regularization-based schemes in a setting with random task orderings. Both the
setting and—especially—the schemes play a central role in the practical and theoretical continual
learning literature, as discussed below. We find this combination mutually beneficial: (1) regularization improves the best known upper bound under random orderings, achieving an optimal rate; and
(2) randomness facilitates analysis that motivates heuristics for setting the regularization strength.
We focus on two forms of regularization: a well-known explicit isotropic ℓ2 regularization, and
implicit regularization induced by a finite number of gradient steps on the unregularized loss of each
task. Prior work studied such schemes in restricted settings—i.e., two tasks [28, 29], simplified data
models [28, 48, 29], weak regularization [13, 23], or cyclic orderings [5]. In contrast, we consider
any number of regression tasks drawn from any collection, under random orderings.
∗

Equal contribution.
Department of Computer Science, Technion.
‡
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI, Tel Aviv University.
§
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI, Tel Aviv University, and Google Research.
¶
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

