WarpGAN: Warping-Guided 3D GAN Inversion with
Style-Based Novel View Inpainting

1

Kaitao Huang1 , Yan Yan1† , Jing-Hao Xue2 , Hanzi Wang1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, P.R. China
2
Department of Statistical Science, University College London, UK
huangkt@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yanyan@xmu.edu.cn

Figure 1: Visual examples. Given a single input image (the first row), our WarpGAN synthesizes
images from five novel views: front, right, left, top, and down (the second to the sixth rows).

Abstract
3D GAN inversion projects a single image into the latent space of a pre-trained 3D
GAN to achieve single-shot novel view synthesis, which requires visible regions
with high fidelity and occluded regions with realism and multi-view consistency.
However, existing methods focus on the reconstruction of visible regions, while
the generation of occluded regions relies only on the generative prior of 3D GAN.
As a result, the generated occluded regions often exhibit poor quality due to
the information loss caused by the low bit-rate latent code. To address this, we
introduce the warping-and-inpainting strategy to incorporate image inpainting into
3D GAN inversion and propose a novel 3D GAN inversion method, WarpGAN.
Specifically, we first employ a 3D GAN inversion encoder to project the single-view
image into a latent code that serves as the input to 3D GAN. Then, we perform
warping to a novel view using the depth map generated by 3D GAN. Finally,
we develop a novel SVINet, which leverages the symmetry prior and multi-view
image correspondence w.r.t. the same latent code to perform inpainting of occluded
regions in the warped image. Quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate
that our method consistently outperforms several state-of-the-art methods.
†

Corresponding Author
Please visit the Project Page for visualizations and code.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

