Robust Federated Finetuning of LLMs via Alternating
Optimization of LoRA

Shuangyi Chen1∗
University of Toronto

Yuanxin Guo1∗
University of Toronto

shuangyi.chen@mail.utoronto.ca

yuanxin.guo@mail.utoronto.ca

Yue Ju
Ericsson-GAIA Montréal

Hardik Dalal
Ericsson-GAIA Montréal

Zhongwen Zhu
Ericsson-GAIA Montréal

yue.ju@ericsson.com

hardik.dalal@ericsson.com

zhongwen.zhu@ericsson.com

Ashish Khisti
University of Toronto
akhisti@ece.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods like Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) optimize federated training by reducing computational and communication
costs. We propose RoLoRA, a federated framework using alternating optimization
to fine-tune LoRA adapters. Our approach emphasizes the importance of learning
up and down projection matrices to enhance expressiveness and robustness. We use
both theoretical analysis and extensive experiments to demonstrate the advantages
of RoLoRA over prior approaches that either generate imperfect model updates
or limit expressiveness of the model. We provide a theoretical analysis on a linear model to highlight the importance of learning both the down-projection and
up-projection matrices in LoRA. We validate the insights on a non-linear model
and separately provide a convergence proof under general conditions. To bridge
theory and practice, we conducted extensive experimental evaluations on language
models including RoBERTa-Large, Llama-2-7B on diverse tasks and FL settings
to demonstrate the advantages of RoLoRA over other methods.

1

Introduction

The remarkable performance of large language models (LLMs) stems from their ability to learn
at scale. With their broad adaptability and extensive scope, LLMs depend on vast and diverse
datasets to effectively generalize across a wide range of tasks and domains. Federated learning [28]
offers a promising solution for leveraging data from multiple sources, which could be particularly
advantageous for LLMs.
Recently, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) has emerged as an innovative training strategy
that updates only a small subset of model parameters, substantially reducing computational and
memory demands. A notable method in this category is LoRA [21], which utilizes low-rank matrices
to approximate weight changes during fine-tuning. These matrices are integrated with pre-trained
weights for inference, facilitating reduced data transfer in scenarios such as federated learning, where
update size directly impacts communication efficiency. Many works integrate LoRA into federated
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

