ChemOrch: Empowering LLMs with Chemical
Intelligence via Synthetic Instructions

Yue Huang1∗, Zhengzhe Jiang∗ , Xiaonan Luo1 , Kehan Guo1 , Haomin Zhuang1 , Yujun Zhou1
Zhengqing Yuan1 , Xiaoqi Sun2 , Jules Schleinitz3 , Yanbo Wang4 , Shuhao Zhang5
Mihir Surve6 , Nitesh V Chawla1 , Olaf Wiest6 , Xiangliang Zhang1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
2
MIT 3 CalTech 4 MBZUAI 5 CMU
6
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame

Abstract
Empowering large language models (LLMs) with chemical intelligence remains a
challenge due to the scarcity of high-quality, domain-specific instruction-response
datasets and the misalignment of existing synthetic data generation pipelines with
the inherently hierarchical and rule-governed structure of chemical information.
To address this, we propose ChemOrch, a framework that synthesizes chemically
grounded instruction–response pairs through a two-stage process: task-controlled
instruction generation and tool-aware response construction. ChemOrch enables
controllable diversity and levels of difficulty for the generated tasks, and ensures
response precision through tool planning & distillation, and tool-based self-repair
mechanisms. The effectiveness of ChemOrch is evaluated based on: 1) the high
quality of generated instruction data, demonstrating superior diversity and strong
alignment with chemical constraints; 2) the reliable generation of evaluation
tasks that more effectively reveal LLM weaknesses in chemistry; and 3) the
significant improvement of LLM chemistry capabilities when the generated
instruction data are used for fine-tuning. Our work thus represents a critical step
toward scalable and verifiable chemical intelligence in LLMs. The code is available
at https://github.com/HowieHwong/ChemOrch.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited exceptional capabilities across a wide range of
tasks, to be widely applied in various downstream tasks [1–5]. Among these, chemistry represents a
particularly promising field where LLMs can assist in accelerating molecular design [6, 7], facilitating
scientific discovery [8, 9], and democratizing access to expert-level chemical knowledge [10, 11].
Empowering LLMs with strong chemical reasoning capabilities could significantly impact areas such
as drug discovery, materials development, and organic synthesis [12, 13].
Despite this potential and existing efforts [9, 10], empowering LLMs with chemistry domain knowledge remains challenging. First of all, there exists Challenge 1: data scarcity in both training and
testing, as disclosed in recent benchmarking studies [14]: LLMs have not yet achieved the level of
performance expected by chemistry scientists. High-quality instruction datasets for guiding LLMs to
learn chemistry knowledge are extremely limited. While chemistry-related corpora have been utilized
during pretraining [4], constructing task-specific fine-tuning datasets and fine-grained evaluation sets
often requires intensive expert annotation [15], leading to high costs and limited scalability.
To overcome data scarcity, synthetic data generation offers a promising alternative. However, there
exists Challenge 2: mismatch between general-purpose synthetic frameworks and chemistry∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

