Agents Robust to Distribution Shifts Learn Causal
World Models Even Under Mediation
Matteo Ceriscioli, Karthika Mohan
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS)
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
{ceriscim,karthika.mohan}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
In this work, we prove that agents capable of adapting to distribution shifts must
have learned the causal model of their environment even in the presence of mediation. This term describes situations where an agent’s actions affect its environment,
a dynamic common to most real-world settings. For example, a robot in an industrial plant might interact with tools, move through space, and transform products to
complete its task. We introduce an algorithm for eliciting causal knowledge from
robust agents using optimal policy oracles, with the flexibility to incorporate prior
causal knowledge. We further demonstrate its effectiveness in mediated singleagent scenarios and multi-agent environments. We identify conditions under which
the presence of a single robust agent is sufficient to recover the full causal model
and derive optimal policies for other agents in the same environment. Finally, we
show how to apply these results to sequential decision-making tasks modeled as
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs).

1

Introduction

Consider an AI system designed to control a sprinkler. The goal of this system is to maintain optimal
vegetation conditions while minimizing water consumption. Such a system adapts to seasonal changes
and shifts in the rainfall distribution in order to consistently achieve optimal results across diverse
weather patterns. This system can be viewed as an agent since it is an entity that maps percepts
(e.g. humidity, month of the year) to actions (activation of the sprinkler), and maximizes expected
utility (promoting vegetation growth while conserving water) [Russell and Norvig, 1995]. Now,
suppose we are tasked with developing an AI system to control a robot responsible for cleaning
the windows of a building. One might notice that there is an overlap between the environment in
which the sprinkler controller operates and that of the window-cleaning robot. For example, along
the Mediterranean coasts of Europe, southerly winds such as the sirocco and libeccio transport dust
and sand from the Sahara, which, when mixed with rain, settle and leave persistent stains on glass
surfaces. Therefore, meteorological factors such as wind direction and rainfall occurrence also play an
important role in the cleaning robot decision task. This raises the question of whether the adaptability
of the sprinkler controller entails the acquisition of some form of weather-related knowledge, and
whether this knowledge, possibly causal in nature, can be transferred to help us develop robust
policies for the window-cleaning robot. In this paper, we show that agents capable of behaving
optimally under distribution shifts must indeed possess causal knowledge about their environment,
and that this knowledge can be elicited and reused to derive better policies for other agents. Returning
to the sprinkler example, its adaptability reflects causal knowledge about the weather, which can be
extracted and used to improve the policy of the window-cleaning robot.
Investigating the link between causal understanding and robustness to shifts in the environment
is essential for building AI systems capable of generalizing across diverse scenarios [Pearl, 2018,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

