Graph Persistence goes Spectral

Mattie Ji
University of Pennsylvania
mji13@sas.upenn.edu

Amauri H. Souza
Federal Institute of Ceará
amauriholanda@ifce.edu.br

Vikas Garg
Aalto University
YaiYai Ltd
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Including intricate topological information (e.g., cycles) provably enhances the expressivity of message-passing graph neural networks (GNNs) beyond the WeisfeilerLeman (WL) hierarchy. Consequently, Persistent Homology (PH) methods are
increasingly employed for graph representation learning. In this context, recent
works have proposed decorating classical PH diagrams with vertex and edge features for improved expressivity. However, these methods still fail to capture basic
graph structural information. In this paper, we propose SpectRe — a new topological descriptor for graphs that integrates spectral information into PH diagrams.
Notably, SpectRe is strictly more expressive than PH and spectral information on
graphs alone. We also introduce notions of global and local stability to analyze existing descriptors and establish that SpectRe is locally stable. Finally, experiments
on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of SpectRe and
its potential to enhance the capabilities of graph models in relevant learning tasks.
Code is available at https://github.com/Aalto-QuML/SpectRe/.

1

Introduction

Relational data is ubiquitous in real-world applications, and can be elegantly abstracted with graphs.
GNNs are state-of-the-art models for graph representation learning [10, 11, 28, 36, 51, 55, 62]. Almost
all commonly employed GNNs can be cast as schemes where nodes repeatedly exchange messages
with their neighbors [25]. Despite empirical success, GNNs are known to have some key limitations.
Notably, due to their strong local inductive bias, these GNNs and their higher-order counterparts
are bounded in power by the WL hierarchy [40, 41, 43, 62]. Furthermore, they fail to compute
important graph properties such as cycles and connectivity [15, 24]. Topological descriptors such as
those based on PH can provide such information not just for GNNs but also the so-called topological
neural networks (TNNs) that generalize message-passing to higher-dimensional topological domains,
enabling more nuanced representations than the standard GNNs [6–8, 22, 26, 27, 46, 47, 56].
Specifically, PH employs filtrations (or filter functions) that can track the evolution of key topological
information; e.g., when a new component starts or the time interval during which a component
survives (until two components merge, or indefinitely). This persistence information is typically
encoded as (birth, death) pairs, or more generally tuples with additional entries, in a persistence
diagram. The topological features derived from these persistence diagrams can be integrated into
GNNs and TNNs to enhance their expressivity and boost their empirical performance [56]. PH is thus
increasingly being utilized in (graph) machine learning [1, 9, 13, 14, 29–31, 49, 54, 63, 64, 66, 67].
Understandably, there is a growing interest in designing more expressive PH descriptors for graphs [2].
Recently, Immonen et al. [33] analyzed the representational ability of color-based PH schemes, providing a complete characterization of the power of 0-dimensional PH methods that employ vertex-level
or edge-level filtrations using graph-theoretic notions. They also introduced RePHINE as a strictly
more powerful descriptor than these methods. However, it turns out that RePHINE is still unable to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

