AiDE-Q: Synthetic Labeled Datasets Can Enhance
Learning Models for Quantum Property Estimation

Xinbiao Wang1,3 , Yuxuan Du1,2∗, Zihan Lou3 , Yang Qian4 , Kaining Zhang1 ,
Yong Luo3∗ , Bo Du3 , Dacheng Tao1∗
1
College of Computing and Data Science,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
2
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
3
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
4
Department of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
yuxuan.du@ntu.edu.sg,yluo180@gmail.com,dacheng.tao@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Quantum many-body problems are central to various scientific disciplines, yet their
ground-state properties are intrinsically challenging to estimate. Recent advances
in deep learning (DL) offer potential solutions in this field, complementing prior
purely classical and quantum approaches. However, existing DL-based models
typically assume access to a large-scale and noiseless labeled dataset collected
by infinite sampling. This idealization raises fundamental concerns about their
practical utility, especially given the limited availability of quantum hardware in the
near term. To unleash the power of these DL-based models, we propose AiDE-Q
(automatic data engine for quantum property estimation), an effective framework
that addresses this challenge by iteratively generating high-quality synthetic labeled
datasets. Specifically, AiDE-Q utilizes a consistency-check method to assess the
quality of synthetic labels and continuously improves the employed DL models
with the identified high-quality synthetic dataset. To verify the effectiveness of
AiDE-Q, we conduct extensive numerical simulations on a diverse set of quantum
many-body and molecular systems, with up to 50 qubits. The results show that
AiDE-Q enhances prediction performance for various reference learning models,
with improvements of up to 14.2%. Moreover, we exhibit that a basic supervised
learning model integrated with AiDE-Q outperforms advanced reference models,
highlighting the importance of a synthetic dataset. Our work paves the way for
more efficient and practical applications of DL for quantum property estimation.

1

Introduction

Many fundamental problems across diverse scientific disciplines, from condensed matter physics to
quantum chemistry and materials science, can be reduced to solving quantum many-body problems
[1–3]. A central challenge in this regime is characterizing ground-state properties, a task known
as quantum property estimation (QPE), which offers critical insight into the behavior of complex
quantum systems [4–6]. Numerous methods have been proposed towards QPE, ranging from classical
simulations [7–11] to quantum algorithms for state learning [12–17], but their applicability remains
limited. That is, classical simulations face exponential computational costs as the system size
increases [18, 19], while quantum algorithms often require extensive measurements and complex
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

