Improving planning and MBRL with
temporally-extended actions

Palash Chatterjee
Indiana University
palchatt@iu.edu

Roni Khardon
Indiana University
rkhardon@iu.edu

Abstract
Continuous time systems are often modeled using discrete time dynamics but this
requires a small simulation step to maintain accuracy. In turn, this requires a large
planning horizon which leads to computationally demanding planning problems
and reduced performance. Previous work in model-free reinforcement learning
has partially addressed this issue using action repeats where a policy is learned to
determine a discrete action duration. Instead we propose to control the continuous
decision timescale directly by using temporally-extended actions and letting the
planner treat the duration of the action as an additional optimization variable along
with the standard action variables. This additional structure has multiple advantages.
It speeds up simulation time of trajectories and, importantly, it allows for deep
horizon search in terms of primitive actions while using a shallow search depth
in the planner. In addition, in the model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
setting, it reduces compounding errors from model learning and improves training
time for models. We show that this idea is effective and that the range for action
durations can be automatically selected using a multi-armed bandit formulation
and integrated into the MBRL framework. An extensive experimental evaluation
both in planning and in MBRL, shows that our approach yields faster planning,
better solutions, and that it enables solutions to problems that are not solved in the
standard formulation.

1

Introduction

Many interesting real life systems evolve continuously with time, but the dynamics of such systems
are often modeled using a discrete-time approximation. In these models, time evolves in discrete steps
of δt called the timescale of the system. Simulators used in RL or robotics often use such models
to capture physical systems. Setting δt to a small value allows the discrete-time models to have a
good local approximation. To obtain a trajectory of the system using such models, the dynamics
function needs to be evaluated at fixed intervals of δt . Because δt is small, the number of decisions
required to solve even a simple task can be quite large. From the perspective of planning or MBRL,
this translates to longer planning horizons (or rollouts) which can limit their effectiveness.
Shooting based planners like Cross Entropy Method (CEM) and Model Predictive Path Integral
(MPPI) [Kobilarov, 2012, Botev et al., 2013, Williams et al., 2017, Chua et al., 2018] rely on
sampling to estimate the highly rewarding regions of the state space. They are known to perform
poorly as the planning horizon increases, especially in environments with noisy dynamics or sparse
rewards. This is because in such environments the variance of their estimates increases and they
need a large number of samples in order to act reliably [Chatterjee et al., 2023]. In addition, when
planning with learned models as in MBRL, longer rollouts can lead to compounding errors [Janner
et al., 2019].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

