A Near-optimal, Scalable and Parallelizable
Framework for Stochastic Bandits Robust to
Adversarial Corruptions and Beyond

Zicheng Hu Cheng Chen∗
MoE Engineering Research Center of Hardware/Software Co-design Technology and Application
East China Normal University
51275902019@stu.ecnu.edu.cn chchen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate various stochastic bandit problems in the presence of adversarial
corruptions. A seminal work for this problem is the BARBAR [1] algorithm,
which achieves both robustness and efficiency. However, it suffers from a regret
of O(KC), which does not match the lower bound of Ω(C), where K denotes the
number of arms and C denotes the corruption level. In this paper, we first improve
the BARBAR algorithm by proposing a novel framework called BARBAT, which
eliminates the factor of K to achieve an optimal regret bound up to a logarithmic
factor. We also extend BARBAT to various settings, including multi-agent bandits,
graph bandits, combinatorial semi-bandits and batched bandits. Compared with
the Follow-the-Regularized-Leader framework, our methods are more amenable to
parallelization, making them suitable for multi-agent and batched bandit settings,
and they incur lower computational costs, particularly in semi-bandit problems.
Numerical experiments verify the efficiency of the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the most fundamental online learning tasks, and
it has a long and rich history [2, 3]. Recently, as security concerns have grown, many studies
focus on the so-called adversarially corrupted regime where an adversary is allowed to manipulate
reward observations in a stochastic environment. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized
into two classes: the Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) family of algorithms [4, 5, 6, 7]
and elimination-based algorithms [8, 1, 9, 10]. FTRL-based methods perform optimally in both
stochastic and adversarial settings and also achieve optimal regret in the adversarially corrupted
setting. However, these methods need to solve an optimization problem in each round, which may
incur high computational costs in many scenarios such as semi-bandits. Also, the FTRL framework
is challenging to extend to parallel settings such as batched bandits and multi-agent bandits. On the
other hand, elimination-based methods such as BARBAR [1] are computationally efficient and easy
to parallelize. However, the BARBAR algorithm suffers from a suboptimal regret of O(KC), and it
remains an open question how to achieve optimal regret by elimination-based methods.
In this paper, we improve upon the BARBAR [1] method and propose a novel framework called
BARBAT (Bad Arms get Recourse, Best Arm gets Trust) for stochastic bandits with adversarial
corruptions. Unlike BARBAR, which employs dynamic epoch lengths, BARBAT adopts static epoch
lengths by increasing the probability of selecting the estimated best arm. In addition, BARBAT
utilizes epoch-varying failure probabilities δm instead of a global failure probability δ used in
BARBAR, allowing us to achieve near-optimal regret bounds. We further demonstrate that our
∗

The corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

