Inner Speech as Behavior Guides: Steerable Imitation
of Diverse Behaviors for Human-AI coordination
Rakshit S. Trivedi∗ †
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
triver@mit.edu

Kartik Sharma∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
ksartik@gatech.edu

David C. Parkes
Harvard University
parkes@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
Effective human-AI coordination requires artificial agents capable of exhibiting and
responding to human-like behaviors while adapting to changing contexts. Imitation
learning has emerged as one of the prominent approaches to build such agents by
training them to mimic human-demonstrated behaviors. However, current methods
struggle to capture the inherent diversity and non-Markovian nature of human behavior and lack the ability to steer behavior at inference time. Drawing inspiration
from the theory of human cognitive processes, where inner speech guides action
selection before execution, we propose MIMIC (Modeling Inner Motivations for
Imitation and Control), a framework that uses language as an internal representation of behavioral intent. MIMIC employs the novel use of vision-language models
as linguistic scaffolding to train a conditional variational autoencoder capable of
generating inner speech from observations. A diffusion-based behavior cloning
policy then selects actions conditioned on current observations and the generated
inner speech. MIMIC enables fine-grained steering of behavior at inference time
by conditioning the agent on behavior-specific speech. Experiments across robotic
manipulation tasks and human-AI collaboration games demonstrate that MIMIC
significantly enhances both behavior diversity and fidelity to human demonstrations while enabling nuanced behavioral steering without training on additional
demonstrations. We open source our code and provide pre-trained MIMIC agents
and qualitative demos at: https://mimic-research.github.io.

1

Introduction

Human-AI collaboration in complex settings requires artificial agents that can anticipate, understand,
and appropriately respond to the full spectrum of human behavior. This capability appears important
in ensuring AI safety and alignment with human values and expectations [5, 7, 28]. One direction
towards progress is to develop artificial agents which are able to mimic human behavioral patterns.
Through in silico surrogates for the richness of human behavior, we can hope to support the safe
deployment of AI technologies involving human-AI collaboration—enabling comprehensive predeployment testing and validation across diverse interaction scenarios that would otherwise be
impractical or unsafe to assess through direct human participation.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

