RANK++LETR: Learn to Rank and Optimize
Candidates for Line Segment Detection

Xin Tong
Baojie Tian
Yufei Guo
Zhe Ma∗
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC
xin_tong@pku.edu.cn, mazhe_thu@163.com

Abstract
It is observed that the confidence score may fail to reflect the predicting quality
accurately in previous proposal-based line segment detection methods, since the
scores and the line locations are predicted simultaneously. We find that the line
segment detection performance can be further improved by learning-based line
candidate ranking and optimizing strategy. To this end, we build a novel end-to-end
line detecting model named RANK++LETR upon deformable DETR architecture,
where the encoder is used to select the line candidates while the decoder is applied
to rank and optimize these candidates. We design line-aware deformable attention
(LADA) module in which attention positions are distributed in a long narrow area
and can align well with the elongated geometry of line segments. Moreover, we innovatively apply ranking-based supervision in line segment detection task with the
design of contiguous labels according to the detection quality. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method outperforms previous SOTA methods in prediction
accuracy and gets faster inferring speed than other Transformer-based methods.

1

Introduction

Line segments and junctions are crucial information in structured scenes and are ubiquitous in humanmade environments. An accurate line segment detection algorithm can significantly enhance various
computer vision applications, such as 3D reconstruction [36; 2], camera calibration [22; 27], depth
estimation [40], scene understanding [11], object detection [29], SLAM [18; 41], etc. Traditional
geometric-based line segment detection algorithms usually extract low-level image features and group
them into line segments. These methods often run at a fast speed, while may suffer from fragmented
prediction. Learning-based methods achieve promising results by learning knowledge from image
sets with supervision, which are able to detect longer and more meaningful line segments.
Proposal-based methods constitute a pivotal component within learning-based approaches and have
been extensively studied recently. These models typically output target predictions such as endpoint
coordinates or midpoint coordinates with endpoint offsets for line segments. Generally, these methods
first simultaneously predict both the positional coordinates and confidence scores of candidate
line segments, then select the top-ranked proposal-based on confidence scores as final predictions.
Previous study [31] points out that some accurately detected line segments are assigned low confidence
scores during prediction since confidence prediction and location regression of line segments are
independent. Specifically, given the simultaneously predicted line candidates with confidence scores
and positions, the detection performance can be significantly improved even if only proper scores
are assigned. Based on the observation, we find that the line segment detection performance can be
further improved by learning-based line candidate ranking and optimizing strategy.
Transformers depend on attention modules to gather relevant features. However, in the classic
deformable attention module, the attention position of a query is usually around a reference point on
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

