Ambient Diffusion
mni:
Training Good Models with Bad Data

Giannis Daras ∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
gdaras@mit.edu

Adrian Rodriguez-Munoz ∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
adrianrm@mit.edu

Adam Klivans
The University of Texas at Austin
klivans@utexas.edu

Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
torralba@mit.edu

Constantinos Daskalakis
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
costis@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We show how to use low-quality, synthetic, and out-of-distribution images to
improve the quality of a diffusion model. Typically, diffusion models are trained
on curated datasets that emerge from highly filtered data pools from the Web and
other sources. We show that there is immense value in the lower-quality images
that are often discarded. We present Ambient Diffusion Omni, a simple, principled
framework to train diffusion models that can extract signal from all available images
during training. Our framework exploits two properties of natural images – spectral
power law decay and locality. We first validate our framework by successfully
training diffusion models with images synthetically corrupted by Gaussian blur,
JPEG compression, and motion blur. We then use our framework to achieve stateof-the-art ImageNet FID and we show significant improvements in both image
quality and diversity for text-to-image generative modeling. The core insight is
that noise dampens the initial skew between the desired high-quality distribution
and the mixed distribution we actually observe. We provide rigorous theoretical
justification for our approach by analyzing the trade-off between learning from
biased data versus limited unbiased data across diffusion times.

1

Introduction

Large-scale, high-quality training datasets have been a primary driver of recent progress in generative
modeling. These datasets are typically assembled by filtering massive collections of images sourced
from the web or proprietary databases [25, 44, 53, 58, 59]. The filtering process—which determines
which data is retained—is crucial to the quality of the resulting models [13, 25, 27, 33]. However,
filtering strategies are often heuristic and inefficient, discarding large amounts of data [13, 25, 44, 51].
We demonstrate that the data typically rejected as low-quality holds significant, underutilized value.
Extracting meaningful information from degraded data requires algorithms that explicitly model the
degradation process. In generative modeling, there is growing interest in approaches that learn to
generate directly from degraded inputs [1, 2, 5, 7, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18, 31, 40, 46, 47, 48, 52, 55,
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

