RespoDiff: Dual-Module Bottleneck Transformation
for Responsible & Faithful T2I Generation

Silpa Vadakkeeveetil Sreelatha∗
University of Surrey

Sauradip Nag
Simon Fraser University

Serge Belongie
University of Copenhagen

Muhammad Awais
University of Surrey

Anjan Dutta
University of Surrey

Abstract
The rapid advancement of diffusion models has enabled high-fidelity and semantically rich text-to-image generation; however, ensuring fairness and safety remains
an open challenge. Existing methods typically improve fairness and safety at the
expense of semantic fidelity and image quality. In this work, we propose RespoDiff,
a novel framework for responsible text-to-image generation that incorporates a
dual-module transformation on the intermediate bottleneck representations of diffusion models. Our approach introduces two distinct learnable modules: one focused
on capturing and enforcing responsible concepts, such as fairness and safety, and
the other dedicated to maintaining semantic alignment with neutral prompts. To
facilitate the dual learning process, we introduce a novel score-matching objective
that enables effective coordination between the modules. Our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in responsible generation by ensuring semantic alignment while optimizing both objectives without compromising image fidelity. Our
approach improves responsible and semantically coherent generation by ~20%
across diverse, unseen prompts. Moreover, it integrates seamlessly into large-scale
models like SDXL, enhancing fairness and safety .The project page is available at
https://vssilpa.github.io/respodiff_project_page.

1

Introduction

Models such as Stable Diffusion v1.4 (SDv1.4), SDXL, FLUX, and SD3 exemplify recent advancements in text-to-image (T2I) generation, revolutionizing content creation and visual communication
by generating high-quality visuals from text prompts (Podell et al., 2024; Rombach et al., 2022).
However, these models risk reinforcing stereotypes or producing harmful content, which can lead to
societal consequences (Luccioni et al., 2023; Perera and Patel, 2023; Rando et al., 2022; Schramowski
et al., 2023). Ensuring a responsible workflow is critical to mitigating these risks.
Previous methods for responsible text-to-image (T2I) generation include prompt modification
(Chuang et al., 2023; Ni et al., 2024), model fine-tuning (Gandikota et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024),
model editing (Gandikota et al., 2024), classifier guidance (Schramowski et al., 2023), and latent
vector injection (Li et al., 2024). Despite advancements in responsible T2I generation, many existing
approaches still compromise semantic fidelity and image quality, reducing their effectiveness in
producing both responsible and faithful generation. To address these challenges, we propose RespoDiff, a novel framework for responsible T2I generation that introduces a dual-module transformation
on the bottleneck representations of diffusion models. Specifically, given a responsible category,
such as demographic attributes (e.g., gender) or safety factors – and its associated target concepts
∗

Email address: s.vadakkeeveetilsreelatha@surrey.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

