NoisyGRPO: Incentivizing Multimodal CoT
Reasoning via Noise Injection and Bayesian Estimation

Longtian Qiu1 , Shan Ning1,3 , Jiaxuan Sun1 , Xuming He1,2
1
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Lingang Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{qiult, ningshan2022, sunjx2022, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promise in enhancing the general Chainof-Thought (CoT) reasoning capabilities of multimodal large language models
(MLLMs). However, when applied to improve general CoT reasoning, existing RL
frameworks often struggle to generalize beyond the training distribution. To address
this, we propose NoisyGRPO, a systematic multimodal RL framework that introduces controllable noise into visual inputs for enhanced exploration and explicitly
models the advantage estimation process via a Bayesian framework. Specifically,
NoisyGRPO improves RL training by: (1) Noise-Injected Exploration Policy:
Perturbing visual inputs with Gaussian noise to encourage exploration across a
wider range of visual scenarios; and (2) Bayesian Advantage Estimation: Formulating advantage estimation as a principled Bayesian inference problem, where
the injected noise level serves as a prior and the observed trajectory reward as the
likelihood. This Bayesian modeling fuses both sources of information to compute
a robust posterior estimate of trajectory advantage, effectively guiding MLLMs
to prefer visually grounded trajectories over noisy ones. Experiments on standard
CoT quality, general capability, and hallucination benchmarks demonstrate that
NoisyGRPO substantially improves generalization and robustness, especially in
RL settings with small-scale MLLMs such as Qwen2.5-VL 3B. The project page is
available at https://artanic30.github.io/project_pages/NoisyGRPO.

1

Introduction

The success of OpenAI’s O1 [34] and DeepSeek-R1 [7] highlights that activating Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) reasoning abilities through Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a promising strategy for scaling
model intelligence at test time. In particular, value-free RL methods such as Group Relative Policy
Optimization [44] (GRPO) have demonstrated substantial improvements in LLM performance while
avoiding the costly requirement of training a separate value model. As recent works show [38, 13,
8, 30, 46], this efficiency in both data and computation makes GRPO an appealing approach for
extension to complex visual language tasks such as visual math problem solving.
However, when applying GRPO to improve general chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning in multimodal
large language models (MLLMs), we observe notable limitations in the model’s ability to generalize
beyond the training distribution, which hinders the broad applicability of MLLMs. As shown
in Figure 1, higher training rewards under the GRPO framework do not consistently yield better
evaluation performance. We identify two primary factors contributing to this issue: (1) Limited Policy
Exploration. RL in the generative model domain utilizes temperature sampling to generate multiple
rollouts for policy exploration; however, as noted in DAPO [58], these rollouts often converge to
near-identical outputs during training, leading to insufficient exploration and early deterministic
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

