G-Net: A Provably Easy Construction of
High-Accuracy Random Binary Neural Networks

Alireza Aghasi∗
Dept. Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Oregon State University
alireza.aghasi@oregonstate.edu

Nicholas F. Marshall
Dept. Mathematics
Oregon State University
marsnich@oregonstate.edu

Saeid Pourmand
Dept. Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Oregon State University
pourmans@oregonstate.edu

Wyatt D Whiting
Dept. Mathematics
Oregon State University
whitinwy@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel randomized algorithm for constructing binary neural networks
with tunable accuracy. This approach is motivated by hyperdimensional computing
(HDC), which is a brain-inspired paradigm that leverages high-dimensional vector
representations, offering efficient hardware implementation and robustness to
model corruptions. Unlike traditional low-precision methods that use quantization,
we consider binary embeddings of data as points in the hypercube equipped with the
Hamming distance. We propose a novel family of floating-point neural networks,
G-Nets, which are general enough to mimic standard network layers. Each floatingpoint G-Net has a randomized binary embedding, an embedded hyperdimensional
(EHD) G-Net, that retains the accuracy of its floating-point counterparts, with
theoretical guarantees, due to the concentration of measure. Empirically, our binary
models match convolutional neural network accuracies and outperform prior HDC
models by large margins, for example, we achieve almost 30% higher accuracy
on CIFAR-10 compared to prior HDC models. G-Nets are a theoretically justified
bridge between neural networks and randomized binary neural networks, opening a
new direction for constructing robust binary/quantized deep learning models. Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/GNet2025/GNet.

1

Introduction

We are motivated by hyperdimensional computing (HDC), a brain-inspired computational paradigm
that uses high-dimensional vectors as the basic elements of computation [33]. Applications of
HDC include classification and regression [7, 10, 17, 35, 39], reinforcement learning [4, 25], and
dimensionality reduction [14, 24]. Recent works have also explored online learning approaches
[10, 12] and advanced the theoretical understanding of HDC [26, 31, 37]. HDC methods can be
efficiently implemented on hardware, making these models attractive for edge and low-energy
computing [3, 5, 13, 16, 18, 19]. For readers less familiar with HDC, Section A of the Appendix
offers a detailed taxonomy and broader overview of HDC methods.
For predictive tasks, an HDC pipeline typically consists of two core components: a hyperdimensional
embedding module, which often carries some component of randomness, and an inference module
[32]. The embedding transforms input data into high-dimensional representations (often binary
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

