A Plug-and-Play Query Synthesis Active Learning
Framework for Neural PDE Solvers
Zhiyuan Wang1 , Jinwoo Go2 , Byung-Jun Yoon1,2 , Nathan Urban2 , Xiaoning Qian1,2,3
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
2
Computing & Data Sciences, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY
3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX

Abstract
In recent developments in scientific machine learning (SciML), neural surrogate
solvers for partial differential equations (PDEs) have become powerful tools for
accelerating scientific computation for various science and engineering applications. However, training neural PDE solvers often demands a large amount of
high-fidelity PDE simulation data, which are expensive to generate. Active learning
(AL) offers a promising solution by adaptively selecting training data from the PDE
settings–including parameters, initial and boundary conditions–that are expected to
be most informative to help reduce this data burden. In this work, we introduce
PaPQS, a Plug-and-Play Query Synthesis AL framework that synthesizes informative PDE settings directly in the continuous design space. PaPQS optimizes
the Expected Information Gain (EIG) while encouraging batch diversity, enabling
model-aware exploration of the design space via backpropagation through the neural PDE solution trajectories. The framework is applicable to general PDE systems
and surrogate architectures, and can be seamlessly integrated with existing AL
strategies. Extensive experiments across different PDE systems demonstrate that
our AL framework, PaPQS, consistently improves sample efficiency over existing
AL baselines.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental tools for modeling a wide range of physical
phenomena in science and engineering. Traditional numerical solvers, such as finite difference and
finite element methods [1], provide accurate solutions but often entail significant computational costs,
especially when high spatial and temporal resolutions are required. The high computational cost
becomes a critical bottleneck in applications involving fast or extensive evaluations, especially for
consequent uncertainty quantification, optimization, and decision-making [2, 3].
Neural PDE solvers have recently been developed as efficient surrogates to alleviate this cost, enabling
accelerated uncertainty analysis and decision making [4, 5, 6, 7]. Unlike typical supervised learning
tasks, training neural PDE surrogates must account for spatiotemporal complexity and sensitivity to
initial and boundary conditions, particularly in complex systems with chaotic or highly nonlinear
dynamics. Therefore, randomly simulating many high-fidelity trajectories is impractical, given its
prohibitive time and cost. These challenges motivate the development of new active learning (AL)
methods tied to PDE systems, which seek to improve data efficiency by selectively querying the most
informative PDE settings rather than relying on exhaustive data. Recent studies have evaluated AL
for neural PDE surrogates, aiming to reduce the number of expensive simulations while maintaining
neural surrogate model accuracy [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

