AgentTTS: Large Language Model Agent for Test-time
Compute-optimal Scaling Strategy in Complex Tasks

Fali Wang1∗, Hui Liu2 , Zhenwei Dai2 , Jingying Zeng2 , Zhiwei Zhang1 , Zongyu Wu1 ,
Chen Luo2 , Zhen Li2 , Xianfeng Tang2 , Qi He2 , Suhang Wang1
1
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
2
Amazon, Palo Alto, CA, USA
{fqw5095,zbz5349,zzw5373,szw494}@psu.edu
{liunhu,zejingyi,zwdai,cheluo,xianft}@amazon.com

Abstract
Test-time scaling (TTS) enhances the performance of large language models
(LLMs) by allocating additional compute resources during inference. However,
existing research primarily investigates TTS in single-stage tasks; while many
real-world problems are multi-stage complex tasks, composed of a sequence of
heterogeneous subtasks with each subtask requires LLM of specific capability.
Therefore, we study a novel problem: the test-time compute-optimal scaling in
multi-stage complex tasks, aiming to select suitable models and allocate budgets
per subtask to maximize overall performance. TTS in multi-stage tasks introduces
two fundamental challenges: (i) The combinatorial search space of model and
budget allocations, combined with the high cost of inference, makes brute-force
search impractical. (ii) The optimal model and budget allocations across subtasks
are interdependent, increasing the complexity of the compute-optimal search. To
address this gap, we conduct extensive pilot experiments on four tasks across six
datasets, deriving three empirical insights characterizing the behavior of LLMs
in multi-stage complex tasks. Informed by these insights, we propose AgentTTS,
an LLM-agent-based framework that autonomously searches for compute-optimal
allocations through iterative feedback-driven interactions with the execution environment. Experimental results demonstrate that AgentTTS significantly outperforms traditional and other LLM-based baselines in search efficiency, and shows
improved robustness to varying training set sizes and enhanced interpretability. 2

1

Introduction

Test-time scaling (TTS), which refers to allocating additional computational resources during inference, has shown promising results in improving the performance of large language models
(LLMs) [2, 45, 55, 33, 19, 54, 26]. For example, Brown et al. [2] scaled inference compute via
repeated sampling of candidate solutions, using a verifier to select the best prediction, enabling a
weak small model to outperform single-sample state-of-the-art models. Despite its effectiveness,
existing methods are primarily designed for single-stage tasks, where the model performs a single
function, such as mathematical problem solving [45, 2, 55, 33, 19, 26, 14] or code generation [2, 34].
However, many real-world applications involve multi-stage complex tasks, for which compute allocation remains underexplored. These tasks involve a sequential execution of heterogeneous subtasks
to accomplish complex objectives. Representative examples include retrieval-then-generation QA
systems [16], waterfall-style software development (comprising requirement analysis, system design,
∗
2

Work done during an internship at Amazon.
Code link: https://github.com/FairyFali/AgentTTS/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

