Generalization Bounds for Kolmogorov-Arnold
Networks (KANs) and Enhanced KANs with Lower
Lipschitz Complexity

Pengqi Li Lizhong Ding∗ Jiarun Fu Chunhui Zhang Ye Yuan Guoren Wang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{pengqi.li, jrfu, zhangch, yuan-ye}@bit.edu.cn
lizhong.ding@outlook.com wanggrbit@126.com

Abstract
Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs) have demonstrated remarkable expressive
capacity and predictive power in symbolic learning. However, existing generalization errors of KANs primarily focus on approximation errors while neglecting
estimation errors, leading to a suboptimal bias-variance trade-off and poor generalization performance. Meanwhile, the unclear generalization mechanism hinders the
design of more effective KANs. As the authors of KANs highlighted, they “would
like to explore ways to restrict KANs’ hypothesis space so that they can achieve
good performance.” To address these challenges, we explore the generalization
mechanism of KANs and design more effective KANs with lower model complexity and better generalization. We define Lipschitz complexity as the first structural
measure for deep functions represented by KANs and derive novel generalization
bounds based on Lipschitz complexity, establishing a theoretical foundation for understanding their generalization behavior. To reduce Lipschitz complexity and boost
the generalization mechanism of KANs, we propose Lipschitz-Enhanced KANs
(LipKANs) by integrating the Lip layers and pioneering the L1.5 -regularization,
contributing to tighter generalization bounds. Empirical experiments validate that
the proposed LipKANs enhance the generalization mechanism of KANs when
modeling complex distributions. We hope our theoretical insights and proposed
LipKANs lay a foundation for the future development of KANs.

1

Introduction

KANs represent multivariate functions as layer-wise iterative compositions of univariate continuous
functions [Liu et al., 2025], indicating the strong expressive capacity to model complex distributions
and possessing faster neural scaling laws. The fundamental difference between KANs and existing
neural network architectures [He et al., 2016, Vaswani, 2017, Brown et al., 2020] is that KANs replace
the single activation in each layer with a family of activations. KANs demonstrate strong accuracy and
interpretability on AI + Science tasks [Shukla et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2025b], while also achieving
promising results in socio-economic tasks [Xu et al., 2024b], engineering-related tasks [Mubarak
et al., 2024, Kundu et al., 2024, Bresson et al., 2024, Carlo et al., 2024], and interpretability-driven
tasks [Galitsky, 2024]. While KANs demonstrate strong approximation capabilities and excel in
symbolic learning, their generalization does not show a significant advantage over existing models [Yu
et al., 2024, Zheng et al., 2025]. We suggest that the suboptimal generalization performance of KANs
arises from an increased hypothesis space complexity, which introduces an approximation-estimation
error trade-off: while lowering approximation error, it elevates sample complexity, thereby raising
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

