A Provable Approach for End-to-End
Safe Reinforcement Learning

Akifumi Wachi∗
Takumi Tanabe∗

Kohei Miyaguchi∗
Rei Sato∗

Youhei Akimoto†‡

∗

LY Corporation † University of Tsukuba ‡ RIKEN AIP
{akifumi.wachi, kmiyaguc, takumi.tanabe, sato.rei}@lycorp.co.jp
akimoto@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
A longstanding goal in safe reinforcement learning (RL) is a method to ensure
the safety of a policy throughout the entire process, from learning to operation.
However, existing safe RL paradigms inherently struggle to achieve this objective.
We propose a method, called Provably Lifetime Safe RL (PLS), that integrates
offline safe RL with safe policy deployment to address this challenge. Our proposed
method learns a policy offline using return-conditioned supervised learning and
then deploys the resulting policy while cautiously optimizing a limited set of
parameters, known as target returns, using Gaussian processes (GPs). Theoretically,
we justify the use of GPs by analyzing the mathematical relationship between
target and actual returns. We then prove that PLS finds near-optimal target returns
while guaranteeing safety with high probability. Empirically, we demonstrate
that PLS outperforms baselines both in safety and reward performance, thereby
achieving the longstanding goal to obtain high rewards while ensuring the safety of
a policy throughout the lifetime from learning to operation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has exhibited remarkable capabilities in a wide range of real problems,
including robotics [32], data center cooling [34], finance [23], and healthcare [60]. RL has attracted
significant attention through its successful deployment in language models [21, 38] or diffusion
models [7]. As RL becomes a core component of advanced AI systems that affect our daily lives,
ensuring the safety of these systems has emerged as a critical concern. Hence, while harnessing the
immense potential of RL, we must simultaneously address and mitigate safety concerns [4].
Safe RL [18, 20] is a fundamental and powerful paradigm for incorporating explicit safety considerations into RL. Given its wide range of promising real-world applications, safe RL naturally spans
a broad scope and involves several critical considerations in its formulation. For example, design
choices must be made regarding the desired level of safety (e.g., safety guarantees are required
in expectation or with high probability), the phase in which safety constraints are enforced (e.g.,
post-convergence or even during training), and other related aspects [27, 55].
A longstanding goal in safe RL is to develop a methodology with a safety guarantee throughout the
entire process, from learning to operation. However, existing safe RL paradigms inherently struggle
to achieve this goal. In online safe RL, where an agent learns its policy while interacting with the
environment, ensuring safety is especially challenging during the initial phases of policy learning.
While safe exploration [51], sim-to-real safe RL [24], or end-to-end safe RL [11] have been actively
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

