Discrete Diffusion Models: Novel Analysis and New
Sampler Guarantees

Yuchen Liang† , Yingbin Liang† , Lifeng Lai‡ , Ness Shroff†
†
‡
The Ohio State University
University of California, Davis

Abstract
Discrete diffusion models have recently gained significant prominence in applications involving natural language and graph data. A key factor influencing their
effectiveness is the efficiency of discretized samplers. Among these, τ -leaping
samplers have become particularly popular due to their theoretical and empirical success. However, existing theoretical analyses of τ -leaping often rely on
somewhat restrictive and difficult-to-verify regularity assumptions, and their convergence bounds contain quadratic dependence on the vocabulary size. In this work,
we introduce a new analytical approach for discrete diffusion models that removes
the need for such assumptions. For the standard τ -leaping method, we establish
convergence guarantees in KL divergence that scale linearly with vocabulary size,
improving upon prior results with quadratic dependence. Our approach is also more
broadly applicable: it provides the first convergence guarantees for other widely
used samplers, including the Euler method and Tweedie τ -leaping. Central to our
approach is a novel technique based on differential inequalities, offering a more
flexible alternative to the traditional Girsanov change-of-measure methods. This
technique may also be of independent interest for the analysis of other stochastic
processes.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling is a core component of deep learning, aiming to generate samples that closely
approximate distributions of training data. Recently, diffusion models [1, 2, 3] have gained significant
attention. These models really work well in various generative tasks, particularly in image and video
generation [4, 5]. Their effectiveness has been extensively documented in several comprehensive
surveys [6, 7, 8].
Discrete (i.e., discrete sample space) diffusion models form a specialized subclass within the broader
family of diffusion models and have gained increasing prominence in generative modeling. Similar
to their continuous (i.e., continuous sample space) counterparts, they adopt the standard diffusion
framework comprising of a forward and a reverse process. Differently, by operating over discrete
sample spaces, both processes are formulated as discrete-state Markov chains, first under discrete-time
[3] and later under continuous-time [9]. Since the seminal work [3], discrete diffusion models have
been remarkably useful for a variety of discrete-data applications, achieving excellent performance
in natural language processing (NLP) [10], graph generation [11, 12], and drug design [13]. Recent
advances, such as SEDD and RADD, have further demonstrated language generation capabilities that
rival those of traditional autoregressive models such as GPTs [10, 14].
Despite their empirical success, the theoretical understanding of discrete diffusion models remains
limited. Existing theoretical studies on discrete-state diffusion models have mainly focused on various
sampling methods. One focus has been on the random-step-size samplers, which sample both the
next-state and the transition-times in the reverse process. This includes the Gillespie’s algorithm [15]
and the uniformization algorithm [16]. Specifically, the uniformization algorithm has been analyzed
in [17, 18]. While these algorithms are able to simulate the reverse process exactly, their convergence
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

