Mitigating Intra- and Inter-modal Forgetting in
Continual Learning of Unified Multimodal Models

Xiwen Wei, Mustafa Munir, Radu Marculescu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
{xiwenwei, mmunir, radum}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Unified Multimodal Generative Models (UMGMs) unify visual understanding
and image generation within a single autoregressive framework. However, their
ability to continually learn new tasks is severely hindered by catastrophic forgetting, both within a modality (intra-modal) and across modalities (inter-modal).
While intra-modal forgetting has been studied in prior continual learning (CL)
work, inter-modal forgetting remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we identify and empirically validate this phenomenon in UMGMs and provide a theoretical explanation rooted in gradient conflict between modalities. To address
both intra- and inter-modal forgetting, we propose Modality-Decoupled Experts
(MoDE), a lightweight and scalable architecture that isolates modality-specific
updates to mitigate the gradient conflict and leverages knowledge distillation
to prevent catastrophic forgetting and preserve pre-trained capabilities. Unlike
previous CL methods that remain modality-coupled and suffer from modality
gradient conflict, MoDE explicitly decouples modalities to prevent interference.
Experiments across diverse benchmarks demonstrate that MoDE significantly
mitigates both inter- and intra-modal forgetting, outperforming prior CL baselines in unified multimodal generation settings. Codes are publicly available:
https://github.com/Christina200/MoDE-official.git.

1

Introduction

Traditional multimodal models are typically divided into two categories: multimodal understanding
(e.g. answering questions about images) and multimodal generation (e.g. generating images from
text prompts) [1, 2]. Unified Multimodal Generative Models (UMGMs) aim to integrate these
two tasks within a single framework. Recent advancements in UMGMs [3–8] have demonstrated
strong performance on a wide range of tasks, such as visual question answering (VQA), image
captioning, visual reasoning, classification, reading comprehension, and image generation. These
models typically embed multiple input types into a shared representation space and leverage one
single transformer backbone to model cross-modal interactions. Training generally follows a twostage paradigm: an initial pretraining phase focused on text–image alignment, followed by fine-tuning
for specific downstream tasks. During the second stage, instruction tuning (which fine-tunes the
model on diverse, task-specific instructions paired with expected outputs) has emerged as a widely
adopted strategy to better align model behavior with human intent [9, 10].
While UMGMs demonstrate impressive zero-shot performance on a wide range of unseen instructions,
their effectiveness is inconsistent across all tasks, particularly when the relevant task data is absent
from the pretraining corpus. Expanding the training dataset to include new task data can significantly
improve performance on those tasks. However, given the continual emergence of novel multimodal
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

