Causal-R: A Causal-Reasoning Geometry Problem
Solver for Optimized Solution Exploration

Wenjun Wu1,3 , Lingling Zhang1,3∗, Bo Zhao1,3 , Muye Huang1,4 , Qianying Wang2 , Jun Liu1,3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
2
Lenovo Research
3
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
4
Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China

Abstract
The task of geometry problem solving has been a long-standing focus in the
automated mathematics community and is drawing growing attention due to its
complexity for both symbolic and neural models. Although prior studies have
explored various effective approaches for enhancing problem solving performances,
two fundamental challenges remain unaddressed, which are essential to the application in practical scenarios. First, the multi-step reasoning gap between the initial
geometric conditions and ultimate problem goal leads to a large search space for
solution exploration. Second, obtaining multiple interpretable and shorter solutions remains an open problem. In this work, we introduce the Causal-Reasoning
Geometry Problem Solver to overcome these challenges. Specifically, the Causal
Graph Reasoning theory is proposed to perform symbolic reasoning before problem
solving. Several causal graphs are constructed according to predefined rule base,
where each graph is composed of primitive nodes, causal edges and prerequisite
edges. By applying causal graph deduction from initial conditions, the reachability
status of nodes is iteratively conveyed by causal edges until reaching the target
nodes, representing feasible causal deduction paths. In this way, the search space
of solutions is compressed from the beginning, the end and intermediate reasoning
paths, while ensuring the interpretability and variety of solutions. To achieve this,
we further propose Forward Matrix Deduction which transforms the causal graphs
into matrices and vectors, and applies matrix operations to update the status value
of reachable nodes in iterations. Finally, multiple solutions can be generated by
tracing back from the target nodes after validation. Experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method to obtain multiple shorter and interpretable solutions.

1

Introduction

Geometry Problem Solving (GPS) is a long-standing task 30, 10, 27 in the automated mathematics
problem solving community 11, 5, 28. It aims to obtain the final numerical answer with a given
geometric diagram and problem text which includes a problem goal (e.g., “Find length of AD.”),
as illustrated in an example in fig. 1 (a). In recent years, this task has attracted increasing attention
due to its challenging requirements of multiple capabilities of the model, including multi-modal
understanding, abstract geometric reasoning and mathematical computation.
Existing methods can be categorized into two main branches according to their reasoning mechanisms.
Neural-based methods 2, 3, 35 extract the multi-modal features of original geometry problem and
∗

Corresponding author. Email: nickjunwork@163.com, zhanglling@xjtu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

