AceSearcher: Bootstrapping Reasoning and Search
for LLMs via Reinforced Self-Play

Ran Xu1

Yuchen Zhuang2

Joyce C. Ho1

1

Linjun Zhang3

Zihan Dong3
Haoyu Wang4

Jonathan Wang1

Yue Yu2

Wenqi Shi5

Carl Yang1

Emory University 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 Rutgers University
4
SUNY Albany 5 UT Southwestern Medical Center
Dataset/Model: https://huggingface.co/AceSearcher
Code: https://github.com/ritaranx/AceSearcher/

Abstract
Search-augmented LLMs often struggle with complex reasoning tasks due to ineffective multi-hop retrieval and limited reasoning ability. We propose AceSearcher,
a cooperative self-play framework that trains a single large language model (LLM)
to alternate between two roles: a decomposer that breaks down complex queries
and a solver that integrates retrieved contexts for answer generation. AceSearcher
couples supervised fine-tuning on a diverse mixture of search, reasoning, and
decomposition tasks with reinforcement fine-tuning optimized for final answer
accuracy, eliminating the need for intermediate annotations. Extensive experiments
on three reasoning-intensive tasks across 10 datasets show that AceSearcher outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving an average exact match improvement of
7.6%. Remarkably, on document-level finance reasoning tasks, AceSearcher-32B
matches the performance of the giant DeepSeek-V3 model using less than 5% of
its parameters. Even at smaller scales (1.5B and 8B), AceSearcher often surpasses
existing search-augmented LLMs with up to 9× more parameters, highlighting its
exceptional efficiency and effectiveness in tackling complex reasoning tasks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in areas such as natural
language generation [65, 80, 17] and complex reasoning [26, 20]. However, they often fall short
when handling long-tailed or dynamically evolving knowledge [48]. To address these limitations, a
growing body of work has explored augmenting LLMs with external search tools that retrieve relevant
information at inference time. Search-augmented LLMs not only improve factual accuracy [2, 58],
but also facilitate efficient adaptation to new tasks and domains without costly parameter updates [78].
Despite notable advances in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [2, 39, 45, 86, 50], most existing
approaches are restricted to relatively simple questions [33, 48] solvable through single-turn retrieval.
However, real-world applications often demand more complex reasoning, requiring (i) multi-hop
retrieval to gather relevant evidence from large corpora due to the low recall of direct single-step
retrieval [83], and (ii) reasoning capability to integrate multiple pieces of information beyond span
extraction for response generation [9]. To address these challenges, prior works propose multi-step
search via iterative prompting [68, 31, 36, 42, 88], often relying on powerful, closed-source LLMs
with strong reasoning abilities. Alternatively, tree-search algorithms have been explored to improve
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

