Point Cloud Synthesis Using
Inner Product Transforms
Ernst Röell1,2,3

Bastian Rieck1,2

1

2

AIDOS Lab, University of Fribourg, Switzerland
Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Munich, Germany
3
Technical University of Munich, Germany

Abstract
Point cloud synthesis, i.e. the generation of novel point clouds from an input
distribution, remains a challenging task, for which numerous complex machine
learning models have been devised. We develop a novel method that encodes
geometrical-topological characteristics of point clouds using inner products, leading
to a highly-efficient point cloud representation with provable expressivity properties.
Integrated into deep learning models, our encoding exhibits high quality in typical
tasks like reconstruction, generation, and interpolation, with inference times orders
of magnitude faster than existing methods.

1

Introduction

Point clouds are a data modality of crucial relevance for numerous domains. While computer graphics
is the predominant application area, where point clouds are often used as precursor to more structured
representations like meshes, they also occur in higher dimensions in the form of sensor data, for
instance. However, the synthesis of hitherto-unseen point clouds from a given distribution still proves
to be a challenging task, with numerous models aiming to address it [39]. The complexity arises
because of the sparsity and ‘set-like’ structure of point clouds, making it hard to generalise existing
machine learning architectures directly. State-of-the-art methods thus typically require large amounts
of compute, exhibiting long training and inference times. With recent work [33] demonstrating
that a change of perspective—like exchanging raw coordinates for Fourier-based features—can
make comparatively simple deep-learning architectures competitive in computer-vision tasks, our
paper explores the question to what extent novel representations of point clouds can lead to gains in
computational performance without sacrificing too much quality.
To obtain such representations, we build on a multi-scale geometrical-topological descriptor [35]
based on inner products of coordinates representing a high-dimensional shape. Using suitable
approximations, this descriptor permits us to represent a point cloud as a single 2D image. Unlike
other single-view representations, however, the coordinates of the image represent a different ‘domain,’
namely geometrical-topological aspects. In fact, this mapping is computationally efficient and
injective, making it theoretically possible to reconstruct a point cloud from its descriptor (we will
demonstrate that this property also holds empirically when working with approximations). We refer to
this mapping as the Inner Product Transform (IPT) and use it for the generation of 3D point clouds.1
Our work primarily focuses on building highly-efficient models that enable real-time inference in
settings of limited computational resources while also being trainable on commodity hardware.
1

For readers familiar with computational topology, the IPT is a special case of the Euler Characteristic
Transform (ECT). Our focus on point clouds permits us to formulate the IPT without any background knowledge
in computational topology, while also resulting in substantially simplified proofs and more powerful statements
about its theoretical properties.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

