On Efficiency-Effectiveness Trade-off of
Diffusion-based Recommenders
Wenyu Mao1 , Jiancan Wu1,2∗, Guoqing Hu1 , Zhengyi Yang1 , Wei Ji3 , Xiang Wang1∗ ,
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Nanjing University

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful paradigm for generative sequential
recommendation, which typically generate next items to recommend guided by
user interaction histories with a multi-step denoising process. However, the multistep process relies on discrete approximations, introducing discretization error
that creates a trade-off between computational efficiency and recommendation
effectiveness. To address this trade-off, we propose TA-Rec, a two-stage framework
that achieves one-step generation by smoothing the denoising function during
pretraining while alleviating trajectory deviation by aligning with user preferences
during fine-tuning. Specifically, to improve the efficiency without sacrificing
the recommendation performance, TA-Rec pretrains the denoising model with
Temporal Consistency Regularization (TCR), enforcing the consistency between the
denoising results across adjacent steps. Thus, we can smooth the denoising function
to map the noise as oracle items in one step with bounded error. To further enhance
effectiveness, TA-Rec introduces Adaptive Preference Alignment (APA) that aligns
the denoising process with user preference adaptively based on preference pair
similarity and timesteps. Extensive experiments prove that TA-Rec’s two-stage
objective effectively mitigates the discretization errors-induced trade-off, enhancing
both efficiency and effectiveness of diffusion-based recommenders. Our code is
available at https://github.com/maowenyu-11/TA-Rec.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1–3] have recently shown strong potential in generative sequential recommendation
[4–6, 4, 7], owing to their remarkable ability to model complex distributions of user behaviors and
generate oracle items that best match user preferences. At the core of diffusion-based sequential
recommendation [4, 5, 7] is framing a theoretical continuous process [2, 3] which gradually reconstructs the oracle items from random noise. Typically, such theoretical continuous process (e.g.,
Stochastic Differential Equations (SDE) [2]) is realized by multi-step discrete approximations [8–11]
(e.g., Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [1]) for practical implementation: they add
noise to the ground-truth next items in the forward process and then denoise it step by step in the
reverse process with denoising models, guided by the interaction history [12].
While achieving success, this discrete approximation inherently introduces discretization errors [13]
between the practical reverse trajectory (i.e., the dashed line of discrete DDPM in Figure 1a) and the
theoretical trajectory (i.e., the solid line of continuous SDE in Figure 1a). Such discretization error is
primarily caused by high-order truncation in numerical solvers and accumulates across the multi-step
reverse process. When approximating SDE [2] with finite steps T , discretization errors grow as T
decreases [14, 15], creating an efficiency-effectiveness trade-off: increasing the number of steps T
∗

Corresponding author: wujcan@gmail.com, xiangwang@ustc.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

