Cooperative Retrieval-Augmented Generation for
Question Answering: Mutual Information Exchange
and Ranking by Contrasting Layers

Youmin Ko1 , Sungjong Seo1 , Hyunjoon Kim1,2∗
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University
2
Department of Data Science, Hanyang University
{youminkk0213, chrisseo2002, hyunjoonkim}@hanyang.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Since large language models (LLMs) have a tendency to generate factually inaccurate output, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has gained significant attention
as a key means to mitigate this downside of harnessing only LLMs. However,
existing RAG methods for simple and multi-hop question answering (QA) are still
prone to incorrect retrievals and hallucinations. To address these limitations, we
propose CoopRAG, a novel RAG framework for the QA task in which a retriever
and an LLM work cooperatively with each other by exchanging informative knowledge, and the earlier and later layers of the retriever model work cooperatively with
each other to accurately rank the retrieved documents relevant to a given query.
In this framework, we (i) unroll a question into sub-questions and a reasoning
chain in which uncertain positions are masked, (ii) retrieve the documents relevant
to the question augmented with the sub-questions and the reasoning chain, (iii)
rerank the documents by contrasting layers of the retriever, and (iv) reconstruct
the reasoning chain by filling the masked positions via the LLM. Our experiments
demonstrate that CoopRAG consistently outperforms state-of-the-art QA methods
on three multi-hop QA datasets as well as a simple QA dataset in terms of both the
retrieval and QA performances. Our code is available.2

1

Introduction

Since large language models (LLMs) have a tendency to generate factually inaccurate output, retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) has gained significant attention as a key means to mitigate this downside
of harnessing only LLMs in various tasks such as knowledge base question answering (KBQA) [4, 21,
24, 79, 87], multi-hop question answering (QA) [19, 20, 42, 86], knowledge graph completion [39, 81,
90], and recommender systems [2, 10, 71, 77]. Recent studies have made various attempts to address
the downside of LLMs: (i) applying the fine-granular late interaction scoring mechanism [32, 57]
using multi-vector representations, (ii) augmenting a query with its hypothetical answers or queryrelated concepts by employing LLMs [34, 43, 45], and (iii) allowing LLMs to either generate
summaries or a knowledge graph to connect groups of disparate but related passages, and exploring
multiple documents from the core concepts of the query in a structure-augmented manner [12, 19, 20].
However, these approaches are still prone to incorrect retrievals and hallucinations [5, 23, 26, 27, 80]
especially in simple and multi-hop QA. We hypothesize that these limitations stem from the following
three reasons.
∗
2

Corresponding author.
https://github.com/meaningful96/CoopRAG

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

