Synergy Between the Strong and the Weak:
Spiking Neural Networks are Inherently Self-Distillers

Yongqi Ding, Lin Zuo∗, Mengmeng Jing, Kunshan Yang, Pei He, Tonglan Xie
School of Information and Software Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{yqding,ksyang,202321090226,2021090907006}@std.uestc.edu.cn
linzuo@uestc.edu.cn, jingmeng1992@gmail.com

Abstract
Brain-inspired spiking neural networks (SNNs) promise to be a low-power alternative to computationally intensive artificial neural networks (ANNs), although
performance gaps persist. Recent studies have improved the performance of SNNs
through knowledge distillation, but rely on large teacher models or introduce additional training overhead. In this paper, we show that SNNs can be naturally
deconstructed into multiple submodels for efficient self-distillation. We treat each
timestep instance of the SNN as a submodel and evaluate its output confidence,
thus efficiently identifying the strong and the weak. Based on this strong and weak
relationship, we propose two efficient self-distillation schemes: (1) Strong2Weak:
During training, the stronger "teacher" guides the weaker "student", effectively improving overall performance. (2) Weak2Strong: The weak serve as the "teacher",
distilling the strong in reverse with underlying dark knowledge, again yielding
significant performance gains. For both distillation schemes, we offer flexible
implementations such as ensemble, simultaneous, and cascade distillation. Experiments show that our method effectively improves the discriminability and
overall performance of the SNN, while its adversarial robustness is also enhanced,
benefiting from the stability brought by self-distillation. This ingeniously exploits
the temporal properties of SNNs and provides insight into how to efficiently train
high-performance SNNs.

1

Introduction

Currently, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have shown outstanding performance in both computer
vision and natural language processing [1, 2]. However, ANN inference involves intensive multiplyaccumulate (MAC) operations that consume significant power, limiting its deployment in powerconstrained scenarios such as edge devices [3]. To reduce power consumption toward sustainable
artificial intelligence, brain-inspired research is being conducted in anticipation of low-power artificial
intelligence through neuromorphic computing [4].
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are considered to be a low-power alternative to ANNs by transmitting information through bionic binary spikes, avoiding heavy MAC operations, and requiring
only energy-efficient accumulation (AC) operations [3, 5]. Moreover, spiking neurons, which model
the membrane potential dynamics of biological neurons that evolve over time, are able to extract
underlying temporal features, making SNNs more favorable for exploiting their potential in temporal
tasks [6, 7]. Combined with neuromorphic chips and dynamic vision sensors, SNNs can perform
various tasks with ultra-low latency and power consumption [8]. For example, the SNN on the
Tianmouc chip requires only 0.7mW to perform typical vision tasks [9].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

