Adaptive Surrogate Gradients for Sequential
Reinforcement Learning in Spiking Neural Networks

Korneel Van den Berghe∗
Delft University of Technology
Vijay Janapa Reddi
Harvard University

Stein Stroobants
Delft University of Technology
G.C.H.E. de Croon
Delft University of Technology

Abstract
Neuromorphic computing systems are set to revolutionize energy-constrained
robotics by achieving orders-of-magnitude efficiency gains, while enabling native
temporal processing. Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) represent a promising
algorithmic approach for these systems, yet their application to complex control
tasks faces two critical challenges: (1) the non-differentiable nature of spiking
neurons necessitates surrogate gradients with unclear optimization properties,
and (2) the stateful dynamics of SNNs require training on sequences, which in
reinforcement learning (RL) is hindered by limited sequence lengths during early
training, preventing the network from bridging its warm-up period.
We address these challenges by systematically analyzing surrogate gradient slope
settings, showing that shallower slopes increase gradient magnitude in deeper
layers but reduce alignment with true gradients. In supervised learning, we find
no clear preference for fixed or scheduled slopes. The effect is much more pronounced in RL settings, where shallower slopes or scheduled slopes lead to a ×2.1
improvement in both training and final deployed performance. Next, we propose
a novel training approach that leverages a privileged guiding policy to bootstrap
the learning process, while still exploiting online environment interactions with
the spiking policy. Combining our method with an adaptive slope schedule for a
real-world drone position control task, we achieve an average return of 400 points,
substantially outperforming prior techniques, including Behavioral Cloning and
TD3BC, which achieve at most –200 points under the same conditions. This work
advances both the theoretical understanding of surrogate gradient learning in SNNs
and practical training methodologies for neuromorphic controllers demonstrated in
real-world robotic systems.

1

Introduction

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are a class of neuromorphic algorithms [1] that offer native temporal
processing and significantly outperform conventional deep learning architectures in terms of energy
efficiency across a wide range of applications [2, 3, 4]. However, training SNNs for control tasks
remains challenging due to the non-differentiable nature of spiking neurons, which complicates
gradient-based optimization. Surrogate gradients [5] are a popular solution to this issue. Gygax and
Zenke [6] demonstrate that the gradient can severely deviate from its true value depending on the
surrogate gradient chosen. Yet, how these deviations affect learning in deep or stacked architectures
remains largely unexplored.
∗

Corresponding email: korneel.vandenberghe@hotmail.be

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

