AegisGuard: RL-Guided Adapter Tuning for
TEE-Based Efficient & Secure On-Device Inference
Che Wang1,2∗, Ziqi Zhang3 , Yinggui Wang5 , Tiantong Wang2 , Yurong Hao2 ,
Jianbo Gao4 , Tao Wei5 , Yang Cao6 , Zhong Chen1 , Wei Yang Bryan Lim2
School of Computer Science, Peking University1 ,
Nanyang Technological University2 , University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign3 ,
Beijing Jiaotong University4 , Ant Group5 , Institute of Science Tokyo6
chewang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
On-device large models (LMs) reduce cloud dependency but expose proprietary
model weights to the end-user, making them vulnerable to white-box model stealing (MS) attacks. A common defense is TEE-Shielded DNN Partition (TSDP),
which places all trainable LoRA adapters (fine tuned on private data) inside a
trusted execution environment (TEE). However, this design suffers from excessive
host-to-TEE communication latency. We propose AegisGuard, a fine tuning and
deployment framework that selectively shields the MS sensitive adapters while
offloading the rest to the GPU, balancing security and efficiency. AegisGuard integrates two key components: i) RL-based Sensitivity Measurement (RSM), which
injects Gaussian noise during training and applies a lightweight reinforcement
learning to rank adapters based on their impact on model stealing; and (ii) ShieldedAdapter Compression (SAC), which structurally prunes the selected adapters to
reduce both parameter size and intermediate feature maps, further lowering TEE
computation and data transfer costs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
AegisGuard achieves black-box level MS resilience (surrogate accuracy around
39%, matching fully shielded baselines), while reducing end-to-end inference
latency by 2–3× and cutting TEE memory usage by 4× compared to state-of-the-art
TSDP methods.

1

Introduction

The rapid development of large models (LMs) [6, 10, 28] has enabled efficient on-device LM inference,
attracting attention from both academia and industry [2, 22, 39]. Particularly with parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT; e.g., Low-Rank Adaptation [15]), LMs can quickly adapt to various downstream
tasks. A popular solution to provide LM-based services is to deploy proprietary LMs fine-tuned on
private data to the users’ devices. However, such deployments introduce serious security risks, as
attackers with visibility of model parameters can exploit exposed components (white-box accessible to
the user) to effectively perform Model Stealing attacks [26], replicating and redistributing proprietary
model capabilities by a surrogate model.
Existing works proposed TEE-Shielded DNN Partition (TSDP) [45, 4, 47, 36] to enhance the security
of on-device inference. TSDP partitions the model into two parts and deploy them across TEE and
untrusted GPU for accelerating the efficiency of trusted inference. The goal of TSDP is to reduce
the workload in TEE by outsourcing the computation-intensive layers to untrusted GPUs, premised
on model security. Compared to cryptographic solutions like multi-party computation (MPC)[42]
∗

Work done at NTU

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

