Embodied Crowd Counting

Runling Long1 , Yunlong Wang1 , Jia Wan1∗, Xiang Deng1 , Xingting Zhu2 , Weili Guan1 ,
Antoni B. Chan2 , Liqiang Nie1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
City University of Hong Kong
{24b951033,220110608}@stu.hit.edu.cn
{jiawan1998,nieliqiang}@gmail.com
{dengxiang,guanweili}@hit.edu.cn
{xt.zhu}@my.cityu.edu.hk
{abchan}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Occlusion is one of the fundamental challenges in crowd counting. In the community, various data-driven approaches have been developed to address this issue, yet
their effectiveness is limited. This is mainly because most existing crowd counting
datasets on which the methods are trained are based on passive cameras, restricting
their ability to fully sense the environment. Recently, embodied navigation methods
have shown significant potential in precise object detection in interactive scenes.
These methods incorporate active camera settings, holding promise in addressing the fundamental issues in crowd counting. However, most existing methods
are designed for indoor navigation, showing unknown performance in analyzing
complex object distribution in large-scale scenes, such as crowds. Besides, most
existing embodied navigation datasets are indoor scenes with limited scale and
object quantity, preventing them from being introduced into dense crowd analysis.
Based on this, a novel task, Embodied Crowd Counting (ECC), is proposed to
count the number of persons in a large-scale scene actively. We then build up an
interactive simulator, the Embodied Crowd Counting Dataset (ECCD), which enables large-scale scenes and large object quantities. A prior probability distribution
approximating a realistic crowd distribution is introduced to generate crowds. Then,
a zero-shot navigation method (ZECC) is proposed as a baseline. This method
contains an MLLM-driven coarse-to-fine navigation mechanism, enabling active
Z-axis exploration, and a normal-line-based crowd distribution analysis method for
fine counting. Experimental results show that the proposed method achieves the
best trade-off between counting accuracy and navigation cost. Code can be found
at https://github.com/longrunling/ECC?.

1

Introduction

Crowd counting is critical for public safety and urban planning [23]. One main challenge in this
field is occlusion. It can be categorized into two aspects: overlap and invisibility. Overlap refers to
the high density of people stacked together, making it difficult to distinguish each individual from
some viewpoints, while invisibility indicates that the current camera position is obstructed, such as
being blocked by buildings, or far from the crowds so that the target cannot be detected clearly. To
summarize, these situations are caused by a poor observation point. Existing methods try to solve
these challenges from several perspectives, such as using multi-scale feature extraction [22], body
part detection [30], or multi-camera fusion [56, 57]. Datasets are also expanded for enhancing method
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

