Centralized Reward Agent for Knowledge Sharing and
Transfer in Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning

Haozhe Ma1,2 , Zhengding Luo3∗, Thanh Vinh Vo1 , Kuankuan Sima4 , Tze-Yun Leong1
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
TikTok Pte. Ltd., Singapore
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
{haozhe.ma, kuankuan_sima}@u.nus.edu,
{votv, leongty}@nus.edu.sg, luoz0021@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Reward shaping is effective in addressing the sparse-reward challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) by providing immediate feedback through auxiliary, informative
rewards. Based on the reward shaping strategy, we propose a novel multi-task
reinforcement learning framework that integrates a centralized reward agent (CRA)
and multiple distributed policy agents. The CRA functions as a knowledge pool,
aimed at distilling knowledge from various tasks and distributing it to individual
policy agents to improve learning efficiency. Specifically, the shaped rewards serve
as a straightforward metric for encoding knowledge. This framework not only
enhances knowledge sharing across established tasks but also adapts to new tasks
by transferring meaningful reward signals. We validate the proposed method on
both discrete and continuous domains, including the representative Meta-World
benchmark, demonstrating its robustness in multi-task sparse-reward settings and
its effective transferability to unseen tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant progress across various domains, such as
robotics [Kober et al., 2013], gaming [Lample and Chaplot, 2017], autonomous vehicles [Aradi,
2020], signal processing [Luo et al., 2024], and large language models [Shinn et al., 2023, Ouyang
et al., 2022]. However, environments with sparse and delayed rewards remain a significant challenge,
as the absence of immediate feedback hinders the agent from distinguishing the value of states and
leads to aimless exploration [Ladosz et al., 2022]. Reward Shaping (RS) has been proven to be
an effective technique for addressing this challenge by providing additional dense and informative
rewards [Sorg et al., 2010b,a]. Concurrently, multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) is becoming
increasingly important due to its ability to transfer knowledge across tasks. In this context, the auxiliary rewards infused with task-specific information in RS offer a straightforward means to distribute
knowledge among different tasks. Integrating RS techniques into MTRL is a highly promising and
intuitive direction to enhance the efficacy of multi-task learning systems.
Numerous MTRL algorithms for knowledge transfer have been developed. Policy distillation methods
identify and combine commonalities across different policies [Rusu et al., 2016, Teh et al., 2017,
Parisotto et al., 2016, Xu et al., 2024]; representation sharing methods extract and share the common
features or gradients among agents [Yang et al., 2020, D’Eramo et al., 2020, Sodhani et al., 2021];
and parameter sharing methods design architectural modules to reuse parameters or layers across
networks [Sun et al., 2022, Cheng et al., 2023]. Despite their potential, these strategies often face slow
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

