A RM: Adaptive Reasoning Model

Siye Wu♠

Jian Xie♡∗ Yikai Zhang♠ Aili Chen♠ Kai Zhang♡ Yu Su♡ Yanghua Xiao♠♣†
♠
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science,
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University
♡
The Ohio State University ♣ Shanghai Academy of AI for Science
siyewu24@m.fudan.edu.cn, xie.1741@osu.edu, shawyh@fudan.edu.cn

Project Page: https://team-arm.github.io/arm

Abstract
While large reasoning models demonstrate strong performance on complex tasks,
they lack the ability to adjust reasoning token usage based on task difficulty. This
often leads to the “overthinking” problem—excessive and unnecessary reasoning—
which, although potentially mitigated by human intervention to control the token
budget, still fundamentally contradicts the goal of achieving fully autonomous AI.
In this work, we propose Adaptive Reasoning Model (A RM), a reasoning model
capable of adaptively selecting appropriate reasoning formats based on the task at
hand. These formats include three efficient ones—Direct Answer, Short CoT, and
Code—as well as a more elaborate format, Long CoT. To train A RM, we introduce
Ada-GRPO, an adaptation of Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), which
addresses the format collapse issue in traditional GRPO. Ada-GRPO enables A RM
to achieve high token efficiency, reducing tokens by an average of ∼ 30%, and
up to ∼ 70%, while maintaining performance comparable to the model that relies
solely on Long CoT. Furthermore, not only does it improve inference efficiency
through reduced token generation, but it also brings a ∼ 2× speedup in training.
In addition to the default Adaptive Mode, A RM supports two additional reasoning
modes: 1) Instruction-Guided Mode, which allows users to explicitly specify the
reasoning format via special tokens—ideal when the appropriate format is known
for a batch of tasks. 2) Consensus-Guided Mode, which aggregates the outputs
of the three efficient formats and resorts to Long CoT in case of disagreement,
prioritizing performance with higher token usage.

1

Introduction

The emergence of large reasoning models (LRMs) such as OpenAI-o1 [19] and DeepSeek-R1 [11] has
led to unprecedented breakthroughs in problem-solving capabilities through test-time scaling [3; 57].
These models are designed to solve tasks using Long Chain-of-Thought (Long CoT), generating more
tokens to achieve better performance. However, because they are primarily trained on tasks requiring
intensive reasoning, LRMs tend to apply Long CoT uniformly across all tasks, resulting in the socalled “overthinking” problem [4; 42]. This issue refers to the excessive use of tokens for reasoning,
which yields no performance gains and may introduce noise that misleads the model [52; 7].
While some efforts aim to reduce token usage in LRMs, they often rely on clear estimations of the
token budget per task [1; 46] or require specialized, length-constrained model training [16]. In reality,
such estimations are not always accurate, and a more desirable solution is for models to adaptively
∗
†

Project lead. Part of the work was done at Fudan University.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

