More of the Same: Persistent Representational Harms
Under Increased Representation

Jennifer Mickel
EleutherAI
jamickel@utexas.edu

Maria De-Arteaga
Universitat Ramon Llull, ESADE
maria.dearteaga@esade.edu

Liu Leqi
UT Austin
leqiliu@utexas.edu

Kevin Tian
UT Austin
kjtian@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
To recognize and mitigate the harms of generative AI systems, it is crucial to consider whether and how different societal groups are represented by these systems.
A critical gap emerges when naively measuring or improving who is represented,
as this does not consider how people are represented. In this work, we develop
GAS(P), an evaluation methodology for surfacing distribution-level group representational biases in generated text, tackling the setting where groups are unprompted
(i.e., groups are not specified in the input to generative systems). We apply this
novel methodology to investigate gendered representations in occupations across
state-of-the-art large language models. We show that, even though the gender
distribution when models are prompted to generate biographies leads to a large
representation of women, even representational biases persist in how different genders are represented. Our evaluation methodology reveals that there are statistically
significant distribution-level differences in the word choice used to describe biographies and personas of different genders across occupations, and we show that many
of these differences are associated with representational harms and stereotypes.
Our empirical findings caution that naively increasing (unprompted) representation
may inadvertently proliferate representational biases, and our proposed evaluation
methodology enables systematic and rigorous measurement of the problem.

1

Introduction

The existence of social biases and representational harms in the outputs of language models and
generative AI systems is well documented [17, 61, 81]. As a result, a number of benchmarks and
evaluations have been created to measure social biases. These methods typically rely on templates
specifying social groups [15, 17], or sentences containing specific stereotypes [48, 49]. Although
these methods give insights into the nature of existing social biases and representational harms,
they do not provide insight into whether these social biases proliferate when social groups are not
prompted, which is troubling, as most usage of generative AI does not specify a social group. In this
work, we develop the GAS(P) evaluation methodology for surfacing representational differences in
how groups are represented in text without specifying the group in the prompt. We then apply this
evaluation methodology to the gender and occupation context to study representational harms in the
output of large language models.
Representational harms are multi-dimensional [18]. In particular, both who is represented and how
they are represented matter. This can pose challenges for bias measurement and mitigation efforts.
While a number of bias mitigation methods have been developed to address harmful social biases,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

