Replicable Online Learning
Saba Ahmadi∗
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
saba@ttic.edu
& Siddharth Bhandari
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
siddharth@ttic.edu
& Avrim Blum
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
avrim@ttic.edu

Abstract
We investigate the concept of algorithmic replicability introduced by Impagliazzo
et al. [2022], Ghazi et al. [2021], Ahn et al. [2024] in an online setting. In our
model, the input sequence received by the online learner is generated from timevarying distributions chosen by an adversary (obliviously). Our objective is to
design low-regret online algorithms that, with high probability, produce the exact same sequence of actions when run on two independently sampled input sequences generated as described above. We refer to such algorithms as adversarially replicable.
Previous works (such as Esfandiari et al. [2022]) explored replicability in the online setting under inputs generated independently from a fixed distribution; we
term this notion as iid-replicability. Our model generalizes to capture both adversarial and iid input sequences, as well as their mixtures, which can be modeled by
setting certain distributions as point-masses.
We demonstrate adversarially replicable online learning algorithms for online linear optimization and the experts problem that achieve sub-linear regret. Additionally, we propose a general framework for converting an online learner into an
adversarially replicable one within our setting, bounding the new regret in terms
of the original algorithms regret. We also present a nearly optimal (in terms of
regret) iid-replicable online algorithm for the experts problem, highlighting the
distinction between the iid and adversarial notions of replicability.
Finally, we establish lower bounds on the regret (in terms of the replicability parameter and time) that any replicable online algorithm must incur.

1

Introduction

The replicability crisis, which is pervasive across scientific disciplines, has substantial implications
for the integrity and reliability of findings. In a survey of 1,500 researchers, it was reported that
70% had attempted but failed to replicate another researchers findings [Baker, 2016]. A recent
Nature article [Ball, 2023] discusses how the replicability crisis in AI is creating a ripple effect
across numerous scientific fields, including medicine, due to AIs broad applications. This highlights
an urgent need to establish a formal framework for assessing the replicability of experiments in
machine learning.
Driven by this context, Impagliazzo et al. [2022] (see also Ghazi et al. [2021], Ahn et al. [2024])
initiate the study of reproducibility as a property of algorithms themselves, rather than the process
∗

Authors are ordered alphabetically. The second author did this work prior to joining Amazon.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

