Dynamics of Spontaneous Topic Changes in Next
Token Prediction with Self-Attention
Mumin Jia∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
York University
Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3
amyjia@yorku.ca

Jairo Diaz-Rodriguez∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
York University
Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3
jdiazrod@yorku.ca

Abstract
Human cognition is punctuated by abrupt, spontaneous shifts between topics—driven by emotional, contextual, or associative cues—a phenomenon known
as spontaneous thought in neuroscience. In contrast, self-attention-based models
rely on structured patterns over their inputs to predict each next token, lacking
spontaneity. Motivated by this distinction, we characterize spontaneous topic
changes in self-attention architectures and reveal divergences from spontaneous
human thought. First, we establish theoretical results under a simplified, singlelayer self-attention model with suitable conditions by defining a topic as a set of
Token Priority Graphs (TPGs). Specifically, we demonstrate that (1) the model
maintains the priority order of tokens related to the input topic, (2) a spontaneous
topic change can occur only if lower-priority tokens outnumber all higher-priority
tokens of the input topic, and (3) unlike human cognition, the longer context length
or the more ambiguous input topic does not increase the likelihood of spontaneous
change. Second, we empirically validate that the effect of input length or topic
ambiguity persists in modern, state-of-the-art LLMs, underscoring a fundamental
disparity between human cognition and AI behavior in the context of spontaneous
topic changes. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has explored these
questions with a focus so closely aligned to human thought.

1

Introduction

Human cognition is punctuated by abrupt, apparently unstructured topic changes, the hallmark of
spontaneous human thought, a phenomenon that has become a central topic in cognitive neuroscience
[4, 8, 9, 23, 32–34]. For example, a spontaneous shift in focus during a conversation, a sudden
leap between ideas when brainstorming, or an unexpected redirection in storytelling. These abrupt
changes may be due to an emotional connection, such as recalling reading a book during a family
vacation, where sensory details like the scent of the ocean or the warmth of the sun trigger a vivid
memory. However, LLMs shift topics in response to contextual cues in the input, rather than initiating
spontaneous topic changes on their own. They follow a structured, statistical approach, remaining on
topic unless explicit cues signal a change. Figure 1 illustrates this distinction using the first sentence
of the book “One hundred years of solitude” [11].
Our work takes initial steps toward formalizing the dynamics of spontaneous topic changes in LLMs
and analyzing how they relate to or diverge from spontaneous human thought. To this end, we ground
our theoretical analysis in a single-layer self-attention model and empirically extend it to modern
LLMs, laying the groundwork for drawing comparisons between AI models and human cognition.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

