PseuZO: Pseudo-Zeroth-Order Algorithm for Training
Deep Neural Networks
Pengyun Yue1,* , Xuanlin Yang1,5,* , Mingqing Xiao1,4 , Zhouchen Lin1,2,3,†
State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
4
Microsoft Research Asia
5
Zhongguancun Academy
yuepy@pku.edu.cn,xuanlinyang@stu.pku.edu.cn,{mingqing_xiao,zlin}@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Zeroth-order Optimization (ZO) has received wide attention in machine learning,
especially when computing full gradient is expensive or even impossible. Recently,
ZO has emerged as an important paradigm for memory-efficient fine-tuning of large
language models (LLMs), circumventing the memory overhead of backpropagation.
However, existing ZO gradient estimators exhibit dimension-dependent variance
scaling as !(d), leading to dimension-dependent convergence rates without further assumptions on the objective function, which is prohibitive for large-scale
LLM parameters. To address this problem, we present a Pseudo-Zeroth-Order
(PseuZO) framework for optimizing composite objective functions, especially
large-scale models: minx→X F(x) = Ez g → h(x; z), where h represents complex,
high-dimensional representations and g is a task-specific loss. While existing
zeroth-order methods estimate gradients with final loss functions, our PseuZO algorithm estimate the Jacobian matrix of h(x) with the model output o = h(x), and
the gradient of the loss function on model output e = ↑o g(o), and apply exponential moving average on Jacobian estimators to reduce the variance. Moreover, we
use the
to reduce memory costs. Our algorithm achieves
! sliding
" window technique #$
an O max ω1 Lε↑2 , ω1 Lϑ22 ε↑4 convergence rate, where ω1 is the effective dimension of F. Experimental results demonstrate that PseuZO outperforms MeZO
and MeZO-SVRG in classification, multiple choice and generation tasks in both
full-parameter and PEFT fine-tuning settings by boosting convergence in the early
stages of training. For instance, under the same computation time, with respect to
SST2 task, PesuZO gets 9.8% higher accuracy than MeZO (91.2% v.s. 82.4%).
With the sliding window technique, our PseuZO achieves 70% ↓ 80% memory reduction compared to FO-SGD for different model sizes as PseuZO only introduced
a small dimension-independent memory overhead, which enables efficient scaling
of the model size. The code is available at https://github.com/YangBigMn/PseuZO.

1

Introduction

Zeroth-order optimization [45, 20, 36] has served as a core technique for problems where gradient
calculations are impractical. These methods rely solely on function evaluations, making them
uniquely suited for black-box scenarios like adversarial attacks [6, 59], reinforcement learning [8, 14],
and hyperparameter tuning [23, 37]. Compared to first-order and higher-order optimization methods,
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

