AnaCP: Toward Upper-Bound Continual Learning via
Analytic Contrastive Projection

1

Saleh Momeni1 , Changnan Xiao2 , Bing Liu1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago
2
ChangnXX.github.io
{smomen3, liub}@uic.edu changnanxiao@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of class-incremental learning (CIL), a core setting
within continual learning where a model learns a sequence of tasks, each containing
a distinct set of classes. Traditional CIL methods, which do not leverage pretrained models (PTMs), suffer from catastrophic forgetting (CF) due to the need to
incrementally learn both feature representations and the classifier. The integration
of PTMs into CIL has recently led to efficient approaches that treat the PTM as
a fixed feature extractor combined with analytic classifiers, achieving state-ofthe-art performance. However, they still face a major limitation: the inability to
continually adapt feature representations to best suit the CIL tasks, leading to
suboptimal performance. To address this, we propose AnaCP (Analytic Contrastive
Projection), a novel method that preserves the efficiency of analytic classifiers while
enabling incremental feature adaptation without gradient-based training, thereby
eliminating the CF caused by gradient updates. Our experiments show that AnaCP
not only outperforms existing baselines but also achieves the accuracy level of joint
training, which is regarded as the upper bound of CIL.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) learns a sequence of tasks incrementally, where each task introduces a set
of new classes [1]. The key challenge in CL is catastrophic forgetting (CF) [2], a phenomenon
where learning new tasks degrades the performance on previously learned ones. Among CL settings,
class-incremental learning (CIL) [3] is particularly challenging as it needs to build a unified classifier
to recognize all encountered classes, without task-id information at test time. This paper focuses on
the CIL setting. Early CIL approaches typically trained models from scratch using regularization,
experience replay, or architectural modifications to mitigate CF [4, 5]. However, they fall significantly
short of joint training accuracy, which trains a model with the data from all tasks simultaneously,
representing the upper bound for CIL performance [6].
Recent CIL methods increasingly exploit pre-trained models (PTMs) to improve accuracy by leveraging their strong feature representations [7, 8, 9]. Existing PTM-based approaches for CIL can be
broadly divided into three main categories: (i) fine-tuning the PTM, either fully or through lightweight
adapter [10], (ii) optimizing learnable prompts while keeping the PTM parameters frozen [11], and
(iii) using the PTM as a fixed feature extractor paired with an analytic classifier, such as the nearest
class mean (NCM) method or more advanced variants [12, 13, 14]. We use the term analytic to
describe methods with a closed-form solution that requires no gradient-based training. The first
two groups require task-specific training, which is slow and prone to CF. The third group is highly
efficient and immune to CF because it avoids gradient-based updates.
Analytic approaches often achieve state-of-the-art performance in CIL, outperforming methods that
fine-tune the PTM or learn prompts [15, 14]. However, a major limitation of the analytic methods
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

