Learning Multi-Source and Robust Representations
for Continual Learning

Fei Ye1 , YongCheng Zhong1 , Qihe Liu1∗, Adrian G. Bors2 ,
JingLing Sun1 , RongYao Hu1 , ShiJie Zhou1
1
School of Information and Software Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York
{feiye@uestc.edu.cn, 202422090410@std.uestc.edu.cn, qiheliu@uestc.edu.cn,
adrian.bors@york.ac.uk, jlsun@uestc.edu.cn, ryhu@uestc.edu.cn, sjzhou@uestc.edu.cn}

Abstract
Plasticity and stability denote the ability to assimilate new tasks while preserving
previously acquired knowledge, representing two important concepts in continual
learning. Recent research addresses stability by leveraging pre-trained models to
provide informative representations, yet the efficacy of these methods is highly
reliant on the choice of the pre-trained backbone, which may not yield optimal
plasticity. This paper addresses this limitation by introducing a streamlined and
potent framework that orchestrates multiple different pre-trained backbones to
derive semantically rich multi-source representations. We propose an innovative
Multi-Scale Interaction and Dynamic Fusion (MSIDF) technique to process and
selectively capture the most relevant parts of multi-source features through a series
of learnable attention modules, thereby helping to learn better decision boundaries
to boost performance. Furthermore, we introduce a novel Multi-Level Representation Optimization (MLRO) strategy to adaptively refine the representation
networks, offering adaptive representations that enhance plasticity. To mitigate
over-regularization issues, we propose a novel Adaptive Regularization Optimization (ARO) method to manage and optimize a switch vector that selectively governs
the updating process of each representation layer, which promotes the new task
learning. The proposed MLRO and ARO approaches are collectively optimized
within a unified optimization framework to achieve an optimal trade-off between
plasticity and stability. Our extensive experimental evaluations reveal that the
proposed framework attains state-of-the-art performance. The source code of our
algorithm is available at https://github.com/CL-Coder236/LMSRR.

1

Introduction

To thrive in natural environments, advanced intelligent entities must possess a robust ability to
assimilate new information while retaining previously acquired critical knowledge [17]. This ability,
known as continual learning (CL), is also pivotal in artificial intelligence systems, facilitating the
deployment of numerous real-time applications such as autonomous driving and robotic navigation.
Despite the impressive performance of contemporary deep learning models on static datasets [21], they
experience substantial performance degradation in continual learning scenarios due to catastrophic
forgetting [44]. This phenomenon occurs when the neural network overwrites its parameters to
accommodate new task learning, leading to network forgetting.
∗

corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

