Enhancing Training Data Attribution with
Representational Optimization

Weiwei Sun1 Haokun Liu2 Nikhil Kandpal2 Colin Raffel2 Yiming Yang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Toronto & Vector Institute
{sunnweiwei,haokunliu412,nkandpa2,craffel}@gmail.com

Abstract
Training data attribution (TDA) methods aim to measure how training data impacts a model’s predictions. While gradient-based attribution methods, such as
influence functions, offer theoretical grounding, their computational costs make
them impractical for large-scale applications. Representation-based approaches
are far more scalable, but typically rely on heuristic embeddings that are not optimized for attribution, limiting their fidelity. To address these challenges, we
propose AirRep, a scalable, representation-based approach that closes this gap
by learning task-specific and model-aligned representations optimized explicitly
for TDA. AirRep introduces two key innovations: a trainable encoder tuned for
attribution quality, and an attention-based pooling mechanism that enables accurate
estimation of group-wise influence. We train AirRep using a ranking objective over
automatically constructed training subsets labeled by their empirical effect on target predictions. Experiments on instruction-tuned LLMs demonstrate that AirRep
achieves performance on par with state-of-the-art gradient-based approaches while
being nearly two orders of magnitude more efficient at inference time. Further
analysis highlights its robustness and generalization across tasks and models. Our
code is available at https://github.com/sunnweiwei/AirRep.

1

Introduction

The remarkable success of large language models (LLMs) has been demonstrated across a wide range
of tasks. However, a fundamental question remains open in machine learning: how does the behavior
of LLMs depend on their training data? More specifically, what training examples cause models to
generalize well—or underperform—on specific inputs or tasks? Training Data Attribution (TDA), the
process of measuring the impact of specific parts of the training data on the predictions of machine
learning models, is an important step to answering this question [1]. TDA is crucial for ensuring
transparency and accountability in AI systems by revealing how data influences model outputs.
Existing approaches to TDA can broadly be categorized as either gradient-based or representationbased. Gradient-based approaches, rooted in influence estimation [2, 3], aim to quantify the impact
of individual training points on model predictions. Their core idea is to use gradients and the
inverse Hessian of the loss function to make a first-order approximation of how a model’s predictions
would change if a certain example was removed from the training set [3]. While these methods are
theoretically well-motivated, they are typically computationally expensive and rely on assumptions of
loss convexity and model optimality — both of which are violated in modern neural networks [4, 5].
In contrast, representation-based methods estimate influence based on similarity in the representation
space. The core assumption is that training examples whose representations are close to a test input are
likely to have influenced its prediction [6]. Recent works have explored various notions of similarity
based on model hidden states [7, 6], n-gram features [8], and text embeddings [9, 10]. Compared
to gradient-based TDA, representation-based approaches are more computationally efficient and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

