PaZO: Preconditioned Accelerated Zeroth-Order
Optimization for Fine-Tuning LLMs

Hanzhen Zhao1
hzzhao@pku.edu.cn

Shihong Ding1
dingshihong@stu.pku.edu.cn

†

Cong Fang1,2
fangcong@pku.edu.cn

†

Zhouchen Lin1,2,3
zlin@pku.edu.cn
1

State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Abstract
This paper introduces PaZO, a preconditioned accelerated zeroth-order optimization
algorithm for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs). First, we theoretically
demonstrate the necessity of preconditioning in zeroth-order optimization, proving
that zeroth-order stochastic gradient descent (ZO-SGD) alone fails to achieve the
ideal convergence rate. Building on this, we propose a Preconditioned Simultaneous
Perturbation Stochastic Approximation (PSPSA) and theoretical version of PaZO,
and demonstrate that setting the order of preconditioner as −1/2 in PSPSA yields
the improved convergence rate for PaZO. Moreover, we design a practical version
of PaZO that stabilizes training via diagonal Hessian estimate and moving average
technique. Extensive experiments on diverse downstream tasks with models like
RoBERTa-large and OPT show PaZO’s effectiveness. Compared to other zerothorder baselines, PaZO achieves better performance across models and tasks. Code
is available at Code.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning pre-trained large language models (LLMs) has become one of the dominant methodologies for adapting models to specialized downstream tasks [19] and aligning them with human
instructional preferences [42]. However, as models are scaled up [1], the memory overhead extremely
increases during fine-tuning, since computing gradients during backpropagation needs to cache model
activations and historical gradients (e.g., for Adam-based optimization [28]). Parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) methods [29, 31, 23] reduce memory overhead by fine-tuning only a small number
of extra parameters but still need to cache large quantities of activations. Recently, zeroth-order
optimization algorithms (ZO) [37, 59, 58] have enabled the fine-tuning of LLMs with billions of
parameters on a single consumer-grade GPU, due to their requirement for only forward passes to
estimate gradients, without backpropagation and the storage of activations. Lightweight memory has
solidified its role as a critical methodology for fine-tuning tasks in resource-constrained scenarios.
As research on zeroth-order optimization methods for fine-tuning LLMs advances, whether preconditioning zeroth-order algorithms with higher-order information can enhance optimization efficiency
has become a pivotal challenge, since adaptive first-order optimizers such as Adam [28] and AdamW
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

