ST2360D: Spatial-to-Temporal Consistency for
Training-free 360 Monocular Depth Estimation

Zidong Cao1∗ Jinjing Zhu1∗ Hao Ai2∗ Lutao Jiang1 Yuanhuiyi Lyu1 Hui Xiong1,3†
1
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, HKUST (Guangzhou), China
2
University of Birmingham, UK
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, Hong Kong SAR, China
caozidong1996@gmail.com; jinjingzhu.mail@gmail.com;
aihao199712@gmail.com; jianglutao98@gmail.com;
ryan.lyu.mail@gmail.com; xionghui@ust.hk

Abstract
360◦ monocular depth estimation plays a crucial role in scene understanding owing
to its 180◦ × 360◦ field-of-view (FoV). To mitigate the distortions brought by
equirectangular projection, existing methods typically divide 360◦ images into
distortion-less perspective patches. However, since these patches are processed
independently, depth inconsistencies are often introduced due to scale drift among
patches. Recently, video depth estimation (VDE) models have leveraged temporal
consistency for stable depth predictions across frames. Inspired by this, we propose
to represent a 360◦ image as a sequence of perspective frames, mimicking the
viewpoint adjustments users make when exploring a 360◦ scenario in virtual reality.
Thus, the spatial consistency among perspective depth patches can be enhanced
by exploiting the temporal consistency inherent in VDE models. To this end, we
introduce a training-free pipeline for 360◦ monocular depth estimation, called
ST2 360D. Specifically, ST2 360D transforms a 360◦ image into perspective video
frames, predicts video depth maps using VDE models, and seamlessly merges these
predictions into a complete 360◦ depth map. To generate sequenced perspective
frames that align with VDE models, we propose two tailored strategies. First,
a spherical-uniform sampling (SUS) strategy is proposed to facilitate uniform
sampling of perspective views across the sphere, avoiding oversampling in polar
regions typically with limited structural details. Second, a latitude-guided scanning
(LGS) strategy is introduced to organize the frames into a coherent sequence,
starting from the equator, prioritizing low-latitude slices, and progressively moving
toward higher latitudes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ST2 360D achieves
strong zero-shot capability on several datasets, supporting resolutions up to 4K.

1

Introduction

There has been growing interest in 360◦ cameras for capturing a 180◦ × 360◦ field-of-view (FoV).
360◦ monocular depth estimation is crucial for scene understanding [1, 2] with a wide range of
applications such as autonomous driving [3, 4], virtual reality (VR) [5, 6, 7], and visual navigation [8].
The most common representation of 360◦ images is the equirectangular projection (ERP), which maps
spherical data onto a 2D plane for storage and processing. However, ERP representation introduces
spherical distortions, particularly near the poles [9], stretching visual content unevenly and degrading
the performance of perspective depth estimators when applied to 360◦ images.
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

