Reframing Gaussian Splatting Densification with
Complexity-Density Consistency of Primitives

Zhemeng Dong, Junjun Jiang∗, Youyu Chen, Jiaxin Zhang, Kui Jiang, Xianming Liu
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology

Figure 1: Comparison between vanilla 3DGS and our CDC-GS on the rendering quality and distribution of Gaussian primitives. CDC-GS allocates Gaussian primitives in a more efficient fashion,
using more primitives modeling complex region and less to model plain area, and thus significantly
improves the rendering quality with a similar level of primitive number.

Abstract
The essence of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) training is to smartly allocate Gaussian primitives, expressing complex regions with more primitives and vice versa.
Prior researches typically mark out under-reconstructed regions in a renderingloss-driven manner. However, such a loss-driven strategy is often dominated by
low-frequency regions, which leads to insufficient modeling of high-frequency
details in texture-rich regions. As a result, it yields a suboptimal spatial allocation of Gaussian primitives. This inspires us to excavate the loss-agnostic visual
prior in training views to identify complex regions that need more primitives to
model. Based on this insight, we propose Complexity-Density Consistent Gaussian
Splatting (CDC-GS), which allocates primitives based on the consistency between
visual complexity of training views and the density of primitives. Specifically,
primitives involved in rendering high visual complexity areas are categorized as
modeling high complexity regions, where we leverage the high frequency wavelet
components of training views to measure the visual complexity. And the density
of a primitive is computed with the inverse of geometric mean of its distance to
the neighboring primitives. Guided by the positive correlation between primitive
complexity and density, we determine primitives to be densified as well as pruned.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our CDC-GS surpasses the baseline methods in rendering quality by a large margin using the same amount of Gaussians.
And we provide insightful analysis to reveal that our method serves perpendicularly
to rendering loss in guiding Gaussian primitive allocation. Our implementations
are available on our project page: cdc-gs.github.io.
∗

Corresponding author. E-mail: jiangjunjun@hit.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

