FlyLoRA: Boosting Task Decoupling and Parameter
Efficiency via Implicit Rank-Wise Mixture-of-Experts

Heming Zou1∗ Yunliang Zang2∗ Wutong Xu1 Yao Zhu1 Xiangyang Ji1†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Academy of Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University
{zouhm24, xwt22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yunliangzang@tju.edu.cn, ee_zhuy@zju.edu.cn
xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is a widely used parameter-efficient fine-tuning
method for foundation models, but it suffers from parameter interference, resulting
in suboptimal performance. Although Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)-based LoRA variants show promise in mitigating intra-task correlations in single-task instruction tuning, they introduce additional router parameters and remain ineffective in multi-task
model merging where inter-task interference arises. Inspired by the fly olfactory
circuit, we propose FlyLoRA, an implicit MoE-based LoRA variant that introduces:
(1) rank-wise expert activation in the up-projection matrix, and (2) an implicit
router that unifies expert routing and down-projection, where a frozen sparse random projection matrix replaces the traditional dense trainable version. This design
resolves the trade-off between intra-task decorrelation and computational efficiency
by eliminating the need for an explicit router, while inherently mitigating intertask interference due to the orthogonality property of random matrices. Extensive
experiments across four domains—general knowledge understanding, scientific
question answering, mathematical reasoning, and code generation—demonstrate
consistent performance improvements over existing methods. Beyond empirical
gains, FlyLoRA highlights how biological structures can inspire innovations in AI
technologies. Code is available at https://github.com/gfyddha/FlyLoRA.

1

Introduction

Foundation models have demonstrated remarkable cross-domain capabilities with the scaling of
model parameters [1, 4, 15, 43, 57, 63, 64]. To enhance their performance on downstream tasks,
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) has become a typical post-training approach. However, full-parameter
fine-tuning (Full FT) incurs prohibitive computational overhead and storage costs, making customized
deployment impractical for most individual users. To address this issue, Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) [26, 27, 35, 40, 44, 47, 84, 90] has emerged as a widely adopted technique that
significantly reduces resource consumption by keeping pre-trained weights frozen while fine-tuning
only a small set of additional injected parameters.
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [27] is one of the most prominent PEFT methods. By leveraging
the intrinsic low-dimensional properties of large language models [2, 36], LoRA approximates the
parameter matrix update ∆W ∈ Rm×n as the product of two low-rank matrices, B ∈ Rm×r and
A ∈ Rr×n , where r ≪ min(m, n). This method preserves much of the capability of Full FT across
most tasks while substantially reducing both memory requirements and computational overhead.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

