Pose Splatter: A 3D Gaussian Splatting Model for
Quantifying Animal Pose and Appearance

Jack Goffinet∗ ,1 , Youngjo Min∗ ,1 , Carlo Tomasi1 , David E. Carlson1,2,3
1
Department of Computer Science
2
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
3
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
{jack.goffinet, youngjo.min, tomasi, david.carlson} @duke.edu,

Abstract
Accurate and scalable quantification of animal pose and appearance is crucial for
studying behavior. Current 3D pose estimation techniques, such as keypoint- and
mesh-based techniques, often face challenges including limited representational detail, labor-intensive annotation requirements, and expensive per-frame optimization.
These limitations hinder the study of subtle movements and can make large-scale
analyses impractical. We propose Pose Splatter, a novel framework leveraging
shape carving and 3D Gaussian splatting to model the complete pose and appearance of laboratory animals without prior knowledge of animal geometry, per-frame
optimization, or manual annotations. We also propose a rotation-invariant visual
embedding technique for encoding pose and appearance, designed to be a plug-in
replacement for 3D keypoint data in downstream behavioral analyses. Experiments
on datasets of mice, rats, and zebra finches show Pose Splatter learns accurate 3D
animal geometries. Notably, Pose Splatter represents subtle variations in pose,
provides better low-dimensional pose embeddings over state-of-the-art as evaluated by humans, and generalizes to unseen data. By eliminating annotation and
per-frame optimization bottlenecks, Pose Splatter enables analysis of large-scale,
longitudinal behavior needed to map genotype, neural activity, and behavior at high
resolutions.

1

Introduction

The study of animal behavior is a central focus in neuroscience research, as it provides essential
context for understanding neural and physiological processes. In particular, accurate capture of 3D
pose allows researchers to study important elements of animal behavior including walking, balance,
and interaction with the environment [38]. These elements are essential for detecting small behavioral
changes associated with neurological diseases or therapies [62].
Deep learning methods originally developed for 3D human pose estimation from images [4, 46, 21]
have inspired and driven dramatic advances in 3D animal shape and pose reconstruction as well [83,
45, 25, 75, 1, 5]. These methods are most often based on either keypoints or meshes.
Keypoint-based methods [45, 25, 12, 18, 14] are straightforward to implement and relatively efficient
computationally. They triangulate a set of anatomical points (e.g., joints, wing edges, or tail tips)
across multiple camera views to reconstruct their 3D positions. However, each keypoint must be
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

