UltraLED: Learning to See Everything in
Ultra-High Dynamic Range Scenes

Yuang Meng∗ Xin Jin∗ Lina Lei

Chun-Le Guo† Chongyi Li

VCIP, CS, Nankai University
https://srameo.github.io/projects/ultraled

Abstract
Ultra-high dynamic range (UHDR) scenes exhibit significant exposure disparities
between bright and dark regions. Such conditions are commonly encountered
in nighttime scenes with light sources. Even with standard exposure settings,
a bimodal intensity distribution with boundary peaks often emerges, making it
difficult to preserve both highlight and shadow details simultaneously. RGB-based
bracketing methods can capture details at both ends using short-long exposure pairs,
but are susceptible to misalignment and ghosting artifacts. We found that a shortexposure image already retains sufficient highlight detail. The main challenge of
UHDR reconstruction lies in denoising and recovering information in dark regions.
In comparison to the RGB images, RAW images, thanks to their higher bit depth
and more predictable noise characteristics, offer greater potential for addressing
this challenge. This raises a key question: can we learn to see everything in UHDR
scenes using only a single short-exposure RAW image? In this study, we rely solely
on a single short-exposure frame, which inherently avoids ghosting and motion
blur, making it particularly robust in dynamic scenes. To achieve that, we introduce
UltraLED, a two-stage framework that performs exposure correction via a ratio
map to balance dynamic range, followed by a brightness-aware RAW denoiser
to enhance detail recovery in dark regions. To support this setting, we design a
9-stop bracketing pipeline to synthesize realistic UHDR images and contribute a
corresponding dataset based on diverse scenes, using only the shortest exposure as
input for reconstruction. Extensive experiments show that UltraLED significantly
outperforms existing single-frame approaches. Our code and dataset are made
publicly available at https://srameo.github.io/projects/ultraled.

1

Introduction

UHDR scenes are common in daily life, such as night streets illuminated by headlights and streetlights,
or indoor environments with bright window light and dim interiors. The extreme contrast in these
scenes exceeds the capacity of conventional cameras in a single exposure, often resulting in bimodal
intensity distributions, where highlight and shadow regions form separate peaks with little midtone.
This phenomenon makes it difficult for cameras to retain details across the full brightness range, often
causing loss of visual information and reduced image fidelity.
Recent methods often use bracketing [17, 14, 56, 7, 36] to capture a sequence of exposures ranging
from short to long. Nevertheless, this kind of approach inherently suffers from inter-frame motion,
resulting in misalignment and ghosting artifacts that degrade reconstruction quality. Some generative
approaches [30] hallucinate missing highlights from single long-exposure input (i.e., Fig. 1(a)), yet
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
C. L. Guo is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

