Spike-timing-dependent Hebbian learning
as noisy gradient descent

Niklas Dexheimer1∗ Sascha Gaudlitz2∗ Johannes Schmidt-Hieber1
1
University of Twente 2 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
{n.dexheimer, a.j.schmidt-hieber}@utwente.nl sascha.gaudlitz@hu-berlin.de

Abstract
Hebbian learning is a key principle underlying learning in biological neural networks. We relate a Hebbian spike-timing-dependent plasticity rule to noisy gradient descent with respect to a non-convex loss function on the probability simplex.
Despite the constant injection of noise and the non-convexity of the underlying
optimization problem, one can rigorously prove that the considered Hebbian learning dynamic identiﬁes the presynaptic neuron with the highest activity and that the
convergence is exponentially fast in the number of iterations. This is non-standard
and surprising as typically noisy gradient descent with ﬁxed noise level only converges to a stationary regime where the noise causes the dynamic to ﬂuctuate
around a minimiser.

1

Introduction

Hebbian learning is a fundamental concept in computational neuroscience,
dating back to Hebb [16]. In this work, we provide a rigorous analysis of a
x
Hebbian spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) rule. Those are learning
w
rules for the synaptic strength parameters that only depend on the spike times
w
x
y
of the involved neurons. More precisely, we consider a neural network composed of d presynaptic/input neurons, which are connected to one postsynapw
..
.
tic/output neuron. The presynaptic neurons communicate with the postsynapx
tic neuron by sending spike sequences, the so-called spike-trains. Reweighted
by synaptic strength parameters w1 , . . . , wd ≥ 0, they contribute to the postInput
Output
synaptic membrane potential. Whenever the postsynaptic membrane potential Neurons
Neuron
exceeds a threshold, the postsynaptic neuron emits a spike, and the membrane
potential is reset to zero. Experiments have shown the following stylised facts, Figure 1: Neural
which lie at the core of Hebbian learning based on spikes: (1) Locality: The network with a sinchange of the synaptic weight wi depends only on the spike-train of neuron i gle output neuron
and the postsynaptic spike-train. (2) Spike-timing: The change of the synaptic
weight wi depends on the relative timing of presynaptic spikes of neuron i and
of the postsynaptic neuron. More precisely, a pre-post spike sequence tends to increase wi , whereas
a post-pre sequence tends to decrease wi . We refer to Morrison et al. [28] for a more comprehensive
list of experimental results on STDP rules.
1

1

2

2

d

d

Hebbian learning rules are well-studied if instead of the precise timings of pre- and postsynaptic
spikes, only the mean ﬁring rates are taken into account. These rate-based models exhibit many
desirable properties, including performing streaming PCA [23, 19] and receptive ﬁeld development
[13, Section 11.1.4]. Much less is known if the precise timing of pre- and postsynaptic spikes is
considered, since the intrinsic randomness of the dynamics complicates the mathematical analysis.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

