Improved Algorithms for Fair Matroid
Submodular Maximization
Sherry Sarkar∗
Carnegie Mellon University
sherrys@andrew.cmu.edu

Sepideh Mahabadi
Microsoft Research
smahabadi@microsoft.com

Jakub Tarnawski
Microsoft Research
jakub.tarnawski@microsoft.com

Abstract
Submodular maximization subject to matroid constraints is a central problem with
many applications in machine learning. As algorithms are increasingly used in
decision-making over datapoints with sensitive attributes such as gender or race, it
is becoming crucial to enforce fairness to avoid bias and discrimination. Recent
work has addressed the challenge of developing efficient approximation algorithms
for fair matroid submodular maximization. However, the best algorithms known so
far are only guaranteed to satisfy a relaxed version of the fairness constraints that
loses a factor 2, i.e., the problem may ask for ℓ elements with a given attribute, but
the algorithm is only guaranteed to find ⌊ℓ/2⌋. In particular, there is no provable
guarantee when ℓ = 1, which corresponds to a key special case of perfect matching.
In this work, we achieve a new trade-off via an algorithm that gets arbitrarily close
to full fairness. Namely, for any constant ε > 0, we give a constant-factor approximation to fair monotone matroid submodular maximization that in expectation
loses only a factor (1 − ε) in the lower-bound fairness constraint. Our empirical
evaluation on a standard suite of real-world datasets – clustering, recommendation,
and coverage tasks – demonstrates the practical effectiveness of our methods.
The
code
for
the
paper
is
available
fair-matroid-submodular-neurips2025.

1

at

https://github.com/dj3500/

Introduction

Machine learning is increasingly deployed in high-stakes decision-making, raising concerns about
the propagation of bias and unfairness in automated systems. These challenges are especially acute
in domains such as education, law enforcement, hiring, and credit [MMD16; Whi22; Eur22]. In
response, a growing body of research has focused on developing algorithms that incorporate fairness
constraints for core problems including clustering [CKLV17], data summarization [CKSDKV18],
classification [ZVGG17], voting [CHV18], and ranking [CSV18].
This paper studies fairness in the context of monotone submodular maximization subject to matroid
constraints. Submodular functions, which capture the principle of diminishing returns, are fundamental to a range of machine learning applications such as recommender systems [EG11], feature
selection [DK11], active learning [GK11], and data summarization [LB11]. Matroids provide a
general framework for modeling independence constraints, encompassing cardinality, partition, graph
connectivity, and linear independence constraints.
∗

Part of this work was done while an intern at Microsoft Research.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

