An Efficient Local Search Approach for Polarized
Community Discovery in Signed Networks

Linus Aronsson
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology &
University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
linaro@chalmers.se

Morteza Haghir Chehreghani
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology &
University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
morteza.chehreghani@chalmers.se

Abstract
Signed networks, where edges are labeled as positive or negative to represent
friendly or antagonistic interactions, provide a natural framework for analyzing
polarization, trust, and conflict in social systems. Detecting meaningful group
structures in such networks is crucial for understanding online discourse, political
divisions, and trust dynamics. A key challenge is to identify communities that
are internally cohesive and externally antagonistic, while allowing for neutral or
unaligned vertices. In this paper, we propose a method for identifying k polarized
communities that addresses a major limitation of prior methods: their tendency to
produce highly size-imbalanced solutions. We introduce a novel optimization objective that avoids such imbalance. In addition, it is well known that approximation
algorithms based on local search are highly effective for clustering signed networks
when neutral vertices are not allowed. We build on this idea and design the first
local search algorithm that extends to the setting with neutral vertices while scaling
to large networks. By connecting our approach to block-coordinate Frank-Wolfe
optimization, we prove a linear convergence rate, enabled by the structure of our
objective. Experiments on real-world and synthetic datasets demonstrate that our
method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in solution quality, while
remaining competitive in computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Signed networks extend traditional graph representations by associating each edge with a positive or
negative number, indicating friendly or antagonistic relationships. Originating from studies on social
dynamics in the 1950s [22], signed networks introduce fundamental differences in graph structure
that make many algorithms designed for unsigned networks inapplicable [42, 6, 44]. These challenges
have fueled extensive research in recent years, leading to advances in signed network embeddings,
signed clustering, and signed link prediction. We refer to the survey by [42] for a comprehensive
review of these methods. Most relevant to this paper is the problem of signed clustering, which
we split into two categories: (i) signed network partitioning (SNP), and (ii) polarized community
discovery (PCD). The latter is the problem studied in this paper.
The goal of signed clustering is to identify k clusters where intra-cluster similarity is maximized
(predominantly positive) and inter-cluster similarity is minimized (predominantly negative). This
problem has numerous real-world applications [42], particularly in social networks, where vertices
represent individuals and edges capture friendly or antagonistic relationships (e.g., shared or opposing
political views). Detecting conflicting groups in such networks is crucial for analyzing polarization
[1, 47, 45], echo chambers [19, 17], and the spread of misinformation [41, 13, 46].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

