Subsampled Ensemble Can Improve Generalization
Tail Exponentially

Huajie Qian
DAMO Academy
Alibaba Group
Bellevue, WA 98004
h.qian@alibaba-inc.com

Donghao Ying
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
donghaoy@berkeley.edu

Henry Lam
IEOR Department
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
henry.lam@columbia.edu

Wotao Yin
DAMO Academy
Alibaba Group
Bellevue, WA 98004
wotao.yin@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Ensemble learning is a popular technique to improve the accuracy of machine
learning models. It traditionally hinges on the rationale that aggregating multiple
weak models can lead to better models with lower variance and hence higher
stability, especially for discontinuous base learners. In this paper, we provide
a new perspective on ensembling. By selecting the most frequently generated
model from the base learner when repeatedly applied to subsamples, we can attain
exponentially decaying tails for the excess risk, even if the base learner suffers from
slow (i.e., polynomial) decay rates. This tail enhancement power of ensembling
applies to base learners that have reasonable predictive power to begin with and is
stronger than variance reduction in the sense of exhibiting rate improvement. We
demonstrate how our ensemble methods can substantially improve out-of-sample
performances in a range of numerical examples involving heavy-tailed data or
intrinsically slow rates.

1

Introduction

Ensemble learning [17, 65] is a class of methods designed to improve the accuracy of machine
learning models by combining multiple models, known as “base learners”, through aggregation
techniques such as averaging or majority voting. In the existing literature, ensemble methods—most
notably bagging [8] and boosting [24]—are primarily justified based on their ability to reduce bias
and variance or improve model stability. This justification has been shown to be particularly relevant
for certain U-statistics [13] and models with hard-thresholding rules, such as decision trees [9, 19].
In contrast to this traditional understanding, we present a novel perspective on ensemble learning,
demonstrating its capability to achieve a significantly stronger effect than variance reduction: By
suitably selecting the best base learners trained on random subsamples, ensembling leads to exponentially decaying excess risk tails. Specifically, for general stochastic optimization problems
that suffer from a slow (polynomial) decay in excess risk tails, ensembling can reduce these tails
to an exponential decay rate, a substantial improvement beyond the constant-factor gains typically
exhibited by variance reduction.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

