N AUTILUS
: A Large Multimodal Model for
Underwater Scene Understanding
Wei Xu1∗ , Cheng Wang1∗ , Dingkang Liang1 , Zongchuang Zhao1 ,
Xingyu Jiang1 , Peng Zhang2 , Xiang Bai1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
National University of Defense Technology
{wxu2023, cwang666, dkliang, xbai}@hust.edu.cn

Coarse & Fine-grained Classification
Identify the object
inside the specified
regression box.

Counting

VQA

Check the number of
fish in the image.

Identify the taxonomic class
of the fish shown in
the image.

“43”

“Actinopteri”

“corals”

Detection

Grounding

Detect all cuttlefish objects.

Outline the descripted region.

Q: What is on the sea floor?
A: “Coral and rocks.”
Q: What color are the fishes?
A: “Yellow and silver.”
Q: Is the water bright or dim?
A: “Dim and blue.”

Region & Image Caption

A squid swimming
in the water, has
its fins spread out.

Can you give a description of
this image?
Describe this
region.
“Two divers in scuba gear are
swimming with fish.”

“Two scuba divers swim near
a coral reef with many small,
silver fish surrounding them.
Bright coral and sea plants
decorate the ocean floor.”

Figure 1: The underwater environment presents a visually rich and dynamically evolving landscape.
NAUTILUS addresses eight diverse underwater tasks, encompassing coarse-grained classification,
fine-grained classification, counting, visual question answering (VQA), detection, grounding, region
caption, and image caption, enabling comprehensive understandings across multiple granularities.

Abstract
Underwater exploration offers critical insights into our planet and attracts increasing attention for its broader applications in resource exploration, national security,
etc. We study the underwater scene understanding methods, which aim to achieve
automated underwater exploration. The underwater scene understanding task demands multi-task perceptions from multiple granularities. However, the absence of
large-scale underwater multi-task instruction-tuning datasets hinders the progress
of this research. To bridge this gap, we construct NautData, a dataset containing
1.45 M image-text pairs supporting eight underwater scene understanding tasks. It
enables the development and thorough evaluation of the underwater scene understanding models. Underwater image degradation is a widely recognized challenge
that interferes with underwater tasks. To improve the robustness of underwater
scene understanding, we introduce physical priors derived from underwater imaging models and propose a plug-and-play vision feature enhancement (VFE) module,
which explicitly restores clear underwater information. We integrate this module
into renowned baselines LLaVA-1.5 and Qwen2.5-VL and build our underwater
LMM, NAUTILUS. Experiments conducted on the NautData and public underwater
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

