Statistical inference for Linear Stochastic
Approximation with Markovian Noise

Sergey Samsonov
HSE University
svsamsonov@hse.ru

Marina Sheshukova
HSE University
msheshukova@hse.ru

Eric Moulines
Ecole Polytechnique,
MBZUAI
eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu

Alexey Naumov
HSE University,
Steklov Mathematical Institute
of Russian Academy of Sciences
anaumov@hse.ru

Abstract
In this paper we derive non-asymptotic Berry-Esseen bounds for Polyak-Ruppert
averaged iterates of the Linear Stochastic Approximation (LSA) algorithm driven
by the Markovian noise. Our analysis yields O(n−1/4 ) convergence rates to
the Gaussian limit in the Kolmogorov distance. We further establish the nonasymptotic validity of a multiplier block bootstrap procedure for constructing the
confidence intervals, guaranteeing consistent inference under Markovian sampling.
Our work provides the first non-asymptotic guarantees on the rate of convergence
of bootstrap-based confidence intervals for stochastic approximation with Markov
noise. Moreover, we recover the classical rate of order O(n−1/8 ) up to logarithmic
factors for estimating the asymptotic variance of the iterates of the LSA algorithm.

1

Introduction

Stochastic approximation (SA) has become foundational to modern machine learning, especially its
reinforcement learning (RL) domain. Many classical RL algorithms, including Q-learning [80, 76],
the actor–critic algorithm [35], and policy evaluation algorithms, such as temporal difference (TD)
learning [76] are special instances of SA. Recent research has extensively studied both the asymptotic
[14] and non-asymptotic behavior [49] of these algorithms. It is important not only to establish the
convergence of SA estimators, but also to quantify their uncertainty, which is typically done through
the asymptotic normality of corresponding estimates, see [57, 46]. Recent works have focused on
deriving non-asymptotic convergence rates for SA methods [69, 67, 82]. Notably, most existing
results consider settings with independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) noise. In contrast,
many practical SA applications involve dependent noise, often forming a Markov chain. This
additionally complicates the problem. Indeed, even the problem of deriving precise Berry–Esseen
type convergence rates for additive functionals of Markov chains is challenging compared to i.i.d.
setting, where quantitative results are well-established, starting from Bentkus’ influential work [7].
Asymptotic normality of SA estimates is particularly important in practice, as it allows one to
construct approximate confidence intervals for the parameters of interest. Different approaches either
directly utilize the asymptotic normality and aim to estimate the asymptotic covariance matrix directly
(the plug-in or batch-mean methods, see [17, 15, 63]), or rely on the non-parametric methods, based
on the bootstrap [27, 64]. When the latter approach is applied to the dependent observations, standard
bootstrap methods need to be carefully adjusted to account for the dependence structure, see [29, 42].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

