K EY D IFF: Key Similarity-Based KV Cache Eviction
for Long-Context LLM Inference in
Resource-Constrained Environments
Junyoung Park∗ Dalton Jones Matthew J Morse
Raghavv Goel Mingu Lee Chris Lott
Qualcomm AI Research
{junpark,daltjone,mattmors,raghgoel,mingul,clott}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
We demonstrate that geometrically distinctive keys during LLM inference tend
to have high attention scores. Based on the phenomenon we propose K EY D IFF,
a training-free KV cache eviction method based solely on key similarity. Unlike
other KV cache eviction methods, K EY D IFF can process arbitrarily long prompts
within strict resource constraints and efficiently generate responses. We provide
a theoretical basis for K EY D IFF by relating key diversity with attention scores.
These results imply K EY D IFF can efficiently identify the most important tokens
to retain. Notably K EY D IFF does not rely on attention scores, allowing the use
of optimized attention mechanisms like FlashAttention. Under a strict memory
allowance, we demonstrate the effectiveness of K EY D IFF for the Llama and Qwen
model families by observing a performance gap of less than 0.04% with 8K cache
budget (∼ 23% KV cache reduction) from the non-evicting baseline on LongBench
for Llama 3.1-8B and Llama 3.2-3B. We also observe near baseline performance for
Deepseek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B on the Math500 reasoning benchmark and decrease
end-to-end inference latency by up to 30% compared to the other token-eviction
methods.

1

Introduction

Key-Value (KV) caching is a standard technique to accelerate large language model (LLM) inference
that reuses key and value states (KVs) from previously processed tokens, enabling efficient autoregressive generation. This is crucial for long-context applications such as document summarization, code
generation, question answering [7, 25, 31, 10], retrieval augmented generation [19] and reasoning
[34, 17, 41]. However, the memory footprint of the stored KV cache grows linearly with input length,
which becomes a bottleneck in memory-constrained environments.
This challenge is particularly acute for LLM inference on edge device, where compute, memory, and
power resources are limited [3, 22, 32, 36]. While KV cache eviction policies have been proposed
to bound memory overhead by removing unimportant KVs (often measured by attention scores)
[35, 24, 43], they typically process the entire prompt at once and violate memory constraints during
intermediate computation.
To enforce strict memory bounds throughout the prompt prefill and token generation inference phases,
we adopt a block-wise inference strategy: the input prompt is divided into smaller blocks which are
processed sequentially by the model, similar to [18, 1, 37]. After processing each block, we evict
some of the cached KVs by according to an eviction policy that scores each KV, as illustrated in
Figure 1. Unlike previous approaches that apply eviction after processing the entire prompt, this
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

