VT-FSL: Bridging Vision and Text with LLMs for
Few-Shot Learning

Wenhao Li1, 2 , Qiangchang Wang1∗ , Xianjing Meng3 , Zhibin Wu1 , Yilong Yin1∗
1
School of Software, Shandong University 2 Shenzhen Loop Area Institute
3
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Shandong University of Finance and Economics
{wenhao.li, zhibinwu}@mail.sdu.edu.cn,
rongmengyuan@gmail.com, {qiangchang.wang, ylyin}@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to recognize novel concepts from only a few labeled support samples. Recent studies enhance support features by incorporating
additional semantic information (e.g., class descriptions) or designing complex
semantic fusion modules. However, these methods still suffer from hallucinating semantics that contradict the visual evidence due to the lack of grounding in
actual instances, resulting in noisy guidance and costly corrections. To address
these issues, we propose a novel framework, bridging Vision and Text with LLMs
for Few-Shot Learning (VT-FSL), which constructs precise cross-modal prompts
conditioned on Large Language Models (LLMs) and support images, seamlessly integrating them through a geometry-aware alignment mechanism. It mainly consists
of Cross-modal Iterative Prompting (CIP) and Cross-modal Geometric Alignment
(CGA). Specifically, the CIP conditions an LLM on both class names and support
images to generate precise class descriptions iteratively in a single structured reasoning pass. These descriptions not only enrich the semantic understanding of
novel classes but also enable the zero-shot synthesis of semantically consistent
images. The descriptions and synthetic images act respectively as complementary
textual and visual prompts, providing high-level class semantics and low-level
intra-class diversity to compensate for limited support data. Furthermore, the CGA
jointly aligns the fused textual, support, and synthetic visual representations by
minimizing the kernelized volume of the 3-dimensional parallelotope they span.
It captures global and nonlinear relationships among all representations, enabling
structured and consistent multimodal integration. The proposed VT-FSL method
establishes new state-of-the-art performance across ten diverse benchmarks, including standard, cross-domain, and fine-grained few-shot learning scenarios. Code is
available at https://github.com/peacelwh/VT-FSL.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in computer vision [1–3] and natural language
processing [4] thanks to the availability of large-scale annotated datasets. However, collecting
such data is often expensive or infeasible in many real-world scenarios [5–10]. Few-shot learning
(FSL) [11] aims to address this challenge by enabling models to generalize from only a few labeled
samples.
In FSL, the support set provides N novel classes, each with K labeled samples. The model learned
from the support set is required to classify test samples from the query set. Among various approaches,
metric-based methods [11–22] are widely adopted due to their superior scalability and performance.
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

