Memory by accident: a theory of learning as a
byproduct of network stabilization

Basile Confavreux
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
basile.confavreux@gmail.com

William Dorrell
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London

Nishil Patel
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London

Andrew Saxe
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London

Abstract
Synaptic plasticity is widely considered to be crucial to the brain’s ability to learn
throughout life. Decades of theoretical work have therefore been invested in
deriving and designing biologically plausible learning rules capable of granting
various memory abilities to neural networks. Most of these theoretical approaches
optimize directly for a desired memory function; but this procedure can lead to
complex, finely-tuned rules, rendering them brittle to perturbations and difficult
to implement in practice. Instead, we build on recent work that automatically
discovers large numbers of candidate plasticity rules operating in recurrent spiking
neural networks. Surprisingly, despite the fact that these rules are selected solely
to achieve network stabilization, we observe across a range of network models—
feedforward, recurrent; rate and spiking—that almost all these rules endow the
network with simple forms of memory such as familiarity detection - seemingly
by accident. To understand this phenomenon, we study an analytic toy model. We
observe that memory arises from the degeneracy of weight matrices that stabilize
a network: where the network lands in this space of stable weights depends on
its past inputs—that is, memory. Even simple Hebbian plasticity rules can utilize
this degeneracy, creating a zoo of memory abilities with various lifetimes. In
practice, the larger the network and the more co-active plasticity rules in the
system, the stronger the memory-by-accident phenomenon becomes. Overall, our
findings suggest that activity-silent memory is a near-unavoidable consequence of
stabilization. Simple forms of memory, such as familiarity or novelty detection,
appear to be widely available resources for plastic brain networks, suggesting
that they could form the raw materials that were later sculpted into higher-order
cognitive abilities.

1

Introduction

Understanding how the brain orchestrates its plastic synapses is a holy grail of neuroscience, a
potential stepping stone on the way to generalist models of brain function. Yet, despite concerted
effort, empirical plasticity data remains scarce, largely due to the difficulty of recording synapses
in vivo during learning. Consequently, theory and computation have played an out-sized role in
developing and testing plasticity hypotheses [1]. Most theories derive their proposed learning rules by
optimizing for some reasonable neural goals; for a memory system these might include the capacity,
reliability or decodability of memories, while enforcing biological plausibility constraints such as
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

