Tail-Optimized Caching for LLM Inference

Wenxin Zhang
Columbia Business School
wz2574@columbia.edu

Yueying Li
Cornell University, Department of Computer Science
yl3469@cornell.edu

Ciamac C. Moallemi
Columbia Business School
ciamac@gsb.columbia.edu

Tianyi Peng
Columbia Business School
tp2845@columbia.edu

Abstract
Prompt caching is critical for reducing latency and cost in LLM inference—OpenAI
and Anthropic report up to 50–90% cost savings through prompt reuse. Despite
its widespread success, little is known about what constitutes an optimal prompt
caching policy, particularly when optimizing tail latency—a metric of central
importance to practitioners. The widely used Least Recently Used (LRU) policy
can perform arbitrarily poor on this metric, as it is oblivious to the heterogeneity
of conversation lengths. To address this gap, we propose Tail-Optimized LRU,
a simple two-line modification that reallocates KV cache capacity to prioritize
high-latency conversations by evicting cache entries that are unlikely to affect
future turns. Though the implementation is simple, we prove its optimality under a
natural stochastic model of conversation dynamics, providing the first theoretical
justification for LRU in this setting—a result that may be of independent interest to
the caching community. Experimentally, on real conversation data WildChat [Zhao
et al., 2024], Tail-Optimized LRU achieves up to 27.5% reduction in P90 tail Time
to First Token latency and 23.9% in P95 tail latency compared to LRU, along with
up to 38.9% decrease in SLO violations of 200ms. We believe this provides a
practical and theoretically grounded option for practitioners seeking to optimize
tail latency in real-world LLM deployments.

1

Introduction

Prompt Caching is Essential. AI capabilities have exploded in recent years, and so has the demand.
By December 2024, ChatGPT handled 1 billion user messages every day with 300 million weekly
active users [OpenAI Newsroom, 2024]. To efficiently use scarce and costly GPU resources, prompt
caching was proposed [Gim et al., 2024]: it caches the KV cache of existing queries, allowing a
new query to skip some computation by reusing the KV cache it shares with existing queries [vLLM
Team, 2025]. Prompt caching can reduce prefill computation thus Time to First Token (TTFT).
This technique has been adopted by OpenAI and Anthropic, both reporting a significant amount
(50-90%) of latency and cost reductions [OpenAI, 2024, Anthropic, 2024]. Despite the practical
impact of prompt caching, little is known about how much existing caching policies—such as the
Least Recently Used (LRU) policy—can be improved upon with respect to key metrics in LLM
inference systems, which is the main motivation of this work.
Challenges of Optimizing Tail Latency. One of such key metrics is tail latency. In real-time
user-facing applications, companies care about high-percentile response time, e.g., 95% of requests
complete within 200 ms. In LLM conversation-based applications, users arrive to request services
through an alternating sequence of prompts and responses that we call turns. Each prompt, along with
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

