DeepASA: An Object-Oriented Multi-Purpose
Network for Auditory Scene Analysis

Dongheon Lee, Younghoo Kwon, Jung-Woo Choi
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{donghen0115, k0hoo, jwoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose DeepASA, a multi-purpose model for auditory scene analysis that
performs multi-input multi-output (MIMO) source separation, dereverberation,
sound event detection (SED), audio classification, and direction-of-arrival estimation (DoAE) within a unified framework. DeepASA is designed for complex
auditory scenes where multiple, often similar, sound sources overlap in time and
move dynamically in space. To achieve robust and consistent inference across
tasks, we introduce an object-oriented processing (OOP) strategy. This approach
encapsulates diverse auditory features into object-centric representations and refines them through a chain-of-inference (CoI) mechanism. The pipeline comprises
a dynamic temporal kernel-based feature extractor, a transformer-based aggregator, and an object separator that yields per-object features. These features feed
into multiple task-specific decoders. Our object-centric representations naturally
resolve the parameter association ambiguity inherent in traditional track-wise
processing. However, early-stage object separation can lead to failure in downstream ASA tasks. To address this, we implement temporal coherence matching
(TCM) within the chain-of-inference, enabling multi-task fusion and iterative refinement of object features using estimated auditory parameters. We evaluate
DeepASA on representative spatial audio benchmark datasets, including ASA2,
MC-FUSS, and STARSS23. Experimental results show that our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance across all evaluated tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness in both source separation and auditory parameter estimation under diverse spatial auditory scenes. The demo video, samples and code are available at
https://huggingface.co/spaces/donghoney22/DeepASA.

1

Introduction

Auditory scene analysis (ASA) seeks to extract information about individual sound sources from
complex auditory environments [1]. This includes identifying the class of each source, its onset and
offset times, and its direction of arrival (DoA) [2]. In humans, ASA is facilitated by the brain’s ability
to organize sound into perceptual streams by integrating multiple auditory cues such as pitch, timing,
and spatial location, in a complementary fashion [3, 4, 5].
Inspired by this ability, computational auditory scene analysis (CASA) research [2, 6] has aimed to
replicate similar functionality using auditory cues like pitch, onset/offset, interaural level differences
(ILDs), and interaural time differences (ITDs). With the rise of deep learning, a wide array of
models has emerged to tackle specific ASA tasks, including audio tagging (AT) [7, 8, 9], sound event
detection (SED) [10, 11, 12], DoAE [13, 14, 15], and blind source separation (BSS) [16, 17, 18].
However, unlike the human auditory system, these task-specific models typically lack the capacity
for relational reasoning across tasks and cues. As a result, they often fail when critical auditory cues
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

