Small Singular Values Matter: A Random Matrix
Analysis of Transformer Models

Max Staats
Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence
Leipzig University
staats@itp.uni-leipzig.de

Matthias Thamm
Institute for Theoretical Physics
Leipzig University
thamm@itp.uni-leipzig.de

Bernd Rosenow
Institute for Theoretical Physics
Leipzig University
rosenow@physik.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract
This work analyzes singular-value spectra of weight matrices in pretrained transformer models to understand how information is stored at both ends of the spectrum.
Using Random Matrix Theory (RMT) as a zero information hypothesis, we associate agreement with RMT as evidence of randomness and deviations as evidence
for learning. Surprisingly, we observe pronounced departures from RMT not only
among the largest singular values – the usual outliers – but also among the smallest
ones. A comparison of the associated singular vectors with the eigenvectors of
the activation covariance matrices shows that there is considerable overlap wherever RMT is violated. Thus, significant directions in the data are captured by
small singular values and their vectors as well as by the large ones. We confirm
this empirically: zeroing out the singular values that deviate from RMT raises
language-model perplexity far more than removing values from the bulk, and after
fine-tuning the smallest decile can be the third most influential part of the spectrum.
To explain how vectors linked to small singular values can carry more information
than those linked to larger values, we propose a linear random-matrix model. Our
findings highlight the overlooked importance of the low end of the spectrum and
provide theoretical and practical guidance for SVD-based pruning and compression
of large language models.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have become foundational in deep learning, revolutionizing natural
language processing tasks such as translation, text classification, and question answering [27, 45, 48,
51]. Despite the well-documented success [29], a thorough theoretical understanding of their inner
workings remains incomplete. Although researchers have investigated various facets of LLMs [37],
fundamental questions persist about how these models encode information and the specific roles of
their components.
One promising approach for gaining deeper insights is the application of random matrix theory
(RMT), which has proved effective for identifying structural properties and information density in
neural networks [31, 43, 44]. In particular, RMT analysis of the spectrum of weight matrices can
help determine where information is located within models. When networks are randomly initialized,
the weight distributions precisely matches RMT predictions. After training, deviations from these
predictions reveal how model parameters have adapted.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

