Compositional Discrete Latent Code for
High Fidelity, Productive Diffusion Models

Samuel Lavoie∗ Michael Noukhovitch Aaron Courville
Mila, Université de Montréal

Abstract
We argue that diffusion models’ success in modeling complex distributions is,
for the most part, coming from their input conditioning. This paper investigates
the representation used to condition diffusion models from the perspective that
ideal representations should improve sample fidelity, be easy to generate, and be
compositional to allow out-of-training samples generation. We introduce Discrete
Latent Code (DLC), an image representation derived from Simplicial Embeddings
trained with a self-supervised learning objective. DLCs are sequences of discrete
tokens, as opposed to the standard continuous image embeddings. They are easy
to generate and their compositionality enables sampling of novel images beyond
the training distribution. Diffusion models trained with DLCs have improved
generation fidelity, establishing a new state-of-the-art for unconditional image
generation on ImageNet. Additionally, we show that composing DLCs allows the
image generator to produce out-of-distribution samples that coherently combine the
semantics of images in diverse ways. Finally, we showcase how DLCs can enable
text-to-image generation by leveraging large-scale pretrained language models. We
efficiently finetune a text diffusion language model to generate DLCs that produce
novel samples outside of the image generator training distribution. Code available:
https://github.com/lavoiems/DiscreteLatentCode

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models [Ho et al., 2020] have demonstrated incredible capabilities for generating
high-fidelity images [Peebles and Xie, 2023]. To achieve this feat, state-of-the-art methods [Ramesh
et al., 2022, Rombach et al., 2022] generally train by conditioning on image labels or text captions
[Radford et al., 2021]. Yet, strong diffusion models still generate images that exhibit low diversity or
don’t realistically reflect complex input prompts [Astolfi et al., 2024]. We posit that these failures of
diffusion models are rooted in their inability to fully model the data distribution and can be alleviated
by conditioning diffusion models on a better representation of the data. We argue that an ideal
representation should (1) lead to high-fidelity generation of the data and (2) be compositional [Fodor
and Pylyshyn, 1988, Hadley, 1997] to enable a generative model to produce novel images outside the
training distribution by recomposing parts of images seen during training; i.e. enables productive
generation [Edelman and Intrator, 2000] .
A common choice for conditioning diffusion models is with a text prompt or caption. Natural language
is a flexible representation of the world [Whorf, 1956, Wittgenstein, 1953, Niu et al., 2024] that is
easy to transmit and learn [Tomasello, 1999, Smith and Kirby, 2008], and is compositional [Johnson,
2004]; producing novel meanings by composing known words in new ways. However, text captions
are poor descriptors of images [Foucault, 1966, Lavoie et al., 2024] as they only capture a few
concepts of an image while excluding everything else e.g. background subject, contextual items,
quality/resolution of the image itself. Consequently, diffusion models conditioned directly on a text
∗

Correspondence to samuel.lavoie.m@gmail.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

