Modelling the Control of Offline Processing with
Reinforcement Learning

Eleanor Spens1
ellie.spens@ndcn.ox.ac.uk

Neil Burgess2
n.burgess@ucl.ac.uk

Timothy Behrens1,2
timothy.behrens@ndcn.ox.ac.uk
1

University of Oxford

2

University College London

Abstract
Brains reorganise knowledge offline to improve future behaviour, with ‘replay’
involved in consolidating memories, abstracting patterns from experience, and
simulating new scenarios. However, there are few models of how the brain might
orchestrate these processes, and of when different types of replay might be useful.
Here we propose a framework in which a meta-controller learns to coordinate
offline learning of a lower-level agent or model in ‘sleep’ phases to maximise
reward in a ‘wake’ phase. The meta-controller selects among several actions, such
as learning from recent memories in a hippocampal store, abstracting patterns from
memories into a ‘world model’, and learning from generated data. In addition,
the meta-controller learns to estimate the value of each episode, enabling the
prioritisation of past events in memory replay, or of new simulations in generative
replay. Using image classification, maze solving, and relational inference tasks,
we show that the meta-controller learns an adaptive curriculum for offline learning.
This lays the groundwork for normative predictions about replay in a range of
experimental neuroscience tasks.

1

Introduction

Brains are busy during rest, reorganising knowledge to improve future behaviour. In particular, rest
improves the ability to generalise, infer ‘missing links’, and learn statistical patterns [1, 2]. This is
linked to replay, the hippocampal reactivation of experiences in temporally compressed form [3].
Offline replay has several proposed functions: Firstly, it is thought to reactivate real memories to
consolidate them into neocortex [4, 3] or to abstract general patterns from episodes [5]. Secondly,
replay can generate new experiences [6], sometimes referred to as generative replay, which may help
generalisation [7] and lessen catastrophic forgetting [8]. In addition, replay is thought to recombine
conceptual ‘building blocks’ to extrapolate beyond direct observation [7, 9]. Excitingly, recent studies
show that the content of replay depends on the stage of learning [10] and the stage of cognitive
development [11], suggesting variation in the brain’s ‘strategy’ for offline learning over both short
and long timescales. (See Appendix A.2 for additional neuroscience context.)
One might expect the optimal balance of these offline processes to vary based on task demands, the
uncertainty of the environment, and the reliability of internal models. Machine learning involves
similar trade-offs: collecting real-world data may be expensive, while synthetic data may not be
reliable. Whilst ‘data augmentation’ is often used to expand datasets by specifying label-invariant
transformations (e.g. adding noise, rotating, or cropping an image in the case of image classification),
identifying the right transformations can be a process of trial and error. As a result, training data tends
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

