Rescaled Influence Functions: Accurate Data
Attribution in High Dimension

Ittai Rubinstein
EECS and CSAIL
MIT
Cambridge, MA
ittair@mit.edu

Samuel B. Hopkins
EECS and CSAIL
MIT
Cambridge, MA
samhop@mit.edu

Abstract
How does the training data affect a model’s behavior? This is the question we seek
to answer with data attribution. The leading practical approaches to data attribution
are based on influence functions (IF). IFs utilize a first-order Taylor approximation
to efficiently predict the effect of removing a set of samples from the training set
without retraining the model, and are used in a wide variety of machine learning
applications. However, especially in the high-dimensional regime (# params ≥ Ω(#
samples)), they are often imprecise and tend to underestimate the effect of sample
removals, even for simple models such as logistic regression. We present rescaled
influence functions (RIF), a tool for data attribution which can be used as a dropin replacement for influence functions, with little computational overhead but
significant improvement in accuracy. We compare IF and RIF on a range of realworld datasets, showing that RIFs offer significantly better predictions in practice,
and present a theoretical analysis explaining this improvement. Finally, we present
a simple class of data poisoning attacks that would fool IF-based detections but
would be detected by RIF.

1

Introduction

Data attribution aims to explain the behavior of a machine learning model in terms of its training
data. If θ is a model trained on a dataset {(xi , yi )}i∈[n] , the fundamental algorithmic task in data
attribution is to answer the question:
Leave-T -Out Effect: How would θ have been different if some subset T ⊆ [n] of
the training set had been missing?
The ability to quickly and accurately predict a leave-T -out (LTO) effect, or to search for subsets
producing a large leave-out effect, unlocks extensive capabilities from classical statistical inference to
modern machine learning. For example, the jackknife, leave-k-out cross-validation, and bootstrap are
all widely used to quantify uncertainty and estimate generalization error or confidence intervals, and all
rely on the ability to quickly estimate LTO effects [Efr92, GSL+ 19, Jae72]. Machine learning has seen
an explosion of applications of data attribution, for dataset curation [KL17, KATL19], explainability
[KATL19, GBA+ 23], crafting and detection of data poisoning attacks [EIC+ 25, KSL22, SS19],
machine unlearning [SAKS21, GGHVDM19, IASCZ21], credit attribution [JDW+ 19, GZ19], bias
detection [BAHAZ19], and more.
Ascertaining the ground truth leave-T -out effect in general requires a full retrain of a model for each
T of interest, which is computationally intractable in all but the simplest settings. Consequently,
approximations to the leave-T -out effect are widely used. Key desiderata for such approximations
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

