Show-o2: Improved Native Unified Multimodal Models

Jinheng Xie1 Zhenheng Yang2 Mike Zheng Shou1∗
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore

2

ByteDance

Abstract
This paper presents improved native unified multimodal models, i.e., Show-o2, that
leverage autoregressive modeling and flow matching. Built upon a 3D causal variational autoencoder space, unified visual representations are constructed through
a dual-path of spatial (-temporal) fusion, enabling scalability across image and
video modalities while ensuring effective multimodal understanding and generation. Based on a language model, autoregressive modeling and flow matching
are natively applied to the language head and flow head, respectively, to facilitate
text token prediction and image/video generation. A two-stage training recipe is
designed to effectively learn and scale to larger models. The resulting Show-o2
models demonstrate versatility in handling a wide range of multimodal understanding and generation tasks across diverse modalities, including text, images, and
videos. Code and models are released at https://github.com/showlab/Show-o.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [108, 134] have achieved unprecedented performance levels, fueled
by extensive web-scale text resources, substantial computational power, and billions of parameters.
In the multimodal domain, large multimodal models (LMMs) [7, 29, 56] and visual generative
models [37, 89, 126], have also demonstrated exceptional capabilities in tasks such as generalpurpose visual question answering and text-to-image/video generation. Given their success, unified
multimodal models (UMMs) [103,121,129] have been investigated to unify multimodal understanding
and generation within a single model or system. In addition to multimodal understanding capability,
this line of approaches seeks to simultaneously cultivate multimodal understanding and generation
abilities in the model/system through pre-training, fine-tuning, or connecting tailored models.
Here, we provide a comparative analysis of selected UMMs in Table 1, focusing on two perspectives,
including i) visual representations for understanding and generation and ii) the type of unified
modeling. Generally, there are two approaches to incorporating visual representations for multimodal
understanding and generation: i) a unified representation for both understanding and generation,
as seen in works like Chameleon [103], Transfusion [148], and Show-o [129]; and ii) decoupled
representations, utilizing CLIP [91] for multimodal understanding and variational autoencoder (VAE)
for visual generation. To involve both multimodal understanding and generation capabilities, two
primary methods have been explored: i) natively applying multimodal understanding and generation
objectives within a single model and ii) tuning adapters to assemble tailored models. We refer the
first type as native unified multimodal models, distinguishing it from the second type that assembles
tailored models. These principles, combined with autoregressive or diffusion modeling or both,
contribute to the development of unified multimodal models.
Compared to existing UMMs that primarily focus on text and image, our approach explores model
designs that provide substantial potential and scalability in natively unifying text, image, and video
modalities. An overview of our approach is presented in Fig. 1. Specifically, for visual inputs, we
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

