Orochi: Versatile Biomedical Image Processor

Gaole Dai1,∗
Rongyu Zhang1

Chenghao Zhou1,2,*
Yuan Zhang1

Chengkai Hou1

Jianxu Chen3,B
jianxu.chen@isas.de

Yu Zhou3,*
Tiejun Huang1

Shanghang Zhang1,B
shanghang@pku.edu.cn

1

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
3
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

Abstract
Deep learning has emerged as a pivotal tool for accelerating research in the life sciences, with the low-level processing of biomedical images (e.g., registration, fusion,
restoration, super-resolution) being one of its most critical applications. Platforms
such as ImageJ (Fiji) and napari have enabled the development of customized plugins for various models. However, these plugins are typically based on models that
are limited to specific tasks and datasets, making them less practical for biologists.
To address this challenge, we introduce Orochi, the first application-oriented, efficient, and versatile image processor designed to overcome these limitations. Orochi
is pre-trained on patches/volumes extracted from the raw data of over 100 publicly
available studies using our Random Multi-scale Sampling strategy. We further propose Task-related Joint-embedding Pre-Training (TJP), which employs biomedical
task-related degradation for self-supervision rather than relying on Masked Image
Modelling (MIM), which performs poorly in downstream tasks such as registration.
To ensure computational efficiency, we leverage Mamba’s linear computational
complexity and construct Multi-head Hierarchy Mamba. Additionally, we provide
a three-tier fine-tuning framework (Full, Normal, and Light) and demonstrate that
Orochi achieves comparable or superior performance to current state-of-the-art
specialist models, even with lightweight parameter-efficient options. We hope
that our study contributes to the development of an all-in-one workflow, thereby
relieving biologists from the overwhelming task of selecting among numerous
models. Our pre-trained weights and code will be released.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of deep learning, modern neural networks have demonstrated remarkable
scalability and spawned a wide array of downstream applications in AI for Life Science [1, 2, 3].
Among these, biomedical image processing is a pivotal topic. Its significance arises from the inherent
∗

Equal Contribution, BCorresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

