On the SAC-BL Algorithm for Anomaly Detection

Xinsong Ma
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
maxinsong1018@gmail.com

Jie Wu
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
biandekeren@gmail.com

Weiwei Liu ∗
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
liuweiwei863@gmail.com

Abstract
Visual anomaly detection is significant in safety-critical and reliability-sensitive
scenarios. Prior studies mainly emphasize the design and training of scoring
functions, while little effort has been devoted to constructing decision rules based
on these score functions. A recent work Ma et al. (2025b) highlights this issue and
proposes the SAC-BL algorithm to address it. This method consists of a strong
anomaly constraint (SAC) network and a betting-like (BL) algorithm serving as the
decision rule. The SAC-BL algorithm can control the false discovery rate (FDR).
However the performance of SAC-BL algorithm on anomalous examples, or its
false positive rate (FPR), has not been thoroughly investigated. This paper provides
a deeper analysis of this problem and explores how to theoretically reduce its FPR.
First, we show that as the number of testing examples tends to infinity, the SAC-BL
algorithm performs well on abnormal data if the scores follow the generalized
Gaussian-like distribution family. But such conditions about the number of testing
examples and the distribution of scores are overly restrictive for the real-world
applications. So, we attempt to decrease the FPR of the SAC-BL algorithm under
the condition of finite samples for practical anomaly detection. To this end, we
redesign the BL algorithm by incorporating a randomization strategy and propose
a novel stochastic BL (SBL) algorithm. The combination of the SAC network
and the SBL algorithm yields our method, SAC-SBL. Theoretical results show
that the SAC-SBL algorithm can achieve smaller FPR than SAC-BL algorithm
while controlling its FDR. Finally, extensive experimental results demonstrate the
superiority of our method over SAC-BL algorithm on multiple visual anomaly
detection benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Visual anomaly detection (AD) (Haselmann et al., 2018) is a critical task in computer vision, where
the objective is to identify and spatially localize regions in visual data that deviate from normal
patterns (Gong et al., 2019; Tien et al., 2023). The AD has wide-ranging applications, including
industrial quality control (Bergmann et al., 2019a), medical image analysis (Huang et al., 2024),
video surveillance (Lv et al., 2023) and autonomous driving (Huang et al., 2020). Unlike standard
supervised learning problems, The AD task is characterized by a scarcity or complete absence of
labeled anomalous data, due to the inherent rarity, unpredictability, and diversity of anomalies in
real-world scenarios (Bergmann et al., 2019b). Consequently, most existing approaches adopt an
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

