Accelerated Sampling from Masked Diffusion Models
via Entropy Bounded Unmasking

Heli Ben-Hamu

Itai Gat

Daniel Severo

Niklas Nolte

Brian Karrer

FAIR, Meta AI

Abstract
Recent masked diffusion models (MDMs) have shown competitive performance
compared to autoregressive models (ARMs) for language modeling. While most
literature has focused on performance enhancing sampling procedures, efficient
sampling from MDMs has been scarcely explored. We make the observation
that often a given sequence of partially masked tokens determines the values
of multiple unknown tokens deterministically, meaning that a single prediction
of a masked model holds additional information unused by standard sampling
procedures. Based on this observation, we introduce EB-Sampler, a simple dropin replacement for existing samplers, utilizing an Entropy Bounded unmasking
procedure that dynamically unmasks multiple tokens in one function evaluation
with predefined approximate error tolerance. We formulate the EB-Sampler as part
of a broad family of adaptive samplers for which we provide an error analysis that
motivates our algorithmic choices. EB-Sampler accelerates sampling from current
state of the art MDMs by roughly 2-3x on standard coding and math reasoning
benchmarks without loss in performance. We also validate the same procedure
works well on smaller reasoning tasks including maze navigation and Sudoku,
tasks ARMs often struggle with.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the success of diffusion and flow Esser et al. (2024); Polyak et al. (2024) models in
continuous domains (e.g., images, video), research efforts have focused on adapting these frameworks
to discrete state spaces. Many of these approaches (Austin et al., 2021a; Lou et al., 2023; Sahoo
et al., 2024; Campbell et al., 2024; Gat et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Kitouni et al., 2024) utilize
the masked modeling paradigm, thus we generally refer to these approaches as Masked Diffusion
Models (MDMs). Recent large MDMs such as LLaDa (Nie et al., 2025b) and Dream (Ye et al., 2025)
have shown competitive performance compared to similarly sized autoregressive models (ARMs) in
the 7 billion parameter range on traditional language tasks including code, text, and mathematical
reasoning benchmarks. These results open the possibility of scaled non-autoregressive generation for
language using MDMs, a possible competitor to large language models (LLMs).
Abstractly, MDMs sample fixed-length sequences as discrete tokens from a vocabulary. They begin
from a sequence of mask tokens and iteratively update tokens until all tokens are unmasked. Replacing
a masked token with a token from the vocabulary is unmasking. In contrast to standard ARMs, the
order in which tokens are unmasked becomes a design choice. Recent models often leverage samplers
that surpass the performance of random order unmasking, deviating from the masked diffusion process
used at training (Austin et al., 2021a). In particular, LLaDa and Dream achieve strong performance
by unmasking tokens in a much more favorable order dictated by model predictions (Chang et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2023).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

