Dynamic Gaussian Splatting from Defocused
and Motion-blurred Monocular Videos
Xuankai Zhang1 , Junjin Xiao1 , Qing Zhang1∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University
zhangxk53@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,xiaojj37@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
zhangqing.whu.cs@gmail.com

https://dydeblur.github.io/

Sharp GT

SoM

D2RF

De4DGS

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Performance of our method. Our method allows to synthesize high-quality sharp novel
views for videos with defocus blur (top) and motion blur (bottom). As shown on the right, our method
not only obtains significantly better results than existing methods, e.g., D3DGS [15], SoM [52],
D2RF [32], DyBluRF [47], and De4DGS [58], but also achieves a performance of 65.143 FPS at a
resolution of 512 × 288 on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.

Abstract
This paper presents a unified framework that allows high-quality dynamic Gaussian
Splatting from both defocused and motion-blurred monocular videos. Due to the
significant difference between the formation processes of defocus blur and motion
blur, existing methods are tailored for either one of them, lacking the ability to
simultaneously deal with both of them. Although the two can be jointly modeled
as blur kernel-based convolution, the inherent difficulty in estimating accurate blur
kernels greatly limits the progress in this direction. In this work, we go a step further
towards this direction. Particularly, we propose to estimate per-pixel reliable blur
kernels using a blur prediction network that exploits blur-related scene and camera
information and is subject to a blur-aware sparsity constraint. Besides, we introduce
a dynamic Gaussian densification strategy to mitigate the lack of Gaussians for
incomplete regions, and boost the performance of novel view synthesis by incorporating unseen view information to constrain scene optimization. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in generating
photorealistic novel view synthesis from defocused and motion-blurred monocular
videos. Our code is available at https://github.com/hhhddddddd/dydeblur.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

