Inverse Q-Learning Done Right:
Offline Imitation Learning in Qπ -Realizable MDPs

Antoine Moulin
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
antoine.moulin@upf.edu

Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Luca Viano
EPFL
luca.viano@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the problem of offline imitation learning in Markov decision processes
(MDPs), where the goal is to learn a well-performing policy given a dataset of
state-action pairs generated by an expert policy. Complementing a recent line of
work on this topic that assumes the expert belongs to a tractable class of known
policies, we approach this problem from a new angle and leverage a different type
of structural assumption about the environment. Specifically, for the class of linear
Qπ -realizable MDPs, we introduce a new algorithm called saddle-point offline
imitation learning (SPOIL), which is guaranteed to match the performance of any
expert up to an additive error ε with access to O(ε−2 ) samples. Moreover, we
extend this result to possibly nonlinear Qπ -realizable MDPs at the cost of a worse
sample complexity of order O(ε−4 ). Finally, our analysis suggests a new loss
function for training critic networks from expert data in deep imitation learning.
Empirical evaluations on standard benchmarks demonstrate that the neural net
implementation of SPOIL is superior to behavior cloning and competitive with
state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

In imitation learning (IL), a learner observes a finite dataset of state-action pairs generated by
an expert policy interacting with an environment modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP;
Puterman, 2014). The learner’s objective is to find a policy that performs nearly as well as the
expert policy with respect to an unknown ground-truth reward function. This work focuses on offline
imitation learning, where the learner cannot collect new state-action sequences from the MDP used
for generating the expert’s data. In this context, we propose new algorithms that operate under a
previously under-explored set of structural assumptions on the learning environment.
Recent years have seen a quite significant surge of interest in the problem of imitation learning, not
unlikely due to its relevance to next-token prediction in generative language models (Rajaraman et al.,
2020; Foster et al., 2024; Rohatgi et al., 2025). A common feature of these recent works is that they
all make the assumption that the expert data has been generated by a fixed policy that belongs to a
known, finite class of policies and they return policies within the same class. Such an assumption is
often referred to as expert realizability and can be formally stated as follows.
Assumption (Expert realizability). The learner has access to a function class ΠE that contains the
unknown expert policy πE , that is, such that πE ∈ ΠE .
Several clean and elegant results were proved under this assumption, in particular showing the
existence of conceptually simple algorithms achieving tight upper bounds on the sample complexity
of finding good solutions, and lower bounds demonstrating the near-optimality of these algorithms
under said assumptions. These bounds typically depend on a measure of complexity of the policy class
(as measured by, say, its covering number). However, further scrutiny reveals that these assumptions
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

