Do-PFN: In-Context Learning for
Causal Effect Estimation
Jake Robertson1,2,3∗ Arik Reuter4,5,∗ Siyuan Guo4,5,1 Noah Hollmann1
Frank Hutter1,2,3,† Bernhard Schölkopf2,4,†
1
Prior Labs, Freiburg, Germany
ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
3
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
4
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
5
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
2

∗

Equal contribution

†

Equal supervision

Abstract
Causal effect estimation is critical to a range of scientific disciplines. Existing
methods for this task either require interventional data, knowledge about the
ground-truth causal graph, or rely on assumptions such as unconfoundedness,
restricting their applicability in real-world settings. In the domain of tabular
machine learning, Prior-data fitted networks (PFNs) have achieved state-of-theart predictive performance, having been pre-trained on synthetic causal data to
solve tabular prediction problems via in-context learning. To assess whether
this can be transferred to the problem of causal effect estimation, we pre-train
PFNs on synthetic data drawn from a wide variety of causal structures, including
interventions, to predict interventional outcomes given observational data. Through
extensive experiments in synthetic and semi-synthetic settings, we show that our
approach allows for the accurate estimation of causal effects without knowledge of
the underlying causal graph.

1

Introduction

The estimation of causal effects is fundamental to scientific disciplines such as medicine, economics,
and the social sciences (Pearl, 2009; Varian, 2016; Imbens, 2024; Wu et al., 2024). Questions such
as “Does a new drug reduce the risk of cancer?” and “What is the impact of minimum wage on
employment?” can only be answered by taking the causal nature of the problem into account.
The widely accepted gold standard for assessing causal effects are randomized controlled trials
(RCTs). While RCTs allow for the direct estimation of causal effects, they can sometimes be
unethical or expensive, and, in many cases, simply impossible. In contrast to experimental data from
RCTs, observational data is more accessible, collected without interfering in the independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d) data-generating process. Estimating causal effects from observational
data alone can be challenging or even impossible without strict assumptions (Spirtes et al., 1993).
Various methods have been proposed to address the problem of causal effect estimation, typically
relying on the assumption of unconfoundedness (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). This assumption
states that, conditional on a set of observed covariates, treatment assignment is independent of the
potential outcomes. While this condition enables identification of causal effects from observational
data, it can be difficult to verify or justify in practice, as it requires that relevant confounders are
observed and properly accounted for (Hernán and Robins, 2010; Imbens and Rubin, 2015). Under
unconfoundedness, a variety of estimation techniques have been developed, including causal forests
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

