INC: An Indirect Neural Corrector for
Auto-Regressive Hybrid PDE Solvers

Hao Wei
Technical University of Munich
hao.wei@tum.de

Aleksandra Franz
Technical University of Munich
aleksandra.franz@tum.de

Bjoern List
Technical University of Munich
bjoern.list@tum.de

Nils Thuerey
Technical University of Munich
nils.thuerey@tum.de

Abstract
When simulating partial differential equations, hybrid solvers combine coarse
numerical solvers with learned correctors. They promise accelerated simulations
while adhering to physical constraints. However, as shown in our theoretical framework, directly applying learned corrections to solver outputs leads to significant
autoregressive errors, which originate from amplified perturbations that accumulate
during long-term rollouts, especially in chaotic regimes. To overcome this, we
propose the Indirect Neural Corrector (INC), which integrates learned corrections
into the governing equations rather than applying direct state updates. Our key
insight is that INC reduces the error amplification on the order of ∆t−1 + L, where
∆t is the timestep and L the Lipschitz constant. At the same time, our framework
poses no architectural requirements and integrates seamlessly with arbitrary neural
networks and solvers. We test INC in extensive benchmarks, covering numerous
differentiable solvers, neural backbones, and test cases ranging from a 1D chaotic
system to 3D turbulence. INC improves the long-term trajectory performance (R2 )
by up to 158.7%, stabilizes blowups under aggressive coarsening, and for complex
3D turbulence cases yields speed-ups of several orders of magnitude. INC thus
enables stable, efficient PDE emulation with formal error reduction, paving the way
for faster scientific and engineering simulations with reliable physics guarantees.
Our source code is available at https://github.com/tum-pbs/INC

1

Introduction

Numerical simulation of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) over long time horizons
is crucial for many scientific and engineering scenarios, with applications ranging from sub-grid
turbulence closure in climate models to real-time aerodynamic design and plasma physics. Traditional
numerical solvers deliver rigorous solutions [1–3], but their computational cost becomes prohibitive
when resolving fine-scale features. Designed to replicate the behavior of traditional numerical
solvers, neural emulators seek to accelerate solving by learning a surrogate directly from data [4–14].
However, their long-term performance is problematic, especially for chaotic dynamics, as a tiny
inaccuracy from a single step of an emulator can lead to solutions drifting out of distribution [15–18].
On the other hand, hybrid neural solvers combine benefits from numerical and neural methods by
integrating a coarse-grid physics solver as a backbone with a neural network. This network reconstructs missing, unresolved, or erroneously represented physics, akin to closure models [19]. Such
approaches can be broadly categorized into two types: learned correction and learned interpolation.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

