Path Gradients after Flow Matching

Lorenz Vaitl
lorenz.vaitl@outlook.com

Leon Klein
Freie Universität Berlin
leon.klein@fu-berlin.de

Abstract
Boltzmann Generators have emerged as a promising machine learning tool for
generating samples from equilibrium distributions of molecular systems using
Normalizing Flows and importance weighting. Recently, Flow Matching has helped
speed up Continuous Normalizing Flows (CNFs), scale them to more complex
molecular systems, and minimize the length of the flow integration trajectories.
We investigate the benefits of using Path Gradients to fine-tune CNFs initially
trained by Flow Matching, in a setting where the target energy is known. Our
experiments show that this hybrid approach yields up to a threefold increase in
sampling efficiency for molecular systems, all while using the same model, a similar
computational budget and without the need for additional sampling. Furthermore,
by measuring the length of the flow trajectories during fine-tuning, we show that
Path Gradients largely preserve the learned structure of the flow.

1

Introduction

Generative models, ranging from GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and VAEs (Kingma & Welling,
2014) to Normalizing Flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2019) and Diffusion
Models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021), have advanced rapidly in recent years, driving progress
both in media generation and in scientific applications such as simulation-based inference. While
scientific workflows often incorporate domain-specific symmetries, they tend to under-exploit a
crucial resource: the unnormalized target density.
Boltzmann Generators (Noé et al., 2019) are typically trained either via self-sampling (Boyda et al.,
2021; Nicoli et al., 2020; Invernizzi et al., 2022; Midgley et al., 2023), leveraging gradients from the
target distribution, or using samples from the target without incorporating gradient information (Nicoli
et al., 2023; Klein et al., 2023b; Draxler et al., 2024; Klein & Noé, 2024). However, these approaches
each ignore complementary parts of the training signal: either the data or its local geometry. Notably,
first-order information evaluated at target samples remains underused, despite its potential to improve
training. In this work, we close this gap by fine-tuning Continuous Normalizing Flows, initially
trained with Flow Matching, using Path Gradients (Roeder et al., 2017; Vaitl, 2024) on samples from
the target distribution. Furthermore, our approach requires computing target gradients only once
per training sample, avoiding the potentially high cost of repeatedly computing gradients on newly
generated samples for self-sampling.
Flow Matching, a method for training CNFs, is based on target samples. It is closely related to
diffusion model training and has recently gained traction for its simulation-free training and strong
empirical performance, both in generative modeling benchmarks (Lipman et al., 2023; Esser et al.,
2024; Jin et al., 2024) and in scientific domains (Stark et al., 2024; Jing et al., 2024; Klein & Noé,
2024). Here, we investigate how incorporating Path Gradients on samples from the target distribution,
enhances CNF performance post flow-matching.
Path gradients are low variance gradient estimators, which have strong theoretical guarantees close to
the optimum (Roeder et al., 2017) and incorporate gradient information from both, the variational
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

