Video-RAG: Visually-aligned Retrieval-Augmented
Long Video Comprehension

Yongdong Luo1 Xiawu Zheng1∗ Guilin Li1 Shukang Yin Haojia Lin1
Chaoyou Fu2 Jinfa Huang3 Jiayi Ji1 Fei Chao1 Jiebo Luo3 Rongrong Ji1
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Nanjing University 3 University of Rochester

Abstract
Existing large video-language models (LVLMs) struggle to comprehend long
videos correctly due to limited context. To address this problem, fine-tuning longcontext LVLMs and employing GPT-based agents have emerged as promising
solutions. However, fine-tuning LVLMs would require extensive high-quality data
and substantial GPU resources, while GPT-based agents would rely on proprietary
models (e.g., GPT-4o). In this paper, we propose Video Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (Video-RAG), a training-free and cost-effective pipeline that employs
visually-aligned auxiliary texts to help facilitate cross-modality alignment while
providing additional information beyond the visual content. Specifically, we
leverage open-source external tools to extract visually-aligned information from
pure video data (e.g., audio, optical character, and object detection), and incorporate
the extracted information into an existing LVLM as auxiliary texts, alongside
video frames and queries, in a plug-and-play manner. Our Video-RAG offers
several key advantages: (i) lightweight with low computing overhead due to singleturn retrieval; (ii) easy implementation and compatibility with any LVLM; and
(iii) significant, consistent performance gains across long video understanding
benchmarks, including Video-MME, MLVU, and LongVideoBench. Notably, our
model demonstrates superior performance over proprietary models like Gemini1.5-Pro and GPT-4o when utilized with a 72B model. Codes are available at
https://github.com/Leon1207/Video-RAG-master.

1

Introduction

With the advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs), numerous studies have been conducted
to enhance their ability to comprehend and process videos [12, 16, 18, 51, 24, 47, 19, 3, 2, 50, 23,
25, 17], collectively termed Large Video-Language Models (LVLMs). Although current LVLMs
have demonstrated promising performance in understanding short videos, effective comprehension of
extremely long videos continues to be a major challenge.
To address this challenge, recent studies [49, 45, 35, 42, 55] have sought to extend the reasoning
context length of LVLMs, essentially finetuning long-context LVLMs for long video understanding.
LongVA [49] first introduces increasing the token capacity of an LLM and transferring its long-context
comprehension capabilities to video data. However, training such a model requires pre-training on an
extended corpus, and often there are distribution shifts between deployment videos and finetuning
videos. As demonstrated in Video-MME [6], LongVA declines when increasing the video frame
sampling rate from 128 to 384 (52.6% → 51.8%). This outcome suggests that simply increasing the
∗

Corresponding author: zhengxiawu@xmu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

