A Cramér–von Mises Approach to Incentivizing
Truthful Data Sharing

Alex Clinton
University of Wisconsin-Madison
aclinton@wisc.edu

Thomas Zeng
University of Wisconsin-Madison
tpzeng@wisc.edu

Xiaojin Zhu
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu

Yiding Chen
Cornell University
yc2773@cornell.edu

Kirthevasan Kandasamy
University of Wisconsin-Madison
kandasamy@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Modern data marketplaces and data sharing consortia increasingly rely on incentive
mechanisms to encourage agents to contribute data. However, schemes that reward
agents based on the quantity of submitted data are vulnerable to manipulation, as
agents may submit fabricated or low-quality data to inflate their rewards. Prior
work has proposed comparing each agent’s data against others’ to promote honesty:
when others contribute genuine data, the best way to minimize discrepancy is to do
the same. Yet prior implementations of this idea rely on very strong assumptions
about the data distribution (e.g. Gaussian), limiting their applicability. In this
work, we develop reward mechanisms based on a novel two-sample test statistic
inspired by the Cramér-von Mises statistic. Our methods strictly incentivize agents
to submit more genuine data, while disincentivizing data fabrication and other types
of untruthful reporting. We establish that truthful reporting constitutes a (possibly
approximate) Nash equilibrium in both Bayesian and prior-agnostic settings. We
theoretically instantiate our method in three canonical data sharing problems
and show that it relaxes key assumptions made by prior work. Empirically, we
demonstrate that our mechanism incentivizes truthful data sharing via simulations
and on real-world language and image data.

1

Introduction

Data is invaluable for machine learning (ML). Yet many organizations and individuals lack the
capability to collect sufficient data on their own. This has driven the emergence of data marketplaces [1–3]—where consumers purchase data from contributors with money—and consortia [4–6]
for data sharing and federated learning—where agents share their own data in return for access to others’ data. As such platforms depend critically on data from contributing agents, they incentivize these
agents to contribute more data via commensurate rewards: consortia typically grant agents greater
access to the pooled data [7, 8], while marketplaces provide correspondingly larger payments [9, 10].
However, most existing work implicitly assume that contributors will report data truthfully. In
reality, strategic contributors may untruthfully report data to exploit the incentive scheme. As one
such example, they may fabricate data—either through naïve random generation or sophisticated
ML-based synthesis —to artificially inflate their submissions and maximize their own rewards. In
naive incentive schemes, where rewards scale with the quantity of data, such behavior can flood the
system with poor quality data which undermines trust in the platform.
The central challenge in preventing such strategic misreporting, including fabrication, is that consortia and marketplace operators typically lack ground-truth knowledge about the underlying data
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

