JavisGPT: A Unified Multi-modal LLM for
Sounding-Video Comprehension and Generation

Kai Liu1,2∗, Jungang Li3∗, Yuchong Sun4∗, Shengqiong Wu2 , Jianzhang Gao4 ,
Daoan Zhang5 , Wei Zhang6 , Sheng Jin7 , Sicheng Yu8 , Geng Zhan9 , Jiayi Ji2 ,
Fan Zhou1 , Liang Zheng10 , Shuicheng Yan2 , Hao Fei2†, Tat-Seng Chua2
1

ZJU, 2 NUS, 3 HKUST(GZ), 4 RUC, 5 UR, 6 HZCU, 7 NTU, 8 SMU, 9 USYD, 10 ANU

Project: https://JavisVerse.github.io/JavisGPT-page
Entity Localization
How many people can be identified in the
video and audio?
Two. The video shows one person riding
a snowmobile, and the audio includes a
woman's voice speaking.

Instruction-Followed Generation
Convert these details into an engaging video
story? A man is playing the guitar…
Sure, here is the
produced sounding
video. Hope you will
like it.

Relationship Comprehension
When does the sound of an engine starting
up occur?
The sound of an engine starting up is
heard after the man begins speaking.

Global Perception
What is the atmosphere of the video and
audio?
The performance, audience clapping, and
flute playing create a lively atmosphere.

In-context Reasoning
I don’t like this video, where too much finger
movement information is lost.
Sorry. I’ve adjusted
the perspective to
provide closer shots
(without changing the
music).

Proactive Conversation
Hi, JavisGPT. How do you feel about cars that
are painted red?
Red cars? They’re bold and eye-catching.
Are you a fan of them?
Yeah, especially racing cars. Imagine a race car
with the number 27, whose loud engine …
That sounds like an
adrenaline-packed
moment! As you prefer,
here is a red racing car,
number 27, speeding
through the track.

This looks great! Can you extend the video a
bit, maybe adding more high-speed turns?
Absolutely! I’ll expand
the video, highlighting
more dramatic turns,
precision cornering,
and a nail-biting final
stretch to amplify the
thrill.

Figure 1: JavisGPT supports multi-level synchronized audio-video content (i.e., sounding video)
comprehension (left), and simultaneously complex instruction-based audio-video generation, interleaved in-context generation (middle), and multi-turn proactive conversations (right).

Abstract
This paper presents JavisGPT, the first unified multimodal large language model (MLLM)
for joint audio-video (JAV) comprehension and generation. JavisGPT has a concise encoderLLM-decoder architecture, which has a SyncFusion module for spatio-temporal audio-video
fusion and synchrony-aware learnable queries to bridge a pretrained JAV-DiT generator. This
design enables temporally coherent video-audio understanding and generation from multimodal
instructions. We design an effective three-stage training pipeline consisting of multimodal
pretraining, audio-video fine-tuning, and large-scale instruction-tuning, to progressively build
multimodal comprehension and generation from existing vision-language models. For instruction tuning, we construct JavisInst-Omni, a high-quality instruction dataset with over 200K
GPT-4o-curated audio-video-text dialogues that cover diverse and multi-level comprehension
and generation scenarios. On JAV comprehension and generation benchmarks, our experiments
show that JavisGPT outperforms existing MLLMs, particularly in complex and temporally
synchronized settings.
* Equal contribution. Work done during Kai Liu’s visiting period at NUS. Email: kail@zju.edu.cn
†

Corresponding author. Email: haofei7419@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

