Semi-supervised Graph Anomaly Detection via
Robust Homophily Learning

1

Guoguo Ai1,2∗ , Hezhe Qiao 2∗, Hui Yan 1† , Guansong Pang 2†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
{guoguo, yanhui}@njust.edu.cn,
hezheqiao.2022@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, gspang@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Current semi-supervised graph anomaly detection (GAD) methods utilizes a small
set of labeled normal nodes to identify abnormal nodes from a large set of unlabeled
nodes in a graph. These methods posit that 1) normal nodes share a similar level of
homophily and 2) the labeled normal nodes can well represent the homophily patterns in the entire normal class. However, this assumption often does not hold well
since normal nodes in a graph can exhibit diverse homophily in real-world GAD
datasets. In this paper, we propose RHO, namely Robust Homophily Learning, to
adaptively learn such homophily patterns. RHO consists of two novel modules,
adaptive frequency response filters (AdaFreq) and graph normality alignment
(GNA). AdaFreq learns a set of adaptive spectral filters that capture different
frequency components of the labeled normal nodes with varying homophily in
the channel-wise and cross-channel views of node attributes. GNA is introduced
to enforce consistency between the channel-wise and cross-channel homophily
representations to robustify the normality learned by the filters in the two views.
Experiments on eight real-world GAD datasets show that RHO can effectively
learn varying, often under-represented, homophily in the small labeled node set and
substantially outperforms state-of-the-art competing methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/mala-lab/RHO.

1

Introduction

Graph anomaly detection (GAD) has received increasing attention in recent years due to its wide
range of applications, such as fraud detection in finance, review spam detection, and abusive user
detection [1, 20, 27, 37]. Semi-supervised GAD, which aims to leverage a small set of labeled normal
nodes to identify abnormal nodes from a large set of unlabeled nodes in a graph, is among the most
realistic problem settings in real-life applications [33, 37, 38]. This is because GAD datasets are
typically dominated by normal nodes, which can greatly facilitate the annotation of a few normal
nodes, e.g., if we randomly sample a few nodes from a large graph, most nodes would be normal.
Current semi-supervised GAD methods are generally built upon two key assumptions: (1) all normal
nodes exhibit a similar level of homophily, and (2) the labeled normal nodes can well represent the
overall homophily pattern of the entire graph [6, 7, 12, 38, 42]. However, these two assumptions often
do not hold well in the real-world GAD datasets. This is because although normal nodes generally
exhibit high homophily, there can be large variations of homophily across the normal nodes, some of
which can possess relatively low homophily (see Fig. 1a for visualization of this observation on the
∗
†

Equal Contribution. The work was done when Guoguo Ai visited Singapore Management University.
Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

