Physics-informed Neural Operator for Pansharpening

Xinyang Liu1,2∗, Junming Hou1∗, Chenxu Wu1 , Xiaofeng Cong3 , Zihao Chen1
Shangqi Deng5 , Junling Li1 , Liang-Jian Deng4†, Bo Liu6†
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University
School of Engineering Mathematics and Technology, University of Bristol
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University
4
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
6
Faculty of Computer Science and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
codex.lxy@gmail.com,junming_hou@seu.edu.cn
liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn,liubo@suat-sz.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Over the past decades, pansharpening has contributed greatly to numerous remote
sensing applications, with methods evolving from theoretically grounded models to
deep learning approaches and their hybrids. Though promising, existing methods
rarely address pansharpening through the lens of underlying physical imaging processes. In this work, we revisit the spectral imaging mechanism and propose a novel
physics-informed neural operator framework for pansharpening, termed PINO,
which faithfully models the end-to-end electro-optical sensor process. Specifically,
PINO operates as: (1) First, a spatial-spectral encoder is introduced to aggregate
multi-granularity high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) and low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) features. (2) Subsequently, an iterative neural integral process
utilizes these fused spatial-spectral characteristics to learn a continuous radiance
field Li (x, y, λ) over spatial coordinates and wavelength, effectively emulating
band-wise spectral integration. (3) Finally, the learned radiance field is modulated by the sensor’s spectral responsivity Rb (λ) to produce the desired fusion
products. This physics-grounded fusion paradigm offers a principled solution
for pansharpening in accordance with sensor imaging physics. Experiments on
multiple benchmark datasets show that our method surpasses state-of-the-art fusion algorithms, achieving reduced spectral aberrations and finer spatial textures.
Furthermore, extension to hyperspectral (HS) data demonstrates its generalizability
and universality. The code is available at https://github.com/ez4lionky/PINO.

1

Introduction

Remote sensing satellites have become indispensable tools for Earth observation and monitoring,
which span diverse civilian and military applications, such as precision agriculture, environmental
monitoring, and mineral exploration [56, 67, 50, 49]. Unfortunately, existing optical satellite sensors
struggle to directly acquire high-resolution multispectral (HRMS) observations. Instead, they typically
acquire paired low-resolution (LR) MS and high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) images of the same
scene. Pansharpening techniques aim to bridge the resolution gap by fusing complementary PAN and
MS modalities to produce HRMS images, benefiting downstream remote sensing tasks.
∗
†

Co-first authors
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

