Dual-Stage Value-Guided Inference with
Margin-Based Reward Adjustment for Fast and
Faithful VLM Captioning

Ankan Deria1 , Adinath Madhavrao Dukre1 , Feilong Tang1 , Sara Atito2 , Sudipta Roy3
Muhammad Awais2 , Muhammad Haris Khan1 , Imran Razzak1,4
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
University of Surrey, UK
3
Jio Institute, India
4
UNSW, Australia

Abstract
Despite significant advances in inference-time search for vision–language models
(VLMs), existing approaches remain both computationally expensive and prone
to unpenalized, low-confidence generations which often lead to persistent hallucinations. We introduce Value-guided Inference with Margin-based Reward
(ViMaR)1 , a two-stage inference framework that improves both efficiency and
output fidelity by combining a temporal-difference value model with a marginaware reward adjustment. In the first stage, we perform a single pass to identify the
highest-value caption among diverse candidates. In the second stage, we selectively
refine only those segments that were overlooked or exhibit weak visual grounding,
thereby eliminating frequently rewarded evaluations. A calibrated margin-based
penalty discourages low-confidence continuations while preserving descriptive richness. Extensive experiments across multiple VLM architectures demonstrate that
ViMaR generates captions that are significantly more reliable, factually accurate,
detailed, and explanatory, while achieving over 4× speedup compared to existing
value-guided methods. Specifically, we show that ViMaR trained solely on LLaVA
Mistral-7B generalizes effectively to guide decoding in stronger unseen models.
To further validate this, we adapt ViMaR to steer generation in both LLaVAOneVision-Qwen2-7B and Qwen2.5-VL-3B, leading to consistent improvements
in caption quality and demonstrating robust cross-model guidance. This crossmodel generalization highlights ViMaR’s flexibility and modularity, positioning
it as a scalable and transferable inference-time decoding strategy. Furthermore,
when ViMaR-generated captions are used for self-training, the underlying models
achieve substantial gains across a broad suite of visual comprehension benchmarks,
underscoring the potential of fast, accurate, and self-improving VLM pipelines.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) [2, 6, 11, 17, 23] have revolutionized our ability to produce fluent,
richly detailed image descriptions. However, they still contend with two intertwined challenges:
generating precise, fine-grained captions and combating “hallucinations” [21, 6, 47, 36, 46, 23, 37],
which often arise from unpenalized, low-confidence outputs that misrepresent the scene. Simply
scaling up training data can ameliorate these issues, but it incurs prohibitive annotation and API costs,
1

Code: https://github.com/ankan8145/ViMaR

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

