SPC: Evolving Self-Play Critic via Adversarial Games
for LLM Reasoning

Jiaqi Chen1
Bang Zhang∗
Ruotian Ma2†
Peisong Wang3
4
2
2
Xiaodan Liang Zhaopeng Tu Xiaolong Li Kwan-Yee K. Wong1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent
3
Tsinghua University 4 MBZUAI
Project:

https://chen-judge.github.io/SPC/

Abstract
Evaluating the step-by-step reliability of large language model (LLM) reasoning,
such as Chain-of-Thought, remains challenging due to the difficulty and cost of
obtaining high-quality step-level supervision. In this paper, we introduce SelfPlay Critic (SPC), a novel approach where a critic model evolves its ability to
assess reasoning steps through adversarial self-play games, eliminating the need
for manual step-level annotation. SPC involves fine-tuning two copies of a base
model to play two roles, namely a “sneaky generator” that deliberately produces
erroneous steps designed to be difficult to detect, and a “critic” that analyzes the
correctness of reasoning steps. These two models engage in an adversarial game in
which the generator aims to fool the critic, while the critic model seeks to identify
the generator’s errors. Using reinforcement learning based on the game outcomes,
the models iteratively improve; the winner of each confrontation receives a positive
reward and the loser receives a negative reward, driving continuous self-evolution.
Experiments on three reasoning process benchmarks (ProcessBench, PRM800K,
DeltaBench) demonstrate that our SPC progressively enhances its error detection
capabilities (e.g., accuracy increases from 70.8% to 77.7% on ProcessBench)
and surpasses strong baselines, including distilled R1 model. Furthermore, SPC
can guide the test-time search of diverse LLMs and significantly improve their
mathematical reasoning performance on MATH500 and AIME2024, surpassing
those guided by state-of-the-art process reward models.

1

Introduction

The Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [1–3] reasoning process, which emerges in the autoregressive generation
of large language models (LLMs), has been applied to address a variety of complex tasks [4–13].
Training methods such as Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) [14, 15], Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) [16, 17], and self-play reinforcement learning [18, 19], have demonstrated
success in obtaining high-quality CoT. Recently, the popular o1 [20], R1 [21], and QwQ [22] utilize
large-scale reinforcement learning for training and employ test-time scaling to generate long CoT,
further enhancing their reasoning capabilities. As the CoT generated by LLMs becomes increasingly
complex and diverse, it is particularly important to verify the reliability of the reasoning process,
analyze the potential errors in reasoning steps, and guide the test-time search to improve the reasoning
process [23–31].
A number of verification models have been developed to analyze and evaluate the reasoning process
of LLMs. For example, outcome verifiers [25] provide outcome-level validation to rank or reward
multiple responses from LLMs. Process verifiers [23, 25], which validate each step in the reasoning
∗

Independent researcher. †Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

