O RIGEN: Zero-Shot 3D Orientation Grounding in
Text-to-Image Generation

Yunhong Min∗

Daehyeon Choi∗

Kyeongmin Yeo
KAIST

Jihyun Lee

Minhyuk Sung

{dbsghd363,daehyeonchoi,aaaaa,jyun.lee,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1: 3D orientation-grounded text-to-image generation results of O RIGEN. We present
O RIGEN, the first zero-shot method for 3D orientation grounding in text-to-image generation across
multiple objects and diverse categories. O RIGEN generates high-quality images that are accurately
aligned with the grounding orientation conditions (colored arrows) and the input text prompts.

Abstract
We introduce O RIGEN, the first zero-shot method for 3D orientation grounding
in text-to-image generation across multiple objects and diverse categories. While
previous work on spatial grounding in image generation has mainly focused on
2D positioning, it lacks control over 3D orientation. To address this, we propose
a reward-guided sampling approach using a pretrained discriminative model for
3D orientation estimation and a one-step text-to-image generative flow model.
While gradient-ascent-based optimization is a natural choice for reward-based guidance, it struggles to maintain image realism. Instead, we adopt a sampling-based
approach using Langevin dynamics, which extends gradient ascent by simply injecting random noise—requiring just a single additional line of code. Additionally,
we introduce adaptive time rescaling based on the reward function to accelerate
convergence. Our experiments show that O RIGEN outperforms both training-based
and test-time guidance methods across quantitative metrics and user studies. Project
Page: https://origen2025.github.io.

1

Introduction

Controllability is a key aspect of generative models, enabling precise, user-driven outputs. In
image generation, spatial grounding ensures structured and semantically meaningful results by
incorporating conditions that cannot be fully specified through text alone. Recent research integrating
spatial instructions, such as bounding boxes [1–5] and segmentation masks [3, 6, 7, 4, 8, 9], has
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

