Robust Integrated Learning and Pauli Noise
Mitigation for Parametrized Quantum Circuits

Md Mobasshir Arshed Naved
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA
naved@purdue.edu

Wenbo Xie
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA
xie401@purdue.edu

Wojciech Szpankowski
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA
szpan@purdue.edu

Ananth Grama
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA
ayg@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel gradient-based framework for learning parameterized quantum
circuits (PQCs) in the presence of Pauli noise in gate operation. The key innovation
in our framework is the simultaneous optimization of model parameters and learning of an inverse noise channel, specifically designed to mitigate Pauli noise. Our
parametrized inverse noise model utilizes the Pauli-Lindblad equation and relies
on the principle underlying the Probabilistic Error Cancellation (PEC) protocol
to learn an effective and scalable mechanism for noise mitigation. In contrast to
conventional approaches that apply predetermined inverse noise models during execution, our method systematically mitigates Pauli noise by dynamically updating
the inverse noise parameters in conjunction with the model parameters, facilitating task-specific noise adaptation throughout the learning process. We employ
proximal stochastic gradient descent (proximal SGD) to ensure that updates are
bounded within a feasible range to ensure stability. This approach allows the model
to converge efficiently to a stationary point, balancing the trade-off between noise
mitigation and computational overhead, resulting in a highly adaptable quantum
model that performs robustly in noisy quantum environments.

1

Introduction

Quantum systems offer the potential to solve computationally hard problems in simulation, optimization, and machine learning. However, they pose significant challenges on NISQ devices [22]. The
presence of quantum noise, which leads to errors in state preparation, gate operation, and measurement [12, 20], severely constrains the performance of variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) and
quantum machine learning (QML) tasks. A major contributor to quantum noise in NISQ devices
is gate noise, commonly modeled as Pauli noise [29]. Pauli noise occurs when unintended Pauli
operators (X, Y , Z) are applied to quantum states during gate operations. These disruptions degrade
the fidelity of quantum circuits and, in turn, the performance of parameterized quantum circuits
(PQCs) commonly used in optimization and machine learning. Effective noise mitigation techniques
are necessary to realize the potential of quantum computations on NISQ devices.
Pauli noise mitigation strategies, such as zero noise extrapolation (ZNE) and probabilistic error
cancellation (PEC), have several practical drawbacks. ZNE mitigates Pauli noise by purposely
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

