Pattern-Guided Adaptive Prior for Structure Learning

Lyuzhou Chen, Yijia Sun, Yanze Gao, Xiangyu Wang∗ ,
Derui Lyu, Taiyu Ban, Xin Wang, Xiren Zhou, Huanhuan Chen∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
96 Jinzhai Rd, Hefei, China, 230026
{clz31415@mail., sunyijia2002@mail., gaoyz@mail., sa312@,}
{drlv@mail., banty@mail., wz520@mail., zhou0612@, hchen@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning the causality between variables, known as DAG structure learning, is
critical yet challenging due to issues such as insufficient data and noise. While
prior knowledge can improve the learning process and refine the DAG structure,
incorporating prior knowledge is not without pitfalls. In particular, we find that
the gap between the imprecise prior knowledge and the exact weights modeled
by existing methods may result in deviation in edge weights. Such deviation can
subsequently cause significant inaccuracies when learning the DAG structure. This
paper addresses this challenge by providing a theoretical analysis of the impact of
deviation in edge weights during the optimization process of structure learning. We
identify two special graph patterns that arise due to the deviation and show that their
occurrence increases as the degree of deviation grows. Building on this analysis,
we propose the Pattern-Guided Adaptive Prior (PGAP) framework. PGAP detects
these patterns as structural signals during optimization and adaptively adjusts the
structure learning process to counteract the identified weight deviation, thereby
improving the integration of prior knowledge. Experiments verify the effectiveness
and robustness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Discovering directed acyclic graph (DAG) structures of variable associations from observational
data, also known as structure learning [Scanagatta et al., 2019, Heinze-Deml et al., 2018], is gaining
significant attention in many practical applications [Peters et al., 2017, Gong et al., 2022]. However,
the broad application of structure learning is frequently hindered when relying on data alone. Such
difficulties arise primarily from challenges like insufficient data and unavoidable noise [Ramsey et al.,
2018]. To overcome these limitations and improve practical applicability, prior knowledge is often
incorporated. This knowledge, typically derived from domain expertise about the existence of specific
relationships [Constantinou et al., 2023], allows for the integration of established insights. By doing
so, prior knowledge can guide the DAG’s structure, reduce the search space, and thereby enhance the
efficiency and reliability of the learning process [Eggeling et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2023].
In practical scenarios, the prior knowledge available from domain experts is often imprecise, since it
typically indicates the existence of dependencies between variables rather than specifying their exact
magnitude or detailed functional form1 [Kitson et al., 2023]. This imprecision contrasts with the
requirements of existing modeling approaches, which often describe the relationships within a DAG
structure using precise numerical weights for the connections between variables [Zheng et al., 2018].
Indeed, most current methods widely incorporate such imprecise prior knowledge, yet the potential
1
This paper refers to priors that correctly assert the existence of a directional relationship (e.g., variable A
influences variable B) as accurate, but not precise because they do not specify an exact numerical strength.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

