From Specificity to Generality: Revisiting
Generalizable Artifacts in Detecting Face Deepfakes
Long Ma1 Zhiyuan Yan2
Qinglang Guo1 Zhen Bi5 6

Jin Xu4 Yize Chen3
Yong Liao1∗ Hui Lin7

1

School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
5
Huzhou University 6 Banbu AI Foundation
7
China Academy of Electronics and Information Technology
{longm@mail, yliao@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting deepfakes has been an increasingly important topic, especially given the
rapid development of AI generation techniques. In this paper, we ask: How can we
build a universal detection framework that is effective for most facial deepfakes?
One significant challenge is the wide diversity of existing deepfake generators,
which produced varied types of forgery artifacts (e.g., lighting inconsistency, color
mismatch, etc). But should we “teach” the detector to learn all these artifacts separately? It is impossible and impractical to elaborate on them all. So the core idea
is to pinpoint the more common and general artifacts across different deepfakes.
Through systematic analysis of shared technical frameworks in existing deepfake
algorithms, we categorize deepfake artifacts into two distinct yet complementary
types: Face Inconsistency Artifacts (FIA) and Up-Sampling Artifacts (USA). FIA
arise from the challenge of generating all intricate details, inevitably causing inconsistencies between the complex facial features and relatively uniform surrounding
areas. USA, on the other hand, are the inevitable traces left by the generator’s
decoder during the up-sampling process, with all existing deepfakes exhibiting
either or both artifacts. Subsequently, we propose a novel image-level pseudo-fake
creation framework that constructs fake samples with only the FIA and USA, without introducing extra less-general artifacts. Specifically, we reconstruct the target
face to simulate the USA, while utilize image-level blend on diverse facial regions
to create the FIA. We surprisingly found that, with this intuitive design, a standard
image classifier trained only with our pseudo-fake data can non-trivially generalize
well to unseen deepfakes.

1

Introduction

In recent years, A growing number of facial manipulation techniques have advanced due to the rapid
development of generative models [35, 36, 58, 75], which facilitate the production of highly realistic
and virtually undetectable alterations. As a result, the risks of personal privacy being violated and the
spread of misinformation have increased significantly. Therefore, developing a universal deepfake
detector that can be used to detect the existing diverse fake methods has become an urgent priority.
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

