Sequential Multi-Agent
Dynamic Algorithm Configuration

Chen Lu1,2 , Ke Xue1,2∗, Lei Yuan1,2 , Yao Wang3 ,
Yaoyuan Wang3 , Sheng Fu3 , Chao Qian1,2∗
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
Advanced Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. Shenzhen, China
{xuek, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The performance of an algorithm often critically depends on its hyperparameter configuration. Dynamic algorithm configuration (DAC) is a recent trend in automated
machine learning, which can dynamically adjust the algorithm’s configuration
during the execution process and relieve users from tedious trial-and-error tuning
tasks. Recently, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) approaches have
improved the configuration of multiple heterogeneous hyperparameters, making
various parameter configurations for complex algorithms possible. However, many
complex algorithms have inherent inter-dependencies among multiple parameters
(e.g., determining the operator type first and then the operator’s parameter), which
are, however, not considered in previous approaches, thus leading to sub-optimal
results. In this paper, we propose the sequential multi-agent DAC (Seq-MADAC)
framework to address this issue by considering the inherent inter-dependencies of
multiple parameters. Specifically, we propose a sequential advantage decomposition network, which can leverage action-order information through sequential
advantage decomposition. Experiments from synthetic functions to the configuration of multi-objective optimization algorithms demonstrate Seq-MADAC’s
superior performance over state-of-the-art MARL methods and show strong generalization across problem classes. Seq-MADAC establishes a new paradigm for
the widespread dependency-aware automated algorithm configuration. Our code is
available at https://github.com/lamda-bbo/seq-madac.

1

Introduction

Identifying proper configurations of hyperparameters is critical for many learning and optimization
algorithms [15, 26]. Algorithm configuration (AC) [14, 23] has emerged to alleviate the user’s burden
of manual trial-and-error tuning. However, the static configuration policies obtained by AC may not
achieve optimal performance, because algorithms may require different configurations at different
execution stages [37]. Dynamic AC (DAC) [2, 1] is a prevalent paradigm that enables dynamic
adaptation of the algorithm’s configuration during the execution process, which is more flexible
compared to AC. Specifically, DAC formulates the configuration process as a contextual Markov
decision process (MDP) and then leverages reinforcement learning (RL) [32] to learn dynamic
configuration policies. DAC has been shown to outperform static AC methods on many tasks, such as
learning rate tuning of deep neural networks [7] and step-size control of evolution strategies [35].
Due to the increasing complexity of real-world problem modeling, the performance of an algorithm
usually relies on multiple types of hyperparameters. Consider MOEA/D [48], a widely adopted
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

