Solving Discrete (Semi) Unbalanced Optimal
Transport with Equivalent Transformation
Mechanism and KKT-Multiplier Regularization

Weiming Liu1 , Xinting Liao2∗, Jun Dan2 , Fan Wang2 , Hua Yu3 ,
Junhao Dong3 , Shunjie Dong4 , Lianyong Qi5,6 , Yew-Soon Ong3,7
1

ByteDance Inc., 2 Zhejiang University,
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 5 China University of Petroleum (East China),
6
Shandong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Oil & Gas Industrial Software,
7
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Institute of High Performance Computing,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
lwming95@gmail.com, {xintingliao, danjun, fanwang97}@zju.edu.cn,
{junhao003, yu_hua, asysong}@ntu.edu.sg, sjdong@sjtu.edu.cn, lianyongqi@gmail.com
3

Abstract
Semi-Unbalanced Optimal Transport (SemiUOT) shows great promise in matching
two discrete probability measures by relaxing one of the marginal constraints. Previous SemiUOT solvers often incorporate an entropy regularization term, inevitably
resulting in inaccurate matching solutions. To address this issue, we propose an
Equivalent Transformation Mechanism (ETM) approach to determine the marginal
probability distributions of SemiUOT with KL divergence. Furthermore, we validate the generalization capability of ETM by exploiting the marginal probability
distributions of Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT). ETM is able to determine
the exact marginal probabilities of both SemiUOT and UOT, based on which we
can transform the SemiUOT/UOT into classic Optimal Transport (OT) problem.
Moreover, we propose a KKT-Multiplier regularization term combined with Multiplier Regularized Optimal Transport (MROT) to achieve more accurate matching
results. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed methods in addressing SemiUOT and UOT problems2 .

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) technique is a powerful tool for matching and discerning two distinct
probability distributions. Nowadays, OT has multiple successful applications in traditional machine
learning [37, 35, 112, 22, 85, 62], unsupervised clustering [4, 15], domain adaptation [25, 23, 84,
60, 61], diffusion [49, 56], generative modeling [50, 79, 100, 44] and many others. Nevertheless,
directly solving OT distances could have relatively high computation cost with around super-cubic
time. Although one can adopt entropy-based Sinkhorn algorithm [24] for solving OT efficiently, it
still suffers from the dilemma of dense and inaccurate solutions [58, 63, 31]. Moreover, classic OT
strictly assumes that the probability masses on both source and target domains should be equal. It
further hurdles the generalization of OT when the data samples inherit noise or outliers.
∗
2

Corresponding author.
The demo code is provided: https://github.com/XeniaLLL/ETM.git

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

