TANDEM: Bi-Level Data Mixture Optimization
with Twin Networks
Jiaxing Wang∗1 , Deping Xiang∗1 , Jin Xu2 , Mingyang Yi† 3 , Guoqiang Gong1 ,
Zicheng Zhang1 , Haoran Li4 , Pengzhang Liu† 1 , Zhen Chen1 , Ke Zhang1 ,
Ju Fan3 , Qixiang Jiang1
1
JD.com 2 University of Oxford 3 Renmin University of China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wangjiaxing41,xiangdeping1,gongguoqiang1,zhangzicheng6}@jd.com
{liupengzhang,chenzhen48,zhangke323,jiangqixia}@jd.com
{yimingyang,fanj}@ruc.edu.cn
jin.xu@stats.ox.ac.uk
lihaoran21@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The capabilities of large language models (LLMs) significantly depend on training
data drawn from various domains. Optimizing domain-specific mixture ratios can
be modeled as a bi-level optimization problem, which we simplify into a singlelevel penalized form and solve with twin networks: a proxy model trained on
primary data and a dynamically updated reference model trained with additional
data. Our proposed method, Twin Networks for bi-level DatA mixturE optiMization (TANDEM), measures the data efficacy through the difference between the
twin models and up-weights domains that benefit more from the additional data.
TANDEM provides theoretical guarantees and wider applicability, compared to
prior approaches. Furthermore, our bi-level perspective suggests new settings to
study domain reweighting such as data-restricted scenarios and supervised finetuning, where optimized mixture ratios significantly improve the performance.
Extensive experiments validate TANDEM’s effectiveness in all scenarios.

1

Introduction

The success of large language models (LLMs) largely relies on extensive training data collected from
diverse domains, including chat logs [18], academic writings [32], mathematical problems [45], and
code repositories [21]. The emergent capabilities observed in LLMs are substantially influenced by
the specific composition of cross-domain corpora [13, 38]. Therefore, it is important to carefully
balance the proportions of domain-specific data in training sets to ensure models develop intended
and balanced capabilities for target domains.
Optimizing the mixture ratios of data domains can be formulated as a bi-level optimization problem,
in which the inner loop optimizes model parameters for a fixed ratio on training data, while the outer
loop searches for the best mixture ratio on validation data. Due to the difficulty of exactly solving this
bi-level problem, we transform it into a single-level optimization problem. Specifically, the inner-level
optimization is viewed as a Lagrangian penalty within the outer-level objective. This perspective
naturally motivates the introduction of twin networks: a proxy model trained exclusively on the
primary training data, and a reference model exposed to additional validation data. Interestingly,
this twin-network formulation relates closely to prior methods such as DoReMi [37] and DoGE
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding to Mingyang Yi and Pengzhang Liu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

