Flexible MOF Generation
with Torsion-Aware Flow Matching

Nayoung Kim
Seongsu Kim
Sungsoo Ahn
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{nayoungkim, seongsu.kim, sungsoo.ahn}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Designing metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) with novel chemistries is a longstanding challenge due to their large combinatorial space and complex 3D arrangements
of the building blocks. While recent deep generative models have enabled scalable
MOF generation, they assume (1) a fixed set of building blocks and (2) known
local 3D coordinates of building blocks. However, this limits their ability to (1)
design novel MOFs and (2) generate the structure using novel building blocks. We
propose a two-stage MOF generation framework that overcomes these limitations
by modeling both chemical and geometric degrees of freedom. First, we train
an SMILES-based autoregressive model to generate metal and organic building
blocks, paired with a cheminformatics toolkit for 3D structure initialization. Second, we introduce a flow matching model that predicts translations, rotations, and
torsional angles to assemble the blocks into valid 3D frameworks. Our experiments
demonstrate improved reconstruction accuracy, the generation of valid, novel, and
unique MOFs, and the ability to create novel building blocks. Our code is available
at https://github.com/nayoung10/MOFFlow-2.

1

Introduction

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are highly crystalline materials known for their permanent
porosity, structural versatility, and broad applications in fields such as gas storage and separations [1,
2], catalysis [3], and drug delivery [4]. MOFs are designed by assembling chemical building blocks,
i.e., metal clusters and organic linkers; their properties (e.g., pore size) can be tuned by swapping
or modifying these components. This tunability has enabled the synthesis of over 100,000 distinct
MOF structures to date [5], yet the theoretical space of possible MOFs is vastly larger, on the order of
millions of structures [6]. Exploring this large design space is a grand challenge in materials science.
Computational modeling of MOFs, i.e., 3D structure prediction and generating new MOFs, poses
significant challenges because of their structural complexity. Traditional methods, such as ab
initio random search [7], attempt to design new MOFs or predict their structures by iteratively
proposing combinations of building blocks and evaluating their stability using energy-based criteria.
However, MOFs typically contain hundreds of atoms per unit cell, rendering these iterative approaches
computationally prohibitive. Even state-of-the-art deep generative models developed for inorganic
materials [8, 9] struggle to scale to the size and complexity of MOFs [10].
In response, researchers have proposed MOF-specific generative models such as MOFDiff [11]
and MOFFlow [10]. While these methods represent significant progress, their design choices still
constrain both chemical diversity and structural fidelity. Specifically, they (1) rely on a fixed set of
predefined building blocks and (2) assume these building blocks are rigid. As a result, the design
space is limited to recombinations of known components with fixed 3D conformations, hindering the
discovery of novel chemistries and overlooking the intrinsic flexibility of organic linkers [12].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

