Distributed mediation analysis with
communication-efﬁciency

Shaomin Li
School of Mathematics and Statistics
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing, 100044
smli1@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the mediation analysis under the distributed framework, where data are
stored and processed across different worker machines due to storage limitations
or privacy concerns. Building upon the classic Sobel’s test and MaxP test, we introduce the distributed Sobel’s test and distributed MaxP test, respectively. These
tests are both communication-efﬁcient and easy to implement. Theoretical analysis and numerical experiments show that, compared to the global test obtained by
pooling all data together, the proposed tests achieve nearly identical power, independent of the number of machines. Furthermore, based on these two distributed
test statistics, many enhanced mediation tests derived from the Sobel’s or MaxP
tests can be easily adapted to the distributed system. We apply our method to
an educational study, testing whether the effect of high school mathematics on
college-level Probability and Mathematical Statistics courses is mediated by Calculus. Our method successfully detects the mediation effect, which would not be
identiﬁable using data from only the ﬁrst or second class, highlighting the advantage of our approach.

1

Introduction

Mediation analysis is regarded as a prevalent tool to dissect a mediation relationship between exposures and outcomes, and it has been widely applied in different ﬁelds, such as epidemiology [29],
economics [1], psychology [18], education [11], and many others. Baron and Kenny[3] provided
the basis for the advance of mediation analysis. They proposed a conventional regression-based
approach, commonly referred to as the causal steps method, to examine the logical relationships
among exposure, mediator, and outcome variables linking in a causal chain. While the causal steps
method established necessary conditions for causal inference, it did not provide a joint test of the
indirect effect of exposure on the outcome through a mediator. To test the mediation effect, the
classic tests are Sobel’s test [31] and the MaxP test [24]. However, these tests suffer from low statistical power, as it overlooks the impact of the composite null structure in mediation analysis [25].
To address the aforementioned issues, Nuijten et al.[26] proposed an approach based on Bayesian
models. Zhang[37] developed two data-adaptive tests that outperform both Sobel’s test and MaxP
test. These studies were limited to a small number of mediators. For high-dimensional mediators,
one usually ﬁrst estimates the proportions of sub-null hypotheses and generates weighted p-values
[7, 8, 10, 17, 23].
In many applications, data is collected independently by numerous agents and organizations. Due to
limitations in resources and concerns about privacy, only summary statistics can be shared between
sites, while raw data remains inaccessible. To address this, distributed learning algorithms have
gained attention in multi-source studies, enabling collaborative analyses without compromising the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

