Noise Hypernetworks: Amortizing Test-Time
Compute in Diffusion Models

Luca Eyring1,2,3 Shyamgopal Karthik1,2,3,4 Alexey Dosovitskiy5
Nataniel Ruiz6∗ Zeynep Akata1,2,3∗
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center of Machine Learning
3
Helmholtz Munich 4 University of Tübingen 5 Inceptive 6 Google
luca.eyring@tum.de

Abstract
The new paradigm of test-time scaling has yielded remarkable breakthroughs in
Large Language Models (LLMs) (e.g. reasoning models) and in generative vision
models, allowing models to allocate additional computation during inference to
effectively tackle increasingly complex problems. Despite the improvements of this
approach, an important limitation emerges: the substantial increase in computation
time makes the process slow and impractical for many applications. Given the
success of this paradigm and its growing usage, we seek to preserve its benefits
while eschewing the inference overhead. In this work we propose one solution to
the critical problem of integrating test-time scaling knowledge into a model during
post-training. Specifically, we replace reward guided test-time noise optimization
in diffusion models with a Noise Hypernetwork that modulates initial input noise.
We propose a theoretically grounded framework for learning this reward-tilted
distribution for distilled generators, through a tractable noise-space objective that
maintains fidelity to the base model while optimizing for desired characteristics.
We show that our approach recovers a substantial portion of the quality gains from
explicit test-time optimization at a fraction of the computational cost. Code is
available at https://github.com/ExplainableML/HyperNoise.

1

Introduction

Recently, inference-time scaling has made remarkable breakthroughs in Large Language Models [28,
40, 84] and generative vision models, enabling models to spend more computation during inference
to solve complex problems effectively. Drawing from the success and growing usage of test-time
compute in LLMs, several methods have attempted to apply similar ideas in the context of diffusion
models for generation [6, 22, 59, 66, 67, 80, 88, 90, 92, 93, 97]. The goal of this process is to spend
additional compute during inference to obtain generations that better reflect desired output properties.
Diffusion model test-time techniques that optimize the initial noise or intermediate steps of the
diffusion process, often guided by feedback from pre-trained reward models [48, 54, 101, 102,
103, 107], have demonstrated significant promise in improving critical attributes of the generated
outputs, such as prompt following, aesthetics, quality and composition [11, 22, 44, 59, 66, 67,
97]. These methods generally fall into two broad categories: gradient-based optimization, which
typically requires substantial GPU memory for backpropagation through the full model [6, 22, 46,
67, 97], and gradient-free optimization, which often necessitates a very large number of function
evaluations (NFEs), sometimes thousands, of the computationally expensive denoising network [44,
∗

Equal Supervision

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

