Flow Equivariant Recurrent Neural Networks

T. Anderson Keller
The Kempner Instutite for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 15213
t.anderson.keller@gmail.com

Abstract
Data arrives at our senses as a continuous stream, smoothly transforming from one
instant to the next. These smooth transformations can be viewed as continuous symmetries of the environment that we inhabit, defining equivalence relations between
stimuli over time. In machine learning, neural network architectures that respect
symmetries of their data are called equivariant and have provable benefits in terms
of generalization ability and sample efficiency. To date, however, equivariance has
been considered only for static transformations and feed-forward networks, limiting
its applicability to sequence models, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
and corresponding time-parameterized sequence transformations. In this work, we
extend equivariant network theory to this regime of ‘flows’ – one-parameter Lie
subgroups capturing natural transformations over time, such as visual motion. We
begin by showing that standard RNNs are generally not flow equivariant: their
hidden states fail to transform in a geometrically structured manner for moving
stimuli. We then show how flow equivariance can be introduced, and demonstrate
that these models significantly outperform their non-equivariant counterparts in
terms of training speed, length generalization, and velocity generalization, on both
next step prediction and sequence classification. We present this work as a first step
towards building sequence models that respect the time-parameterized symmetries
which govern the world around us.

1

Introduction

Every moment, the world around us shifts continuously. As you walk down the street, rooftops
glide past, trees sway in the breeze, and cars drift in and out of view. These smooth, structured
transformations – or flows – are not arbitrary, but instead are underpinned by a precise set of rules: an
algebra which ensures self-consistency across space and time. Mathematically, these transformations
which leave the essence of the world around you unchanged are called symmetries, and, in a sense,
these symmetries over time can be seen to weave together the instantaneous into the continuous.
In machine learning, symmetry has emerged as a powerful handle from which we can grapple with
the challenges of generalization and data efficiency. Models which encode symmetries are called
‘equivariant’, and their steady evolution has delivered significant performance improvements for data
with known structure. Simultaneously, with the success of large language models, sequence modeling
has become a prominent learning paradigm throughout machine learning sub-fields. We therefore
ask: can these everyday smooth, continuous motion symmetries be encoded in our modern sequence
models and leveraged for improved performance? Surprisingly, to date, the study of equivariance
has largely been limited to temporally static transformations, narrowly missing the opportunity to
capture the continuous time-parameterized symmetry transformations that dominate our natural
experience (see Figure 1). In this work, we consider a carefully structured subset of natural motion
transformations called flows: formally, one-parameter Lie subgroups. We introduce a formal notion
of what it means for a sequence model to be ‘flow equivariant’ and proceed to demonstrate that
existing sequence models are indeed not flow equivariant, even when all sub-components of these
models are individually equivariant with respect to the full ‘static’ Lie group symmetry.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

