Toward Efficient Inference Attacks:
Shadow Model Sharing via Mixture-of-Experts

Li Bai1 , Qingqing Ye1 , Xinwei Zhang1 , Sen Zhang1 , Zi Liang1 , Jianliang Xu3 , Haibo Hu1,2∗
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University1
PolyU Research Centre for Privacy and Security Technologies in Future Smart Systems2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University3
baili.bai@connect.polyu.hk, haibo.hu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Machine learning models are often vulnerable to inference attacks that expose
sensitive information from their training data. Shadow model technique is commonly employed in such attacks, such as membership inference. However, the need
for a large number of shadow models leads to high computational costs, limiting
their practical applicability. Such inefficiency mainly stems from the independent
training and use of these shadow models. To address this issue, we present a novel
shadow pool training framework SHAPOOL, which constructs multiple shared
models and trains them jointly within a single process. In particular, we leverage
the Mixture-of-Experts mechanism as the shadow pool to interconnect individual models, enabling them to share some sub-networks and thereby improving
efficiency. To ensure the shared models closely resemble independent models
and serve as effective substitutes, we introduce three novel modules: path-choice
routing, pathway regularization, and pathway alignment. These modules guarantee
random data allocation for pathway learning, promote diversity among shared
models, and maintain consistency with target models. We evaluate SHAPOOL in
the context of various membership inference attacks and show that it significantly
reduces the computational cost of shadow model construction while maintaining
comparable attack performance.

1

Introduction

With the increase of machine learning models trained on sensitive personal data like facial images
and medical records, various inference attacks pose severe threats to them, such as inferring the
membership status of individual records (i.e., membership inference attacks) [1, 2, 3], reconstructing
representative samples (i.e., model inversion attacks) [4, 5], and uncovering statistical properties of
the training dataset (i.e., property inference attacks) [6, 7].
A common technique adopted in almost all such attacks is the shadow model technique, which
enables an adversary to train multiple models using the same architecture as the target model on
similar datasets. Recent works show it is very effective in membership inference [1, 8, 9, 10] and
property inference attacks [11, 12, 13, 14]. Typically, the number of shadow models determines the
quality of inference attacks. For example, to achieve high attack performance, this number is set
to 256 and 100 in [9, 11], respectively. However, the high computational cost of training shadow
models has raised concerns [15, 16, 14]. Several works based on shadow models attempt to address
this issue by optimizing this cost inside of their specific attack algorithms. For instance, QMIA [17]
focuses solely on non-member data to develop a quantile regression model, thereby eliminating the
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

