Resource-Constrained Federated Continual Learning:
What Does Matter?
Yichen Li1,2 , Yuying Wang3 , Jiahua Dong2∗, Haozhao Wang1 ,
Yining Qi1 , Rui Zhang1†, Ruixuan Li1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
{ycli0204,hz_wang}@hust.edu.cn, rayteam@yeah.net

Abstract
Federated Continual Learning (FCL) aims to enable sequential privacy-preserving
model training on streams of incoming data that vary in edge devices by preserving
previous knowledge while adapting to new data. Current FCL literature focuses
on restricted data privacy and access to previously seen data while imposing no
constraints on the training overhead. This is unreasonable for FCL applications in
real-world scenarios, where edge devices are primarily constrained by resources
such as storage, computational budget, and label rate. We revisit this problem
with a large-scale benchmark and analyze the performance of state-of-the-art FCL
approaches under different resource-constrained settings. Various typical FCL
techniques and six datasets in two incremental learning scenarios (Class-IL and
Domain-IL) are involved in our experiments. Through extensive experiments
amounting to a total of over 1,000+ GPU hours, we find that, under limited
resource-constrained settings, existing FCL approaches, with no exception,
fail to achieve the expected performance. Our conclusions are consistent in the
sensitivity analysis. This suggests that most existing FCL methods are particularly
too resource-dependent for real-world deployment. Moreover, we study the performance of typical FCL techniques with resource constraints and shed light on future
research directions in FCL.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) emerges as a distributed learning paradigm, facilitating the collaborative
training of a global deep learning model among edge clients while ensuring the privacy of locally
stored data [38, 54, 53, 26]. Recently, FL has garnered significant interest and found applications in
diverse domains, including recommendation systems [61, 7, 25, 24] and smart healthcare solutions
[59, 41, 71].
Typically, FL has been actively studied in a static setting, where the number of training samples does
not change over time. However, in a realistic FL application, each client may continue collecting new
data and train the local model with streaming tasks, leading to performance degradation on previous
tasks [60, 27, 28]. Such a phenomenon is known as catastrophic forgetting [9] in the Continual
Learning (CL) paradigm. This challenge is further compounded in FL settings, where the local data
remains inaccessible to others, and training on clients is constrained by limited resources.
∗
†

Jiahua Dong and Ruixuan Li are corresponding authors.
Homepage: https://www.ruizhang.info/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

