F INE RS: Fine-grained Reasoning and Segmentation of
Small Objects with Reinforcement Learning

Lu Zhang1 , Jiazuo Yu1 , Haomiao Xiong1 , Ping Hu2 , Yunzhi Zhuge1∗, Huchuan Lu1 , You He3
1
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
zhangluu@dlut.edu.cn, yujiazuo@mail.dlut.edu.cn
https://iiau-zhanglu.github.io/FINERS/

Abstract
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities across a wide range of vision-language tasks. However, due to the restricted
input resolutions, MLLMs face significant challenges in precisely understanding
and localizing visual details in high-resolution images—particularly when dealing
with extra-small objects embedded in cluttered contexts. To address this issue, we
propose F INE RS, a two-stage MLLM-based reinforcement learning framework for
jointly reasoning and segmenting extremely small objects within high-resolution
scenes. F INE RS adopts a coarse-to-fine pipeline comprising Global Semantic
Exploration (GSE) and Localized Perceptual Refinement (LPR). Specifically, GSE
performs instruction-guided reasoning to generate a textural response and a coarse
target region, while LPR refines this region to produce an accurate bounding box
and segmentation mask. To couple the two stages, we introduce a locate-informed
retrospective reward, where LPR’s outputs are used to optimize GSE for more robust coarse region exploration. Additionally, we present F INE RS-4k, a new dataset
for evaluating MLLMs on attribute-level reasoning and pixel-level segmentation
on subtle, small-scale targets in complex high-resolution scenes. Experimental
results on F INE RS-4k and public datasets demonstrate that our method consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art MLLM-based approaches on both instruction-guided
segmentation and visual reasoning tasks.

1

Introduction

Recently, Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] have achieved remarkable
success in a variety of vision-language tasks, such as visual question answering, referring expression
comprehension, and instruction-guided segmentation. Among these tasks, one foundational challenge
is instruction-guided reasoning and segmentation — a capacity of not only understanding what the
user is asking, but also where in the image the referred object appears at the pixel level. Some early
attempts [3] integrate MLLMs [4, 5, 6] with foundational segmentation models [7, 8], enabling joint
language generation and object segmentation for more interactive and interpretable visual understanding. However, these methods are tailored to standard-resolution images and large, prominent objects,
where spatial structures are easily accessible to the model’s visual backbone. Their heavy reliance on
global visual-semantic alignment becomes increasingly unreliable in scenes with dense layouts and
small, low-saliency targets (see Fig. 1 (a)).
To address this challenge, the research community has begun to explore the capacity of MLLMs to
perceive fine-grained, detailed objects within high-resolution images. To mitigate detail degradation
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

