Faster Fixed-Point Methods for Multichain MDPs
Matthew Zurek
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin–Madison
matthew.zurek@wisc.edu

Yudong Chen
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin–Madison
yudongchen@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study value-iteration (VI) algorithms for solving general (a.k.a. multichain)
Markov decision processes (MDPs) under the average-reward criterion, a fundamental but theoretically challenging setting. Beyond the difficulties inherent to all
average-reward problems posed by the lack of contractivity and non-uniqueness
of solutions to the Bellman operator, in the multichain setting an optimal policy
must solve the navigation subproblem of steering towards the best connected component, in addition to optimizing long-run performance within each component.
We develop algorithms which better solve this navigational subproblem in order
to achieve faster convergence for multichain MDPs, obtaining improved rates of
convergence and sharper measures of complexity relative to prior work. Many key
components of our results are of potential independent interest, including novel
connections between average-reward and discounted problems, optimal fixed-point
methods for discounted VI which extend to general Banach spaces, new sublinear
convergence rates for the discounted value error, and refined suboptimality decompositions for multichain MDPs. Overall our results yield faster convergence rates
for discounted and average-reward problems and expand the theoretical foundations
of VI approaches.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) are the canonical framework for modeling sequential decisionmaking problems, and sit at the core of reinforcement learning (RL), operations research, and control
theory. Planning algorithms for solving MDPs therefore play a fundamental role in several fields.
Among planning techniques for MDPs, value-iteration (VI) style methods, which are based upon
solving the Bellman equation, are among the simplest and most fundamental, and also serve as key
primitives within or templates for countless modern RL algorithms.
In this paper we study MDPs with the average-reward criterion, where the objective is to optimize
long-run/steady-state performance. Despite its foundational importance for infinite-horizon problems,
the average-reward setting is less well understood from a theoretical perspective due to its complexity.
Compared to the discounted setting, where the Bellman operator is strongly contractive, the averagereward Bellman operator is merely nonexpansive and has non-unique solutions. In particular we focus
on the unrestricted setting of general (a.k.a. multichain) MDPs, which poses particular analytical
challenges, due in part to the facts that all optimal policies may induce multiple recurrent classes and
so the optimal average-reward may depend on the initial state, and that multiple Bellman/optimality
equations with different behaviors are needed. In more intuitive terms, one key challenge is that
relative to communicating MDPs (where all states are accessible from one another via some sequence
of actions), multichain MDPs may feature multiple inescapable regions of states that differ in the
maximum performance achievable within said regions, and so algorithms for solving multichain
MDPs must solve the “naviagtion/transient” subproblem of reaching the best possible such region, in
addition to the “recurrent” subproblem of optimizing long-run performance within a region.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

