End-to-End Vision Tokenizer Tuning

Wenxuan Wang1,2,3∗, Fan Zhang3∗ , Yufeng Cui3∗ , Haiwen Diao4,3∗ ,
Zhuoyan Luo5,3 , Huchuan Lu4 , Jing Liu1,2† , Xinlong Wang3†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4
Dalian University of Technology 5 Tsinghua University
{wangwenxuan2023@ia.ac.cn,zhangfan@baai.ac.cn,wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn}

Abstract
Existing vision tokenization isolates the optimization of vision tokenizers from
downstream training, implicitly assuming the visual tokens can generalize across
various tasks, e.g., image generation and visual question answering. The vision
tokenizer optimized for low-level reconstruction is agnostic to downstream tasks requiring varied representations and semantics. This decoupled paradigm introduces
a critical misalignment: The loss of the vision tokenization can be the representation bottleneck for target tasks. For example, errors in tokenizing text in an image
lead to poor results when recognizing or generating them. To address this, we
propose ETT, an end-to-end vision tokenizer tuning approach that enables joint
optimization between vision tokenization and target autoregressive tasks. Unlike
prior autoregressive models that use only discrete indices from a frozen vision
tokenizer, ETT leverages the visual embeddings of the tokenizer codebook, and
optimizes the vision tokenizers end-to-end with both reconstruction and caption objectives. Our ETT is simple to implement and integrate, without the need to adjust
the original codebooks or architectures of large language models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our end-to-end vision tokenizer tuning unlocks significant
performance gains, i.e., 2-6% for multimodal understanding and visual generation
tasks compared to frozen tokenizer baselines, while preserving the original reconstruction capability. We hope this very simple and strong method can empower
multimodal foundation models besides image generation and understanding.

1

Introduction

Recently, the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) and multimodal pre-training
has propelled autoregressive (AR) modeling beyond its dominance in natural language processing,
extending its influence into the vision and multimodal tasks. Under the next-token prediction (NTP)
paradigm of autoregressive models, multimodal learning typically encodes multimodal data such as
images and text into compact discrete tokens for unified sequence modeling. For example, a recent
work Emu3 [54] tokenizes text, images, and video into discrete tokens and performs next-token
prediction in a unified token space. Numerous subsequent works [37, 61, 69, 57], have further
advanced this direction, achieving improved performance in visual generation and perception. This
unified next-token prediction paradigm enables a flexible multimodal learning framework for both
training and inference at scale.
Tokenization plays a key role in an autoregressive framework. For modalities such as image and video,
training an efficient and general-purpose tokenizer raises significant challenges as the tokenization can
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

