Detecting Generated Images by Fitting Natural Image
Distributions
Yonggang Zhang1 Jun Nie2,3 Xinmei Tian3 Mingming Gong4,6 Kun Zhang5,6 Bo Han2†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
TMLR Group, Hong Kong Baptist University 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
The University of Melbourne, Australia 5 Carnegie Mellon University
6
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
The increasing realism of generated images has raised significant concerns about
their potential misuse, necessitating robust detection methods. Current approaches
mainly rely on training binary classifiers, which depend heavily on the quantity
and quality of available generated images. In this work, we propose a novel
framework that exploits geometric differences between the data manifolds of natural
and generated images. To exploit this difference, we employ a pair of functions
engineered to yield consistent outputs for natural images but divergent outputs
for generated ones, leveraging the property that their gradients reside in mutually
orthogonal subspaces. This design enables a simple yet effective detection method:
an image is identified as generated if a transformation along its data manifold
induces a significant change in the loss value of a self-supervised model pre-trained
on natural images. Further more, to address diminishing manifold disparities in
advanced generative models, we leverage normalizing flows to amplify detectable
differences by extruding generated images away from the natural image manifold.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of this method. Code is available
at https://github.com/tmlr-group/ConV.

1

INTRODUCTION

Recent advances in generative models have revolutionized image generation, making it possible to
create highly realistic images (Rombach et al., 2022; Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021; Karras et al., 2019).
While these generative models offer impressive capabilities, they also introduce significant risks,
including the proliferation of deepfakes and other manipulated content. The realism achieved by
these technologies raises urgent concerns about their potential misuse in sensitive areas like politics
and economics. Moreover, if we simply use generated images as part of the training data, the trained
model may largely degrade its quality (Shumailov et al., 2024), so it is essential to distinguish between
natural images and generated ones. To deal with these potentially dire risks, various generated image
detection methods have been developed. In this regard, a common approach is to consider generated
image detection as a binary classification task. To train a binary classifier for detecting generated
images, current methods typically require to collect numerous natural and generated images to
construct a training dataset (Chai et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020).
Although current methods have achieved exciting success, they often struggle to generalize well
to images generated by unknown generative models. To promote the generalization ability on
images generated by unknown generative models, one possible approach is to construct a more
extensive training dataset by collecting more natural and generated images for training the binary
classifier (Jeong et al., 2022; Tan et al., 2024). Besides collecting data, advanced methods propose to
†

Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

