GeRaF: Neural Geometry Reconstruction from Radio
Frequency Signals

Jiachen Lu* , Hailan Shanbhag* , Haitham Al Hassanieh
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

Abstract
GeRaF is the first method to use neural implicit learning for near-range 3D geometry reconstruction from radio frequency (RF) signals. Unlike RGB or LiDAR-based
methods, RF sensing can see through occlusion but suffers from low resolution and
noise due to its lensless imaging nature. While lenses in RGB imaging constrain
sampling to 1D rays, RF signals propagate through the entire space, introducing significant noise and leading to cubic complexity in volumetric rendering. Moreover,
RF signals interact with surfaces via specular reflections, requiring fundamentally
different modeling. To address these challenges, GeRaF (1) introduces filter-based
rendering to suppress irrelevant signals, (2) implements a physics-based RF volumetric rendering pipeline, and (3) proposes a novel lensless sampling and lensless
alpha blending strategy that makes full-space sampling feasible during training.
By learning signed distance functions, reflectiveness, and signal power through
MLPs and trainable parameters, GeRaF takes the first step towards reconstructing
millimeter-level geometry from RF signals in real-world settings.

1

Introduction

Geometry reconstruction is a fundamental problem that enables a wide range of applications in
fields such as virtual reality [14, 21, 32] and robotics [22, 29]. In recent years, neural reconstruction
methods [55, 51, 40, 41, 35] have gained significant attention. A key advantage of these methods
is their ability to represent the geometry of a scene continuously, which can help in many downstream tasks. However, vision-based sensors often struggle in environments with adverse weather
conditions [67, 20, 37, 34] or even become completely unusable when objects are obscured by
occlusions [2, 65, 66, 30, 57, 12, 13].
In contrast, radio frequency (RF) sensing, specifically wireless millimeter-wave (mmWave) sensing,
has the ability to see through occlusions and remains robust under challenging visibility conditions
and, unlike X-Ray, is not dangerous to humans [56], making it a compelling alternative for 3D
reconstruction. This could open up a plethora of applications; for example, seeing whether items
inside a box are the correct items, are damaged, or pose a threat, without having to ever open up
the box. On the other hand, mmWave resolution is extremely low compared to vision. Fig. 1 shows
an example of one radar image, which shows significantly less visual context than camera images
provide, making it hard to directly extract 3D reconstruction from a radar image alone. In order
to perform more complete 3D reconstruction, some works [2, 65, 30, 57, 13] have done 3D point
cloud reconstruction or human body tracking by leveraging movement or emulating larger antenna
apertures, however, the recovered point clouds from RF are still too sparse and noisy to reliably
recover detailed geometry. Other works [6, 24] have proposed using neural implicit representations for
RF sensing, aiming to concentrate scene information from heavy noise through neural optimization.
*

Co-primary first authors, indicates equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

