Compositional Reasoning with Transformers, RNNs,
and Chain of Thought

Gilad Yehudai
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
gy2209@nyu.edu

Noah Amsel
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
noah.amsel@nyu.edu

Joan Bruna
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
& Center for Data Science, New York University
Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute
jb4496@nyu.edu

Abstract
It is well understood that different neural network architectures are suited to
different tasks, but is there always a single best architecture for a given task? We
compare the expressive power of transformers, RNNs, and transformers with chain
of thought tokens on a simple and natural class of tasks we term Compositional
Reasoning Questions (CRQ). This family captures multi-step problems with treelike compositional structure, such as evaluating Boolean formulas. We prove that
under standard hardness assumptions, none of these three architectures is capable
of solving CRQs unless some hyperparameter (depth, embedding dimension, and
number of chain of thought tokens, respectively) grows with the size of the input.
We then provide constructions for solving CRQs with each architecture. For
transformers, our construction uses depth that is logarithmic in the problem size.
For RNNs, logarithmic embedding dimension is necessary and sufficient, so long
as the inputs are provided in a certain order. For transformers with chain of thought,
our construction uses n CoT tokens for input size n. These results show that, while
CRQs are inherently hard, there are several different ways for language models to
overcome this hardness. Even for a single class of problems, each architecture has
strengths and weaknesses, and none is strictly better than the others.

1

Introduction

Large language models [Touvron et al., 2023, Anil et al., 2023, Achiam et al., 2023] are increasingly
used to perform logical reasoning and other problems that require algorithmic thinking. To understand
the power and limitations of these models, it is essential to determine what kinds of computational
problems they are capable of solving. To this end, a long line of theoretical work has studied the
expressive power of various language modeling architectures using simple tasks like copying strings,
recognizing formal languages, and determining if a graph is connected [Jelassi et al., 2024, Sanford
et al., 2024b, Strobl et al., 2024]. Such studies typically provide constructions or prove impossibility
results for a particular architecture or paradigm—such as recurrent neural networks, transformers,
and transformers with test-time scaling (“chain of thought”)—following the progress of the field.1
1
In this paper, we consider transformers with and without chain of thought to be distinct architectures.
We also distinguish between “shallow” (constant number of layers compared to the input size) and “deep”
transformers. While these are all types of transformer, our results show that they are qualitatively very different.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

