S PIRAL: Semantic-Aware Progressive LiDAR
Scene Generation and Understanding
Dekai Zhu1,4,∗ Yixuan Hu1,∗ Youquan Liu2 Dongyue Lu3
Lingdong Kong3 Slobodan Ilic1
3

1
Technical University of Munich 2 Fudan University
National University of Singapore 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning

https://dekai21.github.io/SPIRAL/

Figure 1: Visualization of LiDAR scenes and their semantic labels jointly generated by S PIRAL,
exhibiting high geometric fidelity and semantic–geometric consistency.

Abstract
Leveraging recent diffusion models, LiDAR-based large-scale 3D scene generation
has achieved great success. While recent voxel-based approaches can generate both
geometric structures and semantic labels, existing range-view methods are limited
to producing unlabeled LiDAR scenes. Relying on pretrained segmentation models
to predict the semantic maps often results in suboptimal cross-modal consistency.
To address this limitation while preserving the advantages of range-view representations, such as computational efficiency and simplified network design, we propose
S PIRAL, a novel range-view LiDAR diffusion model that simultaneously generates
depth, reflectance images, and semantic maps. Furthermore, we introduce novel
semantic-aware metrics to evaluate the quality of the generated labeled range-view
data. Experiments on the SemanticKITTI and nuScenes datasets demonstrate that
S PIRAL achieves state-of-the-art performance with the smallest parameter size,
outperforming two-step methods that combine the generative and segmentation
models. Additionally, we validate that range images generated by S PIRAL can be
effectively used for synthetic data augmentation in the downstream segmentation
training, significantly reducing the labeling effort on LiDAR data.

1

Introduction

By providing accurate distance measurements regardless of ambient illumination, LiDAR plays a
crucial role in scene understanding and navigation for robotics and autonomous driving [11, 60, 10, 13,
∗

Equal contributions.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

