Entropy Rectifying Guidance
for Diffusion and Flow Models
Tariq Berrada Ifriqi1,2
Adriana Romero-Soriano1,3,4,5
1
Michal Drozdzal
Jakob Verbeek1
Karteek Alahari2
1
2
FAIR at Meta
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, France
3
McGill University 4 Mila, Quebec AI institute 5 Canada CIFAR AI chair
tariqberrada@meta.com

Abstract
Guidance techniques are commonly used in diffusion and flow models to improve
image quality and input consistency for conditional generative tasks such as classconditional and text-to-image generation. In particular, classifier-free guidance
(CFG) is the most widely adopted guidance technique. It results, however, in
trade-offs across quality, diversity and consistency: improving some at the expense
of others. While recent work has shown that it is possible to disentangle these
factors to some extent, such methods come with an overhead of requiring an
additional (weaker) model, or require more forward passes per sampling step. In
this paper, we propose Entropy Rectifying Guidance (ERG), a simple and effective
guidance method based on inference-time changes in the attention mechanism of
state-of-the-art diffusion transformer architectures, which allows for simultaneous
improvements over image quality, diversity and prompt consistency. ERG is more
general than CFG and similar guidance techniques, as it extends to unconditional
sampling. We show that ERG results in significant improvements in various tasks,
including text-to-image, class-conditional and unconditional image generation.
We also show that ERG can be seamlessly combined with other recent guidance
methods such as CADS and APG, further improving generation results.

1 Introduction
Diffusion (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Dhariwal and Nichol,
2021) and flow models (Lipman et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024; Esser et al., 2024) are state-of-the-art
generative modeling tools for various modalities, ranging from images (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Esser et al., 2024), to audio (Wang et al., 2023; Levy et al., 2023), and
video (Jin et al., 2025; Polyak et al., 2024). These models generate data by starting with a simple prior
and iteratively removing noise – a process called “denoising”. See Kingma and Gao (2023); Lipman
et al. (2023) for details on diffusion and flow matching. These models can be conditioned on various
inputs to control the generative process, e.g., in text-to-image models. Guidance techniques such
as classifier guidance (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) and classifier-free guidance (Ho and Salimans,
2021) are commonly used to improve sample quality and consistency with input conditioning. In
the sampling process, these techniques combine a conditional signal with an unconditional one, and
control the strength of conditioning through a scaling parameter. Although such guidance techniques
are a crucial component in achieving state-of-the-art results, they are also known to negatively affect
the diversity of generated samples given a particular prompt (Sadat et al., 2024; Karras et al., 2024;
Kynkäänniemi et al., 2024; Saharia et al., 2022). Moreover, too high guidance scales may lead to
overly saturated images, affecting the quality of generated images (Saharia et al., 2022). An extensive
analysis on the trade-offs of image generation quality, diversity, and consistency was presented
by Astolfi et al. (2024). To mitigate these quality-diversity-consistency trade-offs, more advanced
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

