Debate or Vote: Which Yields Better Decisions
in Multi-Agent Large Language Models?

Hyeong Kyu Choi
Xiaojin Zhu
Sharon Li∗
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
{froilanchoi, jerryzhu, sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Multi-Agent Debate (MAD) has emerged as a promising paradigm for improving
the performance of large language models through collaborative reasoning. Despite
recent advances, the key factors driving MAD’s effectiveness remain unclear. In
this work, we disentangle MAD into two key components–Majority Voting and
inter-agent Debate–and assess their respective contributions. Through extensive
experiments across seven NLP benchmarks, we find that Majority Voting alone
accounts for most of the performance gains typically attributed to MAD. To explain
this, we propose a theoretical framework that models debate as a stochastic process.
We prove that it induces a martingale over agents’ belief trajectories, implying that
debate alone does not improve expected correctness. Guided by these insights,
we demonstrate that targeted interventions, by biasing the belief update toward
correction, can meaningfully enhance debate effectiveness. Overall, our findings
suggest that while MAD has potential, simple ensembling methods remain strong
and more reliable alternatives in many practical settings. Code is released in
https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/debate-or-vote.

1

Introduction
“Out of intense complexities, intense simplicities emerge.”
— W. C HURCHILL

Throughout history, humans have relied on deliberation to resolve ambiguity, challenge assumptions,
and seek better answers. From courtrooms and panels to scientific collaborations, group reasoning
plays a central role in decision-making. This process—where individuals reflect, revise, and converge
through interaction—has long been seen as a hallmark of intelligent behavior. Inspired by this, recent
work has explored whether large language models (LLMs) might similarly benefit from structured
interaction. Multi-Agent Debate (MAD) has emerged as a popular framework: multiple LLM agents
are prompted to discuss a shared question, each updating their answer based on the responses of their
peers [1–6]. The hope is that, like human deliberation, such interaction will improve reasoning and
lead to better outcomes.
At its core, MAD integrates two key ingredients: the use of multiple agents (“Multi-Agent”) and
their interaction through iterative discussions (“Debate”). Recent work has introduced increasingly
sophisticated variants—ranging from diverse communication protocols [3, 7, 8], designing efficient
and effective system architectures [1, 2, 9, 10], and assigning varied roles or personas to agents [11–
13]. Despite these advances, the underlying mechanisms behind MAD’s effectiveness remain unclear.
A natural step toward understanding MAD’s performance is to disentangle the contribution of
each component—are the gains primarily due to meaningful communication between agents, or
simply the result of aggregating multiple outputs? Answering this question is important because it
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

