Linearization Explains Fine-Tuning in Large
Language Models

Zahra Rahimi Afzal∗ a

Tara Esmaeilbeig∗ a,b
Mojtaba Soltanaliana
Mesrob I. Ohannessiana
b
University of Illinois Chicago
Nokia Bell Labs
a
{zrahim2, msol, mesrob}@uic.edu
b
tara.esmaeilbeig@nokia.com

a

Abstract
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) is a popular class of techniques that
strive to adapt large models in a scalable and resource-efficient manner. Yet,
the mechanisms underlying their training performance and generalization remain
underexplored. In this paper, we provide several insights into such fine-tuning
through the lens of linearization. Fine-tuned models are often implicitly encouraged
to remain close to the pretrained model. By making this explicit, using an ℓ2 distance inductive bias in parameter space, we show that fine-tuning dynamics
become equivalent to learning with the positive-definite neural tangent kernel
(NTK). We specifically analyze how close the fully linear and the linearized finetuning optimizations are, based on the strength of the regularization. This allows
us to be pragmatic about how good a model linearization is when fine-tuning
large language models (LLMs). When linearization is a good model, our findings
reveal a strong correlation between the eigenvalue spectrum of the NTK and the
performance of model adaptation. Motivated by this, we give spectral perturbation
bounds on the NTK induced by the choice of layers selected for fine-tuning. We
empirically validate our theory on Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) on LLMs. These
insights not only characterize fine-tuning but also have the potential to enhance
PEFT techniques, paving the way to better informed and more nimble adaptation
in LLMs.

1

Introduction

Foundational large language models (LLMs) [1, 2] have emerged as general-purpose models that are
then adapted to various NLP tasks through fine-tuning. Due to the enormous number of trainable
parameters in these models, full fine-tuning can be expensive in terms of time and other computational
resources [3]. Parameter-Efficient Fine-tuning (PEFT) [4–8] is a particularly popular set of techniques
that strive to tackle this computational burden. They aim to reduce the effective number of trained
parameters, making choices such as focusing on certain layers only or applying rank-limited updates,
all while maintaining how well the model adapts to the task. However, these methods often lack a
fundamental understanding of the dynamics behind these choices, making informed exploration of
the algorithmic space difficult.
In this paper, we introduce linearized fine-tuning, which establishes a foundation for rigorously
understanding adaptation in large models through the lens of Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) regression.
Said simply, linearizing the fine-tuning process reduces the problem to one closely aligned with NTK
regression. This, in turn, allows us to predict the performance of various fine-tuning decisions using
the properties of the NTK kernel. Linearization can be achieved by regularizing fine-tuning to remain
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/zahrahimi/linearization.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

