NTKMTL: Mitigating Task Imbalance in Multi-Task
Learning from Neural Tangent Kernel Perspective

1

Xiaohan Qin1,2 , Xiaoxing Wang1 , Ning Liao1 , Junchi Yan1,2,‡
School of Artificial Intelligence & School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute

Abstract
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) enables a single model to learn multiple tasks simultaneously, leveraging knowledge transfer among tasks for enhanced generalization,
and has been widely applied across various domains. However, task imbalance
remains a major challenge in MTL. Although balancing the convergence speeds
of different tasks is an effective approach to address this issue, it is highly challenging to accurately characterize the training dynamics and convergence speeds
of multiple tasks within the complex MTL system. To this end, we attempt to
analyze the training dynamics in MTL by leveraging Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
theory and propose a new MTL method, NTKMTL. Specifically, we introduce
an extended NTK matrix for MTL and adopt spectral analysis to balance the convergence speeds of multiple tasks, thereby mitigating task imbalance. Based on
the approximation via shared representation, we further propose NTKMTL-SR,
achieving training efficiency while maintaining competitive performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our methods achieve state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of benchmarks, including both multi-task supervised learning and multi-task reinforcement learning. Source code is available at
https://github.com/jianke0604/NTKMTL.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning (MTL) [9, 20, 56, 45, 61] involves training a single model to address multiple tasks
concurrently. This approach enables sharing information and representations across tasks, enhancing
the model’s generalization capabilities and boosting performance on individual tasks [6, 50, 38]. MTL
is particularly advantageous in scenarios with limited computational resources, as it eliminates the
need to maintain separate models for each task. Its utility spans a wide range of domains, including
computer vision [1, 63, 35], natural language processing [10, 34, 40], and robotics [16, 55]. Despite
these benefits, MTL encounters a significant challenge known as task imbalance, where certain
tasks dominate the training process while others suffer from insufficient optimization. Previous
studies [4, 48] have indicated that achieving more balanced optimization across tasks often leads to
improved overall performance. Addressing such a task imbalance issue necessitates the development
of sophisticated optimization strategies to ensure that all tasks benefit equitably from the shared
model parameters.
One widely adopted perspective to address the above issue is to balance the convergence speeds
of different tasks [32, 60, 35]. Nevertheless, it is highly challenging to accurately analyze the
training dynamics and convergence speeds of multiple tasks within the complex MTL system. Most
prior methods [35, 31] approximate the convergence speeds based on the difference or ratio between
consecutive loss values. However, different tasks exhibit vastly different loss scales and heterogeneous
‡

Corresponding author. This work is partly supported by NSFC (92370201).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

