Minimax Adaptive Online Nonparametric Regression
over Besov spaces

Paul Liautaud
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LPSM
F-75005 Paris, France
paul.liautaud@sorbonne-universite.fr

Pierre Gaillard
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France
pierre.gaillard@inria.fr

Olivier Wintenberger
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LPSM
F-75005 Paris, France
Institut Pauli, CNRS and University of Vienna
Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, 1090 Wien, Austria
olivier.wintenberger@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract
We study online adversarial regression with convex losses against a rich class of
continuous yet highly irregular competitor functions,modeled by Besov spaces
s
Bpq
with general parameters 1 ⩽ p, q ⩽ ∞ and smoothness s > dp . We introduce
an adaptive wavelet-based algorithm that performs sequential prediction without
prior knowledge of (s, p, q), and establish minimax-optimal regret bounds against
s
any comparator in Bpq
. We further design a locally adaptive extension capable of
sequentially adapting to spatially inhomogeneous smoothness. This adaptive mechanism adjusts the resolution of the predictions over both time and space, yielding
refined regret bounds in terms of local regularity. Consequently, in heterogeneous
environments, our adaptive guarantees can significantly surpass those obtained by
standard global methods.

1

Introduction

We consider the online regression framework [5, 6], where inputs x1 , . . . , xt , . . . ∈ X arrive in a stream,
and the task is to sequentially predict a response fˆt (xt ) ∈ R using an online predictive algorithm
fˆt : X → R based on past observations s = 1, . . . , t − 1 and the current input xt . The goal is to design
a sequence of predictors (fˆt ) in the competitive approach, i.e., with guarantees that hold uniformly
over all individual (and potentially adversarial) data sequences. Prediction accuracy is assessed
over time using a sequence of convex loss functions (ℓt )t⩾1 , for instance ℓt (fˆt (xt )) = |fˆt (xt ) − yt |
or (fˆt (xt ) − yt )2 , where yt is the observed response associated with xt . After T ⩾ 1 rounds, the
performance of the algorithm is measured through its regret with respect to competitive continuous
functions f ,
RT (f ) :=

T
X
t=1

ℓt (fˆt (xt )) −

T
X

ℓt (f (xt )).

(1)

t=1

Much of the early literature [7, 17, 23, 25] focuses on competitors f belonging to smooth benchmark
classes, such as Lipschitz or kernel-based functions. In this work, we extend this setting by designing
constructive algorithms that are competitive with a much richer class of prediction rules, namely
functions in general Besov spaces [20, 37, 40]. Building on wavelet-based representations, we design
an adaptive algorithm that achieves optimal regret performance (1), against broad classes of prediction
rules, modeled by Besov spaces. Wavelets [8, 11] are indeed a powerful and widely used tool for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

