Do Language Models Use Their Depth Efficiently?

Róbert Csordás Christopher D. Manning Christopher Potts
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
rcsordas@cs.stanford.edu {manning,cgpotts}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Modern LLMs are increasingly deep, and depth correlates with performance, albeit
with diminishing returns. However, do these models use their depth efficiently? Do
they compose more features to create higher-order computations that are impossible
in shallow models, or do they merely spread the same kinds of computation out
over more layers? To address these questions, we analyze the residual stream of
the Llama 3.1, Qwen 3, and OLMo 2 family of models. We find: First, comparing
the output of the sublayers to the residual stream reveals that layers in the second
half contribute much less than those in the first half, with a clear phase transition
between the two halves. Second, skipping layers in the second half has a much
smaller effect on future computations and output predictions. Third, for multihop
tasks, we are unable to find evidence that models are using increased depth to
compose subresults in examples involving many hops. Fourth, we seek to directly
address whether deeper models are using their additional layers to perform new
kinds of computation. To do this, we train linear maps from the residual stream
of a shallow model to a deeper one. We find that layers with the same relative
depth map best to each other, suggesting that the larger model simply spreads the
same computations out over its many layers. All this evidence suggests that deeper
models are not using their depth to learn new kinds of computation, but only using
the greater depth to perform more fine-grained adjustments to the residual. This
may help explain why increasing scale leads to diminishing returns for stacked
Transformer architectures.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]) have improved rapidly in recent years, and one
significant correlate of these improvements is their increasing depth as measured by number of
Transformer layers (Fig. 1). This scaling relationship would seem to follow from the structure of
these LLMs: they predominantly use a stacked Transformer structure [6], which lacks recurrence
across layers, and thus the number of computation steps they can perform is constrained by their depth.
In theory, greater depth should enable them to perform more complex computations by building on
top of the representations computed in previous layers. Deeper models should have the capacity to be
more compositional, leading to better reasoning, math capabilities, and generalization.
However, it is unclear whether these models are using their depth efficiently. On the one hand, Petty
et al. [7] find that increasing depth does not help with compositional generalization, Lad et al. [8]
show that, apart from the first and last layers, models are robust to layer skipping and swapping
neighboring layers (see also Sun et al. [9]), and Gromov et al. [10] were able to remove half of the
layers from the network without significantly affecting performance on MMLU (but not for math).
On the other hand, interpretability research often finds evidence for complex mechanisms spanning
multiple layers [11, 12], suggesting that models can represent more complex operations as their
depth increases. This paper is an exploration of this tension. Our primary question: do deeper LLMs
use their depth to compose more features to create higher-order computations that are impossible
in shallow models, or do they merely spread the same kinds of computation out over more layers?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

