Reinforcement Learning with Imperfect Transition
Predictions: A Bellman-Jensen Approach

Chenbei Lu
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
Zaiwei Chen
Edwardson School of Industrial Engineering
Purdue University
Tongxin Li
School of Data Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
Chenye Wu∗
School of Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)

Adam Wierman
Computing & Mathematical Sciences
Caltech

Abstract
Traditional reinforcement learning (RL) assumes the agents make decisions based
on Markov decision processes (MDPs) with one-step transition models. In many
real-world applications, such as energy management and stock investment, agents
can access multi-step predictions of future states, which provide additional advantages for decision making. However, multi-step predictions are inherently
high-dimensional: naively embedding these predictions into an MDP leads to an
exponential blow-up in state space and the curse of dimensionality. Moreover,
existing RL theory provides few tools to analyze prediction-augmented MDPs, as it
typically works on one-step transition kernels and cannot accommodate multi-step
predictions with errors or partial action-coverage. We address these challenges
with three key innovations: First, we propose the Bayesian value function to characterize the optimal prediction-aware policy tractably. Second, we develop a novel
BellmanJensen Gap analysis on the Bayesian value function, which enables characterizing the value of imperfect predictions. Third, we introduce BOLA (Bayesian
Offline Learning with Online Adaptation), a two-stage model-based RL algorithm
that separates offline Bayesian value learning from lightweight online adaptation
to real-time predictions. We prove that BOLA remains sample-efficient even under
imperfect predictions. We validate our theory and algorithm on synthetic MDPs
and a real-world wind energy storage control problem.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1] has emerged as a powerful framework for sequential decisionmaking, achieving remarkable success across diverse domains [2–5]. Classical RL formulates
∗

Corresponding author, chenyewu@yeah.net

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

