Valid Selection among Conformal Sets
Mahmoud Hegazy1,2

Liviu Aolaritei3

Michael I. Jordan2,3

Aymeric Dieuleveut1

1

CMAP, École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Inria, École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
mahmoud.hegazy@polytechnique.edu liviu.aolaritei@berkeley.edu
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu aymeric.dieuleveut@polytechnique.edu
2

Abstract
Conformal prediction offers a distribution-free framework for constructing prediction sets with coverage guarantees. In practice, multiple valid conformal prediction
sets may be available, arising from different models or methodologies. However,
selecting the most desirable set, such as the smallest, can invalidate the coverage
guarantees. To address this challenge, we propose a stability-based approach that
ensures coverage for the selected prediction set. We extend our results to the
online conformal setting, propose several refinements in settings where additional
structure is available, and demonstrate its effectiveness through experiments.

1

Introduction

Conformal Prediction (CP) provides a principled framework for uncertainty quantification by constructing prediction sets with guaranteed marginal coverage [1–3]. For a desired coverage level 1 − α,
a conformal predictor outputs a set that on average contains the true label with at least this probability.
The appeal of conformal prediction lies in its minimal assumptions about the data distribution and
the underlying predictive model. In practice, multiple conformal prediction algorithms may be
available for a given task, arising from variations in underlying models or data splits. This multiplicity
motivates the choice of the most desirable set, often the smallest. To illustrate, consider a prediction
problem with feature X and K sets {Ciα (X)}K
i=1 , each generated by a different conformal predictor.
Suppose each Ciα (X) satisfies the marginal coverage guarantee P {Y ∈ Ciα (X)} ≥ 1 − α, for all
i ∈ [K], where Y denotes the label associated to X. Although each Ciα (X) individually meets the
coverage guarantee, selecting the smallest set generally invalidates the guarantee due to dependencies
on the data introduced by the selection.
Contributions and outline. To address this issue, we first introduce a novel perspective on the
selection process based on algorithmic stability [4, 5]. The core idea is to employ a stable randomized
selection mechanism, meaning its output is robust to small input perturbations. Such stability then
allows us to transfer the marginal coverage of individual conformal predictors to the selected set.
We introduce several stable selection rules, in particular MinSE, which we prove to be optimal. We
further extend approach, by introducing an adaptive and a derandomized variant. These contributions
are given in Section 3, after recalling preliminaries on conformal prediction in Section 2.
Furthermore, we extend in Section 4 our work to the online conformal setting [6–9], where data
arrives sequentially, and predictions are made in real-time. We first demonstrate how our stabilitybased approach integrates seamlessly with existing online conformal methods, particularly with the
approach of [10], to enable more adaptable selection among online predictors. Finally, in Section 5,
we explore methods to optimize the implementation of our stable selection framework in practice.
In particular, we take a closer look at the split conformal setting, where the stability-based bound
can be overly conservative, and propose a recalibration mechanism that can achieve better empirical
performance. Lastly, we validate our approaches on multiple experimental settings in Section 6.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

