Counterfactual Evolution of Multimodal Datasets via
Visual Programming

Minghe Gao1,2∗, Zhongqi Yue3∗, Wenjie Yan1 , Yihao Hu4 , Wei Ji5
Siliang Tang1 , Jun Xiao1 , Tat-Seng Chua2 , Yueting Zhuang1 , Juncheng Li1†
1

Zhejiang University 2 National University of Singapore
Nanyang Technological University 4 Hainan University 5 Nanjing University
{minghegao,22551068,siliang,junx,yzhuang,junchengli}@zju.edu.cn
nickyuezhongqi@gmail.com, 20223003513@hainanu.edu.cn
weiji0523@gmail.com, chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg
3

Abstract
The rapid development of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) poses
increasing demands on the diversity and complexity of multimodal datasets. Yet
manual annotation pipelines can no longer keep pace. Existing augmentation
methods often follow fixed rules and lack verifiable control over sample diversity
and reasoning complexity. To address this, we introduce Scalable COunterfactual
Program Evolution (SCOPE), a framework that uses symbolic Visual Programming
to guide program evolution via counterfactual reasoning. SCOPE performs the
three steps of counterfactual inference: (1) Abduction, by generating verifiable
programs to model reasoning associations; (2) Action, by intervening on program
structure along three axes—reasoning path, visual context, and cross-instance
composition; and (3) Prediction, by categorizing evolved instances by difficulty,
structure, and input multiplicity. Based on this process, we build SCOPE-Train
and SCOPE-Test, evolving benchmarks with expert validation. To support training,
we propose MAP, a curriculum learning strategy that aligns model capacity with
sample difficulty. Experiments show that SCOPE improves reasoning performance,
exposes model blind spots, and enhances visual dialog capabilities.

1

Introduction

Multimodal datasets [37, 11, 21, 5, 28] have been foundational to the development of powerful
MLLMs. Recent works [10, 22, 35, 36] have devoted substantial effort to collecting and curating
data for both the pretraining and evaluation, aiming to enhance the quality of raw datasets. An ideal
dataset should be sufficiently diverse and scalable, with controllable attributes such as difficulty,
input modality, and the ability to explicitly reflect reasoning processes. However, existing datasets
are mostly static, lack diversity, or rely heavily on manual annotation that can no longer keep pace
with model development. The growing mismatch between the speed of dataset evolution and model
advancement has become a critical bottleneck in developing more generalizable and robust MLLMs.
A systematic dataset evolution framework is urgently needed to address the limitations posed by
low-quality data resources.
Several recent efforts have attempted to modify existing datasets, which can be broadly categorized
into three approaches. A: Prompt-based transformations using large models, such as MAmmoTHVL [16], CoSyn [41], and OmniSearch [20]. These methods feed original VQA or image-question
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

