Learning to Learn with Contrastive Meta-Objective

Shiguang Wu1 , Yaqing Wang2∗ , Yatao Bian3 , Quanming Yao1,4∗
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications
3
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
4
State Key laboratory of Space Network and Communications, Tsinghua University
wsg23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangyaqing@bimsa.cn,
ybian@nus.edu.sg, qyaoaa@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Meta-learning enables learning systems to adapt quickly to new tasks, similar to
humans. Different meta-learning approaches all work under/with the mini-batch
episodic training framework. Such framework naturally gives the information
about task identity, which can serve as additional supervision for meta-training
to improve generalizability. We propose to exploit task identity as additional
supervision in meta-training, inspired by the alignment and discrimination ability
which is is intrinsic in human’s fast learning. This is achieved by contrasting
what meta-learners learn, i.e., model representations. The proposed ConML is
evaluating and optimizing the contrastive meta-objective under a problem- and
learner-agnostic meta-training framework. We demonstrate that ConML integrates
seamlessly with existing meta-learners, as well as in-context learning models, and
brings significant boost in performance with small implementation cost.

1

Introduction

Learning to learn, also known as meta-learning [38, 41], is a powerful paradigm designed to enable
learning systems to adapt quickly to new tasks. During the meta-training phase, a meta-learner
simulates adaptation (learning) across a variety of relevant tasks to accumulate knowledge on how to
learn effectively. In the meta-testing phase, this learned adaptation strategy is applied to unseen tasks.
The adaptation is typically accomplished by the meta-learner, which, given a set of task-specific
training examples, generates a predictive model tailored to that task.
As the objective of meta-learning is to learn a meta-learner to generalize well to unseen tasks where a
few labeled examples are given, the most conventional objective in meta-training follows the natural
idea "train as you test" [46] to minimize the validation loss, by splitting each task into a training
set (support set) to which the meta-learner would be adapted to, and a validation set (query set) to
evaluate the adapted model. Beyond "train as you test", people also have introduced regularization
to the meta-training objective to improve generalizability, like supervision from stronger models
[52, 13, 54], or injecting global information into each task [49]. All these works are under/with the
same mini-batch episodic training framework: sampling a batch of tasks in each episode to obtain an
episodic loss to minimize.
The mini-batch episodic training framework is universal, and naturally gives the information about
task identity, which can serve as additional supervision for meta-training for generalizability. Inspired
by the intrinsic property of human’s fast learning ability: alignment and discrimination [9, 23, 11],
we hope a meta-learner itself should be able to tell if different datasets are from the same
task or different tasks by exploiting task identity. A good learner possesses alignment ability
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

