Normal-Abnormal Guided Generalist
Anomaly Detection

Yuexin Wang1,2∗ , Xiaolei Wang1,2∗ , Yizheng Gong1,2 , Jimin Xiao1†
1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool

Abstract
Generalist Anomaly Detection (GAD) aims to train a unified model on an original
domain that can detect anomalies in new target domains. Previous GAD methods
primarily use only normal samples as references, overlooking the valuable information contained in anomalous samples that are often available in real-world scenarios.
To address this limitation, we propose a more practical approach: normal-abnormalguided generalist anomaly detection, which leverages both normal and anomalous
samples as references to guide anomaly detection across diverse domains. We introduce the Normal-Abnormal Generalist Learning (NAGL) framework, consisting of
two key components: Residual Mining (RM) and Anomaly Feature Learning (AFL).
RM extracts abnormal patterns from normal-abnormal reference residuals to establish transferable anomaly representations, while AFL adaptively learns anomaly
features in query images through residual mapping to identify instance-aware
anomalies. Our approach effectively utilizes both normal and anomalous references for more accurate and efficient cross-domain anomaly detection. Extensive
experiments across multiple benchmarks demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms existing GAD approaches. This work represents the first to adopt a mixture of normal and abnormal samples as references in generalist anomaly detection.
The code and datasets are available at https://github.com/JasonKyng/NAGL.

1

Introduction

Visual Anomaly Detection (AD) [13, 30, 63, 5, 14, 67, 56, 59, 18, 17, 41, 6] plays a crucial role in
industrial quality inspection [2, 48, 69, 25] and medical diagnosis [14, 20]. Its primary objectives are
to classify images as normal or anomalous and to localize anomalies within those images. Traditional
AD methods [31, 8, 15, 53, 9] focus on training and testing a model on a single domain, without
considering how detection capabilities might transfer to a different target domain. However, many
real-world AD scenarios prohibit training on the target domain due to data scarcity and privacy issues,
making it difficult to achieve the desired outcome in that target domain. To address the challenge,
InCTRL [68] and ResAD [60] propose Generalist Anomaly Detection (GAD) that aims to train a
unified model on the original domain while enabling AD on the target domain. As shown in Fig. 1a,
the GAD framework adopts a meta-learning strategy. This strategy trains the model in the original
domain to localize the anomalous regions of a query image by referring to a limited number of normal
references. Subsequently, the learned ability is transferred to the new target domain.
Although previous GAD methods [68, 60] have made substantial progress, they are not yet practical for
real-world applications. Models trained exclusively on normal samples often lack the discriminative
power to reliably distinguish anomalies [14, 61]. However, real-world scenarios often provide a small
number of anomalous samples (e.g., defective parts or diagnosed disease cases). These anomalous
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

