Adaptive Latent-Space Constraints in Personalized
Federated Learning

Sana Ayromlou∗
Vector Institute & Google
Toronto, Ontario, CA
ayromlous@gmail.com

D. B. Emerson
Vector Institute
Toronto, Ontario, CA
david.emerson@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is an effective and widely used approach to training deep
learning models on decentralized datasets held by distinct clients. FL also strengthens both security and privacy protections for training data. Common challenges
associated with statistical heterogeneity between distributed datasets have spurred
significant interest in personalized FL (pFL) methods, where models combine
aspects of global learning with local modeling specific to each client’s unique characteristics. This work investigates the efficacy of theoretically supported, adaptive
MMD measures in pFL, primarily focusing on the Ditto framework, a state-ofthe-art technique for distributed data heterogeneity. The use of such measures
significantly improves model performance across a variety of tasks, especially
those with pronounced feature heterogeneity. Additional experiments demonstrate
that such measures are directly applicable to other pFL techniques and yield similar
improvements across a number of datasets. Finally, the results motivate the use of
constraints tailored to the various kinds of heterogeneity expected in FL systems.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has become an indispensable tool for training deep learning models on
distributed datasets. Such a setting arises naturally in many scenarios where, for various reasons
including privacy, security, and resource constraints, training data should or must reside in disparate
locations. Federally trained models receive updates from a larger collection of training data than
models trained on single data silos and, as such, often demonstrate better performance, generalizability,
and robustness [34]. In a typical FL system, clients each hold a distinct dataset on which a model is
to be collaboratively trained. A server is used to perform model aggregation of some kind, requiring
transfer of model weights but never raw data. In each round, clients perform model training using
their local dataset. After a period of local training, the server aggregates the individual models, or
subsets thereof, and sends the aggregated information back to the clients for another round of training.
While data heterogeneity is challenging in standard model training, it is particularly pernicious in
FL settings due to the increased prevalence of heterogeneity in distributed datasets [19, 40]. Many
works have aimed to address the effects of data heterogeneity in FL since the original mechanism of
FedAvg was introduced [30]. One branch of study considers techniques for robust global optimization,
seeking to restrict or correct local divergence [14, 28, 20, 45]. However, such approaches, referred to
here as global FL methods, typically train a single model for all clients. In many instances, system
and statistical heterogeneity limit the existence of a shared model that performs well across all FL
participants [16, 3]. This has led to the rise of personalized FL (pFL) methods, which federally train
distinct models for each client. Specifically, this work focuses on improving cross-silo pFL methods,
where clients represent a small number of reliable institutions with sufficient training resources [13].
∗

Corresponding author. Work done while at the Vector Institute.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

