AgentBreeder: Mitigating the AI Safety Risks of
Multi-Agent Scaffolds via Self-Improvement

J Rosser
University of Oxford
jrosser@robots.ox.ac.uk

Jakob Foerster
FLAIR
University of Oxford

Abstract
Scaffolding Large Language Models (LLMs) into multi-agent systems often improves performance on complex tasks, but the safety impact of such scaffolds has
not been thoroughly explored. We introduce AGENT B REEDER, a framework for
multi-objective self-improving evolutionary search over scaffolds. We evaluate
discovered scaffolds on widely recognized reasoning, mathematics, and safety
benchmarks and compare them with popular baselines. In ‘blue’ mode, we see
a 79.4% average uplift in safety benchmark performance while maintaining or
improving capability scores. In ‘red’ mode, we find adversarially weak scaffolds
emerging concurrently with capability optimization. Our work demonstrates the
risks of multi-agent scaffolding and provides a framework for mitigating them.
Code is available at https://github.com/jrosseruk/AgentBreeder.

1

Introduction

Recently, the field of artificial intelligence has witnessed remarkable advancements in Large Language
Models (LLMs) and their applications [66]. LLMs are capable of exhibiting human-like reasoning
[2, 48, 56], enabling their application beyond natural language processing to diverse areas such as
code generation [44, 51, 59], embodied AI in robotics [21, 26, 46], and autonomous agents [40, 12].
Our research is motivated by accelerated advancements in autonomous agents such as the recent
release of Operator [40] and Proxy [12] - agents that browse the web and perform tasks autonomously
on behalf of the user. Alignment research to date has almost exclusively focused on the safety of
LLMs in unipolar scenarios; ensuring a single LLM remains aligned inside a single-agent system.
When deployed on the web, agents are placed in novel multi-agent scaffolds and subjected to multipolar challenges [25]. With highly-capable agents now being deployed at scale, we seek to address
the immediate need for more comprehensive safety evaluations of multi-agent systems.
In this paper, we introduce AGENT B REEDER, an evolutionary open-ended framework capable of
generating large populations of diverse multi-agent scaffolds. By equipping this framework with
multi-objective optimization, we explore the generation of multi-agent scaffolds along complementary
objectives of capability and safety. AGENT B REEDER can be used to blue team a set of scaffolds
to generate offspring that exhibit greater adversarial robustness and performance on capability
benchmarks. Similarly, a red teaming approach generates offspring that exhibit greater vulnerability
to adversarial attacks.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

