RePIC: Reinforced Post-Training for
Personalizing Multi-Modal Language Models

Yeongtak Oh1 , Dohyun Chung2 , Juhyeon Shin3 , Sangha Park1 ,
Johan Barthelemy5 , Jisoo Mok4† , Sungroh Yoon1,3†
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Department of Future Automotive Mobility, Seoul National University
3
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
4
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology 5 NVIDIA
{dualism9306, pissaitworks, newjh12, wiarae, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr,
jmok@dgist.ac.kr, jbarthelemy@nvidia.com

Abstract
Recent multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) often struggle to generate
personalized image captions, even when trained on high-quality captions. In this
work, we observe that such limitations persist in existing post-training-based
MLLM personalization methods. Specifically, despite being post-tuned with largescale caption data through supervised fine-tuning (SFT), these models frequently
fail to produce faithful descriptions in real-world scenarios, such as multi-concept
image captioning. However, acquiring large-scale, high-quality captions for such
complex settings is both costly and difficult. To address the data-centric nature of
SFT, we propose a reinforcement learning (RL)-based post-training framework. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first RL-based approach to post-train MLLMs
for personalized image captioning. Our method significantly enhances both visual
recognition and personalized generation capabilities of MLLMs, and consistently
outperforms existing SFT-based baselines, especially in the challenging multiconcept image captioning task. Project page: https://github.com/oyt9306/RePIC

1

Introduction

The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) has greatly propelled the advancement of
AI, particularly in natural language understanding and generation [1, 52, 13, 6]. These models
demonstrate impressive general knowledge and achieve strong performance across a wide range
of tasks [17, 55]. This progress inspired the development of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [31, 25, 57, 4]. MLLMs integrate visual inputs using pretrained vision encoders, treating
image embeddings similarly to text tokens within a unified architecture. This integration [31, 30, 4]
extends the utility of LLMs to vision-language tasks, enabling image-grounded dialogue [25] and
captioning [25, 30, 4].
Unfortunately, despite being pre-trained on large-scale datasets, MLLMs struggle to perform personalization by recognizing and incorporating personal, user-specific concepts, typically provided
in the form of a reference image of the user and an associated textual description [40, 15]. Figure 1
illustrates MLLMs’ failure in personalized image captioning, one of the most widely-studied tasks
in MLLM personalization. Given the reference image of ‘thao’ and the corresponding description
about her, i.e., ‘A 23-year-old woman who adores her beloved dog, Bo.’, an MLLM is
prompted to provide a personalized caption for a new query image of ‘thao’ that significantly differs
†Corresponding authors
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

