Watermarking Autoregressive Image Generation

Nikola Jovanović1,2∗ Ismail Labiad1,3
1

FAIR, Meta

2

Tomáš Souček1

ETH Zurich

3

Martin Vechev2

Pierre Fernandez1

Université Paris-Saclay

Abstract
Watermarking the outputs of generative models has emerged as a promising approach for tracking their provenance. Despite significant interest in autoregressive
image generation models and their potential for misuse, no prior work has attempted to watermark their outputs at the token level. In this work, we present
the first such approach by adapting language model watermarking techniques to
this setting. We identify a key challenge: the lack of reverse cycle-consistency
(RCC), wherein re-tokenizing generated image tokens significantly alters the token sequence, effectively erasing the watermark. To address this and to make our
method robust to common image transformations, neural compression, and removal
attacks, we introduce (i) a custom tokenizer-detokenizer finetuning procedure that
improves RCC, and (ii) a complementary watermark synchronization layer. As
our experiments demonstrate, our approach enables reliable and robust watermark
detection with theoretically grounded p-values. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/wmar.
Autoregressive
Model

…

2

9

1

4

7

What

is

Black

Minorca

?

Watermarked
Sampling

?

Detokenizer

8

Finetuned tokenizer

Generated Content

Watermark
Detection

Tokenizer

Watermarked!
p-value: 1.2 x 10-7

The Black Minorca is a rare
and historic breed
originating from the
Balearic Islands of Spain.
Here's an image of a Black
Minorca hen, showcasing
its signature green sheen
on its feathers:

2

9

1

4

7

8

Watermark synchronization

Figure 1: We watermark autoregressively generated images together with text in a theoretically principled way
by adapting LLM watermarking. We identify and address the novel challenges present in this setting (Sec. 3) via
a custom (de)tokenizer finetuning procedure (Sec. 3.1) and a watermark synchronization layer (Sec. 3.2).

1

Introduction

Autoregressive models are powerful frameworks for understanding and generating diverse content
types. By converting multiple modalities into discrete representations via custom tokenizers [81, 101,
117], a single transformer is able to seamlessly process multiple domains, including text, images [11,
15, 96, 106], audio [8, 24], and even molecules [39]. Following patterns observed in large language
models (LLMs), established scaling laws [2, 36, 89] demonstrate that the performance of these
models improves predictably with size and computational resources, leading to increasing adoption
across research and industry [21, 71, 75]. Most notably, in the image domain, autoregressive models
are widely studied as an alternative to diffusion models for high-quality generation [79, 91, 97, 115].
Watermarking generative model outputs. Regardless of the specific method, the widespread
deployment of high-quality generative models has made the detection of AI-generated content
increasingly challenging. This has raised significant concerns about misuse, including deepfakes,
harmful content generation, and intellectual property violations. One promising direction to help
∗

Work done during a Meta internship. Correspondence to nikola.jovanovic@inf.ethz.ch, pfz@meta.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

