Rethinking Multimodal Learning from the Perspective
of Mitigating Classification Ability Disproportion

Qing-Yuan Jiang†‡ , Longfei Huang† , Yang Yang†∗
†
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
‡
State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, P.R. China
{jiangqy, hlf, yyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal learning (MML) is significantly constrained by modality imbalance,
leading to suboptimal performance in practice. While existing approaches primarily
focus on balancing the learning of different modalities to address this issue, they
fundamentally overlook the inherent disproportion in model classification ability,
which serves as the primary cause of this phenomenon. In this paper, we propose
a novel multimodal learning approach to dynamically balance the classification
ability of weak and strong modalities by incorporating the principle of boosting.
Concretely, we first propose a sustained boosting algorithm in multimodal learning
by simultaneously optimizing the classification and residual errors. Subsequently,
we introduce an adaptive classifier assignment strategy to dynamically facilitate
the classification performance of the weak modality. Furthermore, we theoretically
analyze the convergence property of the cross-modal gap function, ensuring the
effectiveness of the proposed boosting scheme. To this end, the classification
ability of strong and weak modalities is expected to be balanced, thereby mitigating
the imbalance issue. Empirical experiments on widely used datasets reveal the
superiority of our method through comparison with various state-of-the-art (SOTA)
multimodal learning baselines. The source code is available at https://github.
com/njustkmg/NeurIPS25-AUG.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multimodal learning [33, 48, 43, 47, 21] has received growing attention for its ability
to effectively integrate heterogeneous information. As extra information from multimodal data can
be utilized, multimodal learning is expected to achieve better performance compared with unimodal
approaches. However, contrary to expectations, multimodal learning has been surprisingly shown to
underperform compared to unimodal ones in certain scenarios [42, 35, 46].
The root of this problem lies in the existence of the modality imbalance [42]. Concretely, different
modalities in a joint-training paradigm typically converge at different speeds [35, 45]. The fasterconverging modality, i.e., strong modality [49], tends to achieve higher performance, while the weak
modality performs poorly. Subsequently, this disproportion in classification ability often leads to
modality imbalance [42], ultimately resulting in lower performance.
Researchers have explored the modality imbalance issue from various perspectives in multimodal
learning [42, 35, 52]. Given the inconsistent learning progress between strong and weak modalities, a
natural idea [42, 35, 28, 50] is to manually intervene in their learning processes to achieve rebalancing.
Another type of method is to bridge the information gap between modality training phases and enhance
the interaction between different modalities during training. To be specific, impressive works [52, 11]
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

