Look Before You Leap: A GUI-Critic-R1 Model for
Pre-Operative Error Diagnosis in GUI Automation

Yuyang Wanyan1,2,3†∗ , Xi Zhang3∗, Haiyang Xu3‡, Haowei Liu3 , Junyang Wang3 , Jiabo Ye3 ,
Yutong Kou1 , Ming Yan3‡, Fei Huang3 , Xiaoshan Yang1,2‡, Weiming Dong1,2 , Changsheng Xu1,2
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Alibaba Group
wanyanyuyang2021@ia.ac,cn, xiaoshan.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
{shuofeng.xhy, ym119608}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In recent years, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have been extensively utilized for multimodal reasoning tasks, including Graphical User Interface
(GUI) automation. Unlike general offline multimodal tasks, GUI automation is
executed in online interactive environments, necessitating step-by-step decisionmaking based on the real-time status of the environment. This task has a lower
tolerance for decision-making errors at each step, as any mistakes may cumulatively
disrupt the process and potentially lead to irreversible outcomes like deletions or
payments. To address these issues, we introduce a pre-operative critic mechanism that provides effective feedback prior to the actual execution, by reasoning
about the potential outcome and correctness of actions. Specifically, we propose
a Suggestion-aware Group Relative Policy Optimization (S-GRPO) strategy to
construct our pre-operative critic model GUI-Critic-R1, incorporating a novel suggestion reward to enhance the reliability of the model’s feedback. Furthermore,
we develop a reasoning-bootstrapping based data collection pipeline to create a
GUI-Critic-Train and a GUI-Critic-Test, filling existing gaps in GUI critic data.
Static experiments on the GUI-Critic-Test across both mobile and web domains
reveal that our GUI-Critic-R1 offers significant advantages in critic accuracy compared to current MLLMs. Dynamic evaluation on GUI automation benchmark
further highlights the effectiveness and superiority of our model, as evidenced by
improved success rates and operational efficiency. The code is available at https:
//github.com/X-PLUG/MobileAgent/tree/main/GUI-Critic-R1.

1

Introduction

Recently, Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs), leveraging their remarkable perception
and reasoning capabilities, have demonstrated outstanding capabilities in various domains [2, 41].
Among these, GUI automation, as a practical multi-modal application scenario, is emerging as a
significant technological revolution in artificial intelligence interactions [38, 16, 50, 15, 44, 26, 27].
To be specific, given an online GUI device and a natural language instruction, it requires the GUI
agent driven by MLLMs to generate a series of precise operations similar to how humans do [48, 32],
such as click, type, and scroll.
Unlike traditional offline multimodal tasks such as visual question answering [19] and optical
character recognition [14], GUI automation task operates within an online interactive environment
* Equal contribution. † Work done during internship at Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group. ‡ Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

