NOBLE – Neural Operator with Biologically-informed
Latent Embeddings to Capture Experimental
Variability in Biological Neuron Models

Luca Ghafourpour1,2

4

Valentin Duruisseaux2∗ Bahareh Tolooshams3,4∗ Philip H. Wong5
Costas A. Anastassiou5,6 Anima Anandkumar2

1
ETH Zürich 2 California Institute of Technology 3 University of Alberta
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii) 5 Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
6
Archimedes AI, Athena Research Center

Abstract
Characterizing the cellular properties of neurons is fundamental to understanding
their function in the brain. In this quest, the generation of bio-realistic models is
central towards integrating multimodal cellular data sets and establishing causal
relationships. However, current modeling approaches remain constrained by the
limited availability and intrinsic variability of experimental neuronal data. The
deterministic formalism of bio-realistic models currently precludes accounting for
the natural variability observed experimentally. While deep learning is becoming
increasingly relevant in this space, it fails to capture the full biophysical complexity
of neurons, their nonlinear voltage dynamics, and variability. To address these
shortcomings, we introduce NOBLE, a neural operator framework that learns a mapping from a continuous frequency-modulated embedding of interpretable neuron
features to the somatic voltage response induced by current injection. Trained
on synthetic data generated from bio-realistic neuron models, NOBLE predicts
distributions of neural dynamics accounting for the intrinsic experimental variability. Unlike conventional bio-realistic neuron models, interpolating within the
embedding space offers models whose dynamics are consistent with experimentally
observed responses. NOBLE enables the efficient generation of synthetic neurons
that closely resemble experimental data and exhibit trial-to-trial variability, offering
a 4200× speedup over the numerical solver. NOBLE is the first scaled-up deep
learning framework that validates its generalization with real experimental data. To
this end, NOBLE captures fundamental neural properties in a unique and emergent
manner that opens the door to a better understanding of cellular composition and
computations, neuromorphic architectures, large-scale brain circuits, and general
neuroAI applications.

1

Introduction

Hundreds of distinct neuronal cell types co-exist and compute within neural circuits, yet how they
shape cognitive functions remains essentially unanswered [1–5]. This is particularly true in the human
brain, where access and monitoring capabilities are severely limited compared to animal models.
Over the past decade, multimodal cellular datasets that integrate electrophysiology, morphology, and
transcriptomics have emerged for human cell types [6–10].
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

