When Does Closeness in Distribution
Imply Representational Similarity?
An Identifiability Perspective

Beatrix M. G. Nielsen∗,1

Emanuele Marconato2

Andrea Dittadi†,3,4,5

4

Luigi Gresele†,6

1
Technical University of Denmark 2 University of Trento, Italy 3 Helmholtz AI, Munich
Technical University of Munich 5 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML) 6 University of Copenhagen

Abstract
When and why representations learned by different deep neural networks are
similar is an active research topic. We choose to address these questions from
the perspective of identifiability theory, which suggests that a measure of representational similarity should be invariant to transformations that leave the model
distribution unchanged. Focusing on a model family which includes several popular
pre-training approaches, e.g., autoregressive language models, we explore when
models which generate distributions that are close have similar representations. We
prove that a small Kullback–Leibler divergence between the model distributions
does not guarantee that the corresponding representations are similar. This has
the important corollary that models with near-maximum data likelihood can still
learn dissimilar representations—a phenomenon mirrored in our experiments with
models trained on CIFAR-10. We then define a distributional distance for which
closeness implies representational similarity, and in synthetic experiments, we find
that wider networks learn distributions which are closer with respect to our distance
and have more similar representations. Our results thus clarify the link between
closeness in distribution and representational similarity.

1

Introduction

How to compare and relate the internal representations learned by different deep neural networks is a
long-standing and active research topic [3, 30, 33, 38, 45, 49, 65]. Understanding when and why various kinds of representational similarity emerge has implications for model stitching [12, 16, 36, 41,
46], knowledge-distillation [53, 58, 73, 74] and interpretability for concept-based and neuro-symbolic
models [5, 15, 42], see [61] for a review. A theory of when similarity occurs will chiefly depend on
how similarity is measured. As argued by Bansal et al. [3], a similarity measure “should be invariant
to operations that do not modify the ‘quality’ of the representation, but it is not always clear what
these operations are”. Indeed, this depends on how one defines the ‘quality’ of a representation, and
previous works have debated the pros and cons of different choices [3, 14, 30, 31, 45, 49, 65, 67].
We choose to address these questions from the perspective of identifiability theory. In identifiability
of probabilistic models, representations are called equivalent if they result in equal likelihoods, and
∗
†

Correspondence to: bmgi@dtu.dk or beat@itu.dk.
Joint last authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

