Connecting Neural Models Latent Geometries with
Relative Geodesic Representations

Hanlin Yu1
University of Helsinki

Berfin Inal
University of Amsterdam

Georgios Arvanitidis
DTU

Søren Hauberg
DTU

Marco Fumero1
IST Austria

Francesco Locatello
IST Austria

Abstract
Neural models learn representations of high-dimensional data on low-dimensional
manifolds. Multiple factors, including stochasticities in the training process, model
architectures, and additional inductive biases, may induce different representations,
even when learning the same task on the same data. However, it has recently been
shown that when a latent structure is shared between distinct latent spaces, relative
distances between representations can be preserved, up to distortions. Building
on this idea, we demonstrate that exploiting the differential-geometric structure of
latent spaces of neural models, it is possible to capture precisely the transformations
between representational spaces trained on similar data distributions. Specifically,
we assume that distinct neural models parametrize approximately the same underlying manifold, and introduce a representation based on the pullback metric
that captures the intrinsic structure of the latent space, while scaling efficiently
to large models. We validate experimentally our method on model stitching and
retrieval tasks, covering autoencoders and vision foundation discriminative models,
across diverse architectures, datasets, pretraining schemes and modalities. Code is
available at https://github.com/marc0git/RelativeGeodesics.

1

Introduction

Neural models learn meaningful representations
of high-dimensional data generalizing to many
tasks, spanning different data modalities and domains. Recent research reveals that these models often develop similar internal representations
given similar inputs [Li et al., 2015, Moschella
et al., 2023, Fumero et al., 2024, Kornblith et al.,
2019], a phenomenon that was observed in biological networks [Laakso and Cottrell, 2000,
Haxby et al., 2001]. Remarkably, even when
models have different architectures, their internal representations can frequently be aligned
through a simple, e.g. orthogonal, transformation
[Maiorca et al., 2024, Lähner and Moeller, 2024,
Moayeri et al., 2023]. This suggests a certain
consistency in how neural nets encode information, emphasizing the importance of studying the
1

Figure 1: Neural models trained on similar
data learn parametrizations of the same manifold. NNs learn parametrizations (D1 , D2 ) of the
same underlying manifold Y up to isometries T .
Pulling back the metric from Y makes relative
geodesic representations invariant to transformations T between latent spaces Z1 and Z2 .

Corresponding emails: marco.fumero@ist.ac.at, hanlin.yu@helsinki.fi

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

