ElasticMM: Efficient Multimodal LLMs Serving with
Elastic Multimodal Parallelism
Zedong Liu1,2 , Shenggan Cheng3 , Guangming Tan1 , †Yang You3 , and †Dingwen Tao1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) extend LLMs to handle images,
videos, and audio by incorporating feature extractors and projection modules. However, these additional components—combined with complex inference pipelines
and heterogeneous workloads—introduce significant inference overhead. Therefore, efficiently serving MLLMs remains a major challenge. Current tightly coupled serving architectures struggle to distinguish between mixed request types
or adapt parallelism strategies to different inference stages, leading to increased
time-to-first-token (TTFT) and poor resource utilization. To address this, we
introduce Elastic Multimodal Parallelism (EMP), a new serving paradigm that
elastically adapts to resource heterogeneity across request types and inference
stages. Building upon EMP, we develop ElasticMM, an MLLM serving system that
(1) separates requests into independent modality groups with dynamic resource
allocation via a modality-aware load balancer; (2) decouples inference stages and
enables parallelism adjustment and adaptive scaling via elastic partition scheduling;
and (3) improves inference efficiency through unified multimodal prefix caching
and non-blocking encoding. Experiments on diverse real-world datasets show
that ElasticMM outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) serving systems, reducing
TTFT by up to 4.2× and achieving 3.2–4.5× higher throughput while meeting
service-level objectives (SLOs).

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have had a profound impact on real-world applications due to their
exceptional performance [1–3]. Their gradual expansion into the multimodal domain has led to the
emergence of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), which can process inputs such as
images, videos, and audio [4, 5]. By employing feature extractors and projection modules to map
multimodal inputs into the LLM feature space, MLLMs excel at tasks like visual question answering
(VQA), image captioning, and multimodal interaction [6–9]. Consequently, MLLMs are increasingly
deployed in online services, where they are highly sensitive to service-level objectives (SLOs).
Unlike traditional LLMs that process only text [10–14], MLLMs must handle diverse input types,
introducing additional model components and a more complex inference pipeline. This pipeline
typically includes distinct stages such as image preprocessing, image encoding, and language model
inference (comprising prefill and decode). These added stages increase computational complexity
(Fig. 1b) and significantly extend the average context length (Fig. 1c). However, existing inference
serving systems adopt a tightly coupled architecture that neither distinguishes between request types
0

† Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

