Emergent Temporal Correspondences
from Video Diffusion Transformers
Jisu Nam∗1
Soowon Son∗1
Dahyun Chung2
Jiyoung Kim1
Siyoon Jin1
Junhwa Hur†3
Seungryong Kim†1
1
2
3
KAIST
Korea University
Google DeepMind
https://cvlab-kaist.github.io/DiffTrack
Prompt : “A panorama revealing a majestic mountain
range cascading into a tranquil sea, dotted with islets…”
Video

Video

Prompt : “A red fox, its russet fur illuminated by the
golden hues of dawn, stands on the edge of meadow…”

Starting Point(s)

Trajectory Attention

Trajectory Attention

Starting Point(s)

Figure 1: Teaser: DiffTrack reveals how video Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) establish temporal correspondences during video generation. Given a prompt and starting points, DiffTrack tracks how individual points
align across subsequent frames via cross-frame attention in video DiTs (second row). This enables the extraction
of coherent motion trajectories (third row) from both generated and real-world videos in a zero-shot manner.

Abstract
Recent advancements in video diffusion models based on Diffusion Transformers
(DiTs) have achieved remarkable success in generating temporally coherent videos.
Yet, a fundamental question persists: how do these models internally establish and
represent temporal correspondences across frames? We introduce DiffTrack, the
first quantitative analysis framework designed to answer this question. DiffTrack
constructs a dataset of prompt-generated video with pseudo ground-truth tracking
annotations and proposes novel evaluation metrics to systematically analyze how
each component within the full 3D attention mechanism of DiTs (e.g., representations, layers, and timesteps) contributes to establishing temporal correspondences.
Our analysis reveals that query-key similarities in specific, but not all, layers play
a critical role in temporal matching, and that this matching becomes increasingly
prominent during the denoising process. We demonstrate practical applications
of DiffTrack in zero-shot point tracking, where it achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to existing vision foundation and self-supervised video models.
Further, we extend our findings to motion-enhanced video generation with a novel
guidance method that improves temporal consistency of generated videos without
additional training. We believe our work offers crucial insights into the inner
workings of video DiTs and establishes a foundation for further research and
applications leveraging their temporal understanding.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Co-corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

