ZeroPatcher: Training-free Sampler for Video
Inpainting and Editing
Shaoshu Yang1, 3 , Yingya Zhang2 , and Ran He1, 3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Tongyi Lab
3
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), CASIA

Text-to-video Generator

Object removal

ZeroPatcher

Video

Inpainting
Editing

Model

Output

Input

Video editing: The video captures a rhinoceros → robotic
rhinoceros

Figure 1: With ZeroPatcher, a text-to-video generative model can achieve video inpainting and video
editing without any finetuning.

Abstract
Video inpainting and editing have long been challenging tasks in the video generation community, requiring extensive computational resources and large datasets to
train models with satisfactory performance. Recent breakthroughs in large-scale
video foundation models have greatly enhanced text-to-video generation capabilities. This naturally leads to the idea of leveraging the prior knowledge from
these powerful generators to facilitate video inpainting and editing. In this work,
we investigate the feasibility of employing pre-trained text-to-video foundation
models for high-quality video inpainting and editing without additional training.
Specifically, we introduce a model-agnostic denoising sampler that optimizes the
trajectory by maximizing the log-likelihood expectation conditioned on the known
video segments. To enable efficient dynamic object removal and replacement, we
propose a latent mask fuser that performs accurate video masking directly in latent
space, eliminating the need for explicit VAE decoding and encoding. We implement our approach in widely-used foundation generators such as CogVideoX and
HunyuanVideo, demonstrating the model-agnostic nature of our sampler. Comprehensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations confirm that our method achieves
outstanding video inpainting and editing performance in a plug-and-play fashion.

1

Introduction

Given an input video and a dynamic mask, video inpainting or editing tasks require models to render
the masked regions according to user specifications. As a long-standing challenge in video research,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

