PARTONOMY: Large Multimodal Models with
Part-Level Visual Understanding

Ansel Blume1∗, Jeonghwan Kim1∗ , Hyeonjeong Ha1 , Elen Chatikyan1 , Xiaomeng Jin1 ,
Khanh Duy Nguyen1 , Nanyun Peng2 , Kai-Wei Chang2 , Derek Hoiem1 , Heng Ji1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 University of California Los Angeles
{blume5, jk100, hengji}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Real-world objects are composed of distinctive, object-specific parts. Identifying
these parts is key to performing fine-grained, compositional reasoning—yet, large
multimodal models (LMMs) struggle to perform this seemingly straightforward
task. In this work, we introduce PARTONOMY, an LMM benchmark designed
for pixel-level part grounding. We construct PARTONOMY from existing part
datasets and our own rigorously annotated set of images, encompassing 862 part
labels and 534 object labels for evaluation. Unlike existing datasets that simply
ask models to identify generic parts, PARTONOMY uses specialized concepts (e.g.,
agricultural airplane), and challenges models to compare objects’ parts, consider
part-whole relationships, and justify textual predictions with visual segmentations.
Our experiments demonstrate significant limitations in state-of-the-art LMMs (e.g.,
LISA-13B achieves only 5.9% gIoU), highlighting a critical gap in their part
grounding abilities. We note that existing segmentation-enabled LMMs (segmenting LMMs) have two key architectural shortcomings: they use special [SEG]
tokens not seen during pretraining which induce distribution shift, and they discard
predicted segmentations instead of using past predictions to guide future ones.
To address these deficiencies, we propose P LUM, a novel segmenting LMM that
uses span tagging instead of segmentation tokens and that conditions on prior
predictions in a feedback loop. We find that pretrained P LUM outperforms existing
segmenting LMMs on reasoning segmentation, VQA, and visual hallucination
benchmarks. In addition, P LUM finetuned on our proposed Explanatory Part Segmentation task is competitive with segmenting LMMs trained on significantly more
segmentation data. Our work opens up new avenues towards enabling fine-grained,
grounded visual understanding in LMMs. The code and data are publicly available
at: https://github.com/AnselBlume/partonomy

1

Introduction

Real-world objects can be decomposed into distinctive parts. A banana boat (Fig. 2), for instance,
consists of a seating tube, a handle, a hull, and an inflation valve. Such parts characterize each concept,
differentiating one object from another. The ability to recognize and distinguish between parts is an
important element of holistic object understanding, with applications ranging from explainable object
recognition [3, 16, 28, 8, 58], to part-based novel concept design [10], and robotic manipulation
[52, 30, 14]. Decomposing objects into their key building blocks allows models to reason about
objects at a granular level [16, 29], allowing for more complex and nuanced interactions.
Unfortunately, Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), the backbones of today’s multimodal systems,
lack strong part recognition abilities [16, 29, 33]. While they perform well on visual reasoning
[43, 13, 42] and visual hallucination tasks [23], we find that they are unable to accurately identify
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

