Geometry Aware Operator Transformer As An
Efficient And Accurate Neural Surrogate For PDEs
On Arbitrary Domains

Shizheng Wen1
Sepehr Mousavi1,3

Yizhou Zhao4

Arsh Kumbhat1
Praveen Chandrashekar5

Levi Lingsch1,2
Siddhartha Mishra1,2

1

Seminar for Applied Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
ETH AI Center, Zurich, Switzerland
3
Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
4
School of Computer Science, CMU, USA
5
Centre for Applicable Mathematics, TIFR, India

Abstract
The very challenging task of learning solution operators of PDEs on arbitrary domains accurately and efficiently is of vital importance to engineering and industrial
simulations. Despite the existence of many operator learning algorithms to approximate such PDEs, we find that accurate models are not necessarily computationally
efficient and vice versa. We address this issue by proposing a geometry aware operator transformer (GAOT) for learning PDEs on arbitrary domains. GAOT combines
novel multiscale attentional graph neural operator encoders and decoders, together
with geometry embeddings and (vision) transformer processors to accurately map
information about the domain and the inputs into a robust approximation of the
PDE solution. Multiple innovations in the implementation of GAOT also ensure
computational efficiency and scalability. We demonstrate this significant gain in
both accuracy and efficiency of GAOT over several baselines on a large number of
learning tasks from a diverse set of PDEs, including achieving state of the art performance on three large scale three-dimensional industrial CFD datasets. Our project
page for accessing the source code is available at camlab-ethz.github.io/GAOT.

1

Introduction

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are widely used to mathematically model very diverse natural
and engineering systems [17]. Currently, numerical algorithms, such as the finite element and finite
difference methods, are the preferred framework for simulating PDEs [41]. However, these methods
can be computationally very expensive, particularly for the so-called many-query problems such
as uncertainty quantification (UQ), control, and inverse problems. Here, the solver must be called
repeatedly, leading to prohibitive costs and providing the impetus for the design of fast and efficient
surrogates for PDE solvers [34].
To this end, ML/AI based algorithms are increasingly being explored as neural PDE surrogates. In
particular, neural operators [24, 6], including those proposed in [27, 28, 32, 42, 22], which learn
the PDE solution operator from data, are widely used [4]. As many of these neural operators are
restricted to PDEs on Cartesian (regular) grids, they cannot be directly applied to most engineering
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

