Contrastive Consolidation of Top-Down Modulations
Achieves Sparsely Supervised Continual Learning

Viet Anh Khoa Tran
Peter Grünberg Institute
Forschungszentrum Jülich & RWTH Aachen
v.tran@fz-juelich.de

Emre Neftci
Peter Grünberg Institute
Forschungszentrum Jülich & RWTH Aachen
e.neftci@fz-juelich.de

Willem A. M. Wybo
Peter Grünberg Institute
Forschungszentrum Jülich
w.wybo@fz-juelich.de

Abstract
Biological brains learn continually from a stream of unlabeled data, while integrating specialized information from sparsely labeled examples without compromising
their ability to generalize. Meanwhile, machine learning methods are susceptible to
catastrophic forgetting in this natural learning setting, as supervised specialist finetuning degrades performance on the original task. We introduce task-modulated
contrastive learning (TMCL), which takes inspiration from the biophysical machinery in the neocortex, using predictive coding principles to integrate top-down
information continually and without supervision. We follow the idea that these
principles build a view-invariant representation space, and that this can be implemented using a contrastive loss. Then, whenever labeled samples of a new
class occur, new affine modulations are learned that improve separation of the
new class from all others, without affecting feedforward weights. By co-opting
the view-invariance learning mechanism, we then train feedforward weights to
match the unmodulated representation of a data sample to its modulated counterparts. This introduces modulation invariance into the representation space, and, by
also using past modulations, stabilizes it. Our experiments show improvements
in both class-incremental and transfer learning over state-of-the-art unsupervised
approaches, as well as over comparable supervised approaches, using as few as 1%
of available labels. Taken together, our work suggests that top-down modulations
play a crucial role in balancing stability and plasticity.

1

Introduction

Input data streams encountered by animals or humans during development differ markedly from those
commonly used in machine learning. In contemporary machine learning (e.g. foundation models),
data streams typically consist of unlabeled data, augmented with some degree of supervised finetuning in the final training stages [1]. Such an approach is difficult to translate to the continual learning
setting encountered in natural data streams, as the naive introduction of fine-tuning stages often leads
to catastrophic forgetting [2–4]. Meanwhile, animals and humans receive mostly unsupervised inputs,
interspersed with sparse supervised data, which could, for instance, be provided through an external
teacher (e.g. a parent telling their child that the object is called an ‘apple’). Compared to unsupervised
data streams, such sparse supervisory episodes are infrequent. Therefore, the learning dilemma that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

