Inference-Time Reward Hacking
in Large Language Models

Hadi Khalaf
Harvard University

Claudio Mayrink Verdun
Harvard University

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University

Alex Oesterling
Harvard University

Flavio du Pin Calmon
Harvard University

Abstract
A common paradigm to improve the performance of large language models is optimizing for a reward model. Reward models assign a numerical score to an LLM’s
output that indicates, for example, how likely it is to align with user preferences or
safety goals. However, reward models are never perfect. They inevitably function
as proxies for complex desiderata such as correctness, helpfulness, and safety. By
overoptimizing for a misspecified reward, we can subvert intended alignment goals
and reduce overall performance – a phenomenon commonly referred to as reward
hacking. In this work, we characterize reward hacking in inference-time alignment
and demonstrate when and how we can mitigate it by hedging on the proxy reward.
We study this phenomenon under Best-of-n (BoN) and Soft Best-of-n (SBoN), and
we introduce Best-of-Poisson (BoP) that provides an efficient, near-exact approximation of the optimal reward-KL divergence policy at inference time. We show
that the characteristic pattern of hacking as observed in practice (where the true
reward first increases before declining) is an inevitable property of a broad class
of inference-time mechanisms, including BoN and BoP. To counter this effect, we
introduce HedgeTune, an efficient algorithm to find the optimal inference-time
parameter. We demonstrate that hedging mitigates reward hacking and achieves
superior reward-distortion tradeoffs on math, reasoning, and human-preference
setups.

1

Introduction

Almost all current alignment methods, including BoN [1, 2], RLHF [3, 4], DPO [5], and their variants,
aim to maximize a reward function while minimizing divergence from the original model’s outputs 1 .
It is important to distinguish between two types of rewards: proxy rewards which are the computable
signals we directly use during alignment (like scores from a trained reward model), and true rewards,
which represent the often latent quality of the model’s output according to a desired objective. As the
name suggests, proxy rewards are approximations of the true reward and, consequently, of intended
alignment goals such as correctness, helpfulness, and safety.
A fundamental challenge persists across reward-based alignment methods: all proxy reward models are imperfect [6]. This imperfection stems from multiple factors, including the scarcity of
high-quality human-labeled data and the difficulty in formalizing high-level alignment goals into
quantifiable metrics [7, 8]. For instance, consider AI alignment strategies that aim to promote safety.
1

BoN and RLHF optimize an explicitly learned reward model, whereas DPO optimizes an implicit reward
based on the model’s log-probabilities.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

