Infinite Neural Operators:
Gaussian processes on functions

Daniel Augusto de Souza∗
University College London

Yuchen Zhu
University College London

Harry Jake Cunningham
University College London

Yuri Saporito
Fundação Getulio Vargas

Diego Mesquita
Fundação Getulio Vargas

Marc Peter Deisenroth
University College London

Abstract
A variety of infinitely wide neural architectures (e.g., dense NNs, CNNs, and transformers) induce Gaussian process (GP) priors over their outputs. These relationships provide both an accurate characterization of the prior predictive distribution
and enable the use of GP machinery to improve the uncertainty quantification of
deep neural networks. In this work, we extend this connection to neural operators
(NOs), a class of models designed to learn mappings between function spaces.
Specifically, we show conditions for when arbitrary-depth NOs with Gaussiandistributed convolution kernels converge to function-valued GPs. Based on this
result, we show how to compute the covariance functions of these NO-GPs for two
NO parametrizations, including the popular Fourier neural operator (FNO). With
this, we compute the posteriors of these GPs in regression scenarios, including
PDE solution operators. This work is an important step towards uncovering the
inductive biases of current FNO architectures and opens a path to incorporate novel
inductive biases for use in kernel-based operator learning methods.

1

Introduction

Neural Operators (NOs, Kovachki et al., 2023) are deep learning architectures designed to learn
mappings between function spaces—with direct applications in many areas of science and engineering
(Pathak et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024). NOs generalize conventional convolutional neural networks
using kernel integral operators, which integrate the input function against a learnable kernel at each
layer. Importantly, unlike CNNs, NOs can be trained with inputs of mixed, arbitrary resolutions and
output predictions in discretizations of arbitrary granularity.
Despite their growing adoption, most works on NOs are primarily empirical, and most of the
theoretical properties of NOs are still unexplored. In contrast, the convergence of Bayesian neural
networks to Gaussian processes as their width goes to infinity has been amply studied (Neal, 1995;
Novak et al., 2019; Yang, 2019). However, due to the infinite dimensionality of function spaces, it is
unclear whether GPs are a limiting case for NOs and, if this is the case, how to characterize them.
In this work, we elucidate this question and present a set of assumptions that guarantee the existence
of the infinite limit of NOs as Gaussian elements in the space of operators. Additionally, we
present how to derive the covariance function for infinite-width NOs in an analogous fashion to
the covariance functions of infinitely wide, densely connected NNs. Finally, we characterize the
infinite-width limit of Fourier neural operators (FNOs) and propose a novel Bayesian NO architecture
based on Matérn GP-distributed integral kernels.
∗

Corresponding author: daniel.souza.21@ucl.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

