One Token per Highly Selective Frame: Towards
Extreme Compression for Long Video Understanding

Zheyu Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
zheyuz5@illinois.edu
Shixing Chen
Amazon Prime Video
shixic@amazon.com

Ziqi Pang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
ziqip2@illinois.edu

Xiang Hao
Amazon Prime Video
xianghao@amazon.com

Vimal Bhat
Amazon Prime Video
vimalb@amazon.com

Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yxw@illinois.edu

Abstract
Long video understanding is inherently challenging for vision-language models
(VLMs) because of the extensive number of frames. With each video frame typically expanding into tens or hundreds of tokens, the limited context length of
large language models (LLMs) forces the VLMs to perceive the frames sparsely
and lose temporal information. To address this, we explore extreme video token
compression towards one token per frame at the final LLM layer. Our key insight is that heuristic-based compression, widely adopted by previous methods,
is prone to information loss, and this necessitates supervising LLM layers into
learnable and progressive modules for token-level compression (LP-Comp). Such
compression enables our VLM to digest 2x-4x more frames with improved performance. To further increase the token efficiency, we investigate frame-level
compression, which selects the frames most relevant to the queries via the internal attention scores of the LLM layers, named question-conditioned compression
(QC-Comp). As a notable distinction from previous studies, we mitigate the
position bias of LLM attention in long contexts, i.e., the over-concentration on
the beginning and end of a sequence, by splitting long videos into short segments and employing local attention. Collectively, our combined token-level and
frame-level leads to an extreme compression model for long video understanding,
named XComp, achieving a significantly larger compression ratio and enabling
denser frame sampling. Our XComp is finetuned from VideoChat-Flash with a
data-efficient supervised compression tuning stage that only requires 2.5% of the
supervised fine-tuning data, yet boosts the accuracy from 42.9% to 46.2% on
LVBench and enhances multiple other long video benchmarks. Code and Model
are available at https://github.com/ZheyuAqaZhang/XComp.

1

Introduction

Enabling vision-language models (VLMs) to comprehensively understand long videos remains a
critical yet formidable challenge [12, 22, 23, 32, 35, 38, 57, 61, 62, 69, 70]. The sheer volume of
visual information challenges current VLMs’ inherent context length constraints: as each frame is
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

