Equivariance by Contrast: Identifiable Equivariant
Embeddings from Unlabeled Finite Group Actions

Tobias Schmidt1,2 , Steffen Schneider1,2,3∗ and Matthias Bethge3∗
1
Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Munich
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
3
Tübingen AI Center

Abstract
We propose Equivariance by Contrast (EbC) to learn equivariant embeddings from
observation pairs (y, g · y), where g is drawn from a finite group acting on the data.
Our method jointly learns a latent space and a group representation in which group
actions correspond to invertible linear maps—without relying on group-specific
inductive biases. We validate our approach on the infinite dSprites dataset with
structured transformations defined by the finite group G := (Rm × Zn × Zn ),
combining discrete rotations and periodic translations. The resulting embeddings
exhibit high-fidelity equivariance, with group operations faithfully reproduced
in latent space. On synthetic data, we further validate the approach on the nonabelian orthogonal group O(n) and the general linear group GL(n). We also
provide a theoretical proof for identifiability. While broad evaluation across diverse
group types on real-world data remains future work, our results constitute the first
successful demonstration of general-purpose encoder-only equivariant learning
from group action observations alone, including non-trivial non-abelian groups and
a product group motivated by modeling affine equivariances in computer vision.

1

Introduction

In many real-world inference problems, the relationship between observations is governed by structured transformations. The same sample may
be observed before and after an “action” has been applied. In computer
vision, an object may be observed in the form of an image before and after
rotations, translations, or other types of transformations have been applied
[6, 11, 32]. In biology, large-scale single-cell transcriptomic datasets increasingly contain observations of cells before and after perturbations in
the form of gene knockouts [17] or pharmacological intervention [41]. In
neuroscience, neural activity reflects changing brain states under sensory
input or behavioral output [45]. In all these cases, the key to understanding the data lies not only in modeling individual observations but also in
capturing the structured relationships between them.

x

R(g)

x′

f

f
y

y

ϕ

′

ϕ
x̂

R′ (g)

x̂′

Figure 1: Commutative
This motivates the goal of learning equivariant embeddings. In this em- diagram showing data
bedding space, actions are represented by linear transformations. To and model for EbC.
address this challenge in a theoretically grounded way, we adopt a perspective rooted in nonlinear Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and group theory. Suppose that
each observation y ∈ Y arises from a latent representation x ∈ X through an unknown, injective
nonlinear mixing function f , i.e., y = f (x). Nonlinear ICA aims to invert this process: to learn an
encoder ϕ ≈ f −1 that recovers the latent structure from the observed data.
∗

Co-corresponding authors: steffen.schneider@helmholtz-munich.de, matthias.bethge@bethgelab.org.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

