A Stable Whitening Optimizer for
Efficient Neural Network Training

Kevin Frans
UC Berkeley
kvfrans@berkeley.edu

Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley

Abstract
In this work, we take an experimentally grounded look at neural network optimization. Building on the Shampoo family of algorithms, we identify and alleviate
three key issues, resulting in the proposed SPlus method. First, we find that naive
Shampoo is prone to divergence when matrix-inverses are cached for long periods.
We introduce an alternate bounded update combining a historical eigenbasis with
instantaneous normalization, resulting in across-the-board stability and significantly
lower computational requirements. Second, we adapt a shape-aware scaling to
enable learning rate transfer across network width. Third, we find that high learning
rates result in large parameter noise, and propose a simple iterate-averaging scheme
which unblocks faster learning. To properly confirm these findings, we introduce a
pointed Transformer training benchmark, considering three objectives (language
modelling, image classification, and diffusion modelling) across different stages of
training. On average, SPlus is able to reach the validation performance of Adam
within 44 − 58% of the gradient steps and 62 − 83% of the wallclock time.

1

Introduction

The backbone of modern deep learning is stochastic gradient descent – a method which, while
particularly effective in practice, is time-consuming by its iterative nature. As large neural networks
are scaled up to billions of parameters [1, 8, 38], and are trained on datasets of similar scale, it
becomes increasingly important that each gradient update is efficient in making learning progress.
A core optimization strategy involves adapting updates to second-order curvature [3, 24], allowing for
faster learning progress in certain directions while preventing divergence in others. However, practical
challenges arise with regards to large neural network training. For example, it is computationally
intractable to calculate the Hessian of any reasonably-sized network [25, 33], and even further
intractable to invert this matrix. Numerical stability is also a concern, and complex methods often
require additional hyperparameter tuning and regularization [2, 32].
In this work, we take a cautiously empirical view on neural network optimization. We carefully
design an evaluation suite that is well-aligned with common uses today. We consider the optimization
of a standard Transformer model [52] on three distinct training settings – autoregressive language
modelling [42], diffusion modelling [16, 37], and image classification [10]. We further consider the
performance of optimizers at various stages of training (e.g. starting from checkpoints near the start,
middle, and end), to avoid biasing towards early-stage performance gains. To our knowledge, this is
currently the widest-scope comparison of adaptive optimizers on Transformer training.
From findings in this setting, we develop a method we refer to as SPlus. SPlus builds on the Shampoo
family of algorithms [15], which can broadly be seen as approximating a whitening metric from
historical gradients, and performing steepest descent along this metric. We identify and address three
issues with the naive Shampoo update. First, we find that Shampoo often diverges at high learning
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

