In-Context Learning Strategies Emerge Rationally

Daniel Wurgaft1,2,3∗ Ekdeep Singh Lubana2,3∗ Core Francisco Park2
Hidenori Tanaka2,3
Gautam Reddy4
Noah D. Goodman1,5
1
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
2
CBS-NTT Program in Physics of Intelligence, Harvard University
3
Physics of Artificial Intelligence Group, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA
4
Joseph Henry Laboratories of Physics, Princeton University
5
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University

Abstract
Recent work analyzing in-context learning (ICL) has identified a broad set of
strategies that describe model behavior in different experimental conditions. We
aim to unify these findings by asking why a model learns these disparate strategies in
the first place. Specifically, we start with the observation that when trained to learn a
mixture of tasks, as is popular in the literature, the strategies learned by a model for
performing ICL can be captured by a family of Bayesian predictors: a memorizing
predictor, which assumes a discrete prior on the set of seen tasks, and a generalizing
predictor, where the prior matches the underlying task distribution. Adopting the
normative lens of rational analysis, where a learner’s behavior is explained as
an optimal adaptation to data given computational constraints, we develop a
hierarchical Bayesian framework that almost perfectly predicts Transformer nexttoken predictions throughout training—without assuming access to its weights.
Under this framework, pretraining is viewed as a process of updating the posterior
probability of different strategies, and inference-time behavior as a posteriorweighted average over these strategies’ predictions. Our framework draws on
common assumptions about neural network learning dynamics, which make explicit
a tradeoff between loss and complexity among candidate strategies: beyond how
well it explains the data, a model’s preference towards implementing a strategy
is dictated by its complexity. This helps explain well-known ICL phenomena,
while offering novel predictions: e.g., we show a superlinear trend in the timescale
for transitioning from generalization to memorization as task diversity increases.
Overall, our work advances an explanatory and predictive account of ICL grounded
in tradeoffs between strategy loss and complexity.

1

Introduction

In-Context Learning (ICL) has significantly expanded the open-ended nature of large language models
(LLMs) [1–5], allowing them to learn novel behaviors from merely the provided context [6–12].
This has motivated a large body of work that analyzes controlled experimental settings to better
understand ICL [13–17], leading to (i) behavioral accounts of what strategies are followed by a model
to learn from its context [18–23], e.g., the ridge estimator in linear regression tasks [14, 17]; (ii)
developmental accounts identifying when, i.e., under what training [24] and data [25] conditions, a
particular strategy is used by the model [24–30]; or (iii) mechanistic accounts characterizing how
such strategies get implemented [31–33], e.g., the use of induction heads [34]. While some have
attempted characterizing ICL as a single procedure [22, 35, 36], more recent work has argued that
the broader phenomenology of ICL stems from a model learning different strategies under varying
experimental conditions [26, 30, 37].
∗

Equal contribution. Email: wurgaft@stanford.edu, ekdeeplubana@fas.harvard.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

