Learning Crossmodal Interaction Patterns via
Attributed Bipartite Graphs for Single-Cell Omics

Xiaotang Wang
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology (Guangzhou)
xwang285@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
Yun Zhu
Shanghai Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory
zhuyun@pjlab.org.cn

Hao Li
Academy of Military
Medical Sciences
lihao_thu@163.com

Xuanwei Lin
Fuzhou University
lxw_amb@foxmail.com

Yongqi Zhang∗
The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology (Guangzhou)
yongqizhang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Crossmodal matching in single-cell omics is essential for explaining biological
regulatory mechanisms and enhancing downstream analyses. However, current
single-cell crossmodal models often suffer from three limitations: sparse modality
signals, underutilization of biological attributes, and insufficient modeling of regulatory interactions. These challenges hinder generalization in data-scarce settings
and restrict the ability to uncover fine-grained biologically meaningful crossmodal
relationships. Here, we present a novel framework which reformulates crossmodal
matching as a graph classification task on Attributed Bipartite Graphs (ABGs). It
models single-cell ATAC-RNA data as an ABG, where each expressed ATAC and
RNA is treated as a distinct node with unique IDs and biological features. To model
crossmodal interaction patterns on the constructed ABG, we propose Bi2 Former, a
biologically-driven bipartite graph transformer that learns interpretable attention
over ATAC–RNA pairs. This design enables the model to effectively learn and
explain biological regulatory relationships between ATAC and RNA modalities.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that Bi2 Former achieves state-of-the-art performance in crossmodal matching across diverse datasets, remains robust under
sparse training data, generalizes to unseen cell types and datasets, and reveals
biologically meaningful regulatory patterns. This work pioneers an ABG-based
approach for single-cell crossmodal matching, offering a powerful framework for
uncovering regulatory interactions at the single-cell omics. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/wangxiaotang0906/Bi2Former.

1

Introduction

Crossmodal matching [41, 40] is a fundamental task in fields such as vision-language retrieval [31],
protein–description matching [12], and drug-target [13] matching, where the goal is to determine
whether two modality-specific inputs correspond to the same semantic entity. This task facilitates the
learning of latent interaction patterns across different data domains. In single-cell omics study, each
cell is profiled with multiple modalities, such as chromatin accessibility (scATAC-seq [10]) and gene
expression (scRNA-seq [30]). These modalities are inherently correlated, resulting in an intrinsic
need for revealing the crossmodal interactions between them. Crossmodal matching in this context
can help to identify whether a pair of ATAC and RNA profiles originates from the same cell. This
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

