RSafe: Incentivizing proactive reasoning to build
robust and adaptive LLM safeguards

Jingnan Zheng1 Xiangtian Ji1 Yijun Lu2 Chenhang Cui3 Weixiang Zhao4
Gelei Deng5 Zhenkai Liang1 An Zhang1∗ Tat-Seng Chua1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Cornell University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology 4 Harbin Insititute of Technology, China
5
Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to exhibit vulnerabilities despite deliberate safety alignment efforts, posing significant risks to users and society. To
safeguard against the risk of policy-violating content, system-level moderation via
external guard models—designed to monitor LLM inputs and outputs and block
potentially harmful content—has emerged as a prevalent mitigation strategy. Existing approaches of training guard models rely heavily on extensive human curated
datasets and struggle with out-of-distribution threats, such as emerging harmful
categories or jailbreak attacks. To address these limitations, we propose RSafe, an
adaptive reasoning-based safeguard that conducts guided safety reasoning to provide robust protection within the scope of specified safety policies. RSafe operates
in two stages: (1) guided reasoning, where it analyzes safety risks of input content
through policy-guided step-by-step reasoning, and (2) reinforced alignment, where
rule-based RL optimizes its reasoning paths to align with accurate safety prediction.
This two-stage training paradigm enables RSafe to internalize safety principles to
generalize safety protection capability over unseen or adversarial safety violation
scenarios. During inference, RSafe accepts user-specified safety policies to provide
enhanced safeguards tailored to specific safety requirements. Experiments demonstrate that RSafe matches state-of-the-art guard models using limited amount of
public data in both prompt- and response-level harmfulness detection, while achieving superior out-of-distribution generalization on both emerging harmful category
and jailbreak attacks. Furthermore, RSafe provides human-readable explanations
for its safety judgments for better interpretability. RSafe offers a robust, adaptive,
and interpretable solution for LLM safety moderation, advancing the development
of reliable safeguards in dynamic real-world environments. Our code is available
at https://github.com/SophieZheng998/RSafe.git

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in text comprehension
and generation, driving their rapid integration into diverse applications with far-reaching societal
implications [1–4]. However, this expansion raises significant concerns about safety risks, as harmful
content generated by LLMs can lead to negative social impacts [5–8]. To mitigate these risks, defensive strategies encompass the entire LLM lifecycle: implementing data filtering during pre-training,
applying safety alignment techniques in post-training, and deploying system-level moderation during
the inference phase [9–14]. Among these strategies, system-level moderation—typically implemented
via guard models that monitor both inputs and outputs of LLMs [15, 16]—has become an essential
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

