Prior Forgetting and In-Context Overfitting

Sungyoon Lee
Department of Computer Science
Hanyang University
sungyoonlee@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL) is one of the key capabilities contributing to the great
success of LLMs. At test time, ICL is known to operate in the two modes: task
recognition and task learning. In this paper, we investigate the emergence and
dynamics of the two modes of ICL during pretraining. To provide an analytical
understanding of the learning dynamics of the ICL abilities, we investigate the
in-context random linear regression problem with a simple linear-attention-based
transformer, and define and disentangle the strengths of the task recognition and
task learning abilities stored in the transformer model’s parameters. We show that,
during the pretraining phase, the model first learns the task learning and the task
recognition abilities together in the beginning, but it (a) gradually forgets the task
recognition ability to recall the priorly learned tasks and (b) relies more on the
given context in the later phase, which we call (a) prior forgetting and (b) in-context
overfitting, respectively.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) show an emergent behavior [Wei et al., 2022], known as in-context
learning (ICL) [Brown et al., 2020, Kaplan et al., 2020], that they can learn (without updating any
model parameters) a new unseen task from a few demonstrations of input-output pairs given at test
time. While models trained with traditional supervised learning for a given task/mapping learn
task-specific features that might be spurious or irrelevant for other tasks, the ICL ability enables the
models to learn stronger representations with task-agnostic architecture and task-agnostic data and to
efficiently learn diverse tasks via text interaction in a flexible way. Thus, it is often considered as one
of the key capabilities contributing to the great success of LLMs.
At test time, in-context learning is known to operate in the following two modes: given an in-context
task, the model (i) recalls similar functions and concepts learned (priorly) in the pretraining phase
and (ii) smoothly adapts to and implicitly learns the (observed) in-context task [Xie et al., 2022,
Raventós et al., 2024, Pan et al., 2023, Lin and Lee, 2024]. These dual Bayesian modes of ICL are
often called (i) task recognition and (ii) task learning [Pan et al., 2023]. In other words, the pretrained
model (i) knows the prior task distribution and (ii) has the ability to select and perform a proper task
corresponding to the given demonstrations.
The power of each mode of ICL is not the same and one often dominates the other depending on
many factors. To separately investigate the effects of the task recognition and task learning abilities,
it has been proposed to use the experimental setups with noisy output labels (random or semantically
irrelevant labels). Min et al. [2022], Lyu et al. [2023] show that randomly replacing output labels
in the demonstrations does not significantly affect ICL performance which indicates that the task
recognition dominates the task learning. On the other hands, Yoo et al. [2022], Wei et al. [2023], Shi
et al. [2023] show that larger models are easily distracted by wrong or irrelevant demonstrations and
Pan et al. [2023] show that larger models exhibits a better task learning ability than smaller ones and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

