Filter Like You Test: Data-Driven Data Filtering for
CLIP Pretraining

Mikey Shechter∗

Yair Carmon∗

Abstract
We introduce Filter Like You Test (FLYT), an algorithm for curating large-scale
vision-language datasets that learns the usefulness of each data point as a pretraining example. FLYT trains a scoring model that learns to weigh each example’s
features using gradient signals from downstream tasks training sets. Based on FLYT,
we implement Mixing-FLYT (M-FLYT), which takes the per-example scores generated by different scoring methods as features, and learns to unify them into a single
score. FLYT naturally produces a distribution over the training examples, which
we leverage through Soft Cap Sampling (SCS), a strategy for obtaining a filtered
pretraining dataset from per-example probabilities that samples examples while
preventing over-representation through a repetition penalty. Using these methods,
we achieve 40.1% ImageNet zero-shot accuracy on the DataComp medium scale
filtering benchmark, a 2% absolute accuracy increase over all previous results and a
5.5% increase over results that—like us—use only public resources. Our approach
also yields 37.7% on the average of 38 DataComp evaluation tasks, outperforming
previous public-resource approaches by 0.4%.

1

Introduction

Filtering the pretraining data of CLIP models [35] has a dramatic effect on the resulting model’s
quality [39, 40, 17, 51]. Despite intense research and considerable progress, the best existing methods
select data based on heuristic proxies for usefulness [16, 22, 49, 29, 27, 21]. In this work, we take a
different approach: adhering to the core principle of machine learning, we optimize a loss function
that measures the usefulness of data for pretraining.
We consider the setting of the DataComp filtering benchmark [17]. Our goal is to find a filtering
method that selects a subset from a candidate pool of web-sourced image-text training data. To
evaluate the quality of the selected subset, it is fed to a fixed training pipeline and the resulting model
is evaluated on a fixed set of zero-shot image comprehension tasks. The DataComp rules do not
constrain the computational cost of the filtering method. Moreover, DataComp allows using external
data (except evaluation test sets) for making the filtering decisions, so long as the selected training set
is a subset of the candidate pool.
In this setting, we introduce methods that together achieve state-of-the-art performance on the
DataComp medium scale. At the core is Filter Like You Test2 (FLYT), a method for training a scoring
model that predicts the weight an image-text pair should have in CLIP pretraining. Mixing-FLYT
(M-FLYT) is an implementation of FLYT that uses scores generated by existing scoring methods as
input features to the scoring model. Complementing FLYT, Soft Cap Sampling (SCS) is a simple
sampling strategy that leverages the probabilistic structure of FLYT’s scores to construct the final
pretraining dataset.
Filter Like You Test (FLYT) (Section 3.2). FLYT recasts data selection as data re-weighting
[37], and learns to upweight (and hence select) the pretraining data that contributes the most to
∗
2

Tel Aviv University, sachter@mail.tau.ac.il and ycarmon@tauex.tau.ac.il.
The name is inspired by FLYP [18].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

