Optimal Single-Policy Sample Complexity and
Transient Coverage for Average-Reward Offline RL

Matthew Zurek
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin–Madison
matthew.zurek@wisc.edu

Guy Zamir
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin–Madison
gzamir@wisc.edu

Yudong Chen
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin–Madison
yudongchen@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study offline reinforcement learning in average-reward MDPs, which presents
increased challenges from the perspectives of distribution shift and non-uniform
coverage, and has been relatively underexamined from a theoretical perspective.
While previous work obtains performance guarantees under single-policy data
coverage assumptions, such guarantees utilize additional complexity measures
which are uniform over all policies, such as the uniform mixing time. We develop
sharp guarantees depending only on the target policy, specifically the bias span and
a novel policy hitting radius, yielding the first fully single-policy sample complexity
bound for average-reward offline RL. We are also the first to handle general weakly
communicating MDPs, contrasting restrictive structural assumptions made in prior
work. To achieve this, we introduce an algorithm based on pessimistic discounted
value iteration enhanced by a novel quantile clipping technique, which enables the
use of a sharper empirical-span-based penalty function. Our algorithm also does
not require any prior parameter knowledge for its implementation. Remarkably,
we show via hard examples that learning under our conditions requires coverage
assumptions beyond the stationary distribution of the target policy, distinguishing
single-policy complexity measures from previously examined cases. We also
develop lower bounds nearly matching our main result.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive results for many control problems where it
is possible to collect large amounts of experience through online interaction with the environment.
However, many real-world application areas where we would like to apply RL methods, such as
robotics, education, or healthcare, there may not exist simulators and data collection can be expensive
or dangerous. Offline RL is a subfield of RL which seeks to address these issues by learning from
historical data without online interaction, and hence achieving the maximum possible statistical
efficiency is the paramount concern. The lack of online experience collection poses many related
challenges to offline RL methods. One issue, often termed distribution shift, is that improving a
policy’s performance will inherently change the distribution of states and actions it experiences,
potentially moving it away from the distribution of the historical dataset. Another closely related
issue, sometimes referred to as non-uniform coverage, is that our dataset may generally be unevenly
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

