Alligat0R: Pre-Training through Covisibility
Segmentation for Relative Camera Pose Regression

Thibaut Loiseau1
Guillaume Bourmaud2
Vincent Lepetit1
1
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
2
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, IMS, UMR 5218, France
{thibaut.loiseau,vincent.lepetit}@enpc.fr

guillaume.bourmaud@u-bordeaux.fr

CroCo
Masked view

Alligat0R (Ours)
Reference view

View 1

View 2

Reconstruction
Target

Covisibility segmentation
Covisible

Mask 1

Mask 2

Occluded
Outside FOV

➢
➢

➢
➢
➢

Requires pairs with >50% overlap
Limited geometric diversity

Works with any degree of overlap
Interpretable 3D understanding
Signiﬁcant geometric diversity

Figure 1: We introduce Alligat0R, a novel pretraining method for binocular vision. Alligat0R explicitly segments pixels as covisible, occluded, or outside field-of-view, overcoming the fundamental
limitation of CroCo [47, 48] which attempts to reconstruct potentially non-covisible regions.

Abstract
Pre-training techniques have greatly advanced computer vision, with CroCo’s
cross-view completion approach yielding impressive results in tasks like 3D reconstruction and pose regression. However, cross-view completion is ill-posed in
non-covisible regions, limiting its effectiveness. We introduce Alligat0R, a novel
pre-training approach that replaces cross-view learning with a covisibility segmentation task. Our method predicts whether each pixel in one image is covisible in
the second image, occluded, or outside the field of view, making the pre-training
effective in both covisible and non-covisible regions, and provides interpretable
predictions. To support this, we present Cub3, a large-scale dataset with 5M image
pairs and dense covisibility annotations derived from the nuScenes and ScanNet
datasets. Cub3 includes diverse scenarios with varying degrees of overlap. The
experiments show that our novel pre-training method Alligat0R significantly outperforms CroCo in relative pose regression. Alligat0R and Cub3 will be made
publicly available.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

