Stochastic Principal-Agent Problems: Computing and
Learning Optimal History-Dependent Policies

Jiarui Gan
University of Oxford
jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk
Debmalya Mandal
University of Warwick
debmalya.mandal@warwick.ac.uk

Rupak Majumdar
MPI-SWS
rupak@mpi-sws.org
Goran Radanovic
MPI-SWS
gradanovic@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
We study a stochastic principal-agent model. A principal and an agent interact in a
stochastic environment, each privy to observations about the state not available to
the other. The principal has the power of commitment, both to elicit information
from the agent and to signal her own information. The players communicate with
each other and then select actions independently. Both players are far-sighted,
aiming to maximize their total payoffs over the entire time horizon. We consider
both the computation and learning of the principal’s optimal policy. The key challenge lies in enabling history-dependent policies, which are essential for achieving
optimality in this model but difficult to cope with because of the exponential growth
of possible histories as the size of the model increases; explicit representation of
history-dependent policies is infeasible as a result. To address this challenge, we
develop algorithmic techniques based on the concept of inducible value set. The
techniques yield an efficient algorithm that computes an ϵ-approximate optimal
policy in time polynomial in 1/ϵ. We also present an efficient learning algorithm for
an episodic reinforcement learning setting with unknown transition probabilities.
e 2/3 ) for both players over T episodes.
The algorithm achieves sublinear regret O(T

1

Introduction

Many problems in economic theory involve sequential reasoning between multiple parties with asymmetric access to information [37, 20, 4, 27]. For example, in contract theory, one party (the principal)
delegates authority and decision-making power to another (the agent), and the goal is to design
mechanisms to ensure that the agent’s actions align with the principal’s utilities. This broad class
of principal-agent problems lead to many research questions about information design and optimal
strategic behaviors, with broad-ranging applications from governance and public administration to
e-commerce and financial services. In particular, algorithmic techniques for optimal decision-making
and learning are crucial for obtaining effective solutions to real-world problems in this domain.
In this paper, we consider a general framework for stochastic principal-agent problems. We study
the algorithmic problems related to the computation and learning of optimal solutions under this
framework. In this framework, the interaction between the principal and the agent takes place in a
stochastic environment over multiple time steps. In each step, both players are privy to information
not available to the other and make partial observations about the environment. The players can
communicate their private information to influence each other and, based on this communication,
play actions that jointly influence the state of the environment. Each player has their own payoff, and
we study the general-sum case with far-sighted players: each player aims to maximize the (expected)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

