SPOT-Trip: Dual-Preference Driven Out-of-Town Trip
Recommendation
Yinghui Liu1∗, Hao Miao2∗, Guojiang Shen1 , Yan Zhao3 , Xiangjie Kong1†, Ivan Lee4
1
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing,
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China
2
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China, Shenzhen, China
4
STEM, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia
{2112112249, gjshen1975}@zjut.edu.cn, hao.miao@polyu.edu.hk,
zhaoyan@uestc.edu.cn, xjkong@ieee.org, Ivan.Lee@unisa.edu.au

Abstract
Out-of-town trip recommendation aims to generate a sequence of Points of Interest
(POIs) for users traveling from their hometowns to previously unvisited regions
based on personalized itineraries, e.g., origin, destination, and trip duration. Modeling the complex user preferences–which often exhibit a two-fold nature of static
and dynamic interests–is critical for effective recommendations. However, the
sparsity of out-of-town check-in data presents significant challenges in capturing
such user preferences. Meanwhile, existing methods often conflate the static and
dynamic preferences, resulting in suboptimal performance. In this paper, we for
the first time systematically study the problem of out-of-town trip recommendation.
A novel framework SPOT-Trip is proposed to explicitly learns the dual staticdynamic user preferences. Specifically, to handle scarce data, we construct a POI
attribute knowledge graph to enrich the semantic modeling of users’ hometown and
out-of-town check-ins, enabling the static preference modeling through attribute
relation-aware aggregation. Then, we employ neural ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) to capture the continuous evolution of latent dynamic user preferences
and innovatively combine a temporal point process to describe the instantaneous
probability of each preference behavior. Further, a static-dynamic fusion module is
proposed to merge the learned static and dynamic user preferences. Extensive experiments on real data offer insight into the effectiveness of the proposed solutions,
showing that SPOT-Trip achieves performance improvement by up to 17.01%1 .

1

Introduction

With the proliferation of location-based social networks (LBSNs), location-based recommendation
has become an important means to help people discover attractive and interesting points of interest
(POIs) [10, 2], including POI recommendation [52, 22], trip recommendation [14, 23, 54, 39], and outof-town recommendation [46, 47, 32]. Traditional POI and trip recommender systems are dedicated
to recommending POIs within a specific region. However, they may fail when users travel out of their
hometown [47]. Consequently, out-of-town recommendation [32] emerges, which generates POIs for
users traveling from their hometowns to regions that they have seldom visited previously.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
1
The code of SPOT-Trip can be found at https://github.com/Yinghui-Liu/SPOT-Trip.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

