Real-World Reinforcement Learning of
Active Perception Behaviors

Edward S. Hu∗,1 Jie Wang∗,1 Xingfang Yuan∗,1 Fiona Luo1 Muyao Li1
Gaspard Lambrechts2 Oleh Rybkin3 Dinesh Jayaraman1
∗
Equal contribution 1 University of Pennsylvania 2 University of Liège 3 UC Berkeley

Abstract
A robot’s instantaneous sensory observations do not always reveal task-relevant
state information. Under such partial observability, optimal behavior typically
involves explicitly acting to gain the missing information. Today’s standard robot
learning techniques struggle to produce such active perception behaviors. We
propose a simple real-world robot learning recipe to efficiently train active perception policies. Our approach, asymmetric advantage weighted regression (AAWR),
exploits access to “privileged” extra sensors at training time. The privileged sensors enable training high-quality privileged value functions that aid in estimating
the advantage of the target policy. Bootstrapping from a small number of potentially suboptimal demonstrations and an easy-to-obtain coarse policy initialization,
AAWR quickly acquires active perception behaviors and boosts task performance.
In evaluations on 8 manipulation tasks on 3 robots spanning varying degrees of
partial observability, AAWR synthesizes reliable active perception behaviors that
outperform all prior approaches. When initialized with a “generalist” robot policy
that struggles with active perception tasks, AAWR efficiently generates informationgathering behaviors that allow it to operate under severe partial observability for
manipulation tasks. Website: https://penn-pal-lab.github.io/aawr/

1

Introduction

Any organism needs to extract information from the world via its sensory apparatus to make decisions,
solve tasks, and survive. One strategy is to have high bandwidth and sophisticated sensors like the
human eye, to sense as much information as possible and embrace the “blooming, buzzing confusion
of the senses” [1] this entails, subject to natural limits, such as a local field of view. Another strategy
is to use the ability to move around in the world to gather new information and overcome our sensory
limitations - we scan our eyes across a crowded party to find a friend, and polish our glasses to
get a clearer view. Such information gathering behaviors are called active [2] or interactive [3]
perception based on whether they only move a sensor around the world or if they also alter the
world. In the following, we will use “active perception” as shorthand to refer to all such behaviors,
except when the distinction is particularly pertinent. In this work, we are interested in learning
active perception behaviors to compensate for the limitations of various sensory setups in robots,
ranging from entirely blind robots operating purely from proprioception, to robots operating with
sophisticated multi-camera setups.
It has been hard to learn useful active perception behaviors for robotics, and not for lack of trying
[2–12]. Of the techniques commonly in vogue for robotics, imitation learning is ill-suited because
acquiring optimal active perception demonstrations can be cumbersome and unnatural (e.g. forcing a
teleoperator to look through wrist cameras). In theory, RL should be able to learn active perception
behaviors from interaction, but in practice it is too sample-inefficient even in fully observed settings,
leave alone the partially observed settings where active perception is relevant. Moreover, sim-to-real
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

