Short-length Adversarial Training Helps LLMs
Defend Long-length Jailbreak Attacks:
Theoretical and Empirical Evidence

Shaopeng Fu1 Liang Ding2 Jingfeng Zhang3,1 Di Wang1*
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
The University of Sydney 3 The University of Auckland
shaopeng.fu@kaust.edu.sa, liangding.liam@gmail.com
jingfeng.zhang@auckland.ac.nz, di.wang@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Jailbreak attacks against large language models (LLMs) aim to induce harmful
behaviors in LLMs through carefully crafted adversarial prompts. To mitigate
attacks, one way is to perform adversarial training (AT)-based alignment, i.e.,
training LLMs on some of the most adversarial prompts to help them learn how to
behave safely under attacks. During AT, the length of adversarial prompts plays
a critical role in the robustness of aligned LLMs. While long-length adversarial
prompts during AT might lead to strong LLM robustness, their synthesis however
is very resource-consuming, which may limit the application of LLM AT. This
paper focuses on adversarial suffix jailbreak attacks and unveils that to defend
against a jailbreak attack with an adversarial suffix of length Θ(M
√ ), it is enough to
align LLMs on prompts with adversarial suffixes of length Θ( M ). Theoretically,
we analyze the adversarial in-context learning of linear transformers on linear
regression tasks and prove a robust generalization
bound for trained transformers.
√
The bound depends on the term Θ( Mtest /Mtrain ), where Mtrain and Mtest are
the numbers of adversarially perturbed in-context samples during training and
testing. Empirically, we conduct AT on popular open-source LLMs and evaluate
their robustness against jailbreak attacks of different adversarial suffix lengths.
Results confirm a positive correlation between the attack success rate and the
ratio of the square root of the adversarial suffix length during jailbreaking to the
length during AT. Our findings show that it is practical to defend against “longlength” jailbreak attacks via efficient “short-length” AT. The code is available at
https://github.com/fshp971/adv-icl.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [5, 51, 28, 65] are widely adopted in various real-world applications
to assist human users [55, 67, 57, 56, 24], but their safety is found to be vulnerable toward jailbreak
attacks [60]. With carefully crafted adversarial prompts, one can “jailbreak” the safety mechanism of
LLMs and induce arbitrary harmful behaviors [73, 7, 30]. To tackle the challenge, recent studies [63,
36, 68, 6] propose performing safety alignment through adversarial training (AT) [32] to enhance
LLMs’ robustness against jailbreaking. A standard AT for LLMs would train them on jailbreak
prompts synthesized by strong jailbreak attacks to learn to refuse these harmful instructions [36].
In such AT, the length of synthesized adversarial prompts used for model training is critical to the final
jailbreak robustness of LLMs. [3] and [64] have shown that longer adversarial prompts enjoy stronger
*

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

