Order-Level Attention Similarity Across Language
Models: A Latent Commonality

Jinglin Liang1 , Jin Zhong1 , Shuangping Huang1,2∗,
Yunqing Hu3 , Huiyuan Zhang3 , Huifang Li4 , Lixin Fan5 , Hanlin Gu5,6
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Pazhou Laboratory,
3
Zhuzhou CRRC Times Electric Co., 4 China Telecom Research Institute,
5
WeBank, 6 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
eeljl@mail.scut.edu.cn, eehsp@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we explore an important yet previously neglected question: Do
context aggregation patterns across Language Models (LMs) share commonalities?
While some works have investigated context aggregation or attention weights
in LMs, they typically focus on individual models or attention heads, lacking
a systematic analysis across multiple LMs to explore their commonalities. In
contrast, we focus on the commonalities among LMs, which can deepen our
understanding of LMs and even facilitate cross-model knowledge transfer. In this
work, we introduce the Order-Level Attention (OLA) derived from the order-wise
decomposition of Attention Rollout and reveal that the OLA at the same order
across LMs exhibits significant similarities. Furthermore, we discover an implicit
mapping between OLA and syntactic knowledge. Based on these two findings, we
propose the Transferable OLA Adapter (TOA), a training-free cross-LM adapter
transfer method. Specifically, we treat the OLA as a unified syntactic feature
representation and train an adapter that takes OLA as input. Due to the similarities
in OLA across LMs, the adapter generalizes to unseen LMs without requiring
any parameter updates. Extensive experiments demonstrate that TOA’s cross-LM
generalization effectively enhances the performance of unseen LMs. Code is
available at https://github.com/jinglin-liang/OLAS.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of large language models (LMs), their exceptional capabilities have
profoundly impacted human society [1]. In practical applications, practitioners often fine-tune models
to meet the demands of specific tasks [2, 3]. However, due to the lack of efficient methods for
knowledge transfer between different LMs, results fine-tuned on one model cannot be directly reused
on another, significantly increasing development costs. Research in knowledge distillation [4, 5]
and representation learning [6] suggests that when different models share common representational
spaces, efficient knowledge transfer becomes possible. This inspires us to ponder a question: Do
pretrained LMs possess commonality that could enable cross-model knowledge transfer?
We approach this through the lens of attention mechanisms. Although LMs differ in architecture,
training data, and other factors, mainstream transformer-based LMs rely on attention mechanisms [7]
to aggregate context for prediction [8, 9]. Given the similarity in training objectives and attention
mechanisms, different LMs trained on large corpora may converge to an optimal attention pattern for
the same text, resulting in commonalities in their contextual aggregation behavior.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

