VITA-Audio: Fast Interleaved Cross-Modal
Token Generation for Efficient Large
Speech-Language Model

Zuwei Long1,† , Yunhang Shen1,†,♠ , Chaoyou Fu2,⋆ , Heting Gao1 , Lijiang Li2
Peixian Chen1 , Mengdan Zhang1 , Hang Shao1 , Jian Li1 , Jinlong Peng1
Haoyu Cao1 , Ke Li1 , Rongrong Ji3 , Xing Sun1,⋆
1

Tencent Youtu Lab, 2 Nanjing University, 3 Xiamen University
†

Equal Contribution

♠

Project Leader

⋆

Corresponding Author

https://github.com/VITA-MLLM/VITA-Audio

Abstract
With the growing requirement for natural human-computer interaction, speechbased systems receive increasing attention as speech is one of the most common
forms of daily communication. However, the existing speech models still experience high latency when generating the first audio token during streaming, which
poses a significant bottleneck for deployment. To address this issue, we propose
VITA-Audio, an end-to-end large speech model with fast audio-text token generation. Specifically, we introduce a lightweight Multiple Cross-modal Token
Prediction (MCTP) module that efficiently generates multiple audio tokens within
a single model forward pass, which not only accelerates the inference but also significantly reduces the latency for generating the first audio in streaming scenarios.
In addition, a four-stage progressive training strategy is explored to achieve model
acceleration with minimal loss of speech quality. To our knowledge, VITA-Audio
is the first multi-modal large language model capable of generating audio output
during the first forward pass, enabling real-time conversational capabilities with
minimal latency. VITA-Audio is fully reproducible and is trained on open-source
data only. Experimental results demonstrate that our model achieves an inference
speedup of 3 ∼ 5× at 7B parameter scale, but also significantly outperforms opensource models of similar model size on multiple benchmarks for automatic speech
recognition (ASR), text-to-speech (TTS), and spoken question answering (SQA).

1

Introduction

Real-time speech systems have become a crucial research focus for enabling natural dialogue.
Traditional speech systems predominantly adopt a modular design that decomposes real-time speech
processing into three discrete components: automatic speech recognition (ASR), large language
models (LLMs), and text-to-speech (TTS) [54, 32, 69]. However, this cascaded approach suffers
from cumulative latency, loss of paralinguistic information (e.g., emotional prosody, rhythm) during
modality conversion, and error accumulation between modules, substantially lowering the practical
utility of cascaded architectures in real-time interactive scenarios. To address the limitations of
traditional methods, many recent studies have adopted an end-to-end approach to handle inputs and
outputs of the model [58, 10, 23]. These methods directly input speech into LLMs through an audio
encoder and then synthesize speech response with discrete tokens [66] or LLM hidden states [56].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

