Conformal Prediction Beyond the Seen: A Missing
Mass Perspective for Uncertainty Quantification in
Generative Models
Sima Noorani∗
University of Pennsylvania
nooranis@seas.upenn.edu

Shayan Kiyani∗
University of Pennsylvania
shayank@seas.upenn.edu

George Pappas
University of Pennsylvania
pappasg@seas.upenn.edu

Hamed Hassani
University of Pennsylvania
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is essential for safe deployment of generative AI
models such as large language models (LLMs), especially in high-stakes applications. Conformal prediction (CP) offers a principled uncertainty quantification
framework, but classical methods focus on regression and classification, relying
on geometric distances or softmax scores–tools that presuppose structured outputs.
We depart from this paradigm by studying CP in a query-only setting, where prediction sets must be constructed solely from finite queries to a black-box generative
model, introducing a new trade-off between coverage, test-time query budget, and
informativeness. We introduce Conformal Prediction with Query Oracle (CPQ),
a framework characterizing the optimal interplay between these objectives. Our
finite-sample algorithm is built on two core principles: one governs the optimal
query policy, and the other defines the optimal mapping from queried samples
to prediction sets. Remarkably, both are rooted in the classical missing mass
problem in statistics. Specifically, the optimal query policy depends on the rate
of decay–or the derivative–of the missing mass, for which we develop a novel
estimator. Meanwhile, the optimal mapping hinges on the missing mass itself,
which we estimate using Good-Turing estimators. We then turn our focus to implementing our method for language models, particularly in open-ended LLM tasks
involving question answering, multi-step reasoning, and structured information
extraction, where outputs are vast, variable, and often under-specified. Fine-grained
experiments2 on three real-world open-ended tasks and two LLMs, show CPQ’s
applicability to any black-box LLM and highlight: (1) individual contribution of
each principle to CPQ’s performance, and (2) CPQ’s ability to yield significantly
more informative prediction sets than existing conformal methods for language
uncertainty quantification.

1

Introduction

Generative models such as LLMs and diffusion models are widely deployed in high-stakes applications, yet they often produce unreliable outputs. These models may generate plausible but incorrect
information, hallucinate facts, or exhibit inconsistency across runs [1–4]. Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is therefore essential for safe and trustworthy deployment of generative AI, enabling
downstream users to detect unreliable outputs and make informed decisions under uncertainty.
∗
2

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: nooranis@seas.upenn.edu, shayank@seas.upenn.edu.
We release our code at https://github.com/nooranisima/CPQ-missing-mass

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

