AttentionPredictor: Temporal Patterns Matter
for KV Cache Compression

Qingyue Yang1* , Jie Wang1† , Xing Li2‡ , Zhihai Wang1 , Chen Chen2 , Lei Chen2 ,
Xianzhi Yu2 , Wulong Liu2 , Jianye Hao2, 3 , Mingxuan Yuan2 , Bin Li1
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{yangqingyue, zhwangx}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn, li.xing2@huawei.com

Abstract
With the development of large language models (LLMs), efficient inference through
Key-Value (KV) cache compression has attracted considerable attention, especially
for long-context generation. To compress the KV cache, recent methods identify
critical KV tokens through static modeling of attention scores. However, these
methods often struggle to accurately determine critical tokens as they neglect the
temporal patterns in attention scores, resulting in a noticeable degradation in LLM
performance. To address this challenge, we propose AttentionPredictor, which
is the first learning-based method to directly predict attention patterns for
KV cache compression and critical token identification. Specifically, AttentionPredictor learns a lightweight, unified convolution model to dynamically capture
spatiotemporal patterns and predict the next-token attention scores. An appealing
feature of AttentionPredictor is that it accurately predicts the attention score and
shares the unified prediction model, which consumes negligible memory, among
all transformer layers. Moreover, we propose a cross-token critical cache prefetching framework that hides the token estimation time overhead to accelerate the
decoding stage. By retaining most of the attention information, AttentionPredictor
achieves 13× KV cache compression and 5.6× speedup in a cache offloading
scenario with comparable LLM performance, significantly outperforming the stateof-the-arts. The code is available at https://github.com/MIRALab-USTC/LLMAttentionPredictor.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLM) like OpenAI o1 [1] have shown impressive scalability and effectiveness
in tackling complex tasks through long chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning and multi-turn conversations [2–5]. However, these long-context tasks require LLMs to handle extremely lengthy contexts,
presenting computational and memory challenges for LLMs [6]. Specifically, the key-value cache
(KV cache), which holds the attention keys and values during generation to prevent re-computations,
consumes huge GPU memory [7]. For example, for a model with 7 billion parameters, the parameters
consume only 14 GB of memory whereas the KV cache requires around 72 GB with the 128K prompt
length [8]. As the decoding latency and memory footprint scale with the KV cache, it is important to
compress the KV cache as the prompt expands.
*

This work was done when Qingyue Yang was an intern at Huawei.
Project lead.
†
Corresponding author. Email: jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn.
‡

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

