R ETRO -R1: LLM-based Agentic Retrosynthesis

Wei Liu1,3,4 , Jiangtao Feng2,3 , Hongli Yu2 , Yuxuan Song2,5 ,
Yuqiang Li3,4 , Shufei Zhang3 , Lei Bai3 , Wei-Ying Ma2 , Hao Zhou2,3 ∗
1
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Shanghai Innovation Institute
5
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
liuwei@sii.edu.cn, yuhl25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{liyuqiang, zhangshufei, bailei}@pjlab.org.cn
{fengjiangtao, songyuxuan, maweiying, zhouhao}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Retrosynthetic planning is a fundamental task in chemical discovery. Due to the vast
combinatorial search space, identifying viable synthetic routes remains a significant
challenge–even for expert chemists. Recent advances in Large Language Models
(LLMs), particularly equipped with reinforcement learning, have demonstrated
strong human-like reasoning and planning abilities, especially in mathematics
and code problem solving. This raises a natural question: Can the reasoning
capabilities of LLMs be harnessed to develop an AI chemist capable of learning
effective policies for multi-step retrosynthesis? In this study, we introduce R ETRO R1, a novel LLM-based retrosynthesis agent trained via reinforcement learning to
design molecular synthesis pathways. Unlike prior approaches, which typically rely
on single-turn, question-answering formats, R ETRO -R1 interacts dynamically with
plug-in single-step retrosynthesis tools and learns from environmental feedback.
Experimental results show that R ETRO -R1 achieves a 55.79% pass@1 success rate,
surpassing the previous state of the art by 8.95%. Notably, R ETRO -R1 demonstrates
strong generalization to out-of-domain test cases, where existing methods tend
to fail despite their high in-domain performance. Our work marks a significant
step toward equipping LLMs with advanced, chemist-like reasoning abilities,
highlighting the promise of reinforcement learning for enabling data-efficient,
generalizable, and sophisticated scientific problem-solving in LLM-based agents.

1

Introduction

Retrosynthetic planning, a fundamental problem in organic chemistry, starts from a target molecule
and works backward to find a pathway to transform it into commercially available starting materials.
As a crucial task in drug discovery, retrosynthetic planning poses a significant computational challenge
due to its vast and discrete combinatorial search space [1]. Successfully navigating this space
requires not only deep chemical knowledge of reactions and reagents but also sophisticated strategic
reasoning to evaluate a multitude of possible intermediate compounds and multi-step reaction
pathways [2]. Moreover, retrosynthesis is inherently a long-horizon reasoning task, demanding
higher-order chemical logic: decisions made in the early stages of the pathway can profoundly affect
downstream options and ultimately determine the feasibility of the entire synthesis route [3].
Building on advances in single-step retrosynthesis prediction [4, 5], machine learning techniques have
increasingly been applied to the more complex task of planning complete multi-step retrosynthesis
∗

Corresponding author. This work was done while Wei Liu was a research intern at Institute for AI Industry
Research (AIR), Tsinghua University. Jiangtao Feng was the project leader.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

