Preference-Based Dynamic Ranking Structure
Recognition

Nan Lu1,2
nlu99007@gmail.com
1

Jian Shi1,2,∗
jshi@iss.ac.cn

Xin-Yu Tian3
tianx@umn.edu

State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Sciences, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Statistics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA

Abstract
Preference-based data often appear complex and noisy but may conceal underlying
homogeneous structures. This paper introduces a novel framework of ranking
structure recognition for preference-based data. We first develop an approach to
identify dynamic ranking groups by incorporating temporal penalties into a spectral
estimation for the celebrated Bradley-Terry model. To detect structural changes, we
introduce an innovative objective function and present a practicable algorithm based
on dynamic programming. Theoretically, we establish the consistency of ranking
group recognition by exploiting properties of a random ‘design matrix’ induced
by a reversible Markov chain. We also tailor a group inverse technique to quantify
the uncertainty in item ability estimates. Additionally, we prove the consistency of
structure change recognition, ensuring the robustness of the proposed framework.
Experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the practical
utility and interpretability of our approach.

1

Introduction

Preference-based data, where observations arise from pairwise or groupwise comparisons rather than
absolute measurements, is prevalent across various domains. This form of data naturally appears
in applications such as economics [1], online recommendations [2], and sports analytics [3]. In
addition, the use of preference-based data in reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
has led to significant improvements in the performance of large language models [4]. One major
advantage of preference-based data lies in its ease of collection, as it is often more intuitive to express
relative preferences rather than assign absolute scores. Many widely used datasets are inherently
preference-based, making their effective modeling and analysis a pivotal research focus. To handle
such data, the celebrated Bradley-Terry model [5] is widely used for inferring latent preference scores
from pairwise comparisons. This model and its extensions have been extensively studied; see [6–9].
Ranking serves as a crucial tool for summarizing preference-based data, providing interpretable
outcomes that facilitate decision-making in various fields. It has broad applications, including the
evaluation of sports teams [10], institutions [11, 12], recommendation systems [13, 14], financial
markets [15, 16], and bioinformatics [17, 18]. By leveraging ranking positions, comparison results
enable the identification of top-performing entities [19, 20] while also uncovering underlying trends
and patterns [21, 22]. Items to be ranked often possess latent structures due to population homogeneity,
which can be reflected in phenomena such as circular comparison results. Moreover, even a slight
∗

Corresponding author.
Code available at https://github.com/nanlu99/RankStruct.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

