Variance-Reduced Long-Term Rehearsal Learning
with Quadratic Programming Reformulation

Wen-Bo Du, Tian Qin, Tian-Zuo Wang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{duwb, qint, wangtz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In machine learning, a critical class of decision-making problems involves Avoiding
Undesired Future (AUF): given a predicted undesired outcome, how can one make
decision about actions to prevent it? Recently, the rehearsal learning framework
has been proposed to address AUF problem. While existing methods offer reliable
decisions for single-round success, this paper considers long-term settings that involve coordinating multiple future outcomes, which is often required in real-world
tasks. Specifically, we generalize the AUF objective to characterize a long-term decision target that incorporates cross-temporal relations among variables. As directly
optimizing the AUF probability PAUF over this objective remains challenging, we
derive an explicit expression for the objective and further propose a quadratic
programming (QP) reformulation that transforms the intractable probabilistic AUF
optimization into a tractable one. Under mild assumptions, we show that solutions
to the QP reformulation are equivalent to those of the original AUF optimization,
based on which we develop two novel rehearsal learning methods for long-term
decision-making: (i) a greedy method that maximizes the single-round PAUF at
each step, and (ii) a far-sighted method that accounts for future consequences in
each decision, yielding a higher overall PAUF through an√L/(L+1) variance reduction in the AUF objective. We further establish an O(1/ N ) excess risk bound for
decisions based on estimated parameters, ensuring reliable practical applicability
with finite data. Experiments validate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) methods have demonstrated remarkable success in diverse real-world prediction tasks [1]. Instead of solely focusing on the prediction, Zhou [2] emphasizes another important
issue, i.e., if an ML model predicts that something undesired is going to occur, how to find effective
actions to prevent it from happening. This problem is known as avoiding undesired future (AUF) [2].
Consider a portfolio management system as an example, which employs an ML model using economic
indicators (X) to predict monthly portfolio returns (Y). If a predicted return is undesirably low, an
ideal system would have the ability of suggesting to alter allocation weights (Z) across asset classes
(e.g., stocks, bonds) to enhance profitability. Due to expensive transaction costs, alterations must be
carefully justified. Let S denote the desired region specified by decision-makers, AUF can be framed
as finding alterations zξ that maximize the probability of Y ∈ S. In real-world tasks, decisions
are often temporally coupled, e.g., aggressive risk-seeking might boost short-term returns while
increasing future vulnerability. This motivates a more practical AUF goal: finding a sequence of
P
1
alterations (zξt , . . . , zξt+L ) to maximize the probability that the aggregated outcome Ȳ , L+1
i Yi
falls within S. This long-term formulation captures cross-period trade-offs, promotes sustainable
performance, and encompasses the single-round setting as a special case (L = 0).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

