OptiTree: Hierarchical Thoughts Generation with
Tree Search for LLM Optimization Modeling

Haoyang Liu1∗, Jie Wang1†, Yuyang Cai1 , Xiongwei Han2 , Yufei Kuang1 , Jianye Hao2,3
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, 3 Tianjin University

Abstract
Optimization modeling is one of the most crucial but technical parts of operations
research (OR). To automate the modeling process, existing works have leveraged
large language models (LLMs), prompting them to break down tasks into steps
for generating variables, constraints, and objectives. However, due to the highly
complex mathematical structures inherent in OR problems, standard fixed-step
decomposition often fails to achieve high performance. To address this challenge,
we introduce OptiTree, a novel tree search approach designed to enhance modeling
capabilities for complex problems through adaptive problem decomposition into
simpler subproblems. Specifically, we develop a modeling tree that organizes a
wide range of OR problems based on their hierarchical problem taxonomy and
complexity, with each node representing a problem category and containing relevant
high-level modeling thoughts. Given a problem to model, we recurrently search the
tree to identify a series of simpler subproblems and synthesize the global modeling
thoughts by adaptively integrating the hierarchical thoughts. Experiments show that
OptiTree significantly improves the modeling accuracy compared to the state-of-theart, achieving over 10% improvements on the challenging benchmarks. The code
is released at https://github.com/MIRALab-USTC/OptiTree/tree/main.

1

Introduction

Optimization models are fundamental in operations research (OR) with a wide range of critical
applications in route planning [33], production planning [4], economics [23], and so on. Typically,
real-world OR problems are presented as natural language descriptions that must be manually
converted into optimization models before developing solver codes (e.g., Gurobi [14] and Pyomo
[6, 16]) to solve. However, the modeling process is highly technical and time-consuming, requiring
extensive human expertise and domain knowledge [28]. Modeling experts often engage in thorough
discussions with clients to fully grasp the problem scenarios and context. This is followed by a
lengthy iterative process to refine and improve the models, enhancing their accuracy and efficiency.
To reduce the time and cost spent in optimization modeling, recent advances have leveraged large
language models (LLMs) to automate this process, leveraging the rich domain knowledge learnt by
LLMs [39, 1, 17]. Given an OR problem, the LLMs take a natural language description as input
and generate both the optimization model and the corresponding solver code. Existing works on
LLM-based optimization modeling include the prompt-based modeling methods [39, 1, 2] and the
fine-tuned LLM modeling agents [17, 21]. The prompt-based methods typically break down modeling
tasks into sequential steps for generating variables, constraints, and objectives [1, 2]. However, this
∗
†

This work was done when Haoyang Liu interned at Huawei. E-mail: dgyoung@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Corresponding author. Email: jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

