Adaptive and Multi-scale Affinity Alignment for
Hierarchical Contrastive Learning

1

Jiawei Huang1,2 Minming Li2 Hu Ding1∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{hjw0330, huding}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Contrastive self-supervised learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm for
extracting meaningful representations without labels. While effective at capturing broad categorical distinctions, current methods often struggle to preserve the
fine-grained and hierarchical relationships inherent in real-world data. From the
perspective of semantic alignment, conventional contrastive learning aligns representations to semantic structure at a global level, treating the entire embedding
space uniformly and frequently overlooking rich local structural information. In
this paper, we propose Adaptive Multi-scale Affinity alignment (AMA-alignment), a
framework that introduces localized contrastive objectives and a dynamic multiscale optimization strategy to adaptively identify and refine poorly aligned regions
within the embedding space. Although our model is inherently more complex
due to its multi-scale and adaptive design, we provide the theoretical guarantees
indicating that its convergence rate remains comparable to that of standard smooth
non-convex optimization. We conduct a set of experiments on diverse benchmarks
to show that AMA-alignment can effectively preserve hierarchical structure; moreover, AMA-alignment also outperforms existing contrastive methods on a range of
downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised/self-supervised learning has revolutionized the field of representation learning, achieving remarkable results across various domains with limited labeled data [1]. These approaches
uncover intrinsic data relationships, facilitating the learning of meaningful representations without
supervision. Among these methods, contrastive learning (CL) has proved to be a particularly effective
framework. By leveraging data augmentations to generate positive and negative sample pairs, CL
trains models to distinguish between similar instances (positive pairs) and dissimilar ones (negative
pairs) [7, 51]. Beyond this discriminative objective, CL can also be interpreted as an “alignment”
mechanism, encouraging the learned representations to reflect the semantic relationships implicitly
defined by the data augmentation process [50, 48].
Despite its success in capturing high-level categorical distinctions, CL often struggles to preserve the
fine-grained and hierarchical semantic relationships inherent in real-world data [1]. Such relationships
are critical for downstream tasks where subtle variations carry significant semantic differences. For
instance, while a CL model trained on the DeepFashion dataset [33] may correctly distinguish highlevel categories like upper- and lower-body garments, it often struggles with finer-grained distinctions,
failing to differentiate between t-shirts, jackets, sweaters, blouses, and vests.
To obtain fine-grained representations, recent advancements in CL mainly focus on designing stronger
augmentation strategies. These methods construct more informative positive and negative sample
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

