FastJAM: a Fast Joint Alignment Model for Images
Omri Hirsch∗ Ron Shapira Weber∗ Shira Ifergane Oren Freifeld
The Faculty of Computer and Information Science, Ben Gurion University of the Negev (BGU), Israel
The Data Science Research Center, BGU
The School of Brain Sciences and Cognition, BGU
{omrihir,ronsha,shiraif}@post.bgu.ac.il
orenfr@bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Joint Alignment (JA) of images aims to align a collection of images into a unified
coordinate frame, such that semantically-similar features appear at corresponding
spatial locations. Most existing approaches often require long training times, largecapacity models, and extensive hyperparameter tuning. We introduce FastJAM, a
rapid, graph-based method that drastically reduces the computational complexity of
joint alignment tasks. FastJAM leverages pairwise matches computed by an off-theshelf image matcher, together with a rapid nonparametric clustering, to construct
a graph representing intra- and inter-image keypoint relations. A graph neural
network propagates and aggregates these correspondences, efficiently predicting
per-image homography parameters via image-level pooling. Utilizing an inversecompositional loss, that eliminates the need for a regularization term over the predicted transformations (and thus also obviates the hyperparameter tuning associated
with such terms), FastJAM performs image JA quickly and effectively. Experimental results on several benchmarks demonstrate that FastJAM achieves results better
than existing modern JA methods in terms of alignment quality, while reducing
computation time from hours or minutes to mere seconds. Our code is available at
our project webpage, https://bgu-cs-vil.github.io/FastJAM/.

1

Introduction

Joint Alignment (JA) is the task of aligning a collection of images by estimating per-image spatial
transformations such that, when applied, all images become geometrically consistent in a shared
coordinate frame according to certain semantic or geometric criteria (see, e.g., Figure 1). Unlike
pairwise alignment, which aligns each image pair independently and often leads to error accumulation
(i.e., “drifting”), JA enforces a global agreement across the entire set, making JA particularly valuable
for discovering shared structures between images or building a class atlas. However, achieving JA is
inherently challenging: without supervision or a reference image, optimization methods frequently
collapse into trivial or inconsistent solutions. Moreover, existing approaches typically require
extensive computational resources, taking more than an hour [1, 2] to jointly align as few as 30
images. Recently, we proposed a method called SpaceJAM [3] that, partially by virtue of a new
inverse-compositional loss over dense feature maps, significantly mitigated these computational
issues, thereby solved the task in only a few minutes. Additionally, SpaceJAM set new state-of-the-art
quantitative results. A natural question arises, however: is it possible to do even better in terms of
both speed and performance? Fortunately, the answer is positive, as we show in the present paper.
∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

