R2R: Efficiently Navigating Divergent Reasoning
Paths with Small-Large Model Token Routing

Tianyu Fu∗ 1,2 , Yi Ge∗1 , Yichen You1 , Enshu Liu1 , Zhihang Yuan2 ,
Guohao Dai3,2 , Shengen Yan2 , Huazhong Yang1 , Yu Wang† 1
1

Tsinghua University

2

Infinigence AI

3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) achieve impressive reasoning capabilities at the
cost of substantial inference overhead, posing substantial deployment challenges.
Although distilled Small Language Models (SLMs) significantly enhance efficiency,
their performance suffers as they fail to follow LLMs’ reasoning paths. Luckily,
we reveal that only a small fraction of tokens genuinely diverge reasoning paths
between LLMs and SLMs. Most generated tokens are either identical or exhibit
neutral differences, such as minor variations in abbreviations or expressions. Leveraging this insight, we introduce Roads to Rome (R2R), a neural token routing
method that selectively utilizes LLMs only for these critical, path-divergent tokens,
while leaving the majority of token generation to the SLM. We also develop an
automatic data generation pipeline that identifies divergent tokens and generates
token-level routing labels to train the lightweight router. We apply R2R to combine
R1-1.5B and R1-32B models from the DeepSeek family, and evaluate on challenging math, coding, and QA benchmarks. With an average activated parameter size of
5.6B, R2R surpasses the average accuracy of R1-7B by 1.6×, outperforming even
the R1-14B model. Compared to R1-32B, it delivers a 2.8× wall-clock speedup
with comparable performance, advancing the Pareto frontier of test-time scaling
efficiency. Our code is available at https://github.com/thu-nics/R2R.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate strong capabilities across a wide range of tasks [1–3].
Building upon the largest and strongest LLMs, test-time scaling has become a prominent way to
further boost their abilities on challenging tasks [4–7]. It is typically done by generating extensive
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning before producing the final answer. However, this approach
requires massive LLMs with hundreds of billions of parameters to generate thousands of tokens per
query [8], resulting in significant inference overhead [9].
Distilled Small Language Models (SLMs), containing only a few billion parameters, offer much
higher generation efficiency. Through supervised finetuning on LLM responses, SLMs can mimic
LLM reasoning behaviors, making them a popular alternative. However, SLMs may still produce
different reasoning paths from their LLM counterparts during inference, causing severe performance
degradation. For example, compared to the R1-32B LLM, the R1-1.5B SLM provides different final
answers on 45% questions in the AIME benchmark [10], suffering a 4.8× reduction in accuracy as
shown in Table 2.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Yu Wang (yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

