Towards Unsupervised Training of Matching-based
Graph Edit Distance Solver via Preference-aware GAN

Wei Huang
University of New South Wales
w.c.huang@unsw.edu.au

Hanchen Wang
University of Technology Sydney
Hanchen.Wang@uts.edu.au

Dong Wen
University of New South Wales
dong.wen@unsw.edu.au

Shaozhen Ma
University of New South Wales
shaozhen.ma@unsw.edu.au

Wenjie Zhang
University of New South Wales
wenjie.zhang@unsw.edu.au

Xuemin Lin
Shanghai Jiaotong University
xuemin.lin@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Edit Distance (GED) is a fundamental graph similarity metric widely used
in various applications. However, computing GED is an NP-hard problem. Recent
state-of-the-art hybrid GED solver has shown promising performance by formulating GED as a bipartite graph matching problem, then leveraging a generative
diffusion model to predict node matching between two graphs, from which both
the GED and its corresponding edit path can be extracted using a traditional algorithm. However, such methods typically rely heavily on ground-truth supervision,
where the ground-truth node matchings are often costly to obtain in real-world
scenarios. In this paper, we propose GEDRanker, a novel unsupervised GANbased framework for GED computation. Specifically, GEDRanker consists of
a matching-based GED solver and introduces an interpretable preference-aware
discriminator. By leveraging preference signals over different node matchings
derived from edit path lengths, the discriminator can guide the matching-based
solver toward generating high-quality node matching without the need for groundtruth supervision. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our GEDRanker enables the matching-based GED solver to achieve near-optimal
solution quality without any ground-truth supervision. The source code is available
at https://github.com/piupiupiuu/GEDRanker.

1

Introduction

Graph Edit Distance (GED) is a widely used graph similarity metric [1, 2, 3] that determines the
minimum number of edit operations required to transform one graph into another. It has broad
applications in domains such as pattern recognition [4, 5] and computer vision [6, 7]. Figure 1(a)
illustrates an example of an optimal edit path for transforming G1 to G2 with GED(G1 , G2 ) = 4.
GED is particularly appealing due to its interpretability and its ability to capture both attribute-level
and structural-level similarities between graphs. Traditional exact approaches for computing GED
rely on A* search [8, 9, 10]. However, due to the NP-hardness of GED computation, these methods
fail to scale to graphs with more than 16 nodes [9], making them impractical for large graphs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

