PALQO: Physics-informed Model for Accelerating
Large-scale Quantum Optimization
Yiming Huang1⇤, Yajie Hao2⇤ , Jing Zhou5 , Xiao Yuan1†, Xiaoting Wang2† , Yuxuan Du3,4†
1
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
and School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
College of Computing and Data Science
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
4
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
5
Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
yiminghwang@gmail.com, yuxuan.du@ntu.edu.sg, xiaoyuan@pku.edu.cn
xiaoting@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) are leading strategies to reach practical utilities of near-term quantum devices. However, the no-cloning theorem in
quantum mechanics precludes standard backpropagation, leading to prohibitive
quantum resource costs when applying VQAs to large-scale tasks. To address this
challenge, we reformulate the training dynamics of VQAs as a nonlinear partial
differential equation and propose a novel protocol that leverages physics-informed
neural networks (PINNs) to model this dynamical system efficiently. Given a small
amount of training trajectory data collected from quantum devices, our protocol
predicts the parameter updates of VQAs over multiple iterations on the classical
side, dramatically reducing quantum resource costs. Through systematic numerical
experiments, we demonstrate that our method achieves up to a 30x speedup compared to conventional methods and reduces quantum resource costs by as much
as 90% for tasks involving up to 40 qubits, including ground state preparation of
different quantum systems, while maintaining competitive accuracy. Our approach
complements existing techniques aimed at improving the efficiency of VQAs and
further strengthens their potential for practical applications.

1

Introduction

Modern quantum computers, with a steadily increasing number of high-quality qubits, are approaching
the threshold of practical utility [1–3]. In this pursuit, variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) [4–12]
have emerged as a leading strategy, attributed to their flexibility in accommodating circuit depth
and qubit connectivity among different platforms. In recent years, a wide range of theoretical
and experimental studies have demonstrated the feasibility of VQAs across diverse applications,
such as quantum chemistry [13–15], optimization [16–18], and machine learning [19–23]. Despite
the progress, they face critical challenges when applied to large-scale problems. In particular,
the no-cloning theorem and the unitary constraints in the quantum universe prohibit the use of
backpropagation techniques common in deep learning [24], requiring VQAs to update sequentially to
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

