DecompNet: Enhancing Time Series Forecasting
Models with Implicit Decomposition

Donghao Luo, Xue Wang
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
ldh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangxue@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we pioneer the idea of implicit decomposition. And based on this idea,
we propose a powerful decomposition-based enhancement framework, namely DecompNet. Our method converts the time series decomposition into an implicit
process, where it can give a time series model the decomposition-related knowledge during inference, even though this model does not actually decompose the
input time series. Thus, our DecompNet can enable a model to inherit the performance promotion brought by time series decomposition but will not introduce any
additional inference costs, successfully enhancing the model performance while
enjoying better efficiency. Experimentally, our DecompNet exhibits promising
enhancement capability and compelling framework generality. Especially, it can
also enhance the performance of the latest and state-of-the-art models, greatly
pushing the performance limit of time series forecasting. Through comprehensive comparisons, DecompNet also shows excellent performance and efficiency
superiority, making the decomposition-based enhancement framework surpass
the well-recognized normalization-based frameworks for the first time. Code is
available at this repository: https://github.com/luodhhh/DecompNet.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is widely used in various real-world scenarios (e.g., transportation management [4], industrial monitoring [35, 25, 26], energy planning [36, 29] and weather forecasting [40]),
helping the society make better decisions. Because of the immense practical value, various time
series models are developed in recent years, bringing great prosperity to time series forecasting
[39, 28, 1, 24, 27].
Apart from the proposal of time series models, designing model-agnostic enhancement frameworks
is another hot research topic. Enhancement frameworks can assist the existing time series models
to handle the non-stationary issue in time series data, effectively improving their performance.
And recently, the research of enhancement frameworks is still dominated by normalization-based
methods [11, 20, 9, 43].
On the other hand, time series decomposition is also a powerful tool to handle the non-stationary
issue [10, 34], because it can unravel the entangled temporal patterns in raw time series and highlight
the stationary components, making it easier to capture the temporal dependency. However, there is
still no popularized enhancement framework based on time series decomposition. This can be
attributed to the following reasons: (i) Less framework generality. Previous decomposition-based
methods are only designed as specific time series models, not meeting the needs of model-agnostic
frameworks. (ii) Severe efficiency issues. As shown in Figure 1 (a.1), previous decomposition-based
methods need to explicitly decompose the time series into seasonal and trend components and
maintain two expert models (namely seasonal model and trend model) for inference. This process
will multiple the computation and inevitably introduce additional inference costs. Considering the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

