Mechanism Design via the Interim Relaxation

Kshipra Bhawalkar
Google Research
kshipra@google.com

Marios Mertzanidis
Purdue University
mmertzan@purdue.edu

Divyarthi Mohan
Tel Aviv University
divyarthim@tau.ac.il

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
We study revenue maximization for agents with additive preferences, subject to
downward-closed constraints on the set of feasible allocations. In seminal work,
Alaei [Ala14] introduced a powerful multi-to-single agent reduction based on an
ex-ante relaxation of the multi-agent problem. This reduction employs a rounding
procedure which is an online contention resolution scheme (OCRS) in disguise, a
now widely-used method for rounding fractional solutions in online Bayesian and
stochastic optimization problems. In this paper, we leverage our vantage point, 10
years after the work of Alaei, with a rich OCRS toolkit and modern approaches to
analyzing multi-agent mechanisms; we introduce a general framework for designing non-sequential and sequential multi-agent, revenue-maximizing mechanisms,
capturing a wide variety of problems Alaei’s framework could not address. Our
framework uses an interim relaxation, that is rounded to a feasible mechanism using
what we call a two-level OCRS, which allows for some structured dependence
between the activation of its input elements. For a wide family of constraints,
we can construct such schemes using existing OCRSs as a black box; for other
constraints, such as knapsack, we construct such schemes from scratch. We demonstrate numerous applications of our framework, including a sequential mechanism
2e
that guarantees a e−1
≈ 3.16 approximation to the optimal revenue for the case
of additive agents subject to matroid feasibility constraints. The simplicity of our
developed two-level CRSs and OCRSs highlights the strength of our framework:
even with a simple analysis, it yields state-of-the-art approximation guarantees
across a wide range of settings. Finally, we show how it naturally extends to
multi-parameter procurement auctions.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of a revenue-maximizing seller with m heterogeneous items for sale to
n strategic agents with additive preferences, subject to downward-closed constraints on the set
of feasible allocations. Revenue maximization for multi-agent environments is a central problem
in Computer Science and Economics. Beyond Myerson’s [Mye81] single-item mechanism, characterizing the revenue optimal mechanism in multi-item settings is a notoriously hard problem.
Revenue-optimal mechanisms are hard to compute even in basic settings, and exhibit various counterintuitive properties [MV07, DDT13, DDT15, BCKW15, HR15, Das15, HN19, PSCW22]. An active
research area strives to understand optimal and approximately optimal mechanisms from various
perspectives, e.g., their computational complexity [CDW12a, CDW13a, CDW12b, CDW13b], sample complexity [CR14, HMR15, DHP16, MR16, CD17, GHZ19, GW21], robustness [BS11, CD17,
DK19, LLY19, PSW19, BCD20, MMPT24], and the tradeoffs between simplicity and optimal39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

