An Iterative Algorithm for Differentially Private
k-PCA with Adaptive Noise

Johanna Düngler
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
jodu@di.ku.dk

Amartya Sanyal
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
amsa@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Given n i.i.d.random matrices Ai ∈ Rd×d that share common expectation Σ, the
objective of Differentially Private Stochastic PCA is to identify a subspace of
dimension k that captures the largest variance directions of Σ, while preserving
differential privacy (DP) of each individual Ai . Existing methods either (i) require
the sample size n to scale super-linearly with dimension d, even under Gaussian
assumptions on the Ai , or (ii) introduce excessive noise for DP even when the
intrinsic randomness within Ai is small. Liu et al. [2022a] addressed these issues
for sub-Gaussian data but only for estimating the top eigenvector (k = 1) using
their algorithm DP-PCA. We propose the first algorithm capable of estimating
the top k eigenvectors for arbitrary k ≤ d, whilst overcoming both limitations
above. For k = 1, our algorithm matches the utility guarantees of DP-PCA,
achieving near-optimal statistical error even when n = Õ(d). We further provide
a lower bound for general k > 1, matching our upper bound up to a factor of k,
and experimentally demonstrate the advantages of our algorithm over comparable
baselines.

1

Introduction

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a foundational statistical method widely utilized for dimenn
sionality reduction, data visualisation, and noise filtering. Given n data pointsP{xi }i=1 , classical
n
d×d
PCA computes the top eigenvectors of the empirical covariance matrix X := i=1 xi x⊤
.
i ∈R
This problem of extracting the top k eigenvectors is commonly known as k-PCA. In this work,
we consider the problem of Stochastic k-PCA, which differs from the standard setting as follows:
instead of inputting a single matrix, we input a stream of matrices A1 , . . . , An , that are sampled
independently from distributions that share the same expectation Σ. Given this input, the goal of a
Stochastic k-PCA algorithm is to approximate the dominant k eigenvectors of Σ.
Differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006] provides rigorous, quantifiable guarantees of individual
data privacy and has been widely adopted in sensitive data contexts, such as census reporting
[Abowd et al., 2020] and large-scale commercial analytics [Apple, 2017]. Despite extensive study of
differentially private PCA [Blum et al., 2005, Chaudhuri et al., 2013, Hardt and Roth, 2013, Dwork
et al., 2014b], existing methods in the stochastic setting suffer from sample complexity super-linear
in d or inject noise at a scale that ignores the underlying stochasticity in the data.
p When applied to the
stochastic setting, these works generally yield suboptimal error rates of O( dk/n + d3/2 k/(εn))
where ε is the DP parameter.
Example 1 (Spiked Covariance). In the spiked covariance model, we observe i.i.d. matrices
Ai ∈ Rd×d that contain both a deterministic (low-rank) signal and random noise, causing the
Ai to be full-rank. As a concrete illustration, consider data points xi = si + ni , composed of a signal
si ∼ Unif ({v, −v}) with v a unit vector and ni ∼ N (0, σ 2 Id ). Therefore Ai := xi x⊤
i consists of a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

