Tree-Sliced Entropy Partial Transport

Viet-Hoang Tran∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
hoang.tranviet@u.nus.edu
Thanh Chu
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
thanh.chu@u.nus.edu

Thanh Tran
College of Engineering & Computer Science
VinUniversity
21thanh.tq@vinuni.edu.vn
Tam Le†
Department of Advanced Data Science
Institute of Statistical Mathematics
tam@ism.ac.jp

Tan M. Nguyen†
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
tanmn@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Optimal Transport (OT) has emerged as a fundamental tool in machine learning
for comparing probability distributions in a geometrically meaningful manner.
However, a key limitation of classical OT is its requirement that the source and
target distributions have equal total mass, limiting its use in real-world settings
involving imbalanced data, noise, outliers, or structural inconsistencies. Partial
Transport (PT) addresses this limitation by allowing only a fraction of the mass
to be transported, offering greater flexibility and robustness. Nonetheless, similar
to OT, PT remains computationally expensive, as it typically involves solving
large-scale linear programs–especially in high-dimensional spaces. To alleviate
this computational burden, several emerging works have introduced the TreeSliced Wasserstein (TSW) distance, which projects distributions onto tree-metric
spaces where OT problems admit closed-form solutions. Building on this line
of research, we propose a novel framework that extends the tree-sliced approach
to the PT setting, introducing the Partial Tree-Sliced Wasserstein (PartialTSW)
distance. Our method is based on the key observation that, within tree-metric
space, the PT problem can be equivalently reformulated as a standard balanced OT
problem between suitably modified measures. This reformulation enables efficient
computation while preserving the adaptability and robustness of partial transport.
Our method proves effective across challenging tasks such as outlier removal and
addressing class imbalance in image-to-image translation. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/thanhqt2002/PartialTSW.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) [87, 61] is a framework for comparing probability distributions by lifting a
ground cost defined between individual points to a metric over measures. Its ability to capture the
∗
†

Corresponding author
Co–last author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

