ModHiFi: Identifying High Fidelity predictive
components for Model Modification

Dhruva Kashyap
CSA, IISc
kdhruva@iisc.ac.in

Chaitanya Murti
HP Inc. AI Lab
chaitanya.murti@hp.com

Tanay Narshana ∗
Google
tanaynarshana@google.com

Pranav Nayak
CSA, IISc
pranavk@iisc.ac.in

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
CSA, IISc
chiru@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Open weight models, which are ubiquitous, rarely provide access to their training
data or loss function. This makes modifying such models for tasks such as pruning or unlearning, which are constrained by this unavailability, an active area of
research. Existing techniques typically require gradients or ground-truth labels,
rendering them infeasible in settings with limited computational resources. In
this work, we investigate the fundamental question of identifying components
that are critical to the model’s predictive performance, without access to either
gradients or the loss function, and with only distributional access such as synthetic
data. We theoretically demonstrate that the global error is linearly bounded by
local reconstruction errors for Lipschitz-continuous networks such as CNNs and
well-trained Transformers (which, contrary to existing literature, we find exhibit
Lipschitz continuity). This motivates using the locally reconstructive behavior
of component subsets to quantify their global importance, via a metric that we
term Subset Fidelity. In the uncorrelated features setting, selecting individual
components based on their Subset Fidelity scores is optimal, which we utilize
to propose ModHiFi, an algorithm for model modification that requires neither
training data nor access to a loss function. ModHiFi-P, for structured pruning,
achieves an 11% speedup over the current state of the art on ImageNet models
and competitive performance on language models. ModHiFi-U, for classwise
unlearning, achieves complete unlearning on CIFAR-10 without fine-tuning and
demonstrates competitive performance on Swin Transformers.2

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning has made significant strides in a wide variety of tasks, such as classification
[35, 36], image generation [22], and natural language processing [49]; moreover, well-trained open
weight models for such tasks are easily accessible. However, significant challenges remain in their
deployment, such as inference in resource-constrained settings [59, 68], inference with unbalanced or
biased data [28, 29], and interpretable inference [93]. These challenges have increased interest in
methods that modify the parameters of well-trained models to alter their behavior [61, 63, 65]. These
methods include pruning [27], classwise unlearning [31, 34, 65], and debiasing [50, 65], among
other model modifications. Moreover, recent work has studied model modification in the setting
where the original training data and loss function are unavailable [53]; this is motivated by concerns
∗

Author primarily contributed to this work before joining Google.
Our code is available at https://github.com/DhruvaKashyap/modhifi

2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

