Iterative Tool Usage Exploration for Multimodal
Agents via Step-wise Preference Tuning

Pengxiang Li1,2∗ Zhi Gao1,2,3,5∗ Bofei Zhang2 Yapeng Mi2,4 Xiaojian Ma2
Chenrui Shi1,2 Tao Yuan2 Yuwei Wu1,5B Yunde Jia5,1 Song-Chun Zhu2,3,6 Qing Li2B
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 4 Harbin Institute of Technology
5
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
6
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

https://sport-agents.github.io

Abstract
Multimodal agents, which integrate a controller (e.g., a vision language model)
with external tools, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in tackling complex
multimodal tasks. Existing approaches for training these agents, both supervised
fine-tuning and reinforcement learning, depend on extensive human-annotated taskanswer pairs and tool trajectories. However, for complex multimodal tasks, such
annotations are prohibitively expensive or impractical to obtain. In this paper, we
propose an iterative tool usage exploration method for multimodal agents without
any pre-collected data, namely SPORT, via step-wise preference optimization to
refine the trajectories of tool usage. Our method enables multimodal agents to
autonomously discover effective tool usage strategies through self-exploration
and optimization, eliminating the bottleneck of human annotation. SPORT has
four iterative components: task synthesis, step sampling, step verification, and
preference tuning. We first synthesize multimodal tasks using language models.
Then, we introduce a novel trajectory exploration scheme, where step sampling
and step verification are executed alternately to solve synthesized tasks. In step
sampling, the agent tries different tools and obtains corresponding results. In
step verification, we employ a verifier to provide AI feedback to construct stepwise preference data. The data is subsequently used to update the controller for
tool usage through preference tuning, producing a SPORT agent. By interacting
with real environments, the SPORT agent gradually evolves into a more refined
and capable system. Evaluation in the GTA and GAIA benchmarks shows that
the SPORT agent achieves 6.41% and 3.64% improvements, underscoring the
generalization and effectiveness introduced by our method.

1

Introduction

Leveraging large language models (LLMs) or vision-language models (VLMs) as controllers to call
external tools (e.g., web search, visual reasoning, file understanding, and object localization) has
become a promising direction in building multimodal agents [48, 19, 14, 49, 30], achieving impressive
performance for complex tasks [17, 37, 31, 13]. To enhance the planning and reasoning abilities of
agents, existing studies focus on collecting tool usage trajectories to fine-tune the controller of an
agent [21, 18], using human annotation or distillation from closed-source APIs. However, collecting
high-quality tool usage data is labor-intensive and high-cost, and such pre-collected data may lead to
biased distributions inconsistent with the target environments (such as task distributions and available
tools), causing inferior generalization.
∗

Equal contribution. B Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

