Tightening Regret Lower and Upper Bounds in
Restless Rising Bandits

Cristiano Migali
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
cristiano.migali@mail.polimi.it
Gianmarco Genalti
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
gianmarco.genalti@polimi.it

Marco Mussi
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
marco.mussi@polimi.it
Alberto Maria Metelli
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Restless Multi-Armed Bandits (MABs) are a general framework designed to handle
real-world decision-making problems where the expected rewards evolve over
time, such as in recommender systems and dynamic pricing. In this work, we
investigate from a theoretical standpoint two well-known structured subclasses
of restless MABs: the rising and the rising concave settings, where the expected
reward of each arm evolves over time following an unknown non-decreasing and a
non-decreasing concave function, respectively. By providing a novel methodology
of independent interest for general restless bandits, we establish new lower bounds
on the expected cumulative regret for both settings. In the rising case, we prove a
lower bound of order ΩpT 2{3 q, matching known upper bounds for restless bandits;
whereas, in the rising concave case, we derive a lower bound of order ΩpT 3{5 q,
proving for the first time that this setting is provably more challenging than stationary MABs. Then, we introduce Rising Concave Budgeted Exploration
(RC-BEpαq), a new regret minimization algorithm designed for the rising concave
MABs. By devising a novel proof technique, we show that the expected cumulative
r 7{11 q. These results collectively make a
regret of RC-BEpαq is in the order of OpT
step towards closing the gap in rising concave MABs, positioning them between
stationary and general restless bandit settings in terms of statistical complexity.

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandits (MABs, Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020) are a well-known framework to model
decision-making problems, where, for each round, an agent chooses (pulls) an action (arm) among a
set of available actions and observes a reward, i.e., numerical feedback which represents the goodness
of the choice. In this setting, the goal of the learner is to minimize the expected cumulative regret
accumulated during the interaction, i.e., the sum over time of the difference between the expected
reward of the optimal arm and that of the chosen one. The standard MAB setting considers stationary
reward distributions. However, in many real-world decision-making problems, the expected rewards
of available actions can vary over time due to changes in the surrounding environment, such as
shifting in consumer preferences for online marketplaces (Wu et al., 2018) or evolving health status
of patients in treatment selection during clinical trials (Aziz et al., 2021). To address such dynamics,
the restless MABs framework (Tekin and Liu, 2012) has been introduced. This model generalizes the
classical MAB setting by explicitly incorporating the non-stationarity of the arms.1
1

With a slight abuse of terminology, we will use the words non-stationary and restless interchangeably.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

