Nonlinearly Preconditioned Gradient Methods:
Momentum and Stochastic Analysis

Konstantinos Oikonomidis∗
ESAT-STADIUS & Leuven.AI
KU Leuven
konstantinos.oikonomidis@kuleuven.be

Jan Quan∗
ESAT-STADIUS & Leuven.AI
KU Leuven
jan.quan@kuleuven.be

Panagiotis Patrinos
ESAT-STADIUS & Leuven.AI
KU Leuven
panos.patrinos@kuleuven.be

Abstract
We study nonlinearly preconditioned gradient methods for smooth nonconvex optimization problems, focusing on sigmoid preconditioners that inherently perform
a form of gradient clipping akin to the widely used gradient clipping technique.
Building upon this idea, we introduce a novel heavy ball-type algorithm and provide convergence guarantees under a generalized smoothness condition that is less
restrictive than traditional Lipschitz smoothness, thus covering a broader class of
functions. Additionally, we develop a stochastic variant of the base method and
study its convergence properties under different noise assumptions. We compare
the proposed algorithms with baseline methods on diverse tasks from machine
learning including neural network training.

1

Introduction and preliminaries

In this paper we consider general minimization problems of the form:
min f (x),

x∈Rn

(P)

where f : Rn → R is a smooth and possibly nonconvex function. Under (global) Lipschitz continuity
of the gradient, gradient descent (GD) and its stochastic counterpart, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) are the standard methods to efficiently tackle such problems. Gradient descent-type methods
are the backbone of training machine learning models, especially considering the ever-growing size
of datasets and architectures. Nevertheless, most modern-day applications involve cost functions
that do not fit into the traditional Lipschitz gradient assumption [48]. Although GD and SGD,
being versatile solvers, can handle such problems as well, they require careful tuning or expensive
linesearch strategies to converge. In recent years, there has thus been considerable effort to introduce
and analyze methods that can better adapt to more general smoothness conditions.
Gradient clipping [48, 20] is a standard practice in tasks such as language models and has been widely
used to stabilize the training of neural networks. Recently, the method has received a lot of theoretical
attention, especially since it was shown to be effective for problems under a less restrictive notion
of smoothness, called (L0 , L1 )-smoothness [48]. In [36], it was shown that in fact a whole family
of clipping methods, including the soft clipping algorithm [47] can be viewed as simple gradient
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

