GeoLink: Empowering Remote Sensing Foundation
Model with OpenStreetMap Data

Lubin Bai1∗, Xiuyuan Zhang2 , Siqi Zhang3 , Zepeng Zhang4 ,
Haoyu Wang2 , Wei Qin1 , Shihong Du2†
1
School of Earth and Space Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
College of Urban and Environmental Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China
4
Intelligent Maintenance and Operations Systems Lab
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
Integrating ground-level geospatial data with rich geographic context, like OpenStreetMap (OSM), into remote sensing (RS) foundation models (FMs) is essential
for advancing geospatial intelligence and supporting a broad spectrum of tasks.
However, modality gap between RS and OSM data, including differences in data
structure, content, and spatial granularity, makes effective synergy highly challenging, and most existing RS FMs focus on imagery alone. To this end, this study
presents GeoLink, a multimodal framework that leverages OSM data to enhance
RS FM during both the pretraining and downstream task stages. Specifically,
GeoLink enhances RS self-supervised pretraining using multi-granularity learning signals derived from OSM data, guided by cross-modal spatial correlations
for information interaction and collaboration. It also introduces image maskreconstruction to enable sparse input for efficient pretraining. For downstream
tasks, GeoLink generates both unimodal and multimodal fine-grained encodings
to support a wide range of applications, from common RS interpretation tasks
like land cover classification to more comprehensive geographic tasks like urban
function zone mapping. Extensive experiments show that incorporating OSM data
during pretraining enhances the performance of the RS image encoder, while fusing
RS and OSM data in downstream tasks improves the FM’s adaptability to complex geographic scenarios. These results underscore the potential of multimodal
synergy in advancing high-level geospatial artificial intelligence. Moreover, we
find that spatial correlation plays a crucial role in enabling effective multimodal
geospatial data integration. Code, checkpoints, and using examples are released at
https://github.com/bailubin/GeoLink_NeurIPS2025

1

Introduction

Remote sensing (RS) serves as a powerful tool for observing and monitoring our planet. Recently,
the label-free, task-agnostic nature of self-supervised learning (SSL) has enabled RS foundation
models (FMs) to make significant strides [1, 2, 3, 4]. Beyond scaling up the model parameters and
dataset size, many RS FMs have been specifically tailored to accommodate the unique characteristics
of RS image [5, 6, 7, 8], incorporating multi-scale [2, 9], multi-temporal [4, 10, 11, 12, 13], and
multi-spectral [3, 14, 15, 16] processing techniques. After pretraining, these FMs can extract
∗
†

Email: lbbai@stu.pku.edu.cn
Corresponding author: shdu@pku.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

