Less Greedy Equivalence Search

Adiba Ejaz
Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Lab
Columbia University
{adiba.ejaz, eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) is a classic score-based algorithm for causal
discovery from observational data. In the sample limit, it recovers the Markov
equivalence class of graphs that describe the data. Still, it faces two challenges in
practice: computational cost and finite-sample accuracy. In this paper, we develop
Less Greedy Equivalence Search (LGES), a variant of GES that retains its theoretical guarantees while partially addressing these limitations. LGES modifies the
greedy step; rather than always applying the highest-scoring insertion, it avoids
edge insertions between variables for which the score implies some conditional
independence. This more targeted search yields up to a 10-fold speed-up and
a substantial reduction in structural error relative to GES. Moreover, LGES can
guide the search using prior knowledge, and can correct this knowledge when
contradicted by data. Finally, LGES can use interventional data to refine the
learned observational equivalence class. We prove that LGES recovers the true
equivalence class in the sample limit, even with misspecified knowledge. Experiments demonstrate that LGES outperforms GES and other baselines in speed,
accuracy, and robustness to misspecified knowledge. Our code is available at
https://github.com/CausalAILab/lges.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery, the task of learning causal structure from data, is a core problem in the field of
causality [54]. The causal structure may be an end in itself to the scientist, or a prerequisite for
downstream tasks such as inference, decision-making, and generalization [2, 42]. Causal discovery
algorithms have been used in a range of disciplines that span biology, medicine, climate science, and
neuroscience, among others [19, 43, 47, 48].
A hallmark algorithm in the field is Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) [9, 35], which takes as input
observational data and finds a Markov equivalence class (MEC) of causal graphs that describe
the data. In general, the true graph is not uniquely identifiable from observational data, and the
MEC is the most informative structure that can be learned. Under standard assumptions in causal
discovery, GES is guaranteed to recover the true MEC in the sample limit. In contrast, many
causal discovery algorithms—including prominent examples such as max-min hill-climbing [56]
and NoTears [61]—lack such large-sample guarantees. Many variants of GES have been developed,
including faster, parallelized implementations [43], restricted search over bounded in-degree graphs
[10], and Greedy Interventional Equivalence Search (GIES) [24]. The last of these can exploit
interventional data, though is not asymptotically correct [58].
Despite its attractive features, the GES family faces challenges shared across most causal discovery
algorithms. For instance, the problem of causal discovery is NP-hard [11], and GES commonly
struggles to scale in high-dimensional settings. Moreover, in finite-sample regimes, GES often
fails to recover the true MEC. In other words, applying GES in practice is challenging due to both
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

