Adaptive Prediction-Powered AutoEval with
Reliability and Efficiency Guarantees

Sangwoo Park Matteo Zecchin Osvaldo Simeone
Department of Engineering
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom
{sangwoo.park, matteo.1.zecchin, osvaldo.simeone}@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Selecting artificial intelligence (AI) models, such as large language models (LLMs),
from multiple candidates requires accurate performance estimation. This is ideally
achieved through empirical evaluations involving abundant real-world data. However, such evaluations are costly and impractical at scale. To address this challenge,
autoevaluation methods leverage synthetic data produced by automated evaluators,
such as LLMs-as-judges, reducing variance but potentially introducing bias. Recent
approaches have employed semi-supervised prediction-powered inference (PPI)
to correct for the bias of autoevaluators. However, the use of autoevaluators may
lead in practice to a degradation in sample efficiency compared to conventional
methods using only real-world data. In this paper, we propose R-AutoEval+, a
novel framework that provides finite-sample reliability guarantees on the model
evaluation, while also ensuring an enhanced (or at least no worse) sample efficiency compared to conventional methods. The key innovation of R-AutoEval+
is an adaptive construction of the model evaluation variable, which dynamically
tunes its reliance on synthetic data, reverting to conventional methods when the
autoevaluator is insufficiently accurate. Experiments on the use of LLMs-as-judges
for the optimization of quantization settings for the weights of an LLM, for prompt
design in LLMs, and for test-time reasoning budget allocation in LLMs confirm
the reliability and efficiency of R-AutoEval+.

1

Introduction

1.1

Context and Motivation

Selecting an artificial intelligence (AI) model among multiple candidates necessitates accurately
estimating each model’s performance. Typically, performance assessment involves actively employing
each model to gather relevant empirical evidence or data. To mitigate the substantial cost and practical
burden of real-world testing, autoevaluation leverages automated tools to evaluate model performance
without direct human intervention [35, 31, 12, 8, 52, 5].
Standard evaluation based on human judgment – referred to as Eval – and autoevaluation – AutoEval
– each present distinct advantages and drawbacks. Eval provides unbiased estimates of a model’s
performance but requires costly annotation. In contrast, AutoEval is cheaper, as it can rely on
abundant synthetic data, but it may introduce estimation bias [35, 12]. Consequently, neither approach,
in isolation, ensures reliable model evaluation, potentially leading to erroneous evaluation outcomes.
Reliability in evaluation methods can be established via confidence intervals that accurately capture
the true expected performance at a specified coverage level, or through testing strategies that detect
whether target performance levels are met at specified false detection probabilities. For Eval, both
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

