Exploring and Exploiting Model Uncertainty in
Bayesian Optimization

Zishi Zhang1∗, Tao Ren1∗, Yijie Peng1,2†
Guanghua School of Management, Peking University
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory
{zishizhang,rtkenny}@stu.pku.edu.cn, pengyijie@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In this work, we consider the problem of Bayesian Optimization (BO) under reward
model uncertainty—that is, when the underlying distribution type of the reward
is unknown and potentially intractable to specify. This challenge is particularly
evident in many modern applications, where the reward distribution is highly
ill-behaved, often non-stationary, multi-modal, or heavy-tailed. In such settings,
classical Gaussian Process (GP)-based BO methods often fail due to their strong
modeling assumptions. To address this challenge, we propose a novel surrogate
model, the infinity-Gaussian Process (∞-GP), which represents a sequential spatial
Dirichlet Process mixture with a GP baseline. The ∞-GP quantifies both value
uncertainty and model uncertainty, enabling more flexible modeling of complex
reward structures. Combined with Thompson Sampling, the ∞-GP facilitates
principled exploration and exploitation in the distributional space of reward models.
Theoretically, we prove that the ∞-GP surrogate model can approximate a broad
class of reward distributions by effectively exploring the distribution space, achieving near-minimax-optimal posterior contraction rates. Empirically, our method
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in various challenging scenarios, including
highly non-stationary and heavy-tailed reward settings where classical GP-based
BO often fails.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) [Frazier, 2018] is a powerful framework for optimizing expensive-toevaluate black-box functions and has found broad applications in hyperparameter tuning for machine
learning models [Snoek et al., 2012], robotics [Berkenkamp et al., 2023], biology [Amin et al., 2024],
and reinforcement learning [Brochu et al., 2010]. BO typically proceeds by fitting a surrogate model
to the observed reward collected so far, and then using an acquisition policy to guide the selection of
the next location to query. The surrogate model plays a central role in both learning and exploration.
In almost all BO applications, Gaussian Processes (GPs) are used as the default surrogate model. This
practice assumes that the deterministic objective function µ∗ (x) and the noise ϵ∗ (x) satisfy strong
structural conditions, essentially requiring the true objective to "resemble" a GP. Specifically, µ∗ (x)
is often assumed to be a sample path drawn from GP [Russo and Van Roy, 2014, Wang et al., 2025]
or lie in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) with known bounded norm [Srinivas et al., 2010,
2012, Chowdhury and Gopalan, 2017] (the connection between GP regression and RKHS regression
is detailed in Kanagawa et al. [2018]), and ϵ∗ (x) is assumed to be independent and (sub-)Gaussian,
or even noiseless [Chen and Lam, 2023]. These assumptions are critical for theoretical guarantees,
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

