ProDAG: Projected Variational Inference
for Directed Acyclic Graphs

Ryan Thompson∗
University of Technology Sydney

Edwin V. Bonilla
CSIRO’s Data61

Robert Kohn
University of New South Wales

Abstract
Directed acyclic graph (DAG) learning is a central task in structure discovery and
causal inference. Although the field has witnessed remarkable advances over the
past few years, it remains statistically and computationally challenging to learn a
single (point estimate) DAG from data, let alone provide uncertainty quantification.
We address the difficult task of quantifying graph uncertainty by developing a
Bayesian variational inference framework based on novel, provably valid distributions that have support directly on the space of sparse DAGs. These distributions,
which we use to define our prior and variational posterior, are induced by a projection operation that maps an arbitrary continuous distribution onto the space of
sparse weighted acyclic adjacency matrices. While this projection is combinatorial,
it can be solved efficiently using recent continuous reformulations of acyclicity
constraints. We empirically demonstrate that our method, ProDAG, can outperform
state-of-the-art alternatives in both accuracy and uncertainty quantification.

1

Introduction

A directed acyclic graph (DAG) has directed edges between nodes and no directed cycles, allowing
it to represent complex conditional independencies compactly. DAGs play a central role in causal
inference (Spirtes et al., 2001; Pearl, 2009) and consequently have found applications spanning
a broad range of domains such as psychology (Foster, 2010), economics (Imbens, 2020), and
epidemiology (Tennant et al., 2021). The literature on DAGs, dating back at least to the 1980s
(Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter, 1988; Pearl, 1988), has recently witnessed a resurgence of interest due to
a computational breakthrough by Zheng et al. (2018) that formulated a continuous characterization for
the discrete notion of acyclicity. This breakthrough opened the door for scalable first-order algorithms
that can learn DAG structures from datasets containing many more variables than previously assumed
feasible. We refer the reader to Vowels et al. (2022) and Kitson et al. (2023) for surveys of this work.
Unlike frequentist approaches that only learn point estimate DAGs (Zheng et al., 2018; Bello et al.,
2022; Andrews et al., 2023), Bayesian approaches learn entire posterior distributions over DAGs. The
posterior quantifies graph uncertainty while acknowledging that the true DAG might be identifiable
only up to its Markov equivalence class.2 Uncertainty quantification also benefits downstream tasks
such as treatment effect estimation (Geffner et al., 2022) and experimental design (Annadani et al.,
2023b). Most Bayesian approaches use a Gibbs-type prior based on a continuous acyclicity penalty
(Annadani et al., 2021; Lorch et al., 2021; Geffner et al., 2022) or model DAGs in an augmented
space where acyclicity is readily satisfied (Charpentier et al., 2022; Annadani et al., 2023a; Bonilla
et al., 2024). While the former group (Gibbs-type priors) do not guarantee an exact posterior over
DAGs, the latter group (augmented spaces) require relaxations or inference over discrete structures.
∗
2

Corresponding author. Email: ryan.thompson-1@uts.edu.au
The Markov equivalence class is the set of DAGs that encode the same conditional independencies.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

