Demystifying Language Model Forgetting with
Low-rank Example Associations

Xisen Jin, Xiang Ren
University of Southern California
{xisenjin,xiangren}@usc.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) suffer from forgetting of upstream knowledge
when fine-tuned. Despite efforts on mitigating forgetting, few have investigated
how forgotten upstream examples are dependent on newly learned tasks. Insights
on such dependencies enable efficient and targeted mitigation of forgetting. In
this paper, we empirically analyze forgetting that occurs in N upstream examples
of language modeling or instruction-tuning after fine-tuning LLMs on one of M
new tasks, visualized in M × N matrices. We show that the matrices are often
well-approximated with low-rank matrices, indicating the dominance of simple associations between the learned tasks and forgotten upstream examples. Leveraging
the analysis, we predict forgetting of upstream examples when fine-tuning LLMs
on unseen tasks with matrix completion over the empirical associations. This
enables fast identification of most forgotten examples without expensive inference
on the entire upstream data. Despite simplicity, the approach outperforms prior
approaches that learn semantic relationships of learned tasks and upstream examples with LMs. We demonstrate the practical utility of our analysis by showing
statistically significantly reduced forgetting as we upweight predicted examples for
replay during fine-tuning.

1

Introduction

There has been a growing need for continued fine-tuning of LLMs to mitigate harmful behaviors,
update outdated knowledge, and adapt to unseen tasks and domains. Although fine-tuning allows
efficient and incremental adaptation of models, models may suffer from catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Goodfellow et al., 2014) of upstream knowledge learned in the pre-training
or instruction-tuning phase, causing unintended prediction changes over known information. This is
problematic for the performance and reliability of LLMs deployed online, limiting the feasibility of
continual fine-tuning in practice (Raffel, 2023; Shi et al., 2024).
Existing works demonstrate that replaying or mixing in past examples is effective and scalable
approaches to mitigate LLM forgetting (Scialom et al., 2022; Roth et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b;
Ibrahim et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024). These approaches, however, often rely on random sampling
of past examples; knowing what models forget after fine-tuning allows more efficient and targeted
mitigation of forgetting – e.g., by prioritizing the replay of more forgotten examples (Toneva et al.,
2019; Aljundi et al., 2019a). In this paper, we explore how forgetting caused by unseen tasks can
be efficiently predicted, and more specifically, from the forgetting that occurred while learning
other tasks. The complexity of associations between learned tasks and forgotten examples plays an
important role in predictability; Figure 1 (a) illustrates a hypothetical scenario where certain upstream
examples suffer more forgetting regardless of the learned tasks, making forgetting easily predictable;
in contrast, (b) exemplifies upstream example forgetting that is highly dependent on the learned
tasks. Existing theoretical and empirical studies on the associations between learned and forgotten
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

