OmniSVG: A Unified Scalable Vector Graphics
Generation Model
Yiying Yang1,2∗ Wei Cheng2∗ Sijin Chen1 Xianfang Zeng2 Fukun Yin1,2
Jiaxu Zhang2 Liao Wang2 Gang Yu2 ‡ Xingjun Ma1 ‡ Yu-Gang Jiang1
1

Project Page

Icon

2

Fudan University

MMSVG-2M

Illustration

StepFun

MMSVGBench

Character

Models

Code
Text-to-SVG
A cute cartoon
character with a
green and yellow
mushroom hat,
red capes.

Image-to-SVG

Character Reference

Samples Generated by OmniSVG with Wide Complexity Range

Versatility

Figure 1: OmniSVG is capable of autoregressively generating high-quality Scalable Vector Graphs (SVG)
across a wide spectrum of complexity, from simple icons to intricate anime characters. OmniSVG demonstrates
remarkable versatility in generating high-quality SVGs adhering to multimodal instructions, covering tasks like
Text-to-SVG, Image-to-SVG, and Character-Reference SVG, making it a powerful and flexible solution for
diverse creative tasks.

Abstract
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) is an important image format widely adopted
in graphic design because of their resolution independence and editability. The
development of autonomous SVG generation workflows is continuously drawing
attention from both designers and researchers in the AIGC community. However,
existing methods either produce unstructured outputs at huge computational cost
or are limited to generating monochrome icons of over-simplified structures. To
produce high-quality and complex SVG adhering to multi-modal instructions, we
propose OmniSVG, a unified SVG generation framework that inherits knowledge
from a pre-trained Vision-Language Model (VLM). By parameterizing SVG commands and coordinates into discrete token sequences, the auto-regressive nature
enables us to seaminglessly adapt modern VLMs to the direct SVG generation. To
further advance the development of SVG synthesis, we introduce MMSVG-2M,
a multimodal dataset with two million richly annotated SVG assets, along with a
standardized evaluation protocol for conditional SVG generation tasks. Extensive
experiments show that OmniSVG outperforms existing methods and demonstrates
its potential for integration into professional SVG design workflows.

* Yiying Yang and Wei Cheng contributed equally to this work.
‡ Corresponding Authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

