Computational Hardness of Reinforcement Learning
with Partial q π -Realizability

Shayan Karimi
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
skarimi3@ualberta.ca

Xiaoqi Tan
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
xiaoqi.tan@ualberta.ca

Abstract
This paper investigates the computational complexity of reinforcement learning
within a novel linear function approximation regime, termed partial q π -realizability.
In this framework, the objective is to learn an ϵ-optimal policy with respect to a
predefined policy set Π, under the assumption that all value functions corresponding to policies in Π are linearly realizable. This framework adopts assumptions
that are weaker than those in the q π -realizability setting yet stronger than those
in the q ∗ -realizability setup. As a result, it provides a more practical model for
reinforcement learning scenarios where function approximation naturally arise. We
prove that learning an ϵ-optimal policy in this newly defined setting is computationally hard. More specifically, we establish NP-hardness under a parameterized
greedy policy set (i.e., argmax) and, further, show that—unless NP = RP—an
exponential lower bound (exponential in feature vector dimension) holds when the
policy set contains softmax policies, under the Randomized Exponential Time Hypothesis. Our hardness results mirror those obtained in the q ∗ -realizability settings,
and suggest that computational difficulty persists even when the policy class Π is
expanded beyond the optimal policy, reinforcing the unbreakable nature of the computational hardness result regarding partial q π -realizability under two important
policy sets. To establish our negative result, our primary technical contribution is a
reduction from two complexity problems, δ-M AX -3SAT and δ-M AX -3SAT(b),
to instances of our problem settings: G L INEAR -κ-RL (under the greedy policy
set) and S L INEAR -κ-RL (under the softmax policy set), respectively. Our findings
indicate that positive computational results are generally unattainable in the context
of partial q π -realizability, in sharp contrast to the q π -realizability setting under a
generative access model.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), the term “efficiency" often refers to statistical efficiency, which relates
to the number of samples required for an algorithm to converge to a near-optimal solution. Another
critical, though less frequently addressed perspective is computational complexity, which focuses on
the computational demands of the algorithm. To address these challenges, function approximation
techniques—either linear or nonlinear—are commonly employed. These approximation methods
enable the estimation of the value function so that resulting complexity bounds become independent
of the size of the state space [TVR97, SB18, Ber09]. Instead, complexity depends on approximation
parameters, thereby offering a scalable and efficient framework for RL in large state spaces.
Prominent RL applications employing nonlinear value approximators include AlphaGo [SHM+ 16],
AlphaZero [SHS+ 17], MuZero [SAH+ 20], and AlphaStar [MOS+ 23]. Despite their practical success,
nonlinear approximators are challenging to analyze theoretically. In contrast, linear value approximators allow for more tractable theoretical analysis. Two primary settings for linear function approxima39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

