Pin the Tail on the Model: Blindfolded Repair of
User-Flagged Failures in Text-to-Image Services

Gefei Tan∗
Northwestern University
Ellen Kolesnikova†
Decatur High School

Ali Shahin Shamsabadi∗
Brave Software

Hamed Haddadi
Brave Software & Imperial College London

Xiao Wang
Northwestern University

Abstract
Diffusion models are increasingly deployed in real-world text-to-image services.
These models, however, encode implicit assumptions about the world based on webscraped image-caption pairs used during training. Over time, such assumptions
may become outdated, incorrect, or socially biased–leading to failures where the
generated images misalign with users’ expectations or evolving societal norms.
Identifying and fixing such failures is challenging and, thus, a valuable asset for
service providers, as failures often emerge post-deployment and demand specialized
expertise and resources to resolve them. In this work, we introduce SURE, the first
end-to-end framework that SecUrely REpairs failures flagged by users of diffusionbased services. SURE enables the service provider to securely collaborate with an
external third-party specialized in model repairing (i.e., Model Repair Institute)
without compromising the confidentiality of user feedback, the service provider’s
proprietary model, or the Model Repair Institute’s proprietary repairing knowledge.
To achieve the best possible efficiency, we propose a co-design of a model editing
algorithm with a customized two-party cryptographic protocol. Our experiments
show that SURE is highly practical: SURE securely and effectively repairs all 32
layers of Stable Diffusion v1.4 in under 17 seconds (four orders of magnitude more
efficient than a general baseline). Our results demonstrate that practical, secure
model repair is attainable for large-scale, modern diffusion services.

1

Introduction

A growing number of real-world services [26, 29, 1, 25, 40, 2, 6, 21, 24, 28, 17] are helping millions
of users to create images from textual prompts [45]. These services are typically powered by testto-image diffusion models [19, 39], which generate high-quality images [45, 7] when trained on
billion-scale datasets of image-caption pairs scraped from the web. However, diffusion models
implicitly encode the knowledge and assumptions present in their training data [15, 31, 3, 38, 8],
which then appear again during image generation. This can lead to unintentional failures: although
the generated image may be high quality and technically accurate, it can still misalign with users’
values and expectations. For example, diffusion models might retain outdated or incorrect information
(e.g., the identity of a country’s president or a celebrity’s hairstyle). More importantly, diffusion
models may encode harmful stereotypical assumptions about professions into their parameters. For
example, when given the prompt “A photo of a CEO”, the commercial image generation services
predominantly generate images of men—only 4% of outputs depict women [30].
∗
†

Contributed equally as co-first authors.
Work done during an internship at Northwestern University.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

