MultiScale Contextual Bandits for Long Term
Objectives

Richa Rastogi Yuta Saito Thorsten Joachims
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University

Abstract
The feedback that AI systems (e.g., recommender systems, chatbots) collect from
user interactions is a crucial source of training data. While short-term feedback
(e.g., clicks, engagement) is widely used for training, there is ample evidence that
optimizing short-term feedback does not necessarily achieve the desired long-term
objectives. Unfortunately, directly optimizing for long-term objectives is challenging, and we identify the disconnect in the timescales of short-term interventions
(e.g., rankings) and the long-term feedback (e.g., user retention) as one of the key
obstacles. To overcome this disconnect, we introduce the framework of MultiScale
Policy Learning to contextually reconcile that AI systems need to act and optimize
feedback at multiple interdependent timescales. Following a PAC-Bayes motivation, we show how the lower timescales with more plentiful data can provide a
data-dependent hierarchical prior for faster learning at higher scales, where data is
more scarce. As a result, the policies at all levels effectively optimize for the longterm. We instantiate the framework with MultiScale Off-Policy Bandit Learning
(MSBL) and demonstrate its effectiveness on three tasks relating to recommender
and conversational systems.

1

Introduction

Many interactive AI systems (e.g., recommender systems, conversational systems) use abundantly
collected short-term feedback for learning. However, it is well known that over-optimization of
short-term feedback can adversely affect the long-term goals [14, 21, 26]. Similarly, challenges with
competing time horizon objectives [40, 15], and issues like reward hacking [35, 29, 30] and user
manipulation [18, 11] have been previously reported. For example, optimizing for engagement on
social media platforms can lead to clickbait-y or toxic feeds. This neither reflects the user preferences
nor the platform’s goals of retaining users. We wish to design systems that optimize for long-term
objectives, that are beneficial for various stakeholders in the system [1].
A key problem in achieving this goal is that the long-term feedback (e.g., user retention) is at a
different timescale than the short-term interventions (e.g., rankings of recommended products) that
are used to optimize them. For instance, optimizing rankings for clicks in a recommender system is
relatively straightforward since clicks can be attributed to an individual ranking. Indeed, learning
methods such as bandits that optimize for users’ immediate response to recommendations such as
clicks, likes, views, etc are widely used to learn ranking policies [19, 46]. Now, consider optimizing
rankings for the feedback on users’ subscription renewal, which is observed monthly. We note the
disconnect between the timescale of rankings presented and the long-term objective of subscription
renewal, making this a much harder problem than the previous one. While a Markov Decision Process
can in principle model sequential dependencies to achieve long-term goals, in practice the large
resulting state spaces, credit-assignment problems, and the sparsity of long-term feedback prohibit
straightforward applications of reinforcement learning [23].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

