Towards Generalizable 3D Human Pose Estimation via
Ensembles on Flat Loss Landscapes

Jumin Han
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
juminhan@korea.ac.kr

Jun-Hee Kim
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
jh__kim@korea.ac.kr

Seong-Whan Lee
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
sw.lee@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) is a fundamental task in the computer vision.
Generalization in 3D HPE task is crucial due to the need for robustness across
diverse environments and datasets. Existing methods often focus on learning
relationships between joints to enhance the generalization capability, but the role of
the loss landscape, which is closely tied to generalization, remains underexplored.
In this paper, we empirically visualize the loss landscape of the 3D HPE task,
revealing its complexity and the challenges it poses for optimization. To address
this, we first introduce a simple adaptive scaling mechanism that smooths the
loss landscape. We further observe that different solutions on this smoothed loss
landscape exhibit varying generalization behaviors. Based on this insight, we
propose an efficient ensemble approach that combines diverse solutions on the
smooth loss landscape induced by our adaptive scaling mechanism. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that our approach improves the generalization
capability of 3D HPE models, and can be easily applied, regardless of model
architecture, with consistent performance gains.

1

Introduction

3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) is one of the essential computer vision tasks. In recent years,
it has received increased attention due to its successful application in the areas of autonomous
driving [33, 39], robotics [40, 12, 26], and industrial safety [31] along with the advancement of Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs). Especially, in the domain of industrial safety, it is crucial to ensure the
generalization capability of the model as its accuracy can be directly tied to safety concerns.
Unfortunately, it is challenge to get a robust 3D HPE model due to the inherent complexity and
variability of human poses across different datasets and domains. Previous researches have addressed
these challenges by focusing on multi-hypothesis concept [8, 4, 22, 19], learning better posture
information [16, 10, 29], designing elastic model architectures [36, 27], and data augmentation
[7, 28]. Although previous methods have achieved notable performance improvements, they often
overlook the structure of the loss landscape, which plays a critical role in understanding model
generalization and stability [5, 1].
In our analysis, we found that the loss landscape of 3D HPE task can be highly complicated and has
multiple disconnected local minima. Such disconnected modes can pose significant challenges for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

