TAI3: Testing Agent Integrity in Interpreting User Intent

Shiwei Feng∗, Xiangzhe Xu∗, Xuan Chen, Kaiyuan Zhang,
Syed Yusuf Ahmed, Zian Su, Mingwei Zheng, Xiangyu Zhang
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
{feng292, xu1415, chen4124, zhan4057, ahmed298, su284, zheng618, xyzhang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
LLM agents are increasingly deployed to automate real-world tasks by invoking
APIs through natural language instructions. While powerful, they often suffer
from misinterpretation of user intent, leading to the agent’s actions that diverge
from the user’s intended goal, especially as external toolkits evolve. Traditional
software testing assumes structured inputs and thus falls short in handling the
ambiguity of natural language. We introduce TAI3, an API-centric stress testing
framework that systematically uncovers intent integrity violations in LLM agents.
Unlike prior work focused on fixed benchmarks or adversarial inputs, TAI3
generates realistic tasks based on toolkits’ documentation and applies targeted
mutations to expose subtle agent errors while preserving user intent. To guide
testing, we propose semantic partitioning, which organizes natural language
tasks into meaningful categories based on toolkit API parameters and their
equivalence classes. Within each partition, seed tasks are mutated and ranked
by a lightweight predictor that estimates the likelihood of triggering agent errors.
To enhance efficiency, TAI3 maintains a datatype-aware strategy memory that
retrieves and adapts effective mutation patterns from past cases. Experiments
on 80 toolkit APIs demonstrate that TAI3 effectively uncovers intent integrity
violations, significantly outperforming baselines in both error-exposing rate and
query efficiency. Moreover, TAI3 generalizes well to stronger target models using
smaller LLMs for test generation, and adapts to evolving APIs across domains.

1

Introduction

Large Language Model (LLM) agents are rapidly emerging as a powerful paradigm for automating
real-world tasks through natural language. By leveraging external toolkits and invoking APIs, these
agents can translate high-level instructions into concrete actions across diverse domains such as
software development [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], e-commerce [6, 7, 8], and smart home control [9, 10, 11].
Despite their growing popularity and capability, LLM agents raise significant robustness concerns.
Unlike traditional systems programmed with well-defined interfaces, LLM agents operate in natural
language, which has open-ended and ambiguous input spaces. This makes it difficult to ensure that
an agent’s behaviors faithfully reflect the user’s true intent. Even minor misinterpretations can result
in incorrect, unexpected, or unsafe behaviors, posing serious risks in safety- and reliability-critical
settings. In this paper, we call it the intent integrity (or simply integrity) problem of LLM agents.
Existing solutions fall short of addressing the intent integrity problem. Recently, several LLM agent
safety benchmarks [12, 13] are proposed, but they typically rely on fixed test cases, failing to keep
pace with the rapidly evolving landscape of agents. Moreover, many adversarial testing techniques
(e.g., paraphrasing) focus on jailbreaking [14, 15, 16] or prompt injection [17, 18, 19], rather than on
ensuring that the agent executes benign user tasks robustly on evolving toolkits. Classical software
testing [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28] assumes structured input-output behavior, which does not
transfer well to the open-ended and ambiguous nature of natural language. Unlike software testing,
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

