An Information-theoretical Framework for
Understanding Out-of-distribution Detection
with Pretrained Vision-Language Models

Bo Peng, Jie Lu, Guangquan Zhang, Zhen Fang∗
University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, recognized for its ability to identify samples
of unknown classes, provides solid advantages in ensuring the reliability of machine
learning models. Among existing OOD detection methods, pre-trained visionlanguage models have emerged as powerful post-hoc OOD detectors by leveraging
textual and visual information. Despite the empirical success, there still remains
a lack of research on a formal understanding of their effectiveness. This paper
bridges the gap by theoretically demonstrating that existing CLIP-based posthoc methods effectively perform a stochastic estimation of the point-wise mutual
information (PMI) between the input image and each in-distribution label. This
estimation is then utilized to construct energy functions for modeling in-distribution
distributions. Different from prior methods that inherently consider PMI estimation
as a whole task, we, motivated by the divide-and-conquer philosophy, decompose
PMI estimation into multiple easier sub-tasks by applying the chain rule of PMI,
which not only reduces the estimation complexity but also provably increases the
estimation upper bound to reduce the underestimation bias. Extensive evaluations
across mainstream benchmarks empirically manifest that our method establishes a
new state-of-the-art in a variety of OOD detection setups.

1

Introduction

Despite the significant progress in machine learning that has facilitated a broad spectrum of classification tasks [2, 79, 41], models often operate under a closed-world scenario, where test data
stems from the same distribution as the training data. However, real-world applications often entail
open-world scenarios in which deployed models may encounter unseen classes of samples during
training, giving rise to what is known as out-of-distribution (OOD) data. These OOD instances
can potentially undermine a model’s stability and, in certain cases, inflict severe damage on its
performance. Accordingly, a reliable discriminative model should not only correctly classify known
in-distribution (ID) samples but also flag any OOD inputs as unknown. This directly motivates OOD
detection [58, 72, 28] which ensures the safety of decision-critical applications [25, 87].
This paper focuses on post-hoc OOD detection, which are more practical than learning-based
methods that require resource-intensive retraining. Earlier studies [20, 34, 61, 36] primarily utilized
the single modality of pre-trained models, but the success of contrastive language-image pre-training
(CLIP) [57] has recently shifted research toward expanding post-hoc OOD detection from singlemodal to multi-modal methods. Researchers have since explored ways to better leverage multi-modal
models to enhance the performance and applicability of post-hoc OOD detection. A notable method is
MCM [42], which defines textual features as concept prototypes for each ID class and uses the scaled
distance between visual features and the closest ID prototype to measure OOD uncertainty. This
∗

Correspondence to Zhen Fang (zhen.fang@uts.edu.au)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

