Flexible Realignment of Language Models

Wenhong Zhu1,2
1

Ruobing Xie3

Weinan Zhang1,2

Rui Wang1∗

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
3
Large Language Department, Tencent

Abstract
Realignment becomes necessary when a language model (LM) fails to meet expected performance. We propose a flexible realignment framework that supports
quantitative control of alignment degree during training and inference. This framework incorporates Training-time Realignment (TrRa), which efficiently realigns
the reference model by leveraging the controllable fusion of logits from both the
reference and already aligned models. For example, TrRa reduces token usage by
54.63% on DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B without any performance degradation,
outperforming DeepScaleR-1.5B’s 33.86%. To complement TrRa during inference,
we introduce a layer adapter that enables smooth Inference-time Realignment
(InRa). This adapter is initialized to perform an identity transformation at the
bottom layer and is inserted preceding the original layers. During inference, input
embeddings are simultaneously processed by the adapter and the original layer,
followed by the remaining layers, and then controllably interpolated at the logit
level. We upgraded DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B from a slow-thinking model to
one that supports both fast and slow thinking, allowing flexible alignment control
even during inference. By encouraging deeper reasoning, it even surpassed its
original performance.

1

Introduction

Current large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-4o [1], and reasoning-focused models like
OpenAI-o1 [2] and DeepSeek-R1 [3], have achieved remarkable success. These models typically
hinge on a series of critical training phases [4]. First, they undergo pre-training on vast corpora to
master the ability to predict the next token [5]. Next, the pre-trained models are fine-tuned through
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) as a cold start to better adapt to specific domains [6, 7]. Reinforcement
Learning (RL) has emerged as a crucial component of the entire training pipeline.
In the RL phase, the core objective is to maximize the expected reward while incorporating the
KL-divergence from the reference policy [8–10]. The reward signal is key to alignment: correctnessbased rewards improve reasoning ability [2, 3], while 3H-based (honesty, harmlessness, and helpfulness) rewards reflect human values [11]. However, misalignment can still emerge due to imperfect
rewards or evolving user needs. Review the pain points of the existing product models: The most
advanced reasoning models tend to suffer from the overthinking problem [12, 3], leading to increased
computational costs. How can we realign these models for efficient reasoning to ensure user affordability? Meanwhile, to adapt to individual user preferences, conversational models often become
overly sycophantic [13]. How can we realign them to balance personalization and objective responses
better? Realignment is thus essential to correct model behavior and ensure robustness over time.
∗

Corresponding author. Code: https://github.com/zwhong714/ReAligner

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

Email: zwhong714@sjtu.edu.cn

