Test-Time Adaptive Object Detection with Foundation
Model
Yingjie Gao1,2 Yanan Zhang3 Zhi Cai1,2 Di Huang1,2∗
State Key Laboratory of Complex and Critical Software Environment, Beihang University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
{gaoyingjie, caizhi97, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, yananzhang@hfut.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In recent years, test-time adaptive object detection has attracted increasing attention
due to its unique advantages in online domain adaptation, which aligns more closely
with real-world application scenarios. However, existing approaches heavily rely
on source-derived statistical characteristics while making the strong assumption
that the source and target domains share an identical category space. In this paper,
we propose the first foundation model-powered test-time adaptive object detection
method that eliminates the need for source data entirely and overcomes traditional
closed-set limitations. Specifically, we design a Multi-modal Prompt-based MeanTeacher framework for vision-language detector-driven test-time adaptation, which
incorporates text and visual prompt tuning to adapt both language and vision representation spaces on the test data in a parameter-efficient manner. Correspondingly,
we propose a Test-time Warm-start strategy tailored for the visual prompts to effectively preserve the representation capability of the vision branch. Furthermore, to
guarantee high-quality pseudo-labels in every test batch, we maintain an Instance
Dynamic Memory (IDM) module that stores high-quality pseudo-labels from previous test samples, and propose two novel strategies-Memory Enhancement and
Memory Hallucination-to leverage IDM’s high-quality instances for enhancing original predictions and hallucinating images without available pseudo-labels, respectively. Extensive experiments on cross-corruption and cross-dataset benchmarks
demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods, and can adapt to arbitrary cross-domain and cross-category target data.
Code is available at https://github.com/gaoyingjay/ttaod_foundation.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental task in visual perception, object detection [23, 1, 32] has made significant progress,
while its performance drops dramatically when facing domain gaps. Although Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) technology [3, 34] attempts to mitigate domain differences in an offline manner, it
still struggles to meet the real-time domain adaptation requirements in application scenarios such as
autonomous driving [33] and robotics [19]. Consequently, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) [26, 28, 25]
has emerged, which operates in real-time by adapting on the fly during inference.
Existing Test-Time Adaptive Object Detection (TTAOD) methods [2, 31, 29], predominantly built
upon Faster R-CNN [23], leverage self-training or source-target feature alignment strategies to
achieve promising domain adaptation performance. However, as shown in Fig. 1(a), there are two
major issues: (1) requiring statistical characteristics (e.g., the mean and variance of feature maps)
derived from sampled source domain data, which violates the source-free principle of TTA, and
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

