Online Bilateral Trade With Minimal Feedback:
Don’t Waste Seller’s Time
Francesco Bacchiocchi
Politecnico di Milano
francesco.bacchiocchi@polimi.it

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Roberto Colomboni
Politecnico di Milano &
Università degli Studi di Milano
roberto.colomboni@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Abstract
Online learning algorithms for designing optimal bilateral trade mechanisms have
recently received significant attention. This paper addresses a key inefficiency in
prior two-bit feedback models, which synchronously query both the buyer and
the seller for their willingness to trade. This approach is inherently inefficient as
it offers a trade to the seller even when the buyer rejects the offer. We propose
an asynchronous mechanism that queries the seller only if the buyer has already
accepted the offer. Consequently, the mechanism receives one bit of feedback from
the buyer and a “censored” bit from the seller—a signal richer than the standard
one-bit (trade/no-trade) feedback, but less informative than the two-bit model.
Assuming independent valuations with bounded densities—the same distributional
conditions underlying the two-bit results of Cesa-Bianchi et al. [2024a]—we design
an algorithm that achieves Õ(T 2/3 ) regret against the best fixed price in hindsight.
This matches the lower bound for the strictly richer two-bit model, showing that
our mechanism elicits the minimal feedback necessary to attain optimal rates.

1

Introduction

In a bilateral trade problem, a broker faces two rational agents—a seller and a buyer—who wish
to trade an object. Each agent has their own private valuation for the object and seeks to maximize
their utility. The goal of the broker is to design a mechanism that intermediates between the seller
and the buyer, in order to make a trade happen. Ideally, a mechanism for bilateral trade should
be efficient, i.e., it should maximize the sum of agents’ utilities, while also ensuring incentive
compatibility and individual rationality. A well-known mechanism that achieves this objective is
the VCG mechanism [Vickrey, 1961]. Unfortunately, the VCG mechanism fails to meet budget
balance, requiring the broker to subsidize the market and incur in financial losses. Indeed, a general
impossibility result by Myerson and Satterthwaite [1983] shows that full efficiency cannot be attained
while simultaneously maintaining incentive compatibility, individual rationality, and budget balance.
A recent line of research (see, e.g., [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2021, 2024a, Azar et al., 2022]) circumvents
the impossibility result by Myerson and Satterthwaite [1983] through the lens of online learning. This
is done by addressing repeated bilateral trade problems, where the broker faces a sequence of sellers
and buyers willing to trade objects, over a time horizon T . At each time t, a new seller and a new
buyer arrive, each of them with their own private valuation of the object, say St and Bt , respectively.
The broker then proposes a trading price Pt to both agents. Thus, the seller is willing to trade if
St ≤ Pt , while the buyer if Bt ≥ Pt . The trade happens only if both agents accept the price Pt , with
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

