Depth-Bounds for Neural Networks
via the Braid Arrangement
Moritz Grillo
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences
moritz.grillo@mis.mpg.de

Christoph Hertrich
University of Technology Nuremberg
christoph.hertrich@utn.de

Georg Loho
Freie Universität Berlin
University of Twente
georg.loho@math.fu-berlin.de

Abstract
We contribute towards resolving the open question of how many hidden layers are
required in ReLU networks for exactly representing all continuous and piecewise
linear functions on Rd . While the question has been resolved in special cases,
the best known lower bound in general is still 2. We focus on neural networks
that are compatible with certain polyhedral complexes, more precisely with the
braid fan. For such neural networks, we prove a non-constant lower bound of
Ω(log log d) hidden layers required to exactly represent the maximum of d numbers.
Additionally, we provide a combinatorial proof that neural networks satisfying this
assumption require three hidden layers to compute the maximum of 5 numbers;
this had only been veriﬁed with an excessive computation so far. Finally, we show
that a natural generalization of the best known upper bound to maxout networks is
not tight, by demonstrating that a rank-3 maxout layer followed by a rank-2 maxout
layer is sufﬁcient to represent the maximum of 7 numbers.

1

Introduction

Among the various types of neural networks, ReLU networks have become particularly prominent
[Glorot et al., 2011, Goodfellow et al., 2016]. For a thorough theoretical understanding of such neural
networks, it is important to analyze which classes of functions we can represent with which depth.
Classical universal approximation theorems [Cybenko, 1989, Hornik, 1991] ensure that just one
hidden layer can approximate any continuous function on a bounded domain with arbitrary precision.
However, establishing an analogous result for exact representations remains an open question and is
the subject of ongoing research [Arora et al., 2018, Hertrich et al., 2023, Haase et al., 2023, Valerdi,
2024, Averkov et al., 2025].
While in practical settings approximate representations are often sufﬁcient, studying the exact
piecewise linear structure of neural network representations enabled deep connections between neural
networks and ﬁelds like tropical and polyhedral geometry [Huchette et al., 2023]. These connections,
in turn, are important for algorithmic tasks like neural network training [Arora et al., 2018, Goel et al.,
2021, Khalife and Basu, 2022, Froese et al., 2022, Froese and Hertrich, 2023, Bertschinger et al.,
2023] and veriﬁcation [Li et al., 2019, Katz et al., 2017, Froese et al., 2025b,a, Stargalla et al., 2025],
including understanding the computational complexity of the respective tasks.
Arora et al. [2018] initiate the study of exact representations by showing that the class of functions
exactly representable by ReLU networks is the class of continuous piecewise linear (CPWL) functions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

