SimpleStrat: Diversifying Language Model Generation
with Stratification
Justin Wong
UC Berkeley

Yury Orlovskiy
UC Berkeley

Alexander Shypula
University of Pennsylvania

wong.justin@berkeley.edu

yury.orlovskiy@berkeley.edu

shypula@seas.upenn.edu

Michael Luo
UC Berkeley

Sanjit A. Seshia
UC Berkeley

Joseph E. Gonzalez
UC Berkeley

michael.luo@berkeley.edu

sseshia@berkeley.edu

jegonzal@berkeley.edu

Low Temp Sampling

High Temp Sampling

SimpleStrat Sampling
(E/W) of Mississippi River

(N/S) of Missouri
Compromise
Line

California
New York
Washington
Virginia

California
New York
Washington
Virginia

California
New York
Texas
Georgia

Figure 1: SimpleStrat recovers diversity when temperature scaling fails. For the prompt “Name
a U.S. state,” language models exhibit a strong bias toward “California.” Our method, SimpleStrat,
employs automatic stratification to uncover salient diversity dimensions (e.g., whether a state lies
east or west of the Mississippi River) and applies stratified sampling to achieve balanced and diverse
coverage across responses.

Abstract
Generating diverse responses from large language models (LLMs) is crucial for applications such as adversarial testing, search, and synthetic data generation, where
diversity provides distinct answers across generations. Previous approaches rely
solely on increasing the temperature, sacrificing quality. Furthermore, the model’s
next-token probabilities may not be representative of the true answer distribution.
To combat these challenges, we propose SimpleStrat, an alternative that uses the
language model itself to partition the solution space into strata from which to
sample. To measure resampling diversity, we introduce CoverageQA, a dataset of
underspecified questions with multiple equally plausible answers. We propose measuring resampling diversity as the KL Divergence between the response distribution
and the uniform distribution over valid ground truth answers and use recall as an
alternative when assessing proprietary models. On CoverageQA, SimpleStrat improves diversity across all temperatures, showing orthogonal benefits. Quantifiably,
we achieve as much as 4X better recall when applied to GPT-4o, and an average reduction in KL divergence by 0.36 when applied to Llama 3. Furthermore, we show
that SimpleStrat achieves more resampling diversity at temperature T=0 than scaling temperature to T=1 on creative writing, an open-ended domain. Implementation
and dataset available at https://github.com/jwong8314/simplestrat .

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

