Learning to Integrate Diffusion ODEs
by Averaging the Derivatives

Wenze Liu

Xiangyu Yue∗

MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
To accelerate diffusion model inference, numerical solvers perform poorly at
extremely small steps, while distillation techniques often introduce complexity and
instability. This work presents an intermediate strategy, balancing performance and
cost, by learning ODE integration using loss functions derived from the derivativeintegral relationship, inspired by Monte Carlo integration and Picard iteration. From
a geometric perspective, the losses operate by gradually extending the tangent to
the secant, thus are named as secant losses. The target of secant losses is the
same as that of diffusion models, or the diffusion model itself, leading to great
training stability. By fine-tuning or distillation, the secant version of EDM achieves
a 10-step FID of 2.14 on CIFAR-10, while the secant version of SiT-XL/2 attains
a 4-step FID of 2.27 and an 8-step FID of 1.96 on ImageNet-256 × 256. Code is
available at https://github.com/poppuppy/secant-expectation.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4] generate images by reversely
ℒ 𝜃 = || 𝜃 −
||00
denoising their noised versions, which can be formulated by
𝑣(𝑥'! , 𝑟)
stochastic differential equations (SDEs) and the corresponding
𝑥" + 𝑟 − 𝑡 𝑓# ! (𝑥" , 𝑡, 𝑟)
probability flow ordinary differential equations (PF-ODEs) [4].
𝑠
Over recent years, diffusion models have transformed the land𝑓# (𝑥" , 𝑡, 𝑠)
scape of generative modeling, across multiple modalities such 𝑥" , 𝑡
as image [5, 6, 7, 8], video [9, 10, 11] and audio [12, 13, 14].
(a) Estimating interior point 𝑥'!
Despite their remarkable performance, a significant drawback
𝑣(𝑥! , 𝑟)
of diffusion models is their slow inference speed: they typically
𝑥! + 𝑡 − 𝑟 𝑓# ! (𝑥! , 𝑟, 𝑡)
require hundreds to thousands of number of function evalua𝑠
tions (NFEs) to generate a single image. Considerable research
has focused on reducing the number of required steps, with 𝑥'" , 𝑡
𝑓# (𝑥'" , 𝑡, 𝑠)
common approaches falling into categories including faster
samplers [15, 16, 17, 18] for diffusion SDEs or PF-ODEs, and
(b) Estimating end point 𝑥'"
diffusion distillation [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35] methods that distill pretrained diffusion Figure 1: Formulation of secant
models to few-step generators. However, faster samplers ex- losses. We employ an ℓ2 loss beperience significant performance degradation when operating tween the learned secant and a tanwith a small number of function evaluations (typically fewer gent at a random interior time point.
than 10 NFEs). Meanwhile, distillation approaches frequently By estimating either the interior or
introduce substantial computational overhead, complex training the end point, we derive two variprocedures, or training instabilities. Additionally, they some- ants shown in (a) and (b).
times face risks of model collapse and over-smoothing in the generated outputs.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

𝑧

