W EAVER: Shrinking the Generation-Verification Gap
with Weak Verifiers
Jon Saad-Falcon1∗ E. Kelly Buchanan1∗ Mayee F. Chen1∗
Tzu-Heng Huang3 Brendan McLaughlin1 Tanvir Bhathal1
Shang Zhu2 Ben Athiwaratkun2 Frederic Sala3
Scott Linderman1 Azalia Mirhoseini1 Christopher Ré1
1

Together AI 3 University of Wisconsin–Madison
∗
Equal contribution
{jonsaadfalcon, kelly.buchanan, mfchen}@stanford.edu

Stanford University

2

Abstract
Verifiers can improve language model (LM) capabilities by providing feedback or selecting the best response from a pool of generated candidates. Currently, high-quality
verifiers are either unscalable (e.g., humans) or limited in utility (e.g., tools like Lean
for formal proofs). While LM judges and reward models have become broadly useful
as general-purpose verifiers, a significant performance gap remains between them
and oracle verifiers. To help close this gap, we introduce W EAVER, a framework for
designing a strong verifier by combining multiple weak, imperfect verifiers. First
we find that weighted ensembles of verifiers, which typically require learning from
labeled data, significantly outperform unweighted combinations due to differences
in the verifiers. To reduce the dependency on labeled data, W EAVER leverages weak
supervision to estimate each verifier’s accuracy and combines their outputs into a
unified score that better reflects true response quality. However, directly applying
weak supervision algorithms poses several challenges, including inconsistent verifier output formats and handling low-quality verifiers. W EAVER addresses these
challenges by using dataset statistics to normalize outputs and filter specific verifiers.
We study the effectiveness of W EAVER in repeated sampling settings, where a model
generates multiple candidate responses at test time and a verifier is used to select the
correct one. Our evaluations demonstrate that W EAVER significantly improves the
pass@1 performance across several reasoning and math tasks, achieving o3-minilevel accuracy with Llama 3.3 70B Instruct (a much cheaper non-reasoning model)
as the generator, and an ensemble of smaller judge and reward models as the verifiers
(86.2% average). This gain mirrors the jump achieved between GPT-4o and o3-mini
(69.0% vs. 86.7%), which required extensive finetuning and post-training interventions. To make W EAVER more efficient, we train a compact 400M cross-encoder
using W EAVER’s combined output scores. This distilled model retains 98.7% of
W EAVER’s full accuracy while reducing verification compute by up to 99.97%.

1

Introduction

A core challenge in deploying language models (LMs) is verification: determining the quality or
correctness of a model’s response. This problem arises across various components of the LM pipeline,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

