PolyPose: Deformable 2D/3D Registration via
Polyrigid Transformations
Vivek Gopalakrishnan
MIT
vivek@csail.mit.edu

Intraoperativ
e X-ray 1

Neel Dey
MIT, MGH, and HMS
ndey@mgh.harvard.edu

ray 2
rative XIntraope

Polina Golland
MIT
polina@csail.mit.edu

Polyrigid
deformation

Φ(

, …,

)

Before PolyPose

After PolyPose

X-ray (2D)

CT (3D)

Preoperative
CT scan

(A) Misaligned 2D and 3D images

(B) PolyPose: locally-rigid 3D warp eld

(C) Regularizer-free nonrigid registration

fi

Figure 1: PolyPose is a locally-rigid framework for sparse-view deformable 2D/3D registration.
(A) PolyPose can deformably align a high-resolution preoperative 3D volume to as few as two
intraoperative 2D X-rays without the need of expensive regularizers or hyperparameter optimization.
(B) To tackle this highly ill-posed problem, we estimate the poses ( ) of rigid bodies in the volume
and smoothly interpolate them in space to produce a topologically consistent locally-rigid warp.
(C) Using the estimated warps, PolyPose provides 3D volumetric guidance to procedures where only
minimal supervision is available from intraoperative 2D X-rays.

Abstract
Determining the 3D pose of a patient from a limited set of 2D X-ray images
is a critical task in interventional settings. While preoperative volumetric
imaging (e.g., CT and MRI) provides precise 3D localization and visualization of
anatomical targets, these modalities cannot be acquired during procedures, where
fast 2D imaging (X-ray) is used instead. To integrate volumetric guidance into
intraoperative procedures, we present PolyPose, a simple and robust method for
deformable 2D/3D registration. PolyPose parameterizes complex 3D deformation
fields as a composition of rigid transforms, leveraging the biological constraint that
individual bones do not bend in typical motion. Unlike existing methods that either
assume no inter-joint movement or fail outright in this under-determined setting,
our polyrigid formulation enforces anatomically plausible priors that respect the
piecewise-rigid nature of human movement. This approach eliminates the need
for expensive deformation regularizers that require patient- and procedure-specific
hyperparameter optimization. Across extensive experiments on diverse datasets
from orthopedic surgery and radiotherapy, we show that this strong inductive bias
enables PolyPose to successfully align the patient’s preoperative volume to as few
as two X-rays, thereby providing crucial 3D guidance in challenging sparse-view
and limited-angle settings where current registration methods fail. Additional
visualizations, tutorials, and code are available at https://polypose.csail.mit.edu.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

