Multi-Environment POMDPs: Discrete Model
Uncertainty Under Partial Observability

Eline M. Bovy∗
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
eline.bovy@ru.nl

Caleb Probine∗
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
cprobine@utexas.edu

Marnix Suilen
University of Antwerp – Flanders Make
Antwerp, Belgium
marnix.suilen@uantwerpen.be

Ufuk Topcu
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
utopcu@utexas.edu

Nils Jansen
Ruhr-University Bochum & Radboud University
Bochum, Germany & Nijmegen, The Netherlands
n.jansen@rub.de

Abstract
Multi-environment POMDPs (ME-POMDPs) extend standard POMDPs with discrete model uncertainty. ME-POMDPs represent a finite set of POMDPs that
share the same state, action, and observation spaces, but may arbitrarily vary in
their transition, observation, and reward models. Such models arise, for instance,
when multiple domain experts disagree on how to model a problem. The goal
is to find a single policy that is robust against any choice of POMDP within the
set, i.e., a policy that maximizes the worst-case reward across all POMDPs. We
generalize and expand on existing work in the following way. First, we show that
ME-POMDPs can be generalized to POMDPs with sets of initial beliefs, which
we call adversarial-belief POMDPs (AB-POMDPs). Second, we show that any
arbitrary ME-POMDP can be reduced to a ME-POMDP that only varies in its transition and reward functions or only in its observation and reward functions, while
preserving (optimal) policies. We then devise exact and approximate (point-based)
algorithms to compute robust policies for AB-POMDPs, and thus ME-POMDPs.
We demonstrate that we can compute policies for standard POMDP benchmarks
extended to the multi-environment setting.

1

Introduction

Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [25] are important models for sequential
decision-making under uncertainty. With numerous real-world applications, from robotics [47] to
healthcare [21, 49], many algorithms to compute optimal policies have been proposed [32, 39, 40].
Planning algorithms that compute policies for POMDPs rely on knowing the exact parameters of the
underlying transition and observation dynamics, an assumption that is often prohibitive in practice.
Consider, for instance, a setting where a POMDP model is constructed by domain experts. A common
∗

Shared first authorship, ordered alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

