Progressive Data Dropout: An Embarrassingly Simple
Approach to Train Faster

Shriram M S1* , Xinyue Hao2* , Shihao Hou3 , Yang Lu3 , Laura Sevilla-Lara2 ,
Anurag Arnab, Shreyank N Gowda4
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
2
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
3
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
4
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham

Abstract
The success of the machine learning field has reliably depended on training on
large datasets. While effective, this trend comes at an extraordinary cost. This is
due to two deeply intertwined factors: the size of models and the size of datasets.
While promising research efforts focus on reducing the size of models, the other
half of the equation remains fairly mysterious. Indeed, it is surprising that the
standard approach to training remains to iterate over and over, uniformly sampling
the training dataset. In this paper we explore a series of alternative training
paradigms that leverage insights from hard-data-mining and dropout, simple enough
to implement and use that can become the new training standard. The proposed
Progressive Data Dropout reduces the number of effective epochs to as little
as 12.4% of the baseline. This savings actually do not come at any cost for
accuracy. Surprisingly, the proposed method improves accuracy by up to 4.82%.
Our approach requires no changes to model architecture or optimizer, and can be
applied across standard training pipelines, thus posing an excellent opportunity
for wide adoption. Code can be found here: https://github.com/bazyagami/
LearningWithRevision.

1

Introduction

Advances in deep learning over the last years have consistently come at the cost of substantial
computational resources. Each year, the computational cost of the most notable models multiplies by
over 4 times Epoch AI [2023]. This poses challenges both in terms of real-world applications and
sustainability Gowda et al. [2023].
In response to these challenges, a significant body of research has emerged focused on developing
efficient neural architectures. Models such as MobileNet Howard et al. [2017], Sandler et al. [2018],
EfficientNet Tan and Le [2019], and EfficientFormer Li et al. [2022] have demonstrated that carefully
designed architectures can achieve competitive performance with significantly reduced parameter
counts and computational demands. These architectural innovations have been complemented by
techniques such as pruning Han et al. [2015], quantization Jacob et al. [2018], and knowledge
distillation Hinton et al. [2015], all aimed at reducing the resource footprint of deep neural networks.
While most efficiency efforts focus on the model, another underexplored direction is improving how
we train. Standard training treats all samples equally across all epochs, but not all data points are
equally useful throughout the learning process. Some examples are consistently misclassified and
carry high learning value, while others are confidently and correctly classified early on and may
* Equal Contribution.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

