Enhancing GUI Agent with Uncertainty-Aware
Self-Trained Evaluator
Gongwei Chen, Lirong Jie, Lexiao Zou, Weili Guan∗, Miao Zhang∗, Liqiang Nie
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{chengongwei,zhangmiao,guanweili,nieliqiang}@hit.edu.cn
https://github.com/JL181818/URST

Abstract
Benefiting from the availability of extensive navigation trajectories, both manually
and automatically annotated, current graphical user interface (GUI) agents have
achieved remarkable advancements in performance. However, these annotated
datasets often contain substantial noise, which impedes effective agent training
and underscores the necessity for rigorous trajectory quality assessment. In contrast to existing prompting-based evaluators that rely on proprietary multimodal
large language models (MLLMs), we propose an Uncertainty-aware Reinforced
Self-Training (URST) framework to train lightweight MLLMs for efficient and
reliable trajectory evaluation. URST iteratively fine-tunes MLLMs using their
own generated thoughts and judgments to enable self-improvement, while its
uncertainty-aware sampling strategy ensures the selection of the most informative
training examples. To further enhance reasoning and judgment capabilities, we
propose a simplified group policy optimization approach that effectively leverages diverse positive and negative samples for evaluator learning. Our evaluator
demonstrates superior judgment performance across both in-domain and out-ofdomain datasets. When used to filter navigation datasets, it consistently leads to
performance improvements in training GUI agents.

1

Introduction

With the powerful language understanding and generation abilities,
(multimodal) large language modelbased agents [53, 62, 7, 28, 38, 45]
can perform more effectively across
diverse and complex tasks, demonstrating greater generality and adaptability. In a graphical user interface (GUI) scenario, the paradigm
for building agents has shifted from
framework-based [42, 57, 1] to native agents [6, 14, 20, 31]. In the
early stage, many works [42, 57, 1,
61, 16] leverage the advanced foundation models by designing task-specific
workflows and optimizing prompts
to construct framework-based agents.

Navigation Trajectory

What's the weather
like in Chicago?

(a) Prompting-based Methods
Tailored
Prompt

Judgment

MLLM
Training
Trajectories

UncertaintyAware
Sampling

SGPO
Judgment

MLLM
(b) Uncertainty-Aware Reinforced
Self-Training

Figure 1: Comparison of uncertainty-aware reinforced selftraining (URST) method with prompting-based methods. Our
URST iteratively fine-tunes lightweight MLLMs with selfgenerated thoughts via reinforcement learning.

* Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

