CSBrain: A Cross-scale Spatiotemporal Brain
Foundation Model for EEG Decoding

Yuchen Zhou1,2 , Jiamin Wu1,3∗, Zichen Ren1 , Zhouheng Yao1 , Weiheng Lu1 ,
Kunyu Peng4 , Qihao Zheng1 , Chunfeng Song1 , Wanli Ouyang1,3 , Chao Gou2
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Sun Yat-sen University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Karlsruher Institut fur Technologie

Abstract
Understanding and decoding human brain activity from electroencephalography
(EEG) signals is a fundamental problem in neuroscience and artificial intelligence,
with applications ranging from cognition and emotion recognition to clinical diagnosis and brain–computer interfaces. While recent EEG foundation models
have made progress in generalized brain decoding by leveraging unified architectures and large-scale pretraining, they inherit a scale-agnostic dense modeling
paradigm from NLP and vision. This design overlooks an intrinsic property of neural activity—cross-scale spatiotemporal structure. Different EEG task patterns
span a broad range of temporal and spatial scales, from brief neural activations to
slow-varying rhythms, and from localized cortical activations to large-scale distributed interactions. Ignoring this diversity may lead to suboptimal representations
and weakened generalization ability. To address these limitations, we propose
CSBrain, a Cross-scale Spatiotemporal Brain foundation model for generalized
EEG decoding. CSBrain introduces two key components: (i) Cross-scale Spatiotemporal Tokenization (CST), which aggregates multi-scale features within
localized temporal windows and anatomical brain regions into compact scale-aware
token representations; and (ii) Structured Sparse attention (SSA), which models
cross-window and cross-region dependencies for diverse decoding tasks, further
enriching scale diversities while eliminating the spurious dependencies. CST and
SSA are alternately stacked to progressively integrate cross-scale spatiotemporal
dependencies. Extensive experiments across 11 representative EEG tasks and 16
datasets demonstrate that CSBrain consistently outperforms both task-specific models and strong foundation baselines. These results establish cross-scale modeling
as a key inductive bias for generalized EEG decoding and highlight CSBrain as a
robust backbone for future brain–AI research. The code and model are available at
https://github.com/yuchen2199/CSBrain.

1

Introduction

Understanding and decoding human brain activity is a long-standing ambition of neuroscience
and artificial intelligence, with implications ranging from cognitive science to medical diagnostics
and brain-computer interfaces (BCI) [1–6]. Among various neural recording modalities, electroencephalography (EEG) is particularly attractive due to its non-invasive nature, high temporal resolution,
and affordability [7–10]. EEG signals are high-dimensional, multichannel time series that reflect the
brain’s dynamic electrical activity and are widely applied to abnormal identification [11, 12], motor
imagery [13, 14], emotion analysis [15, 16], sleep stage analysis [17, 18], seizure detection [19, 20],
and various neurological disorders [21–23]. Over the past decade, a variety of task-specific deep
∗

Corresponding Author (wujiamin1@pjlab.org.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

