Among Us: A Sandbox for Measuring and Detecting
Agentic Deception

Satvik Golechha
MATS
zsatvik@gmail.com

Adrià Garriga-Alonso
FAR AI
adria@far.ai

Abstract
Prior studies on deception in language-based AI agents typically assess whether the
agent produces a false statement about a topic, or makes a binary choice prompted
by a goal, rather than allowing open-ended deceptive behavior to emerge in pursuit
of a longer-term goal. To fix this, we introduce Among Us1 , a sandbox social
deception game where LLM-agents exhibit long-term, open-ended deception as
a consequence of the game objectives. While most benchmarks saturate quickly,
Among Us can be expected to last much longer, because it is a multi-player game far
from equilibrium. Using the sandbox, we evaluate 18 proprietary and open-weight
LLMs and uncover a general trend: models trained with RL are comparatively
much better at producing deception than detecting it. We evaluate the effectiveness
of methods to detect lying and deception: logistic regression on the activations and
sparse autoencoders (SAEs). We find that probes trained on a dataset of “pretend
you’re a dishonest model: . . . ” generalize extremely well out-of-distribution, consistently obtaining AUROCs over 95% even when evaluated just on the deceptive
statement, without the chain of thought. We also find two SAE features that work
well at deception detection but are unable to steer the model to lie less. We hope
our open-sourced sandbox, game logs, and probes serve to anticipate and mitigate
deceptive behavior and capabilities in language-based agents.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly capable at conversation [1, 2] and reasoning
ability [3, 4], their adoption, especially as agents that can interact with the world, comes with
significant risks. An important risk is deception [5], where an agent intentionally misleads others to
achieve its own goals. Thus, being able to understand, evaluate, and control deception in AI agents
is crucial for their safe and trusted deployment. Prior work has shown models to act deceptively or
“scheme” under specific conditions [6] or when asked to do something harmful intentionally such as
inserting hidden backdoors in code [7], an ability that is seen to persists through safety training.
However, a major hurdle in studying agentic deception is the lack of suitable sandboxes and model
organisms that elicit open-ended, long-term deception. To address this problem, in this work, we
introduce “Among Us” as a rich and controlled sandbox to elicit open-ended deception from LLMagents. Based on the Elo rating system used in games like chess [8], we use deception Elo and
detection Elo as an unbounded metric for measuring the capability to deceive or detect deception. We
show that agents at the frontier are relatively more capable at producing than detecting deception.
Finally, we show that interpretability techniques such as activation monitoring (using linear probes)
and Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) help us detect deception out-of-distribution with high accuracy.
1

The Among Us (game) IP is owned by Innersloth, and we only use it for non-commercial research.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

