A Frustratingly Simple Yet Highly Effective Attack
Baseline: Over 90% Success Rate Against the Strong
Black-box Models of GPT-4.5/4o/o1
Zhaoyi Li∗ , Xiaohan Zhao∗ , Dong-Dong Wu, Jiacheng Cui, Zhiqiang Shen†
VILA Lab, Department of Machine Learning, MBZUAI
∗
Equal contribution † Corresponding Author
https://vila-lab.github.io/M-Attack-Website/
{zhaoyi.li,xiaohan.zhao,dongdong.wu,jiacheng.cui,zhiqiang.shen}@mbzuai.ac.ae

GPT-4o
GPT-4o

Query image

Target image

Describe this image.

GPT-o1
GPT-4o

Describe this image.

The image shows a market scene with large green
apples in the foreground and a partially visible stall
with fruits and people in the background.

A market stall brimming with large, bright green
produce beneath a decorative cloth canopy.

Gemini-2.0-flash

Gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp

Describe this image.

Describe this image.

Green-tinged image of produce stand with melons in
foreground and vendor partially visible in background.

Green produce, possibly gourds or melons, are
displayed under a fabric awning in a market setting.

Claude-3.5-sonnet

Claude-3.7-sonnet-extend

Describe this image.

A market stall displays fresh green cabbages and
produce under a simple covered structure.

Describe this image.

A pile of green apples in the foreground with what
appears to be a small wooden market stall or structure
in the background!

Figure 1: Examples from closed-source LVLMs to targeted attacks generated by our method.

Abstract
Despite promising performance on open-source large vision-language models
(LVLMs), transfer-based targeted attacks often fail against closed-source commercial LVLMs. Analyzing failed adversarial perturbations reveals that the learned
perturbations typically originate from a uniform distribution and lack clear semantic details, resulting in unintended responses. This critical absence of semantic information leads commercial black-box LVLMs to either ignore the perturbation entirely or misinterpret its embedded semantics, thereby causing the attack to
fail. To overcome these issues, we propose to refine semantic clarity by encoding
explicit semantic details within local regions, thus ensuring the capture of finergrained features and inter-model transferability, and by concentrating modifications on semantically rich areas rather than applying them uniformly. To achieve
this, we propose a simple yet highly effective baseline: at each optimization step,
the adversarial image is cropped randomly by a controlled aspect ratio and scale,
resized, and then aligned with the target image in the embedding space. While the
naïve source-target matching method has been utilized before in the literature, we
are the first to provide a tight analysis, which establishes a close connection between perturbation optimization and semantics. Experimental results confirm our
hypothesis. Our adversarial examples crafted with local-aggregated perturbations
focused on crucial regions exhibit surprisingly good transferability to commercial
LVLMs, including GPT-4.5, GPT-4o, Gemini-2.0-flash, Claude-3.5/3.7-sonnet,
and even reasoning models like o1, Claude-3.7-thinking and Gemini-2.0-flashthinking. Our approach achieves success rates exceeding 90% on GPT-4.5, 4o,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

