Conformal Prediction for Time-series Forecasting with
Change Points

Sophia Sun, Rose Yu
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Conformal prediction has been explored as a general and efficient way to provide
uncertainty quantification for time series. However, current methods struggle to
handle time series data with change points — sudden shifts in the underlying
data-generating process. In this paper, we propose a novel Conformal Prediction
for Time-series with Change points (CPTC) algorithm, addressing this gap by
integrating a model to predict the underlying state with online conformal prediction
to model uncertainties in non-stationary time series. We prove CPTC’s validity and
improved adaptivity in the time series setting under minimum assumptions, and
demonstrate CPTC’s practical effectiveness on 6 synthetic and real-world datasets,
showing improved validity and adaptivity compared to state-of-the-art baselines.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/CPTC.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is a key building block of reliable machine learning systems.
Conformal prediction (CP) is a popular distribution-free UQ method that provides finite sample
coverage guarantees without placing assumptions on the underlying data generating process [50, 32].
Because of its simplicity and generality, conformal prediction has seen wide adoption in many tasks,
ranging from healthcare [8], robotics [34], to validating the factuality of generative models [17].
Existing CP algorithms for time series forecasting mostly adopt an online learning framework
[24, 4], where the prediction interval adapts to distribution changes in data reactively. The online CP
algorithms achieve a asymptotic marginal coverage guarantee (the miscoverage rate converges to a
specified fraction as the time horizon goes to infinity). As a result, the algorithms inevitably exhibit
miscoverage when distribution shifts occur, and then have to over- or under-cover in later timesteps
to compensate. This behavior is evident in the ACI and CP baselines in Figure 1. This is undesirable
in practice as these under-covered periods may incur a lot of risk.
This paper builds upon the observation that in real-world scenarios, distribution shifts in time-series
are often predictable. Take for example the task of forecasting electricity demands: we know that the
hidden dynamics may differ between day and night, or during weekdays and weekends. The same
logic applies to traffic forecasting and product demand forecasting, where there are patterns in the
shifts between “surge times” and “normal times”. In this work, we study time series data that exhibit
this type of abrupt shifts, or change points, in the underlying generative process.
State Space Models (SSMs) [28, 10] are a powerful tool for modeling time series data, as they provide
a structured framework to capture the underlying temporal dependencies through latent states. In
particular, Switching Dynamical Systems (SDS) [1] is a type of SSM with an additional set of latent
variables (known as switches) that represent the operating mode active at the current timestep. SDS
introduces the inductive biases that allow SSMs to switch between a discrete set of dynamics, which
can be learned from training data. It is shown to be a flexible, robust, and interpretable representation
of time series with varying dynamics exhibiting change points [9, 16]. SDS is deployed not only for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

