Towards the Resistance of Neural Network
Fingerprinting to Fine-tuning

Ling Tang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
tling@sjtu.edu.cn

Yuefeng Chen
Alibaba Group
yuefeng.chenyf@alibaba-inc.com
Quanshi Zhang∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn

Hui Xue
Alibaba Group
hui.xueh@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
This paper proves a new fingerprinting method to embed the ownership information
into a deep neural network (DNN) with theoretically guaranteed robustness to finetuning. Specifically, we prove that when the input feature of a convolutional layer
only contains low-frequency components, specific frequency components of the
convolutional filter will not be changed by gradient descent during the fine-tuning
process, where we propose a revised Fourier transform to extract frequency components from the convolutional filter. Additionally, we also prove that these frequency
components are equivariant to weight scaling and weight permutations. In this
way, we design a fingerprint module to embed the fingerprint information into
specific frequency components of convolutional filters. Preliminary experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The source code has been released at
https://github.com/tling2000/watermark.

1

Introduction

Fingerprinting techniques have long been used to protect the copyright of digital content, including
images, videos, and audio [Nematollahi et al., 2017]. Recently, these techniques have been extended
to protect the intellectual property of neural networks. Fingerprinting a neural network is usually
conducted to implicitly embed the ownership information into the neural network. In this way, if a
neural network is stolen or further optimized, the ownership information embedded in the network
can be used to verify its true origin. Previous studies usually embedded the ownership information in
different ways. For example, Zeng et al. [2024] directly embedded the fingerprint into the network
parameters. Kim et al. [2023] used the classification results on a particular type of adversarial
examples as the backdoor fingerprint. Kirchenbauer et al. [2023] added a soft fingerprint to the
generation result.
However, one of the core challenges of neural network fingerprinting is the theoretically guaranteed
resistance to fine-tuning. When network parameters are changed during the fine-tuning process,
the fingerprint implicitly embedded in the parameters may be overwritten. Although many studies
[Uchida et al., 2017, Adi et al., 2018, Liu et al., 2021, Bansal et al., 2022, Kim et al., 2023, Yang
and Wu, 2024, Zeng et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2024] have realized this problem and have tested the
resistance of their fingerprints to fine-tuning, or boosted the resistance in an engineering manner,
∗

Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>. He is with the School of Computer
Science, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

