Affine-Invariant Global Non-Asymptotic Convergence
Analysis of BFGS under Self-Concordance

Qiujiang Jin
UT Austin
qiujiangjin0@gmail.com

Aryan Mokhtari
UT Austin & Google Research
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we establish global non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for the
BFGS quasi-Newton method without requiring strong convexity or the Lipschitz
continuity of the gradient or Hessian. Instead, we consider the setting where the
objective function is strictly convex and strongly self-concordant. For an arbitrary
initial point and any arbitrary positive-definite initial Hessian approximation, we
prove global linear and superlinear convergence guarantees for BFGS when the step
size is determined using a line search scheme satisfying the weak Wolfe conditions.
Moreover, all our global guarantees are affine-invariant, with the convergence rates
depending solely on the initial error and the strongly self-concordant constant.
Our results extend the global non-asymptotic convergence theory of BFGS beyond
traditional assumptions and, for the first time, establish affine-invariant convergence
guarantees—aligning with the inherent affine invariance of the BFGS method.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the convex optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where the function f is twice differentiable and strictly convex. We focus on quasi-Newton methods—iterative optimization algorithms that approximate the Hessian and its inverse using gradient
information, making them efficient for large-scale problems where computing the Hessian is costly.
Different variants update the Hessian approximation in distinct ways. The most famous quasi-Newton
methods include the Davidon-Fletcher-Powell (DFP) method [1, 2], the Broyden-Fletcher-GoldfarbShanno (BFGS) method [3–6], the Symmetric Rank-One (SR1) method [7, 8], and the Broyden
method [9]. There are also variants of these methods, including limited memory BFGS [10, 11],
randomized quasi-Newton methods [12–16], and greedy quasi-Newton methods [15–18].
In this paper, we focus exclusively on the BFGS method, one of the most widely used and wellregarded quasi-Newton algorithms. Specifically, we analyze its convergence guarantees in the setting
where the objective function is strictly convex and self-concordant and establish non-asymptotic
guarantees for this case. Before highlighting our contributions, we first provide a summary of the
existing convergence guarantees for BFGS as established in prior work.
Classic asymptotic guarantees. The local asymptotic superlinear convergence of quasi-Newton
methods, including BFGS, has been established in several works [19–28]. Similarly, their global
convergence under globalization strategies like line search and trust-region methods has been analyzed [8, 29–34]. However, these results are asymptotic and lack showing explicit rates.
Non-asymptotic guarantees under stronger assumptions. Recently, there were several breakthroughs regarding the non-asymptotic local superlinear convergence analysis of BFGS including [35–
38] for the case that the objective function is strongly convex. More precisely, these works established
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

