PROFIT: A Specialized Optimizer for
Deep Fine Tuning

Anirudh S Chakravarthy

Shuai Kyle Zheng

Xiao Zhang

Xin Huang

Yuning Chai

Sachithra Hemachandra

Zhao Chen

GM Cruise LLC

Abstract
The fine-tuning of pre-trained models has become ubiquitous in generative AI, computer vision, and robotics. Although much attention has been paid to improving the
efficiency of fine-tuning models, there has been less scholarship around fine-tuning
specifically for improved model performance. To remedy this gap, we present
PROFIT, one of the first optimizers designed to incrementally fine-tune converged
models on new tasks and/or datasets. Unlike traditional optimizers such as SGD or
Adam, which make minimal assumptions due to random initializations, PROFIT
takes the properties of a converged model into account explicitly to regularize the
optimization process. Employing a temporal gradient-orthogonalization process,
PROFIT outperforms fine-tuning methods in various tasks, from image classification to multimodal language model training to large-scale motion prediction.
Moreover, PROFIT is encapsulated as a modular optimizer, which makes it easy to
integrate directly into any training pipeline with minimal engineering effort.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning pre-trained models has become widely adopted in solving computer vision and robotics
problems as well as in modern generative AI settings. As datasets and models increase in size, having
to train a new model for every new application and setting quickly becomes intractable. Imagine, for
example, the cost of having to train a new model every time an autonomous vehicle needs to operate
in a new city, or every time a camera application needs to recognize a new type of object, or every
time a custom LLM needs to update its knowledge cutoff. The shift towards fine-tuning within the
deep learning community has also been accelerated by developments in large foundational models
that were trained on vast quantities of data, such as CLIP Radford et al. [2021], DINO Caron et al.
[2021], and open-source LLMs Touvron et al. [2023a]. Indeed, deep learning is steadily inching
towards a new paradigm where very few practitioners are training models from scratch.
At the same time, fine-tuning a model comes with its own set of challenges. For one, models are
known to readily forget old information when fine-tuned with new information, in a process known
as catastrophic forgetting Goodfellow et al. [2013]. Various mitigation methods have been proposed
Li and Hoiem [2017], but require data engineering and modifications to the model architecture.
Common practice within fine-tuning still largely relies on training on new tasks/data with a smaller
learning rate or with a frozen backbone (or both). Parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods such
as LoRA Hu et al. [2022] introduce learnable adapters for transfer learning, but serve to improve
fine-tuning efficiency rather than accuracy (Biderman et al. [2024]). We aim to improve the accuracy
of fine-tuning while keeping the process efficient by not introducing any additional parameters.
A ubiquitous object within deep learning that is modular and abstracted away from the practitioner is
the optimizer. Many AI models set the optimizer to popular standards like Adam Kingma and Ba
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

