Correcting misinterpretations of additive models

Benedict Clark1 Rick Wilming1 Hjalmar Schulz2
Rustam Zhumagambetov1 Danny Panknin1 Stefan Haufe1,2,3
1
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Berlin, Germany
2
Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
3
Charité – Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany

Abstract
Correct model interpretation in high-stakes settings is critical, yet both post-hoc
feature attribution methods and so-called intrinsically interpretable models can
systematically attribute false-positive importance to non-informative features such
as suppressor variables. Specifically, both linear models and their powerful nonlinear generalisation such as General Additive Models (GAMs) are susceptible
to spurious attributions to suppressors. We present a principled generalisation of
activation patterns – originally developed to make linear models interpretable – to
additive models, correctly rejecting suppressor effects for non-linear features. This
yields PatternGAM, an importance attribution method based on univariate generative surrogate models for the broad family of additive models, and PatternQLR
for polynomial models. Empirical evaluations on the XAI-TRIS benchmark with
a novel false-negative invariant formulation of the earth mover’s distance accuracy metric demonstrates significant improvements over popular feature attribution
methods and the traditional interpretation of additive models. Finally, real-world
case studies on the COMPAS and MIMIC-IV datasets provide new insights into
the role of specific features by disentangling genuine target-related information
from suppression effects that would mislead conventional GAM interpretations.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) models are increasingly used in high-stakes domains, the need for reliable
model explanations has grown in tandem, with much of the work in explainable AI (XAI) has focused
on interpreting ML models through post-hoc attribution techniques. Parallel to this, simple model
architectures such as Generalised Additive Models (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1986; Rudin, 2019), which
are thought of as ‘inherently interpretable’ have become popular. GAMs non-linearly model the output
as a sum of smooth functions applied to each input feature, followed by a link function – typically
the logit or softmax in classification settings. This architecture is often considered interpretable in the
sense that each component function – also known as a shape function – can be visualised to illustrate
how the feature contributes to the model’s prediction. However, how models use specific features,
and therefore, how model coefficients or shape functions must be interpreted, depends non-trivially
on the data generating process, even when models are decomposable into simple terms. It is often
erroneously assumed that non-zero coefficients corresponding to a feature or feature pair imply that
these features carry information about the prediction target. However, depending on the joint causal
structure of the model’s in- and outputs, optimal models may assign significant non-zero weight to
non-informative features and, conversely, zero weight to informative features (Haufe et al., 2014). It
is also possible that a feature enters the model with a polarity that opposes the correlation between
the feature and the target. Such effects can be due to suppressor variables, which are variables that are
statistically unrelated or weakly related to the prediction target but help the model to remove variance
from other variables, therefore improving its predictions (see, e.g., Conger, 1974; Weichwald et al.,
2015; Haufe et al., 2024).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

