New Perspectives on the Polyak Stepsize:
Surrogate Functions and Negative Results

Francesco Orabona
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal, 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
francesco@orabona.com
Ryan D’Orazio
Mila Québec AI Institute, Université de Montréal
Montréal, QC, Canada
ryan.dorazio@mila.quebec

Abstract
The Polyak stepsize has been proven to be a fundamental stepsize in convex optimization, giving near optimal gradient descent rates across a wide range of assumptions. The universality of the Polyak stepsize has also inspired many stochastic
variants, with theoretical guarantees and strong empirical performance. Despite
the many theoretical results, our understanding of the convergence properties and
shortcomings of the Polyak stepsize or its variants is both incomplete and fractured
across different analyses. We propose a new, unified, and simple perspective for
the Polyak stepsize and its variants as gradient descent on a surrogate loss. We
show that each variant is equivalent to minimize a surrogate function with stepsizes
that adapt to a guaranteed local curvature. Our general surrogate loss perspective is then used to provide a unified analysis of existing variants across different
assumptions. Moreover, we show a number of negative results proving that the
non-convergence results in some of the upper bounds is indeed real.

1

Introduction

The iterative optimization of complex functions forms a cornerstone of modern machine learning,
scientific computing, and engineering. Among the most foundational first-order methods is gradient
descent, which iteratively refines a solution by moving in the direction opposite to the function’s
gradient. A critical aspect of gradient descent is the selection of an appropriate stepsize (or learning
rate), as it dictates both the speed of convergence and the stability of the algorithm. The wrong choice
of the stepsizes can lead to slow convergence or, conversely, to divergence, making the tuning process
a significant practical hurdle.
In this landscape of stepsize selection strategies, the Polyak stepsize, proposed by Polyak [36] stands
out for its theoretical elegance and convergence properties. Starting from an arbitrary x1 ∈ Rd , the
Polyak stepsize is defined as
f (xt ) − f ⋆
xt+1 = xt −
gt ,
(1)
∥g t ∥2
where 0 ̸= g t ∈ ∂f (xt ) and f ⋆ = minx f (x). If g t = 0, then xt+1 = xt . This update rule
can achieve linear convergence
√ for strongly convex and smooth functions, O(1/T ) rate for convex
smooth functions, and O(1/ T ) rate for non-smooth convex ones. This is particularly interesting
because all of these rates are achieved with a unique stepsize and without knowledge of smoothness
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

