TransferTraj: A Vehicle Trajectory Learning Model
for Region and Task Transferability

Tonglong Wei1∗, Yan Lin2∗, Zeyu Zhou1 , Haomin Wen3 , Jilin Hu4
Shengnan Guo1,5†, Youfang Lin1,6 , Gao Cong7 , Huaiyu Wan1,6
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, China
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
6
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, China
7
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
{weitonglong, zeyuzhou, guoshn, yflin, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn, lyan@cs.aau.dk,
haominwe@andrew.cmu.edu, jlhu@dase.ecnu.edu.cn, gaocong@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Vehicle GPS trajectories provide valuable movement information that supports
various downstream tasks and applications. A desirable trajectory learning model
should be able to transfer across regions and tasks without retraining, avoiding the
need to maintain multiple specialized models and subpar performance with limited
training data. However, each region has its unique spatial features and contexts,
which are reflected in vehicle movement patterns and are difficult to generalize.
Additionally, transferring across different tasks faces technical challenges due to
the varying input-output structures required for each task. Existing efforts towards
transferability primarily involve learning embedding vectors for trajectories, which
perform poorly in region transfer and require retraining of prediction modules for
task transfer.
To address these challenges, we propose TransferTraj, a vehicle GPS trajectory
learning model that excels in both region and task transferability. For region transferability, we introduce RTTE as the main learnable module within TransferTraj.
It integrates spatial, temporal, POI, and road network modalities of trajectories
to effectively manage variations in spatial context distribution across regions. It
also introduces a TRIE module for incorporating relative information of spatial
features and a spatial context MoE module for handling movement patterns in
diverse contexts. For task transferability, we propose a task-transferable inputoutput scheme that unifies the input-output structure of different tasks into the
masking and recovery of modalities and trajectory points. This approach allows
TransferTraj to be pre-trained once and transferred to different tasks without retraining. We conduct extensive experiments on three real-world vehicle trajectory datasets under various transfer settings, including task transfer, zero-shot
region transfer, and few-shot region transfer. Experimental results demonstrate
that TransferTraj significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in different
scenarios, validating its effectiveness in region and task transfer. Code is available
at https://github.com/wtl52656/TransferTraj.
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

