Fast constrained sampling in pre-trained diffusion
models
Alexandros Graikos
Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY
agraikos@cs.stonybrook.edu

Nebojsa Jojic
Microsoft Research,
Redmond, WA
jojic@microsoft.com

Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY
samaras@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Large denoising diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion, have been trained on
billions of image-caption pairs to perform text-conditioned image generation. As a
byproduct of this training, these models have acquired general knowledge about
image statistics, which can be useful for other inference tasks. However, when
confronted with sampling an image under new constraints, e.g. generating the
missing parts of an image, using large pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models
is inefficient and often unreliable. Previous approaches either utilized backpropagation through the denoiser network, making them significantly slower and more
memory-demanding than simple text-to-image generation, or only enforced the
constraint locally, failing to capture critical long-range correlations in the sampled
image. In this work, we propose an algorithm that enables fast, high-quality generation under arbitrary constraints. We show that in denoising diffusion models,
we can employ an approximation to Newton’s optimization method that allows us
to speed up inference and avoid the expensive backpropagation operations. Our
approach produces results that rival or surpass the state-of-the-art training-free
inference methods while requiring a fraction of the time. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our algorithm under both linear (inpainting, super-resolution) and
non-linear (style-guided generation) constraints. An implementation is provided at
this GitHub repository.

1

Introduction

The development of large text-to-image models [22, 27, 26, 30] has made denoising diffusion [32, 16]
the go-to approach for capturing complex data distributions in high-dimensional spaces, such as
images. By training on billions of text-image pairs, these models have acquired general knowledge
about the image space, beyond text-to-image generation. This knowledge is useful in quickly adapting
to new conditions [45, 40] and utilizing model features to solve downstream image tasks [38, 39].
The simplest way to utilize this prior knowledge is by fine-tuning the model. However, fine-tuning
may require non-trivial computational resources and thus, previous works have focused on developing
algorithms for conditional generation using only the pre-trained model [5, 28, 6, 44, 13]. These
methods modify the diffusion sampling process by computing additional gradient terms that move
the sample towards the condition while denoising. When these gradients are computed using
backpropagation through the model weights, there is a significant increase in inference time. On
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

