BrainOmni: A Brain Foundation Model for
Unified EEG and MEG Signals

Qinfan Xiao1,2∗ , Ziyun Cui1,2∗ , Chi Zhang1,2 , Siqi Chen2 , Wen Wu1
Andrew Thwaites3,4 , Alexandra Woolgar3,5 , Bowen Zhou1,2 , Chao Zhang2,1,4†
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
3
Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK
4
Speech Hearing and Phonetic Sciences, University College London, UK
5
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, UK.
{xiaoqf22, cui-zy24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cz277@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) measure
neural activity non-invasively by capturing electromagnetic fields generated by
dendritic currents. Although rooted in the same biophysics, EEG and MEG exhibit
distinct signal patterns, further complicated by variations in sensor configurations
across modalities and recording devices. Existing approaches typically rely on
separate, modality- and dataset-specific models, which limits the performance
and cross-domain scalability. This paper proposes BrainOmni, the first brain
foundation model that generalises across heterogeneous EEG and MEG recordings.
To unify diverse data sources, we introduce BrainTokenizer, the first tokenizer that
quantises spatiotemporal brain activity into discrete representations. Central to
BrainTokenizer is a novel Sensor Encoder that encodes sensor properties such as
spatial layout, orientation, and type, enabling compatibility across devices and
modalities. Building upon the discrete representations, BrainOmni learns unified
semantic embeddings of brain signals by self-supervised pretraining. To the best
of our knowledge, it is the first foundation model to support both EEG and MEG
signals, as well as the first to incorporate large-scale MEG pretraining. A total
of 1,997 hours of EEG and 656 hours of MEG data are curated and standardised
from publicly available sources for pretraining. Experiments show that BrainOmni
outperforms both existing foundation models and state-of-the-art task-specific
models on a range of downstream tasks. It also demonstrates strong generalisation
to unseen EEG and MEG devices. Further analysis reveals that joint EEG-MEG
(EMEG) training yields consistent improvements across both modalities. Code
and checkpoints are publicly available at https://github.com/OpenTSLab/
BrainOmni.

1

Introduction

Neuronal activity underpins human brain function. This activity generates electrical currents in the
cortex, which in turn produces secondary electrical and magnetic fields. These fields can be indirectly
measured using non-invasive techniques such as electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) [42]. EEG measures electrical potentials through electrodes placed on the
scalp, while MEG uses either gradient or amplitude sensors to measure the magnetic field at specific
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

