Noise Matters: Optimizing Matching Noise for
Diffusion Classifiers
Yanghao Wang, Long Chen∗
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
ywangtg@connect.ust.hk, longchen@ust.hk

Abstract
Although today’s pretrained discriminative vision-language models (e.g., CLIP)
have demonstrated strong perception abilities, such as zero-shot image classification, they also suffer from the bag-of-words problem and spurious bias. To mitigate
these problems, some pioneering studies leverage powerful generative models (e.g.,
pretrained diffusion models) to realize generalizable image classification, dubbed
Diffusion Classifier (DC). Specifically, by randomly sampling a Gaussian noise,
DC utilizes the differences of denoising effects with different category conditions to
classify categories. Unfortunately, an inherent and notorious weakness of existing
DCs is noise instability: different random sampled noises lead to significant performance changes. To achieve stable classification performance, existing DCs always
ensemble the results of hundreds of sampled noises, which significantly reduces
the classification speed. To this end, we firstly explore the role of noise in DC, and
conclude that: there are some “good noises” that can relieve the instability. Meanwhile, we argue that these good noises should meet two principles: 1) Frequency
Matching: noise should destroy the specific frequency signals; 2) Spatial Matching:
noise should destroy the specific spatial areas. Regarding both principles, we
propose a novel Noise Optimization method to learn matching (i.e., good) noise
for DCs: NoOp. For frequency matching, NoOp first optimizes a dataset-specific
noise: Given a dataset and a timestep t, optimize one randomly initialized parameterized noise. For Spatial Matching, NoOp trains a Meta-Network that adopts an
image as input and outputs image-specific noise offset. The sum of optimized noise
and noise offset will be used in DC to replace random noise. Extensive ablations
on various datasets demonstrated the effectiveness of NoOp. It is worth noting
that our noise optimization is orthogonal to existing optimization methods (e.g.,
prompt tuning), our NoOP can even benefit from these methods to further boost
performance. Code is available at https://github.com/HKUST-LongGroup/NoOp.

1

Introduction

Pretrained visual-language models (VLMs) learn the alignment of text and image from the text-image
pairs. Thanks to the large-scale and in-the-wild training data, these discriminative VLMs gain some
generalization capability and can even achieve zero-shot visual classification, e.g., CLIP [1]. When
encountering some rare or customized categories, some works like prompt optimization [2, 3] can
also adapt CLIP with a few-shot training set efficiently. However, the CLIP models are criticized for
an inherent bag-of-words problem [4, 5]. This problem leads to spurious bias, harming compositional
inference and counterfactual reasoning. Thus, recent works [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] try to leverage the
pretrained diffusion models for classification.
∗

Long Chen is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

