Model Selection for Off-policy Evaluation:
New Algorithms and Experimental Protocol

Pai Liu
UIUC

Lingfeng Zhao
Columbia University

Audrey Huang
UIUC

Shivangi Agarwal
IIIT Delhi

Philip Amortila
UIUC

Jinghan Liu
USTC
Nan Jiang∗
UIUC

Abstract
Holdout validation and hyperparameter tuning from data is a long-standing problem
in offline reinforcement learning (RL). A standard framework is to use off-policy
evaluation (OPE) methods to evaluate and select between different policies, but
OPE methods either incur exponential variance (e.g., importance sampling) or
have hyperparameters of their own (e.g., FQE and model-based). We focus on
model selection for OPE itself, which is even more under-investigated. Concretely,
we select among candidate value functions (“model-free”) or dynamics models
(“model-based”) to best assess the performance of a target policy. We develop:
(1) new model-free and model-based selectors with theoretical guarantees, and
(2) a new experimental protocol for empirically evaluating them. Compared to
the model-free protocol in prior works, our new protocol allows for more stable
generation and better control of candidate value functions in an optimizationfree manner, and evaluation of model-free and model-based methods alike. We
exemplify the protocol on Gym-Hopper, and find that our new model-free selector,
LSTD-Tournament, demonstrates promising empirical performance.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising paradigm for applying RL to important application
domains where perfect simulators are not available and we must learn from data [34, 23]. Despite the
significant progress made in devising more performant training algorithms, how to perform holdout
validation and model selection—an indispensable component of any practical machine learning
pipeline—remains an open problem and has hindered the deployment of RL in real-life scenarios.
Concretely, after multiple training algorithms (or instances of the same algorithm with different
hyperparameter settings) have produced candidate policies, the primary task (which contrasts the
secondary task which we focus on) is to select a good policy from these candidates, much like how we
select a good classifier/regressor in supervised learning. To do so, we may estimate the performance
(i.e., expected return) of each policy, and select the one with the highest estimated return.
Unfortunately, estimating the performance of a new target policy based on data collected from a
different behavior policy is a highly challenging task, known as off-policy evaluation (OPE). Popular
OPE algorithms can be roughly divided into two categories, each with their own critical weaknesses:
the first is importance sampling [49, 22, 55], which has elegant unbiasedness guarantees but suffers
variance that is exponential in the horizon, limiting applicability beyond short-horizon settings such
as contextual bandits [36]. The second category includes algorithms such as Fitted-Q Evaluation
(FQE) [14, 31, 47], marginalized importance sampling [38, 44, 57], and model-based approaches
∗

Correspondence to: nanjiang@illinois.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

