LLM Layers Immediately Correct Each Other

Arjun Patrawala

Jiahai Feng

Erik Jones

Jacob Steinhardt

University of California, Berkeley
arjunpatrawala@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Recent methods in language model interpretability employ techniques such
as sparse autoencoders to decompose residual stream contributions into linear,
semantically-meaningful features. Our work demonstrates that an underlying assumption of these methods—that residual stream contributions build additively
upon each other—is insufficient to fully explain model behavior. Specifically, we
identify the Transformer Layer Correction Mechanism (TLCM), wherein adjacent transformer layers systematically counteract each other’s contributions to the
residual stream. TLCM appears in 5 out of 7 major open-source model families
and activates across nearly all tokens in diverse texts. To understand TLCM, we
show that it emerges during pretraining, operates most strongly on punctuation and
numbers, and adaptively calibrates its correction strength based on the preceding
layer’s output. We further show that TLCM actively corrects a small subspace and
promotes other subspaces, different from standard model behavior. We advance the
“propose-and-reject” hypothesis: layers may propose multiple candidate features,
while subsequent layers selectively filter out inappropriate ones. Finally, we discuss
how our findings help explain three persistent challenges in feature-based interpretability: why extracted features descriptions often suffer from low specificity;
why feature-based interventions for model steering fail at low magnitude; why
recent work finds cross-layer transcoders outperform SAEs. 1

1

Introduction

Mechanistic interpretability aims to understand large language models (LLMs) by dissecting the
functions of their components. This research direction has critical implications for monitoring and
controlling language models [29, 42, 27, 13, 39], as well as designing architectural improvements
[51, 50].
A foundational assumption in many interpretability methods is that transformer layers progressively
build upon each other’s contributions to enrich representations in the residual stream. This perspective
has motivated numerous techniques that extract features from transformer layer outputs, including
linear probes [3], the logit lens [37], sparse autoencoders (SAEs) [6], and cross-layer transcoders
(CLTs) [4, 12, 40]. Similarly, analyses of factual recall often characterize successive layers as
gradually augmenting entity representations with additional recalled information [16, 33, 36, 21].
In this work, we introduce the Transformer Layer Correction Mechanism (TLCM), in which adjacent
transformer layers systematically reverse portions of each other’s contributions. Specifically, we find
that in 5 out of 7 open-weight LLM families (Llama 3, OLMo, Mistral, Gemma, and Qwen2), layer
i + 1 consistently produces contributions that partially oppose those of layer i. TLCM challenges
the conventional view that layer contributions primarily add information to the residual stream;
instead, layers actively edit the residual stream by selectively promoting and rejecting components
1

Code is available at https://github.com/arjunpat/transformer-correction

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

