Instance-Dependent Regret Bounds
for Nonstochastic Linear Partial Monitoring

Federico Di Gennaro∗,†
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
digennarof.00@gmail.com

Khaled Eldowa∗,‡
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
& Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
khaled.eldowa3@gmail.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
& Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Abstract
In contrast to the classic formulation of partial monitoring, linear partial monitoring
can model infinite outcome spaces, while imposing a linear structure on both the
losses and the observations. This setting can be viewed as a generalization of
linear bandits where loss and feedback are decoupled in a flexible manner. In
this work, we address a nonstochastic (adversarial), finite-actions version of the
problem through a simple instance of the exploration-by-optimization method that
is amenable to efficient implementation. We derive regret bounds that depend
on the game structure in a more transparent manner than previous theoretical
guarantees for this paradigm. Our bounds feature instance-specific quantities that
reflect the degree of alignment between observations and losses, and resemble
known
guarantees in the stochastic setting. Notably, they achieve the standard
√
T rate in easy (locally observable) games and T 2/3 in hard (globally observable)
games, where T is the time horizon. We instantiate these bounds in a selection of
old and new partial information settings subsumed by this model, and illustrate that
the achieved dependence on the game structure can be tight in interesting cases.

1

Introduction

Partial monitoring models sequential decision-making problems with general feedback structures. A
generic nonstochastic partial monitoring problem is characterized by an action space A, an outcome
space Z, an observation space Σ, a loss function Y : A × Z → R, and an observation function
Φ : A × Z → Σ. All of these components are known to the learner, who interacts with an unknown
environment in a series of T rounds. In each round t, the learner picks an action At ∈ A, observes
Φ(At , Zt ), and incurs the (unobserved) loss Y (At , Zt ), where Zt ∈ Z is a latent outcome. The
learner aims to minimize the regret, defined as the difference between the cumulative losses of played
actions and the cumulative losses incurred by the best action in hindsight. This general decoupling
between losses and observations results in an extraordinary modeling power. Not only does this
framework encompass full-information scenarios [23, 13], where the latent outcome can be inferred
from the observation, and bandit scenarios [4, 11], where the loss and the observation coincide;
∗

Equal contribution.
Now at ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
‡
Now at Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK; Grenoble, France.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

