Bi-Level Knowledge Transfer for Multi-Task
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Junkai Zhang1,2 , Jinmin He1,2 , Yifan Zhang1,2,3∗, Yifan Zang4 , Ning Xu1 , Jian Cheng1,2,5
1 2
C DL, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing
4
Beijing Institute of Astronautical Systems, 5 AiRiA
{zhangjunkai2021, hejinmin2021, zangyifan2019}@ia.ac.cn,
{yfzhang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, nxu@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has achieved remarkable success in
various real-world scenarios, but its high cost of online training makes it impractical
to learn each task from scratch. To enable effective policy reuse, we consider the
problem of zero-shot generalization from offline data across multiple tasks. While
prior work focuses on transferring individual skills of agents, we argue that the
effective policy transfer across tasks should also capture the team-level coordination
knowledge. In this paper, we propose Bi-Level Knowledge Transfer (BiKT) for
Multi-Task MARL, which performs knowledge transfer at both the individual
and team levels. At the individual level, we extract transferable individual skill
embeddings from offline MARL trajectories. At the team level, we define tactics
as coordinated patterns of skill combinations and capture them by leveraging
the learned skill embeddings. We map skill combinations into compact tactic
embeddings and then construct a tactic codebook. To incorporate both skills and
tactics into decision-making, we design a bi-level decision transformer that infers
them in sequence. Our BiKT leverages both the generalizability of individual
skills and the diversity of tactics, enabling the learned policy to perform effectively
across multiple tasks. Extensive experiments on SMAC and MPE benchmarks
demonstrate that BiKT achieves strong generalization to previously unseen tasks.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has shown great potential in a wide range of real-world
applications, such as autonomous driving [4, 44], robotic collaboration [2, 11, 29], and distributed
control [24, 39]. However, training MARL agents from scratch for each new task is often prohibitively
expensive due to the high cost of online interactions and the complexity of coordination among
agents[42, 45]. In real-world scenarios, we usually have access to offline MARL trajectories of
some known tasks. Thus, distilling the multi-agent policy from such data and transferring it to
unseen yet related tasks offers a cost-effective solution, which reduces reliance on online interaction.
Consequently, we consider to solve the problem where agents are trained on known multi-tasks
using offline data and then directly evaluated on previously unseen tasks, aiming to achieve zero-shot
generalization.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

