KL Penalty Control via Perturbation
for Direct Preference Optimization

Sangkyu Lee1,∗ Janghoon Han2 Hosung Song2
Stanley Jungkyu Choi2 Honglak Lee2,3 Youngjae Yu4
Yonsei University1 LG AI Research2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor3 Seoul National University4
oddqueue@yonsei.ac.kr youngjaeyu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) demonstrates the advantage of aligning a
large language model with human preference using only an offline dataset. However, DPO has the limitation that the KL penalty, which prevents excessive deviation
from the reference model, is static throughout the training process. Several methods
claim to change this static KL penalty of DPO into a dynamic one, but no approach
can adaptively assign different KL penalties for each preference pair. In this paper,
we propose ε-Direct Preference Optimization (ε-DPO), which allows adaptive
control of the KL penalty strength β for each preference pair. Specifically, ε-DPO
adaptively controls β for each preference pair based on the monotonicity of logits
as a preference model under the perturbation of β during training. This is equivalent
to adjusting the KL penalty by checking whether the change in training-time temperature can lead to better preference confidence as preference models by simply
reusing the logit of the current policy and the reference policy. Experimental results
show that the simple criterion of ε-DPO for KL penalty relaxation significantly
improves DPO compared to most existing direct alignment algorithms on general
chatbot benchmarks and reveal that this KL penalty control criterion can reflect
confusion as a preference model and provide an efficient KL trade-off, highlighting
the significance of instance-level adaptive KL penalty control in DPO.1

1

Introduction

Aligning large language models with human preferences for helpfulness and harmless principles [2, 4,
9] is a crucial requirement for general chatbot agents. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) [46] is the pioneering approach that regards the alignment of large language models as a
reward maximization problem and solves it by reinforcement learning [37]. However, the complicated
training pipeline of RLHF increases the training complexity and computation cost of the rollout for
online reinforcement learning, in addition to the difficulty of collecting human preference datasets.
Moreover, introducing a trained reward model as a proxy reward function to replace the intractable
ground-truth human preference reward function makes large language models suffer from the side
effect of reward over-optimization [13] inherited from the reward models.
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [32] proposes an alternative approach to reform the limitation
of RLHF by converting the policy optimization problem into a preference modeling problem and
performing alignment using only the offline preference dataset. It shows comparable performance
1

∗
Work done during internship at LG AI Research.
The code is available at github.com/oddqueue/e-dpo.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

