The Curse of Depth in Large Language Models

Wenfang Sun1∗ Xinyuan Song2∗ Pengxiang Li3∗ Lu Yin4 Yefeng Zheng1 Shiwei Liu5†
1
Westlake University 2 Emory University 3 Dalian University of Technology
4
University of Surrey 5 University of Oxford

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the Curse of Depth, a concept that highlights, explains,
and addresses the recent observation in modern Large Language Models (LLMs)
where nearly half of the layers are less effective than expected. We first confirm
the wide existence of this phenomenon across the most popular families of LLMs
such as Llama, Mistral, DeepSeek, and Qwen. Our analysis, theoretically and
empirically, identifies that the underlying reason for the ineffectiveness of deep
layers in LLMs is the widespread usage of Pre-Layer Normalization (Pre-LN).
While Pre-LN stabilizes the training of Transformer LLMs, its output variance
exponentially grows with the model depth, which undesirably causes the derivative of the deep Transformer blocks to be an identity matrix, and therefore barely
contributes to the training. To resolve this training pitfall, we propose LayerNorm
Scaling (LNS), which scales the variance of output of the layer normalization
inversely by the square root of its depth. This simple modification mitigates the
output variance explosion of deeper Transformer layers, improving their contribution. Across a wide range of model sizes (130M to 7B), our experiments show that
LNS consistently outperforms previous normalization and scaling techniques in
enhancing LLM pre-training performance. Moreover, this improvement seamlessly
carries over to supervised fine-tuning. All these gains can be attributed to the fact
that LayerNorm Scaling enables deeper layers to contribute more effectively during
training. Our code is available at LayerNorm-Scaling.

1

Introduction

Recent studies reveal that the deeper layers (Transformer blocks) in modern LLMs tend to be less
effective than the earlier ones [54, 16, 32, 26]. On the one hand, this interesting observation provides
an effective indicator for LLM compression. For instance, we can compress deeper layers significantly
more [54, 29, 14] to achieve high compression ratios. Even more aggressively, entire deep layers can
be pruned completely without compromising performance [33, 39].
On the other hand, having many layers ineffective is undesirable as modern LLMs are extremely
resource-intensive to train, often requiring thousands of GPUs trained for multiple months, let alone
the labor used for data curation and administration [1, 44]. Ideally, we want all layers in a model to
be well-trained, with sufficient diversity in features from layer to layer, to maximize the utility of
resources [26]. The existence of ill-trained layers suggests that there must be something off with
current LLM paradigms. Addressing such limitations is a pressing need for the community to avoid
the waste of valuable resources, as new versions of LLMs are usually trained with their previous
computing paradigm which results in ineffective layers.
To seek the immediate attention of the community, we re-introduce the concept of the Curse of Depth
(CoD) to systematically present the phenomenon of ineffective deep layers in various LLM families,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: shiwei.liu@maths.ox.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

