Highlighting What Matters: Promptable Embeddings
for Attribute-Focused Image Retrieval

Siting Li
University of Washington
sitingli@cs.washington.edu

Xiang Gao
IIIS, Tsinghua University
x-gao22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Simon Shaolei Du
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
While an image is worth more than a thousand words, only a few provide crucial
information for a given task and thus should be focused on. In light of this, ideal
text-to-image (T2I) retrievers should prioritize specific visual attributes relevant to
queries. To evaluate current retrievers on handling attribute-focused queries, we
build COCO-FACET, a COCO-based benchmark with 9,112 queries about diverse
attributes of interest. We find that CLIP-like retrievers, which are widely adopted
due to their efficiency and zero-shot ability, have poor and imbalanced performance,
possibly because their image embeddings focus on global semantics and subjects
while leaving out other details. Notably, we reveal that even recent Multimodal
Large Language Model (MLLM)-based, stronger retrievers with a larger output
dimension struggle with this limitation. Hence, we hypothesize that retrieving
with general image embeddings is suboptimal for performing such queries. As
a solution, we propose to use promptable image embeddings enabled by these
multimodal retrievers, which boost performance by highlighting required attributes.
Our pipeline for deriving such embeddings generalizes across query types, image
pools, and base retriever architectures. To enhance real-world applicability, we offer
two acceleration strategies: Pre-processing promptable embeddings and using linear
approximations. We show that the former yields a 15% improvement in Recall@5
when prompts are predefined, while the latter achieves an 8% improvement when
prompts are only available during inference.

1

Introduction

Images offer valuable information that facilitates problem-solving and reasoning [Zellers et al., 2019,
Lu et al., 2022, 2023]. Although there may be abundant information in one image, especially when it
depicts a complex scene with plenty of elements [Gabbay et al., 2021, Urbanek et al., 2024, Nguyen
et al., 2024], usually only a small part is critical to a task or query at a time. For both performance
and efficiency considerations, there has been recent effort to focus the models on key aspects of
images for better visual reasoning [Wu and Xie, 2023, Hu et al., 2024b, OpenAI, 2025]. Similarly,
for text-to-image (T2I) retrieval that helps knowledge and fact checking [Yasunaga et al., 2022,
Sharifymoghaddam et al., 2024], an ideal retriever should also be able to select images with given
attributes of interest, such as a specified time, location, or object, which are not necessarily the main
elements of the image.
§ https://github.com/lst627/COCO-Facet
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

