Plenodium: Underwater 3D Scene Reconstruction with
Plenoptic Medium Representation

Changguang Wu1 Jiangxin Dong1∗ Chengjian Li1 Jinhui Tang2∗
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 Nanjing Forestry University
{changguangwu, jxdong, lichengjian}@njust.edu.cn, tangjh@njfu.edu.cn
https://plenodium.github.io/
1

Abstract
We present Plenodium (plenoptic medium), an effective and efficient 3D representation framework capable of jointly modeling both objects and the participating
medium. In contrast to existing medium representations that rely solely on viewdependent modeling, our novel plenoptic medium representation incorporates
both directional and positional information through spherical harmonics encoding,
enabling highly accurate underwater scene reconstruction. To address the initialization challenge in degraded underwater environments, we propose the pseudo-depth
Gaussian complementation to augment COLMAP-derived point clouds with robust
depth priors. In addition, a depth ranking regularized loss is developed to optimize
the geometry of the scene and improve the ordinal consistency of the depth maps.
Extensive experiments on real-world underwater datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves significant improvements in 3D reconstruction. Furthermore, we
construct a simulated dataset with GT and the controllable scattering medium to
demonstrate the restoration capability of our method in underwater scenarios.

1

Introduction

Underwater imaging plays a critical role in diverse applications, including underwater construction, marine
sciences, etc. However, its efficacy is significantly hindered by the complex optical properties of the aquatic
environment. These properties lead to wavelength- and
distance-dependent attenuation and scattering of light,
resulting in degraded image quality characterized by the
color cast, diminished contrast, and loss of detail. Given
the expanding scientific and industrial focus on oceanic
exploration, the reconstruction of scattering-affected underwater scenes becomes increasingly important.
Pioneering works [3–7] based on Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [8] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [9] have
significant contributions to 3D reconstruction. These
methods achieve effective surface modeling by constraining their representations to scene surfaces, assuming a
vacuum-like medium between the observer and the objects. However, such approaches neglect the influence
of light scattering in participating media, limiting their
applicability in real underwater environments.
∗

PSNR

SSIM

30.472

0.8763
0.8324

29.600
28.068

0.8099

PSNR

22.222

19.969

0.9178
0.8885

24.844

SSIM
0.9225

2h 0.56
169
7min
249
6.9min

Train Time

Plenodium

WaterSplatting

FPS

SeaThru-NeRF

Figure 1: Comparison of Plenodium, WaterSplatting [1], and SeaThru-NeRF [2]
on reconstruction and restoration performance (PSNR, SSIM), as well as efficiency (FPS, training time).

Jiangxin Dong and Jinhui Tang are corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

