Taught Well Learned Ill: Towards
Distillation-conditional Backdoor Attack
Yukun Chen1,2,∗ , Boheng Li3,∗ , Yu Yuan1,2,∗ , Leyi Qi1,2 ,
Yiming Li3,B , Tianwei Zhang3 , Zhan Qin1,2 , Kui Ren1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Nanyang Technological University
{yukunchen, qinzhan, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn; BOHENG001@e.ntu.edu.sg;
{yuyuan21cath, liyiming.tech}@gmail.com; leyi-qi@outlook.com;
tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a vital technique for deploying deep neural networks (DNNs) on resource-constrained devices by transferring knowledge from
large teacher models to lightweight student models. While teacher models from
third-party platforms may undergo security verification (e.g., backdoor detection),
we uncover a novel and critical threat: distillation-conditional backdoor attacks
(DCBAs). DCBA injects dormant and undetectable backdoors into teacher models, which become activated in student models via the KD process, even with clean
distillation datasets. While the direct extension of existing methods is ineffective
for DCBA, we implement this attack by formulating it as a bilevel optimization
problem and proposing a simple yet effective method (i.e., SCAR). Specifically,
the inner optimization simulates the KD process by optimizing a surrogate student model, while the outer optimization leverages outputs from this surrogate to
optimize the teacher model for implanting the conditional backdoor. Our SCAR
addresses this complex optimization utilizing an implicit differentiation algorithm
with a pre-optimized trigger injection function. Extensive experiments across diverse datasets, model architectures, and KD techniques validate the effectiveness
of our SCAR and its resistance against existing backdoor detection, highlighting
a significant yet previously overlooked vulnerability in the KD process. Our code
is available at https://github.com/WhitolfChen/SCAR.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved excellent performance, leading to their widespread
adoption in numerous safety-critical domains [1, 34, 42]. To achieve better performance, DNNs are
typically designed to be deeper and wider [19, 29]. However, due to limitations of computational and
memory resources, such heavy models are clumsy to deploy on resource-constrained devices (e.g.,
IoT devices). Knowledge distillation (KD) [24, 59, 83], a technique that enhances the performance
of lightweight models (student) by transferring knowledge from larger models (teacher), has gained
increasing popularity. With fewer training steps and less data, KD enables small models to achieve
accuracy and generalization performance comparable to large models [56]. Therefore, an increasing
number of users obtain powerful yet cumbersome large models from third-party platforms (e.g.,
GitHub [69] and Hugging Face [36]) to serve as teachers for training lightweight student models.
∗

The first three authors contributed equally to this work. B Corresponding author: Yiming Li.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

