Random Search Neural Networks for Efficient and
Expressive Graph Learning

Michael Ito
University of Michigan
mbito@umich.edu

Danai Koutra
University of Michigan
dkoutra@umich.edu

Jenna Wiens
University of Michigan
wiensj@umich.edu

Abstract
Random walk neural networks (RWNNs) have emerged as a promising approach
for graph representation learning, leveraging recent advances in sequence models
to process random walks. However, under realistic sampling constraints, RWNNs
often fail to capture global structure even in small graphs due to incomplete
node and edge coverage, limiting their expressivity. To address this, we propose
random search neural networks (RSNNs), which operate on random searches, each
of which guarantees full node coverage. Theoretically, we demonstrate that in
sparse graphs, only O(log |V |) searches are needed to achieve full edge coverage,
substantially reducing sampling complexity compared to the O(|V |) walks required
by RWNNs (assuming walk lengths scale with graph size). Furthermore, when
paired with universal sequence models, RSNNs are universal approximators. We
lastly show RSNNs are probabilistically invariant to graph isomorphisms, ensuring
their expectation is an isomorphism-invariant graph function. Empirically, RSNNs
consistently outperform RWNNs on molecular and protein benchmarks, achieving
comparable or superior performance with up to 16× fewer sampled sequences. Our
work bridges theoretical and practical advances in random walk based approaches,
offering an efficient and expressive framework for learning on sparse graphs.

1

Introduction

Early work on random walk–based graph representations focused on using skip-gram objectives to
learn node embeddings from sampled walks [1, 2]. Building on these ideas and leveraging recent
advances in sequence modeling, random walk neural networks (RWNNs) have emerged as a powerful
paradigm for modern graph learning [3–8], overcoming the limitations of message-passing neural
networks (MPNNs) [9–11] and graph transformers [12–14] by representing graphs as collections of
random walks processed by sequence models. This advancement aligns with the broader research goal
of identifying effective and expressive methods for graph representation learning [15–17]. However,
despite their success, RWNNs encounter critical expressivity challenges under realistic conditions
due to incomplete node and edge coverage, limiting their capacity to capture structure even in small
graphs (Figure 1). In our analysis, we establish that, under partial coverage, RWNNs are strictly less
expressive than traditional MPNNs, highlighting the importance of complete coverage and bridging
the theoretical expressivity of the two paradigms.
To illustrate the limitations of RWNNs, consider the graph composed of connected six-cycles and side
chains shown in Figure 1. Capturing the full structure of this graph requires traversing every node and
edge. However, since the node and edge cover times for a random walk can scale as O(|V ||E|) [18],
RWNNs require either prohibitively long walks or an impractically large number of samples to
guarantee complete coverage. Under realistic sampling constraints where the walk’s number of steps
is significantly less than O(|V ||E|), random walks obtain only partial graph reconstruction: as shown
in Figure 1(a), subgraphs induced by short random walks can miss critical structural components,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

