Unveiling the Uncertainty in Embodied and
Operational Carbon of Large AI Models through a
Probabilistic Carbon Accounting Model

Xiaoyang Zhang1 , Fang He1 , Yang Deng1 , and Dan Wang2
1

2

Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Division of Environment and Sustainability, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{xiaoyang.zhang,fangf.he,yang2.deng}@connect.polyu.hk,
wangdan@ust.hk

Abstract
The rapid growth of large AI models has raised significant environmental concerns
due to their substantial carbon footprint. Existing carbon accounting methods
for AI models are fundamentally deterministic and fail to account for inherent
uncertainties in embodied and operational carbon emissions. Our work aims to
investigate the effect of these uncertainties on embodied and operational carbon
footprint estimates for large AI models. We propose a Probabilistic Carbon Accounting Model (PCAM), which quantifies uncertainties in the carbon accounting
of large AI models. We develop parameter models to quantify key components (processors, memory, storage) in the carbon footprint of AI models. To characterize the
distribution of the parameters, we develop a carbon dataset by aggregating related
data from various sources. Then, we generate the probabilistic distribution of the
parameters from the collected dataset. We compare the performance of PCAM with
LLMCarbon, the state-of-the-art carbon accounting method for large AI models.
PCAM achieves ≤ 7.44% error compared to LLMCarbon’s ≤ 108.51%.

1

Introduction

Large AI models have demonstrated high efficacy across various tasks. However, as model parameters
and training datasets expand, the computational demands for training and deploying large-scale
models grow significantly, leading to notable carbon emissions. For example, recent studies reveal
that training advanced language models like Google’s T5 generates 40% more carbon emissions than
a transcontinental flight between San Francisco and New York [1]. The AI community is increasingly
focused on developing methodologies to tackle social issues [2, 3, 4], particularly in promoting
decarbonization and achieving carbon neutrality by 2050 [5, 6, 7, 8]. Carbon accounting, i.e., to
estimate the carbon footprint of a product, is crucial for understanding the environmental impact
of various operations and for developing strategies to reduce carbon footprints. By quantifying
emissions, organizations can set reduction targets, comply with regulations, and demonstrate their
commitment to sustainability. The carbon footprint of large AI models encompasses two components:
operational carbon (i.e., emissions associated with electricity consumed) and embodied carbon (i.e.,
emissions associated with AI hardware manufacturing).
While existing studies have initiated carbon accounting for AI models [5, 1], current methodologies
exhibit two fundamental limitations. First, they predominantly focus on operational carbon, while
neglecting or applying a simple model to account for embodied carbon. They utilize coarse-grained
average embodied carbon values for one hardware class (e.g., 14nm CPU) directly from Life Cycle
Assessment (LCA) reports, potentially introducing substantial inaccuracies. Second, all existing
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

