Learning Parameterized Skills from Demonstrations

Vedant Gupta1

Haotian Fu1 Calvin Luo1 Yiding Jiang2 George Konidaris1
1
Brown University 2 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We present D EPS, an end-to-end algorithm for discovering parameterized skills
from expert demonstrations. Our method learns parameterized skill policies jointly
with a meta-policy that selects the appropriate discrete skill and continuous parameters at each timestep. Using a combination of temporal variational inference
and information-theoretic regularization methods, we address the challenge of
degeneracy common in latent variable models, ensuring that the learned skills
are temporally extended, semantically meaningful, and adaptable. We empirically
show that learning parameterized skills from multitask expert demonstrations significantly improves generalization to unseen tasks. Our method outperforms multitask
as well as skill learning baselines on both LIBERO and MetaWorld benchmarks.
We also demonstrate that D EPS discovers interpretable parameterized skills, such
as an object grasping skill whose continuous arguments define the grasp location. 1

1

Introduction

The standard application of reinforcement learning to long-horizon sequential decision-making
problems often fails to leverage inherent behavioral patterns, leading to sample inefficiency. In
contrast, humans exhibit a remarkable ability to extract and reuse strong priors from past experiences.
For instance, training a single task-specific policy to master an Atari game can demand over 10
million samples [18, 9], whereas humans can achieve effective gameplay after merely 20 episodes.
A promising avenue for explicitly learning such priors from experience lies within the options
framework [27], which aims to discover modular and temporally extended skills. These skills can
then be flexibly reused and composed, facilitating generalization to novel tasks and reducing the
effective planning horizon.
While prior research has predominantly focused on learning either purely discrete or continuous
skills, these approaches possess inherent limitations. Discrete skills alone may lack the flexibility
required for broad generalization, while continuous skills can be less structured and challenging to
interpret. We propose that learning parameterized skills [4, 5], which are discrete in nature but can
be modulated by continuous arguments, offers a synergistic combination of the benefits from both
independent approaches. Parameterized skills retain the structured and interpretable nature of discrete
skills, while enabling flexible reuse in novel settings through continuous conditioning.
Consider the task of learning a skill to slice fruit. Generalization is crucial here, as no two fruits are
identical, and the skill might need to be applied across diverse kitchen environments with varying
tools. Learning a distinct discrete skill for every possible scenario is not only computationally
intractable but also generalizes poorly to unseen situations. Conversely, learning a parameterized skill
like slice_fruit(x,y,z), where the continuous parameters specify the slicing action based on the
particular instance, compactly represents a family of policies for fruit slicing. This can facilitate robust
generalization to previously unseen slicing angles and accommodate different parameterizations for
various fruits, tools, and kitchen conditions.
1

Website: sites.google.com/view/parameterized-skills Code: github.com/guptbot/DEPS
Correspondence: vedantgupta@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

