Resolution of Simpson’s paradox via the common
cause principle

Arshak Hovhannisyan ∗
Alikhanyan National Laboratory, Yerevan, Armenia
Armen Allahverdyan †
Alikhanyan National Laboratory, Yerevan, Armenia

Abstract
Simpson’s paradox poses a challenge in probabilistic inference and decisionmaking. Our study revisits the paradox by re-estimating its frequency with an
unbiased data generation process and reaffirms that it is not an artifact of deficient
data collection. Thus, it can lead to incorrect recommendations in fields as diverse
as statistics, psychology, and artificial intelligence. We show that the paradox can
be resolved by assuming a minimal — though not necessarily observed — common
cause (or screening) variable for the involved random variables. In our approach,
conditioning on this minimal common cause establishes the correct association
between events, which coincides with the conditioning (i.e., fine-grained) option
of the original Simpson paradox. This resolution applies to both discrete cases
of binary variables and continuous settings modeled by Gaussian variables. For
a non-minimal common cause, the resolution of the paradox is possible, but detailed knowledge of the common cause is required. Our findings extend traditional
understandings of the paradox and offer practical guidance for resolving apparent
contradictions in probabilistic inference, ultimately enhancing decision-making
processes. This point is illustrated by several examples.

1

Introduction

Simpson’s paradox was discovered more than a century ago [1, 2], generated a vast literature, and is
well-recognized in several fields including, statistics, epidemiology, psychology, social science, etc.
[3–24]. This counter-intuitive effect limits the ability to draw conclusions from probabilistic data.
The effect is important because it demands more than simply extracting relative frequencies from
data; e.g. it necessitates looking at exchangeability [9] or causality [7–9, 13, 14].
The paradox starts with two random variables A and B. Now A = (A1 , A2 ) contains control variable
A2 and the target variable A1 , while B is a side random variable that depends on both A1 and A2 .
The meaning of A and B is clarified via examples presented below. If there is no information on the
outcome of B, the behavior of A can be studied on two levels. The first (aggregated) level is that of
marginal probabilities p(A = a). The second level is finer-grained and is represented by conditional
probabilities p(A = a|B = b) for all possible values of B. Simpson’s paradox amounts to certain
relations between those probabilities; see section 2 for details. It states that no decision-making
is possible, because conclusions drawn from probabilities on different levels contradict each other.
Without Simpson’s paradox, decision-making can proceed at the aggregate level, because looking at
the fine-grained level is either redundant or inconclusive. Thus, Simpson’s paradox first and foremost
∗
†

arshak.hovhannisyan@aanl.am
a.allahverdyan@aanl.am

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

