MisoDICE: Multi-Agent Imitation from Unlabeled
Mixed-Quality Demonstrations

The Viet Bui
Singapore Management University, Singapore
theviet.bui.2023@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

Tien Mai
Singapore Management University, Singapore
atmai@smu.edu.sg

Thanh Hong Nguyen
University of Oregon Eugene, Oregon, United States
thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu

Abstract
We study offline imitation learning (IL) in cooperative multi-agent settings, where
demonstrations have unlabeled mixed quality — containing both expert and suboptimal trajectories. Our proposed solution is structured in two stages: trajectory
labeling and multi-agent imitation learning, designed jointly to enable effective
learning from heterogeneous, unlabeled data. In the first stage, we combine advances in large language models and preference-based reinforcement learning to
construct a progressive labeling pipeline that distinguishes expert-quality trajectories. In the second stage, we introduce MisoDICE, a novel multi-agent IL algorithm
that leverages these labels to learn robust policies while addressing the computational complexity of large joint state-action spaces. By extending the popular
single-agent DICE framework to multi-agent settings with a new value decomposition and mixing architecture, our method yields a convex policy optimization
objective and ensures consistency between global and local policies. We evaluate
MisoDICE on multiple standard multi-agent RL benchmarks and demonstrate
superior performance, especially when expert data is scarce.

1

Introduction

Imitation Learning (IL) is a key subfield of Reinforcement Learning (RL) that focuses on learning
effective policies solely from expert demonstration data, without requiring direct access to reward
functions [60]. A broad range of IL algorithms have been developed — primarily for single-agent
settings — ranging from simple supervised learning methods like Behavior Cloning (BC) [41, 45] to
more advanced occupancy-matching techniques [16, 18, 23]. While these methods typically assume
access to high-quality expert demonstrations, recent research has extended single-agent IL to more
challenging scenarios involving limited or suboptimal data [4, 8, 28, 65].
Motivated by the success of single-agent IL, recent studies have sought to extend IL to multiagent settings characterized by complex inter-agent dynamics. For example, leading multi-agent IL
algorithms have adapted well-known single-agent approaches [16, 18, 23] by incorporating gametheoretic concepts such as Nash equilibrium for competitive scenarios [51, 59], or by carefully
decomposing joint policies into local policies in cooperative tasks [36]. A key limitation of these
methods is their reliance on large volumes of expert data to learn effective policies. In practice,
acquiring such comprehensive datasets in complex multi-agent environments is highly impractical,
due to the combinatorial explosion of joint state-action spaces as the number of agents increases.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

