Accelerating Diffusion LLMs via
Adaptive Parallel Decoding

Daniel Israel
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
disrael@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Aditya Grover
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
adityag@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The generation speed of current LLMs is bottlenecked by autoregressive decoding,
where tokens are predicted sequentially one by one. Alternatively, diffusion large
language models (dLLMs) theoretically allow for parallel token generation, but in
practice struggle to achieve the speed of autoregressive models without significantly
sacrificing quality. We therefore introduce adaptive parallel decoding (APD), a
novel method that dynamically adjusts the number of tokens sampled in parallel.
We achieve this by defining a multiplicative mixture between the dLLM marginal
probabilities and the joint probability of sequences under a small auxiliary autoregressive model. This inverts the standard setup of speculative decoding, where the
goal is to sample from a large autoregressive verifier by drafting from a smaller
model. We further optimize APD by enabling KV caching and limiting the size of
the masked input. Altogether, our method puts forward three tunable parameters
to flexibly tradeoff throughput and quality. We show that APD provides markedly
higher throughput with minimal quality degradations on downstream benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have remarkable text generation capabilities and have attracted
evergrowing interest and widespread adoption. However, a significant impediment to their deployment
lies in the speed of text generation [43]. The dominant paradigm, autoregressive models [32],
generates tokens one by one in a sequential manner. While this approach has yielded state-of-the-art
results in terms of quality, the inherent sequentiality of generation limits throughput and hinders
real-time applications, especially as models continue to scale in size [19]. In addition, the recent
phenomenon of test-time scaling [35] and reasoning models [13] suggest that generation speed will
be an important bottleneck for increasing LLM capabilities. This challenge has spurred research into
alternative approaches beyond autoregressive sequential sampling.
One promising alternative to purely sequential generation is offered by diffusion large language
models (dLLMs) [42]. These models, inspired by successes in image generation [36], theoretically
permit the parallel generation of multiple tokens simultaneously, offering a path towards significantly
faster inference. In this work, we challenge the assumption that dLLMs, exemplified by the opensource models Dream [41] and Llada [29], can be practically used for parallel generation without
additional modifications. We find that the quality of these models is best achieved by generating
tokens one at a time (one timestep per token), and attempts to exploit the parallelizability of diffusion
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

