Understanding Outer Optimizers in Local SGD:
Learning Rates, Momentum, and Acceleration

Ahmed Khaled∗
Princeton University
ahmed.khaled@princeton.edu
Chi Jin
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
chij@princeton.edu

Satyen Kale†
Google Research
satyen@satyenkale.com

Rob Fergus
NYU, Meta
fergus@cs.nyu.edu

Arthur Douillard
Google DeepMind
douillard@google.com

Manzil Zaheer
Google DeepMind
manzilzaheer@gmail.com

Abstract
Modern machine learning often requires training with large batch size, distributed
data, and massively parallel compute hardware (like mobile and other edge devices
or distributed data centers). Communication becomes a major bottleneck in such
settings but methods like Local Stochastic Gradient Descent (Local SGD) show
great promise in reducing this additional communication overhead. Local SGD
consists of three parts: a local optimization process, an aggregation mechanism,
and an outer optimizer that uses the aggregated updates from the nodes to produce
a new model. While there exists an extensive literature on understanding the impact
of hyperparameters in the local optimization process, the choice of outer optimizer
and its hyperparameters is less clear. We study the role of the outer optimizer in
Local SGD, and prove new convergence guarantees for the algorithm. In particular,
we show that tuning the outer learning rate allows us to (a) trade off between
optimization error and stochastic gradient noise variance, and (b) make up for
ill-tuning of the inner learning rate. Our theory suggests that the outer learning rate
should sometimes be set to values greater than 1. We extend our results to settings
where we use momentum in the outer optimizer, and we show a similar role for
the momentum-adjusted outer learning rate. We also study acceleration in the
outer optimizer and show that it improves the convergence rate as a function of the
number of communication rounds, improving upon the convergence rate of prior
algorithms that apply acceleration locally. Finally, we also introduce a novel datadependent analysis of Local SGD that yields further insights on outer learning rate
tuning. We conduct comprehensive experiments with standard language models
and various outer optimizers to validate our theory.

1

Introduction

Training very large scale machine learning models requires a lot of compute. This compute is
often centrally controlled by a single entity and tightly connected in a data center. Gradients are
constantly synchronized, hardware failures are controlled and mitigated, and things (mostly) run
smoothly. Building this training infrastructure is expensive, however, and centralized control might
not be desirable for all models. This has led to a surge of interest in decentralized collaborative
training of large-scale models across different, potentially poorly connected clusters (Douillard,
∗
†

Part of this work was done during an internship at Google DeepMind.
Currently at Apple.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

