Two-Stage Learning of Stabilizing Neural Controllers
via Zubov Sampling and Iterative Domain Expansion

Haoyu Li˚ Xiangru Zhong˚ Bin Hu Huan Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
haoyuli5@illinois.com, xiangru4@illinois.edu
binhu7@illinois.com, huan@huan-zhang.com

Abstract
Learning-based neural network (NN) control policies have shown impressive empirical performance. However, obtaining stability guarantees and estimates of the
region of attraction of these learned neural controllers is challenging due to the
lack of stable and scalable training and verification algorithms. Although previous
works in this area have achieved great success, much conservatism remains in
their frameworks. In this work, we propose a novel two-stage training framework
to jointly synthesize a controller and a Lyapunov function for continuous-time
systems. By leveraging a Zubov-inspired region of attraction characterization to
directly estimate stability boundaries, we propose a novel training-data sampling
strategy and a domain-updating mechanism that significantly reduces the conservatism in training. Moreover, unlike existing works on continuous-time systems
that rely on an SMT solver to formally verify the Lyapunov condition, we extend
state-of-the-art neural network verifier α,β-CROWN with the capability of performing automatic bound propagation through the Jacobian of dynamical systems
and a novel verification scheme that avoids expensive bisection. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct numerical experiments by synthesizing and verifying controllers on several challenging nonlinear systems across
multiple dimensions. We show that our training can yield region of attractions with
volume 5 ´ 1.5 ¨ 105 times larger compared to the baselines, and our verification
on continuous systems can be up to 40 ´ 10,000 times faster compared to the
traditional SMT solver dReal. Our code is available at https://github.com/
Verified-Intelligence/Two-Stage_Neural_Controller_Training.

1

Introduction

Learning-based neural network control policies have demonstrated great potential in complex systems
due to their high expressiveness [19, 53]. However, the applications of these neural controllers in
safety-critical real-world physical systems raise concerns since they typically lack stability guarantees.
A promising method for quantifying safety is estimating the region of attraction (ROA), which refers
to the set of initial states from which a system is guaranteed to converge to a desired equilibrium point.
The computation of the ROA is often formulated as the search for an appropriate Lyapunov function
satisfying some algebraic conditions over its sublevel sets [26, 41, 31]. Due to the highly complex
and nonlinear nature of neural networks, searching for a Lyapunov function is not easy. Many
existing works that are able to make stability guarantees about a system have some restrictions on the
problem structure, for example, requiring linear or polynomial parameterizations of the system, where
sum-of-squares technique [37, 47, 30, 7] can be applied. To enable certification for general nonlinear
systems, many recent works explore data-driven methods to synthesize a neural certificate [8], such as
˚

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

