DeCaFlow: A deconfounding causal generative model

Alejandro Almodóvar1, *
Juan Parras1
1

Adrián Javaloy2,*

Santiago Zazo1

Isabel Valera3

Information Processing and Telecommunications Center, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, ES
2
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
3
Department of Computer science, Saarland University, DE

Abstract
We introduce DeCaFlow, a deconfounding causal generative model. Training once
per dataset using just observational data and the underlying causal graph, DeCaFlow
enables accurate causal inference on continuous variables under the presence of
hidden confounders. Specifically, we extend previous results on causal estimation
under hidden confounding to show that a single instance of DeCaFlow provides
correct estimates for all causal queries identifiable with do-calculus, leveraging
proxy variables to adjust for the causal effects when do-calculus alone is insufficient.
Moreover, we show that counterfactual queries are identifiable as long as their
interventional counterparts are identifiable, and thus are also correctly estimated
by DeCaFlow. Our empirical results on diverse settings—including the Ecoli70
dataset, with 3 independent hidden confounders, tens of observed variables and
hundreds of causal queries—show that DeCaFlow outperforms existing approaches,
while demonstrating its out-of-the-box applicability to any given causal graph.

1

Causal generative models and hidden confounding

Causal inference seeks to determine how changes in one variable affect others, which is crucial to
evaluate the effects of interventions in fields such as healthcare [15], marketing policing [74] or
education [85]. In real-world scenarios, where empirical trials often are infeasible due to ethical,
financial, or practical constraints, answering causal queries from observational data becomes essential.
However, this is a challenging task, especially in the presence of unmeasured or hidden confounders
affecting a subset of the observed variables [1, 20].
In this work, we aim to propose a practical approach for accurate causal inference on continuous
variables under the presence of hidden confounders. To this end, we build on two key concepts:
i) causal generative models (CGMs) [9, 27, 31], a class of generative models that can generate
samples not only from the observational distribution, but also from interventional and (in some
cases) counterfactual distributions; and ii) proxy variables, i.e., conditionally independent variables
that yield information about the hidden confounders [45, 46, 46, 76]. Consequently, we introduce
the deconfounding causal normalizing flow (DeCaFlow), a CGM which provides correct estimates
of a broad class of interventional and counterfactual queries under hidden confounding, requiring
only observational data, the causal graph, and training once per dataset. Architecturally, DeCaFlow
resembles variational autoencoders [33] as it is trained with the ELBO and comprises: i) a causal
normalizing flow (CNF) [27] as “decoder”, adapted to be conditioned on the (potentially many)
hidden confounders; and ii) a conditional normalizing flow [79] as “encoder”, computing the modeled
posterior distribution of the hidden confounders given the observations.
*

Equal contribution. Correspondence to alejandro.almodovar@upm.es and ajavaloy@ed.ac.uk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

