Differentiation Through Black-Box Quadratic
Programming Solvers

Connor W. Magoon∗1 , Fengyu Yang∗1 , Noam Aigerman2 , Shahar Z. Kovalsky1
1
Department of Mathematics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
2
Université de Montréal and Mila
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
Differentiable optimization has attracted significant research interest, particularly
for quadratic programming (QP). Existing approaches for differentiating the solution of a QP with respect to its defining parameters often rely on specific integrated
solvers. This integration limits their applicability, including their use in neural
network architectures and bi-level optimization tasks, restricting users to a narrow
selection of solver choices. To address this limitation, we introduce dQP, a modular
and solver-agnostic framework for plug-and-play differentiation of virtually any
QP solver. A key insight we leverage to achieve modularity is that, once the active
set of inequality constraints is known, both the solution and its derivative can be
expressed using simplified linear systems that share the same matrix. This formulation fully decouples the computation of the QP solution from its differentiation.
Building on this result, we provide a minimal-overhead, open-source implementation (https://github.com/cwmagoon/dQP) that seamlessly integrates with
over 15 state-of-the-art solvers. Comprehensive benchmark experiments demonstrate dQP’s robustness and scalability, particularly highlighting its advantages in
large-scale sparse problems.

1

Introduction

Computational methods often rely on solving optimization problems, i.e., finding an optimum of
an objective function subject to constraints. This has led to the development of numerous highperformance open-source and commercial solvers, particularly for constrained convex optimization
[114, 27]. Recently, there has been growing interest in differentiable optimization, which enables
gradient-based learning through optimization layers that show promise across applications such as
image classification [8], optimal transport [97, 98], zero-sum games [75], tessellation [35], control
[9, 38, 40], decision-making [110], robotics [62], biology [116], and NLP [111].
Differentiable optimization focuses on computing the derivatives of the optimal solution to an
optimization problem with respect to parameters defining the problem’s objective and constraints.
Rooted in classical sensitivity analysis and parametric programming [99, 100, 47, 49, 48, 73, 26, 93],
differentiable optimization has gained momentum through the idea that optimization problems
encoding prior domain knowledge can be embedded as parameterized “layers” within neural networks
– training such layers requires computing the derivative (gradient) of the optimization problem’s
solution during backpropagation [5, 1, 23].
This paper focuses on differentiating solutions to Quadratic Programs (QPs)—a core class of convex
problems involving the minimization of a quadratic objective subject to linear inequality constraints.
Despite significant research efforts, existing approaches for differentiating QPs fail to fully leverage
state-of-the-art solvers. General-purpose methods that support a broad class of optimization problems
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

