Why Popular MOEAs Are Popular: Proven
Advantages in Approximating the Pareto Front
Mingfeng Li1→, Qiang Zhang1→, Weijie Zheng1,2†, Benjamin Doerr3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology,
State Key Laboratory of Smart Farm Technologies and Systems,
International Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), CNRS, École Polytechnique,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
limingfeng@stu.hit.edu.cn, zhengweijie@hit.edu.cn, doerr@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in the analysis of multi-objective evolutionary algorithms
(MOEAs) are mathematical runtime analyses of those algorithms which are intensively used in practice. So far, most of these results show the same performance
as previously known for simpler algorithms like the GSEMO. The few results
indicating advantages of the popular MOEAs share the same shortages: They only
consider the problem of computing the full Pareto front, sometimes of algorithms
enriched with newly invented mechanisms, and this on newly designed benchmarks.
In this work, we overcome these shortcomings by analyzing how existing popular
MOEAs approximate the Pareto front of the established L ARGE F RONT benchmark. We prove that several popular MOEAs, including NSGA-II (with current
crowding distance), NSGA-III, SMS-EMOA, and SPEA2, only need an expected
time of O(n2 log n) fitness evaluations to compute an additive ω-approximation of
the Pareto front of the L ARGE F RONT benchmark. This contrasts with the already
proven exponential runtime (with high probability) of the GSEMO on the same
task. Our result is the first mathematical runtime analysis showing and explaining
the superiority of popular MOEAs over simple ones like the GSEMO for the central
task of computing good approximations to the Pareto front.

1

Introduction

Mathematical runtime analyses of the evolutionary algorithms are usually challenging. Early
theoretical results for multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) [LTZ+ 02, LTZ04] focused on the simple algorithms like the (G)SEMO, which use only dominance for the survival selection. Recent breakthroughs like the runtime analysis on the most widely used MOEA,
NSGA-II [DPAM02], successfully conducted in [ZLD22, ZD23], have triggered a new era in the
theory of MOEAs. Other algorithms that are intensively used in practice, like the NSGA-III
[DJ14], SMS-EMOA [BNE07], and SPEA2 [ZLT01], were theoretically analyzed soon thereafter [WD23, BZLQ23, RBLQ24], letting the theory of these popular MOEAs quickly become
a hot topic [BQ22, DQ23a, DOSS23b, BZLQ23, DDHW23, WD23, ZD24b, ZLDD24, DZL+ 24,
ZD24a, ODNS24, RBLQ24, DIK25, DZD25, LZD25].
→
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

