Active Measurement: Efficient Estimation at Scale
Max Hamilton∗ Jinlin Lai∗ Wenlong Zhao Subhransu Maji† Daniel Sheldon†
Manning College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
{jmhamilton,jinlinlai,wenlongzhao,smaji,sheldon}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
AI has the potential to transform scientific discovery by analyzing vast datasets with
little human effort. However, current workflows often do not provide the accuracy
or statistical guarantees that are needed. We introduce active measurement, a
human-in-the-loop AI framework for scientific measurement. An AI model is
used to predict measurements for individual units, which are then sampled for
human labeling using importance sampling. With each new set of human labels,
the AI model is improved and an unbiased Monte Carlo estimate of the total
measurement is refined. Active measurement can provide precise estimates even
with an imperfect AI model, and requires little human effort when the AI model
is very accurate. We derive novel estimators, weighting schemes, and confidence
intervals, and show that active measurement reduces estimation error compared to
alternatives in several measurement tasks.

1

Introduction

AI offers a transformative approach to scientific discovery, empowering scientists to analyze vast
datasets in ways that traditional methods cannot achieve [22, 38, 41]. Applications include species
identification from images and audio for biodiversity monitoring [1, 5, 19, 39], disease diagnosis
in medical imaging [2, 37], classifying galaxies in astronomy [23], assessing crop health in agriculture [13, 14], and myriad other applications in fields such as remote sensing, microscopy, and
neuroscience. In these applications, the typical goal is to make measurements to answer science
or policy questions, which therefore must be precise. But AI models are far from perfect: they
may introduce bias or have unacceptable error rates, and do not offer the statistical guarantees that
scientists desire.
As a concrete example, consider counting birds in the high-resolution photograph in Fig. 1 of a large
flock of Tree Swallows in Old Lyme, CT in September, 2018. Scientists would like to estimate the
population size and track it over time from photographs like this [e.g., 4, 7, 18]. Computer vision
is an excellent tool for this task, but current workflows are poorly suited to scientific measurement.
A scientist might be able to estimate the count with relatively low effort using a pre-trained object
detector adapted with a few labeled examples. However, substantial additional effort is needed
to obtain a model that is accurate enough for scientific measurement and gain confidence in its
performance. A typical scenario would be to first tune and validate the detector’s performance using
labeled image tiles. To obtain bounds on count performance, more validation is needed. After
substantial effort, the scientist may find that the count is 20,358 ± 8000 birds, which is not accurate
enough to track populations over time. What can be done? Under current practice, the scientist
returns to model development. For challenging tasks, it may be impossible to achieve precise enough
measurements.
∗†

Denotes authors with equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

