Remasking Discrete Diffusion Models with
Inference-Time Scaling

Guanghan Wang∗†

Yair Schiff† Subham Sekhar Sahoo Volodymyr Kuleshov
Cornell Tech, Cornell University
{gw354,yzs2,sss284,vk379}@cornell.edu
∗
denotes corresponding author † denotes equal contribution

Abstract
Part of the success of diffusion models stems from their ability to perform iterative
refinement, i.e., repeatedly correcting outputs during generation. However, modern
masked discrete diffusion lacks this capability: when a token is generated, it cannot
be updated again, even when it introduces an error. Here, we address this limitation
by introducing the remasking diffusion model (ReMDM) sampler, a method that
can be applied to pretrained masked diffusion models in a principled way and that is
derived from a discrete diffusion model with a custom remasking backward process.
Most interestingly, ReMDM endows discrete diffusion with a form of inferencetime compute scaling. By increasing the number of sampling steps, ReMDM
generates natural language outputs that approach the quality of autoregressive
models, whereas when the computation budget is limited, ReMDM better maintains
quality. ReMDM also improves sample quality of masked diffusion models for
discretized images, and in scientific domains such as molecule design, ReMDM
facilitates diffusion guidance and pushes the Pareto frontier of controllability
relative to classical masking and uniform noise diffusion. We provide the code
along with a blog post on the project page: https://remdm.github.io

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have gained significant traction as algorithms for generating high-quality images
and videos [50, 52, 18, 42]. Part of the success of diffusion stems from its ability to perform iterative
refinement—repeatedly modifying outputs and fixing errors over multiple steps of generation—which
makes diffusion models especially effective at guided generation [9, 17] and fast sampling [51, 44, 54]
and supports inference-time scaling to improve sample quality [30, 49, 66].
Discrete counterparts of diffusion models [2] have also been steadily improving in quality on tasks
such as language modeling and biological sequence design [29, 41, 46, 1, 43]. However, modern
discrete diffusion—especially the most performant kind that relies on masking [32, 41, 48]—lacks
the fundamental ability to iteratively refine outputs. Once a discrete token is unmasked, it cannot
be updated again, even if it introduces an error. The lack of error correction in turn sets limits on
controllable generation, sampling speed, and sample quality.
Here, we address the inability of masked diffusion models to perform iterative refinement by introducing a new sampler that supports remasking during generation. Our method, the remasking
diffusion model (ReMDM) sampler, is simple and allows users to directly specify the probability
of remasking a token at each time step. We augment the sampler with components that range from
nucleus sampling to remasking schedules, significantly boosting performance.
Our approach for deriving the sampler is rooted in probabilistic modeling. We show that our method
corresponds to ancestral sampling in a discrete diffusion model (also called ReMDM) characterized
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

