Scalable and adaptive prediction bands with kernel
sum-of-squares

1

Louis Allain1,2 Sébastien Da Veiga2 Brian Staber1
Safran Tech, Digital Sciences & Technologies,78114 Magny-Les-Hameaux, France
2
Univ Rennes, Ensai, CNRS, CREST - UMR 9194, F-35000 Rennes, France
{louis.allain,brian.staber}@safrangroup.com
sebastien.da-veiga@ensai.fr

Abstract
Conformal Prediction (CP) is a popular framework for constructing prediction
bands with valid coverage in finite samples, while being free of any distributional
assumption. A well-known limitation of conformal prediction is the lack of adaptivity, although several works introduced practically efficient alternate procedures.
In this work, we build upon recent ideas that rely on recasting the CP problem
as a statistical learning problem, directly targeting coverage and adaptivity. This
statistical learning problem is based on reproducible kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS)
and kernel sum-of-squares (SoS) methods. First, we extend previous results with
a general representer theorem and exhibit the dual formulation of the learning
problem. Crucially, such dual formulation can be solved efficiently by accelerated
gradient methods with several hundreds or thousands of samples, unlike previous
strategies based on off-the-shelf semidefinite programming algorithms. Second,
we introduce a new hyperparameter tuning strategy tailored specifically to target
adaptivity through bounds on test-conditional coverage. This strategy, based on the
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC), is introduced here to tune kernel
lengthscales in our framework, but has broader applicability since it could be used
in any CP algorithm where the score function is learned. Finally, extensive experiments are conducted to show how our method compares to related work. All figures
can be reproduced with the accompanying code at gitlab.com/drti/ksos-bands.

1

Introduction

In many applications, machine learning regression models require a trustworthy uncertainty quantification in their predictions. This is especially true for high-stakes applications such as design
optimization, non-destructive testing, medical diagnostics, autonomous vehicles, or financial forecasting, where decisions based on model predictions can have significant impacts. Having a reliable
uncertainty quantification is thus fundamental. Several machine learning models come with uncertainty quantification in their predictions, such as Gaussian Processes [Rasmussen and Williams,
2005], Random Forests [Breiman, 2001] or Bayesian Neural Networks [Wang and Yeung, 2020],
among many others, but these models generally provide inaccurate prediction bands: coverage guarantees typically hold asymptotically or with strong distributional assumptions. In practice, however,
especially for high-stakes decisions, we should at least provide marginal coverage guarantees that
hold in finite sample and without making any distributional assumptions on the data. In addition, a
desirable feature is adaptivity: we would like prediction bands to be wide when either the model lacks
confidence or if the variability in the data is high, and narrow when both the model is confident and
the variability is low. Having adaptive prediction bands means having an uncertainty quantification
that is informative on either the performance of the model or the variability of the data, which is key
in crucial applications.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

