MemEIC: A Step Toward Continual and
Compositional Knowledge Editing

Jin Seong1,∗ , Jiyun Park1‡,2,∗ , Wencke Liermann1 , Hongseok Choi1
Yoonji Nam1‡,3 , Hyun Kim1 , Soojong Lim1 , Namhoon Lee2,†
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Republic of Korea1
POSTECH2 , Sungkyunkwan University, Korea3
{real_castle, wliermann, hongking9, h.kim, isj}@etri.re.kr
{jiyun.park, namhoon.lee}@postech.ac.kr
seinundzeit@g.skku.edu

Abstract
The dynamic nature of information necessitates continuously updating large visionlanguage models (LVLMs). While recent knowledge editing techniques hint at
promising directions, they often focus on editing a single modality (vision or language) in isolation. This prevalent practice neglects the inherent multimodality of
LVLMs and the continuous nature of knowledge updates, potentially leading to
suboptimal editing outcomes when considering the interplay between modalities
and the need for ongoing knowledge refinement. To address these limitations, we
propose MemEIC, a novel method for Continual and Compositional Knowledge
Editing (CCKE) in LVLMs. MemEIC enables compositional editing of both visual
and textual knowledge sequentially. Our approach employs a hybrid externalinternal editor featuring a dual external memory for cross-modal evidence retrieval
and dual LoRA adapters that facilitate disentangled parameter updates for each
modality. A key component is a brain-inspired knowledge connector, activated
selectively for compositional reasoning, that integrates information across different modalities. Experiments demonstrate that MemEIC significantly improves
performance on complex multimodal questions and effectively preserves prior
edits, setting a new benchmark for CCKE in LVLMs. Our project is available at
https://github.com/MemEIC/MemEIC.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1–3] can be knowledge edited—that is, updated to incorporate new
or corrected facts—without retraining from scratch [4–6]. This capability is crucial to keep LLMs
up-to-date with evolving information or correcting errors on the fly. Large vision–language models
(LVLMs) [7–9] combine textual and visual understanding, making knowledge editing even more
challenging. These models encode factual knowledge in both their textual and visual pathways, and
require mechanisms to update both modalities’ knowledge consistently. Efficiently editing LVLMs
is crucial for real-world applications, such as swiftly correcting critical visual recognition errors
(e.g., misidentifying Donald Trump as Boris Johnson as shown in Fig. 1(a)). However, research in
multimodal knowledge editing remains scarce compared to the extensive studies in textual LLMs.
* Equal Contribution.
†
‡

Corresponding Author.
Work partially done during an internship at ETRI.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

