PolyVivid: Vivid Multi-Subject Video Generation
with Cross-Modal Interaction and Enhancement
Teng Hu1∗ Zhentao Yu2∗ Zhengguang Zhou2 Jiangning Zhang3
Yuan Zhou2 Qinglin Lu2 Ran Yi1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tencent Hunyuan 3 Zhejiang University
Project page:

https://sjtuplayer.github.io/projects/PolyVivid

A woman wearing a white tank top is holding an iPhone.

A young girl is holding a roasted duck.

A panda playing happily with a dog on the grass.

A goose is fighting with a dog.

A man is waling with an old woman hand in hand on the road.

A man is hugging with a woman on the beach.

A man is drinking coffe on the sofa.

A person riding on a tiger, holding an umbrella.

Figure 1: PolyVivid generates high-quality customized videos from multiple subject images and a
text prompt, which ensures a high subject similarity and good subject interaction speciﬁed by text.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in video generation, existing models still lack ﬁnegrained controllability, especially for multi-subject customization with consistent
identity and interaction. In this paper, we propose PolyVivid, a multi-subject video
customization framework that enables ﬂexible and identity-consistent generation.
To establish accurate correspondences between subject images and textual entities,
we design a VLLM-based text-image fusion module that embeds visual identities
into the textual space for precise grounding. To further enhance identity preservation and subject interaction, we propose a 3D-RoPE-based enhancement module
that enables structured bidirectional fusion between text and image embeddings.
Moreover, we develop an attention-inherited identity injection module to effectively inject fused identity features into the video generation process, mitigating
identity drift. Finally, we construct an MLLM-based data pipeline that combines
MLLM-based grounding, segmentation, and a clique-based subject consolidation
strategy to produce high-quality multi-subject data, effectively enhancing subject
distinction and reducing ambiguity in downstream video generation. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that PolyVivid achieves superior performance in identity
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

