MuRating: A High Quality Data Selecting Approach
to Multilingual Large Language Model Pretraining

Zhixun Chen1∗ Ping Guo2 Wenhan Han3 Yifan Zhang2 Binbin Liu2
Haobin Lin2 Fengze Liu2 Yan Zhao2 Bingni Zhang2 Taifeng Wang2
Yin Zheng2, † Trevor Cohn4 Meng Fang5, 3, †
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 ByteDance
3
Eindhoven University of Technology 4 University of Melbourne 5 University of Liverpool

Abstract
Data quality is a critical driver of large language model performance, yet existing
model-based selection methods focus almost exclusively on English, neglecting
other languages that are essential in the training mix for multilingual LLMs. We
introduce MuRating, a scalable framework that transfers high-quality English dataquality signals into a multilingual autorater, capable of handling 17 languages.
MuRating aggregates multiple English autoraters via pairwise comparisons to
learn unified document quality scores, then projects these judgments through
translation to train a multilingual evaluator on monolingual, cross-lingual, and
parallel text pairs. Applied to web data, MuRating selects balanced subsets of
English and multilingual content to pretrain LLaMA-architecture models of 1.2B
and 7B parameters. Compared to strong baselines, including QuRater, FineWeb2HQ, AskLLM, DCLM, our approach increases average accuracy on both English
benchmarks and multilingual evaluations. Extensive analyses further validate that
pairwise training provides greater stability and robustness than pointwise scoring,
underscoring the effectiveness of MuRating as a general multilingual data-selection
framework.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks,
and recent studies have consistently emphasized the critical role of high-quality pretraining data in
driving these advances [5, 51, 7]. To improve data quality, various strategies have been adopted,
such as deduplication [31, 1], heuristic and rule-based filtering [51, 45], and domain-aware sampling
[65, 54]. While effective, these methods often rely heavily on manual heuristics and domain expertise,
lacking a unified or principled framework for evaluating and selecting pretraining data. Moreover,
they are typically applied as pre-defined or post-hoc filters, limiting their adaptability to downstream
performance. In response, model-based data selection approaches have emerged, aiming to learn data
quality judgments from examples or auxiliary supervision. These methods utilize different model
architectures and data selection criteria. For instance, DCLM [33] trains a FastText classifier [27]
using high-quality samples from OH2.5 and Reddit ELI5 as positive supervision, while treating
Common Crawl web data as negatives. Other approaches such as AskLLM [52], QuRater [64], and
the FineWeb-Edu [38] classifier employ prompt-based evaluation criteria using various LLMs to
assess the quality of input samples.
∗
Work done during Zhixun’s internship at ByteDance. Yin Zheng is the tech lead of multilingual LLM
pretrain project at ByteDance.
†
Corresponding Authors. Emails: yzheng3xg@gmail.com and Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

