Zero-Shot Detection of LLM-Generated Text via
Implicit Reward Model

Runheng Liu, Heyan Huang, Xingchen Xiao, Zhijing Wu∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{rhliu,hhy63,xcxiao,zhijingwu}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across
various tasks. However, their ability to generate human-like text has raised concerns about potential misuse. This underscores the need for reliable and effective
methods to detect LLM-generated text. In this paper, we propose IRM, a novel
zero-shot approach that leverages Implicit Reward Models for LLM-generated
text detection. Such implicit reward models can be derived from publicly available instruction-tuned and base models. Previous reward-based method relies
on preference construction and task-specific fine-tuning. In comparison, IRM
requires neither preference collection nor additional training. We evaluate IRM
on the DetectRL benchmark and demonstrate that IRM can achieve superior detection performance, outperforms existing zero-shot and supervised methods in
LLM-generated text detection.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various tasks
[1, 2]. In particular, their ability to follow instructions and generate human-like content has made
them essential tools in various real-world applications. However, this trend raises concerns about the
misuse of LLMs, such as generating fake news [3] and plagiarism [4]. Since LLM-generated text can
be indistinguishable from human-written text [5], it is necessary to develop effective methods for
detecting such content.
Detection methods can generally be categorized into two paradigms: supervised and zero-shot
approaches. Supervised methods typically train a classifier using both human-written and LLMgenerated texts. However, such classifiers often fail to generalize well to texts generated by unseen
LLMs [6, 7]. In contrast, zero-shot methods provide an alternative with more generalization ability
and without the need for training [8]. These methods leverage various LLMs and exploit statistical
classification metrics to assess how likely a text is to be generated by an LLM, such as the average log
likelihood or the log-rank of each tokens within the detected text [9, 10, 5]. However, in real-world
the source LLM of the detected text is often unknown, thus these zero-shot methods have to rely on a
proxy LLM and suffer from a performance drop. This highlights the need to identify model-agnostic
metrics for detection.
ReMoDetect [11] has recently proposed using the reward score—the output of a reward model
that measures the extent to which a text aligns with human values—as a detection metric. The
rationale is that powerful LLMs are typically trained to obtain high reward score, making this signal
potentially model-agnostic. Specifically, ReMoDetect constructs a preference dataset from human
and ChatGPT responses to the same prompt, and fine-tunes a pre-trained reward model for adaptation
to the detection task. However, this fine-tuning inherits the drawbacks of supervised methods. As
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

