Small Batch Size Training for Language Models:
When Vanilla SGD Works, and Why Gradient
Accumulation Is Wasteful
Martin Marek
New York University
martin.m@nyu.edu

Sanae Lotfi
New York University

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Aditya Somasundaram
Columbia University

Micah Goldblum
Columbia University

Abstract
Conventional wisdom dictates that small batch sizes make language model pretraining and fine-tuning unstable, motivating gradient accumulation, which trades off
the number of optimizer steps for a proportional increase in batch size. While it is
common to decrease the learning rate for smaller batch sizes, other hyperparameters
are often held fixed. In this work, we revisit small batch sizes all the way down to
batch size one, and we propose a rule for scaling Adam hyperparameters to small
batch sizes. In particular, rather than holding the decay rate of the second moment
fixed across batch sizes, we propose to hold its half-life fixed in terms of tokens.
We find that small batch sizes (1) train stably, (2) are consistently more robust to
hyperparameter choices, (3) achieve equal or better per-FLOP performance than
larger batch sizes, and (4) notably enable stable language model training with
vanilla SGD, even without momentum, despite storing no optimizer state. Building
on these results, we provide practical recommendations for selecting a batch size
and setting optimizer hyperparameters. We further recommend against gradient
accumulation unless training on multiple devices with multiple model replicas.
Finally, we show that a small batch size combined with an optimizer with a small
state size can provide the performance benefits of full fine-tuning while maintaining
a similar memory footprint to LoRA.

1

Introduction

Large batch sizes are widely believed to improve the stability of language model training [1, 2, 3, 4].
As a consequence, sophisticated optimizers that perform well in large-batch training are increasingly
standard practice [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. In fact, it is common to simulate batch sizes even larger than the
maximum batch size that fits into device memory through gradient accumulation [4, 3, 11, 12].
In small batch size pretraining experiments, one may observe loss spikes and heavy instability
[13, 14, 15, 16]. While it is common to decrease the learning rate for smaller batch sizes, other
hyperparameters, such as the decay rates for the first and second moments in Adam (β1 and β2 ), are
often held fixed across batch sizes. We show that if instead of holding β2 fixed, we hold the half-life
of β2 fixed (measured in number of tokens), stable training is possible all the way down to batch size
one, as illustrated in Figure 1a.
When scaling hyperparameters in this way, we find that small batch sizes can confer computational
advantages and greater robustness. In the small batch regime, we observe that the speed of convergence is less sensitive to optimizer hyperparameters like the learning rate, and momentum becomes
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

