A Closer Look at Graph Transformers:
Cross-Aggregation and Beyond

Jiaming Zhuo1 , Ziyi Ma1 , Yintong Lu1 , Yuwei Liu1 , Kun Fu1 , Di Jin2 ,
Chuan Wang3 , Wenning Wu4 , Zhen Wang4 , Xiaochun Cao5 , Liang Yang1∗
1
Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Calculation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing JiaoTong University, Beijing, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
5
School of Cyber Science and Technology,
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
jiaming.zhuo@outlook.com, zyma@hebut.edu.cn,
{202332803037, 202322802030}@stu.hebut.edu.cn, fukun@hebut.edu.cn,
jindi@tju.edu.cn, wangchuan@iie.ac.cn, wuwenning@nwpu.edu.cn,
w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yangliang@vip.qq.com

Abstract
Graph Transformers (GTs), which effectively capture long-range dependencies and
structural biases simultaneously, have recently emerged as promising alternatives
to traditional Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Advanced approaches for GTs to
leverage topology information involve integrating GNN modules or modulating
node attributes using positional encodings. Unfortunately, the underlying mechanism driving their effectiveness remains insufficiently understood. In this paper, we
revisit these strategies and uncover a shared underlying mechanism—Cross Aggregation—that effectively captures the interaction between graph topology and node
attributes. Building on this insight, we propose the Universal Graph Cross-attention
Transformer (UGCFormer), a universal GT framework with linear computational
complexity. The idea is to interactively learn the representations of graph topology
and node attributes through a linearized Dual Cross-attention (DCA) module. In
theory, this module can adaptively capture interactions between these two types of
graph information, thereby achieving effective aggregation. To alleviate overfitting
arising from the dual-channel design, we introduce a consistency constraint that
enforces representational alignment. Extensive evaluations on multiple benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of UGCFormer.

1

Introduction

Node classification, aimed at accurately predicting node categories based on the graph topology and
node attributes, is a fundamental task in identifying the properties of individual nodes [12, 18, 14, 32,
11, 10]. As a powerful class of models for fusing topology and attribute information in graphs, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved initial successes in this task [29, 5, 52, 24, 22, 25]. In general,
they follow the graph-bound Message Passing (MP) paradigm [16]. While this paradigm endows
GNNs with the localizing property, it also restricts their ability to capture long-range dependencies
[9], resulting in well-known challenges such as over-smoothing [6, 59] and over-squashing [17].
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

