VPO: Reasoning Preferences Optimization Based on
V-Usable Information
B

B

Zecheng Wang1,2* , Chunshan Li1 , Yupeng Zhang2* , Han Liu3 , Bingning Wang2 , Dianhui Chu1 ,
B
and Dianbo Sui1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology
2
WeChat, Tencent Inc
3
Tsinghua University

zechengwang@stu.hit.edu.cn
{lics,chudh,suidianbo}@hit.edu.cn
{xfelixzhang,danialwang}@tencent.com,
han-liu18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) is a widely used preference optimization
algorithm in large language model (LLM) alignment, which reparameterizes the
reward function in reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) without
requiring a separate reward model. However, during the DPO training process,
when a large negative gradient is applied to low-confidence samples, LLMs with a
softmax output head tend to squeeze the confidence in the model’s output distribution towards the highest-confidence sentence, which may lead to a decrease in
the confidence of both preference and non-preference samples, while increasing
the confidence of unrelated tokens. This phenomenon becomes more complex in
reasoning tasks. In this work, focusing on reasoning tasks, we propose VPO, a
negative gradient constraint method for human non-preference samples based on
V-usable information. By using V-usable information to measure the similarity
between preference pairs and selectively constrain the negative gradient, VPO
can alleviate the squeezing effect of DPO, enhance alignment with the generation
objective, and maintain the model’s ability to distinguish between preference and
non-preference samples. We compare VPO with DPO and its latest variants on
mathematical reasoning tasks using the LLama 3.1 and Qwen 2.5 series, including
both Base and Instruct models. Our results demonstrate that VPO consistently and
significantly outperforms existing methods. Specifically, on Qwen2.5-7B-Base,
VPO achieves 7.80% and 13.25% improvement over DPO on MATH500 and
AMC23, respectively. We also conduct ablation experiments and in-depth analysis
on VPO to explain its effectiveness and rationale.

1

Introduction

Recently, large language models (LLMs) have undergone rapid iteration and evolution, attracting
widespread attention across various industries, such as finance, healthcare, and education [9, 26, 4, 38,
31]. Post-training has emerged as a critical phase in the LLM training pipeline, serving to align model
outputs with human values and preferences, ensuring their safety and impartiality, and enhancing
reasoning reliability. Preference optimization, as a post-training alignment method, has been shown
to be more advantageous than simple supervised fine-tuning in aligning with human preferences.
This work was supported by Tencent Inc, China.
*Equal contribution. B Corresponding authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

