KVL INK: Accelerating Large Language Models via
Efficient KV Cache Reuse
Jingbo Yang∗
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
jingbo@ucsb.edu

Bairu Hou∗
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
bairu@ucsb.edu

Wei Wei
Center for Advanced AI
Accenture
wei.h.wei@accenture.com

Yujia Bao
Center for Advanced AI
Accenture
yujia.bao@accenture.com

Shiyu Chang
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
chang87@ucsb.edu

Abstract
We describe KVL INK, an approach for efficient key-value (KV) cache reuse in
large language models (LLMs). In many LLM applications, different inputs can
share overlapping context, such as the same retrieved document appearing in
multiple queries. However, the LLMs still need to encode the entire context for
each query, leading to redundant computation. In this paper, we investigate a new
strategy to eliminate such inefficiency, where the KV cache of each document is
precomputed independently. During inference, the KV caches of retrieved documents are concatenated, allowing the model to reuse cached representations instead
of recomputing them. To mitigate the performance degradation when using KV
caches computed independently for each document, KVL INK introduces two key
techniques: adjusting positional embeddings of the KV cache at inference to match
the global position after concatenation, and using trainable special tokens to restore
self-attention across independently encoded documents. Experiments across 7
datasets demonstrate that KVL INK improves question answering accuracy by an
average of 4% over state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, by leveraging precomputed KV caches, our approach reduces time-to-first-token by up to 96% compared
to standard LLM inference, making it a scalable and efficient solution for context
reuse. Additionally, KVL INK can be combined with KV cache compression to
further save cache loading and storage overhead while outperforming the baselines.
Code is available at https://github.com/UCSB-NLP-Chang/KVLink.

1

Introduction

Large language models have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a broad array of applications—many of which involve processing contexts naturally divided into multiple segments. For
example, in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [1–3], each retrieved document forms a distinct
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

