F LUX: Efficient Descriptor-Driven Clustered Federated
Learning under Arbitrary Distribution Shifts

Dario Fenoglio∗
Università della Svizzera italiana
Lugano, Switzerland
dario.fenoglio@usi.ch

Mohan Li∗
Università della Svizzera italiana
Lugano, Switzerland
mohan.li@usi.ch

Pietro Barbiero
IBM Research
Zurich, Switzerland
pietro.barbiero@ibm.com

Nicholas D. Lane
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
ndl32@cam.ac.uk

Marc Langheinrich
Università della Svizzera italiana
Lugano, Switzerland
marc.langheinrich@usi.ch

Martin Gjoreski
Università della Svizzera italiana
Lugano, Switzerland
martin.gjoreski@usi.ch

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative model training across multiple
clients while preserving data privacy. Traditional FL methods often use a global
model to fit all clients, assuming that clients’ data are independent and identically
distributed (IID). However, when this assumption does not hold, the global model
accuracy may drop significantly, limiting FL applicability in real-world scenarios.
To address this gap, we propose F LUX, a novel clustering-based FL (CFL) framework that addresses the four most common types of distribution shifts during both
training and test time. To this end, F LUX leverages privacy-preserving client-side
descriptor extraction and unsupervised clustering to ensure robust performance and
scalability across varying levels and types of distribution shifts. Unlike existing
CFL methods addressing non-IID client distribution shifts, F LUX i) does not require
any prior knowledge of the types of distribution shifts or the number of client clusters, and ii) supports test-time adaptation, enabling unseen and unlabeled clients
to benefit from the most suitable cluster-specific models. Extensive experiments
across four standard benchmarks, two real-world datasets and ten state-of-theart baselines show that F LUX improves performance and stability under diverse
distribution shifts—achieving an average accuracy gain of up to 23 percentage
points over the best-performing baselines—while maintaining computational and
communication overhead comparable to FedAvg.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [1–4] is a distributed and privacy-preserving Machine Learning (ML)
paradigm that enables multiple isolated clients to collaboratively train models without sharing their
private local data. Traditional FL methods often use a global model to fit all clients’ data [1, 5, 6],
assuming that clients’ data are independent and identically distributed (IID). However, this assumption
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

