Informed Correctors for Discrete Diffusion Models
Yixiu Zhao
Stanford University
yixiuz@stanford.edu

Jiaxin Shi
Google DeepMind
ishijiaxin@gmail.com

Feng Chen
Stanford University
fengc@stanford.edu

Shaul Druckmann
Stanford University
shauld@stanford.edu

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research New England
lmackey@microsoft.com

Scott Linderman
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Discrete diffusion has emerged as a powerful framework for generative modeling in
discrete domains, yet efficiently sampling from these models remains challenging.
Existing sampling strategies often struggle to balance computation and sample
quality when the number of sampling steps is reduced, even when the model
has learned the data distribution well. To address these limitations, we propose
a predictor-corrector sampling scheme where the corrector is informed by the
diffusion model to more reliably counter the accumulating approximation errors.
To further enhance the effectiveness of our informed corrector, we introduce
complementary architectural modifications based on hollow transformers and a
simple tailored training objective that leverages more training signal. We use a
synthetic example to illustrate the failure modes of existing samplers and show how
informed correctors alleviate these problems. On the text8 and tokenized ImageNet
256 × 256 datasets, our informed corrector consistently produces superior samples
with fewer errors or improved FID scores for discrete diffusion models. These
results underscore the potential of informed correctors for fast and high-fidelity
generation using discrete diffusion. Our code is available at https://github.
com/lindermanlab/informed-correctors.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models are powerful generative models for high-dimensional data [1–3]. The
central idea of diffusion models is to gradually corrupt data into noise using a “noising” or “forward”
process and then to train a parameterized model (usually a deep neural network) to learn its time
reversal, commonly known as the “denoising” or “backward” process. In continuous domains like
image generation, the forward process is usually defined by gradual injection of Gaussian noise and
scaling that transform the data distribution into a standard normal. The backward process is then
approximated by learning the gradient of the log density (also known as the “score function”) of the
marginal distribution. To draw samples from a trained model, one first generates Gaussian noise
and then simulates the backward process using the score information. Diffusion generative models
are currently the dominant framework for image generation, and they can generate high-resolution
images with stunning details given prompts from a user [4, 5].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

