Towards Graph Foundation Models:
Training on Knowledge Graphs Enables
Transferability to General Graphs

†

Kai Wang† , Siqiang Luo†∗, Caihua Shan‡ , Yifei Shen‡ ,
Nanyang Technological University ‡ Microsoft Research Asia
†
kai_wang@ntu.edu.sg, siqiang.luo@ntu.edu.sg
‡
caihuashan@microsoft.com, yifeishen@microsoft.com

Abstract
Inspired by the success of large language models, there is a trend toward developing
graph foundation models to conduct diverse downstream tasks in various domains.
However, current models often require extra fine-tuning to apply their learned
structural and semantic representations to new graphs, which limits their versatility.
Recent breakthroughs in zero-shot inductive reasoning on knowledge graphs (KGs),
offer us a new perspective on extending KG reasoning to general graph applications.
In this paper, we introduce SCR, a unified graph reasoning framework designed
to train on knowledge graphs and effectively generalize across a wide range of
graph tasks and domains. We begin by designing the task-specific KG structures to
establish a unified topology for different task formats. Then we propose semanticconditioned message passing, a novel mechanism addressing the inherent semantic
isolation in traditional KG reasoning, by jointly modeling structural and semantic
invariance patterns in graph representations. Evaluated on 38 diverse datasets
spanning node-, link-, and graph-level tasks, SCR achieves substantial performance
gains over existing foundation models and supervised baselines, demonstrating
its remarkable efficacy and adaptability. Our source code is available on https:
//github.com/KyneWang/SCR.

1

Introduction

In pursuit of artificial general intelligence, graph foundation models (GFMs) are designed to pretrain
on large-scale graph data, learn generalizable representations, and adapt them to a wide range of
downstream tasks [39, 36]. However, most GFMs still face challenges, including format mismatches
between pretraining objectives and downstream tasks, and semantic discrepancies between source
and target datasets. As a result, extensive fine-tuning is often required.
In contrast to homogeneous or heterophilic graphs, which define a single relation among nodes,
knowledge graphs capture complex, multi-relational connections among entities. The most common
task is KG reasoning, which involves learning embeddings of entities and relations to infer missing
components in triples (head entity, relation, tail entity) [1, 54]. Moving beyond traditional transductive
knowledge graph (KG) reasoning, recent work [17, 8] explores zero-shot inductive reasoning. This
paradigm learns relation and entity representations conditioned on the graph structure, enabling
generalization to unseen KGs and the inference of entirely new entities and relations without any
fine-tuning. [66].
Inspired by these breakthroughs, we improve the topological transferability of GFMs from a novel
perspective: pre-training on knowledge graphs using inductive reasoning as the training objective,
∗

The Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

