Policy Compatible Skill Incremental Learning
via Lazy Learning Interface

Daehee Lee♠ Dongsu Lee♢ TaeYoon Kwack♠ Wonje Choi♠ Honguk Woo♠∗
♠
Sungkyunkwan University ♢ University of Texas at Austin
dulgi7245@skku.edu, hwoo@skku.edu

Abstract
Skill Incremental Learning (SIL) is the process by which an embodied agent expands and refines its skill set over time by leveraging experience gained through
interaction with its environment or by the integration of additional data. SIL facilitates efficient acquisition of hierarchical policies grounded in reusable skills for
downstream tasks. However, as the skill repertoire evolves, it can disrupt compatibility with existing skill-based policies, limiting their reusability and generalization.
In this work, we propose SIL-C, a novel framework that ensures skill-policy compatibility, allowing improvements in incrementally learned skills to enhance the
performance of downstream policies without requiring policy re-training or structural adaptation. SIL-C employs a bilateral lazy learning-based mapping technique
to dynamically align the subtask space referenced by policies with the skill space
decoded into agent behaviors. This enables each subtask, derived from the policy’s
decomposition of a complex task, to be executed by selecting an appropriate skill
based on trajectory distribution similarity. We evaluate SIL-C across diverse SIL
scenarios and demonstrate that it maintains compatibility between evolving skills
and downstream policies while ensuring efficiency throughout the learning process.
Source code: https://github.com/L2dulgi/SIL-C

1

Introduction

Lifelong embodied agents must continuously integrate novel knowledge from unceasing streams of
data into their evolving skill library while simultaneously leveraging previously acquired skills [1–4].
Skill Incremental Learning (SIL) supports this process by enabling agents to expand and refine
their skill sets over time through continual interaction with the environment or integration of new
data. Accordingly, SIL often aims to facilitate the development of hierarchical policies grounded in
reusable skills for downstream tasks [5–7].
Recent research explores diverse formulations of SIL, such as modular skill composition [8–11],
continual adaptation [12–14], and hierarchical policy learning [15, 16] to support scalable embodied
agents. Yet, a critical challenge remains underexplored; as skills evolve over time, maintaining
compatibility with downstream policies that depend on those skills becomes increasingly difficult [17–
20]. Without proper alignment, updated skills may invalidate previously learned policies, limiting
their reusability and generalization [21–24].
Figure 1 illustrates a policy-compatible SIL scenario involving two types of skill-policy compatibility:
(i) Forward Skill Compatibility (FwSC), which ensures that a newly added skill can be effectively
utilized during the training of future downstream policies, and (ii) Backward Skill Compatibility
(BwSC), which ensures that existing downstream policies can continue to use newly added or updated
skills without requiring re-training, and, when applicable, benefit from improved policy performance.
∗

Corresponding author: Honguk Woo (hwoo@skku.edu)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

