Antidistillation Sampling

Yash Savani∗ Asher Trockman∗ Zhili Feng Yixuan Even Xu
Avi Schwarzschild Alexander Robey Marc Finzi J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
https://antidistillation.com

Abstract
Frontier models that generate extended reasoning traces inadvertently produce
token sequences that can facilitate model distillation. Recognizing this vulnerability, model owners may seek sampling strategies that limit the effectiveness
of distillation without compromising model performance. Antidistillation sampling provides exactly this capability. By strategically modifying a model’s
next-token probability distribution, antidistillation sampling poisons reasoning
traces, rendering them significantly less effective for distillation while preserving
the model’s utility. Our code is available at https://github.com/locuslab/
antidistillation-sampling.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) trained to produce reasoning traces have achieved strong performance
on math, coding, and reasoning benchmarks [1–3]. These traces, however, serve a dual purpose. They
not only enhance model performance, but also enable distillation, a process by which a secondary
model replicates the original model’s capabilities by training on its generations [4–6]. Notably,
distillation can result in substantial capability gains at a fraction of the computational cost needed to
train similarly performant models from scratch.
While effective and efficient, the viability of distillation poses several downsides for companies
deploying frontier reasoning models. First, returning reasoning traces represents a forfeiture of
intellectual property, which can allow competitors to cheaply replicate frontier capabilities. Second,
the threat of distillation incentivizes limiting user access by obscuring token probabilities or truncating
reasoning traces. Finally, model safety is often not preserved by distillation, which enables the
generation of harmful content [7, 8].
To address these issues, we introduce antidistillation sampling (see Figure 1). The main idea
underpinning antidistillation sampling is to adjust a model’s sampling distribution so that generated
traces maintain high likelihood under the unadjusted distribution, and distillation attempts are
simultaneously poisoned. To operationalize this idea, we first formulate the general problem of
poisoning reasoning models trained via distillation. We then derive one solution to this problem
(see Algorithm 1), which facilitates a precise trade-off between two competing objectives—the
utility of the original model and the effectiveness of distillation poisoning—while incurring minimal
computational overhead.
To illustrate our empirical results, consider a reasoning model that achieves 72% accuracy on MMLU.
Naively distilling this model using greedy sampling can produce a student that reaches up to 52%
accuracy. If the teacher model increases its sampling temperature, its accuracy slightly decreases
(e.g., by 4%), yet the distilled student’s accuracy remains largely unchanged at 52%. In contrast,
∗

Equal contribution. Contact: {ysavani,ashert}@cs.cmu.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

