Planning and Learning in Average Risk-aware MDPs

1

Weikai Wang1,2
Erick Delage1,2
2
GERAD & HEC Montréal
Mila - Québec AI Institute
{weikai.wang, erick.delage}@hec.ca

Abstract
For continuing tasks, average cost Markov decision processes have welldocumented value and can be solved using efficient algorithms. However, it explicitly assumes that the agent is risk-neutral. In this work, we extend risk-neutral
algorithms to accommodate the more general class of dynamic risk measures.
Specifically, we propose a relative value iteration (RVI) algorithm for planning and
design two model-free Q-learning algorithms, namely a generic algorithm based
on the multi-level Monte Carlo (MLMC) method, and an off-policy algorithm dedicated to utility-based shortfall risk measures. Both the RVI and MLMC-based Qlearning algorithms are proven to converge to optimality. Numerical experiments
validate our analysis, confirm empirically the convergence of the off-policy algorithm, and demonstrate that our approach enables the identification of policies that
are finely tuned to the intricate risk-awareness of the agent that they serve.

1

Introduction

For continuing tasks where there is a need to optimize a long term periodic payoff, such as network
control, supply chain designs, or maintenance problems (Puterman, 1994), average cost (or reward)
Markov decision processes (MDPs) serve as a crucial model in reinforcement learning (Sutton and
Barto, 2018; Naik et al., 2019) and can be solved using efficient algorithms. In the risk-neutral
setting, different forms of value iteration algorithms co-exist (Puterman, 1994; Bertsekas, 2007) and
some have been extended to a model-free setting using Q-learning style algorithms (Abounadi et al.,
2001; Wan et al., 2021). The question of how to formulate and solve average-cost MDPs however
becomes challenging when the agent is considered risk sensitive. It originates from the pioneering
work of Howard and Matheson (1972) and is covered in recent surveys such as Biswas and Borkar
(2023) and Bäuerle and Jaskiewicz (2024).
This work focuses on average risk-aware MDPs, a general formulation introduced in Shen et al.
(2013) that attempts to find a policy π that minimizes the long-term average of the risk of the cost
process generated by π. While the theoretical foundations of this framework are well studied, finding efficient solution techniques to these problems remains a challenging task. To solve the average
risk-aware MDP problem, one can apply the classic value iteration algorithm (Cavazos-Cadena and
Montes-de Oca, 2003; Ruszczyński, 2010; Shen et al., 2015). This approach relies on the iteration
of the risk-aware Bellman operator and computes the average to obtain the optimal average risk.
However, it is known to suffer from overflow issues when the number of iterations is large. In the
risk-neutral setting, the relative value iteration (RVI) algorithm is widely used (Bertsekas, 2007;
Gupta et al., 2015), as it mitigates overflow issues during long iterations by subtracting a reference
value for each state at every step. However, while some studies have explored RVI algorithms based
on the entropic risk measure (Borkar, 2010; Arapostathis and Borkar, 2019; Hmedi et al., 2023), a
general formulation of the RVI algorithm for risk-aware MDPs remains missing in the literature.
Meanwhile, in practical applications, the environment is rarely known in full, highlighting the importance of developing model-free learning algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, extensions
of the risk-neutral Q-learning algorithms to the average risk-aware setting appear to only exist for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

