Black-Box Membership Inference Attack for LVLMs
via Prior Knowledge-Calibrated Memory Probing
Jinhua Yin1∗, Peiru Yang1∗, Chen Yang2 , Huili Wang1 , Zhiyang Hu3 ,
Shangguang Wang2 , Yongfeng Huang1 , Tao Qi2†
1

2

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Xinjiang University
taoqi.qt@gmail.com

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) derive their capabilities from extensive
training on vast corpora of visual and textual data. Empowered by large-scale
parameters, these models often exhibit strong memorization of their training data,
rendering them susceptible to membership inference attacks (MIAs). Existing MIA
methods for LVLMs typically operate under white- or gray-box assumptions, by
extracting likelihood-based features for the suspected data samples based on the
target LVLMs. However, mainstream LVLMs generally only expose generated
outputs while concealing internal computational features during inference, limiting
the applicability of these methods. In this work, we propose the first black-box MIA
framework for LVLMs, based on a prior knowledge-calibrated memory probing
mechanism. The core idea is to assess the model memorization of the private
semantic information embedded within the suspected image data, which is unlikely
to be inferred from general world knowledge alone. We conducted extensive
experiments across four LVLMs and three datasets. Empirical results demonstrate
that our method effectively identifies training data of LVLMs in a purely black-box
setting and even achieves performance comparable to gray-box and white-box
methods. Further analysis reveals the robustness of our method against potential
adversarial manipulations, and the effectiveness of the methodology designs. Our
code and data are available at https://github.com/spmede/KCMP.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of large vision-language models (LVLMs) [1–3] has profoundly reshaped
multimodal understanding, enabling significant breakthroughs in a wide array of real-world applications [4–7]. These models are typically trained on vast corpora of multimodal data comprising
both textual and visual components [8, 9]. However, the large-scale and often indiscriminate data
collection practices involved in developing LVLMs may inadvertently include sensitive information,
such as personally identifiable data or proprietary visual content, thereby raising serious concerns
about data right infringement [10–13]. Membership inference attacks (MIAs) [14–17] have emerged
as a well-established technique in machine learning research. MIAs are designed to determine
whether a specific data sample was a member of the training dataset of a target machine learning
model. Therefore, extending MIA methodologies to LVLMs represents a promising direction for
safeguarding user rights by detecting potential unauthorized use of visual data during model training.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

