Activated LoRA: Fine-tuned LLMs for Intrinsics
Kristjan Greenewald, Luis Lastras, Thomas Parnell, Vraj Shah, Lucian Popa, Giulio Zizzo,
Chulaka Gunasekara, Ambrish Rawat, David Cox
IBM Research

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as a highly efficient framework for
finetuning the weights of large foundation models, and has become the go-to
method for data-driven customization of LLMs. Despite the promise of highly
customized behaviors and capabilities, switching between relevant LoRAs in a
multiturn setting is inefficient, as the key-value (KV) cache of the entire turn
history must be recomputed with the LoRA weights before generation can begin. To
address this problem, we propose Activated LoRA (aLoRA), an adapter architecture
which modifies the LoRA framework to only adapt weights for the tokens in the
sequence after the aLoRA is invoked. This change crucially allows aLoRA to
accept the base model’s KV cache of the input string, meaning that aLoRA can
be instantly activated whenever needed in a chain without recomputing the prior
keys and values. This enables building what we call intrinsics, i.e. specialized
models invoked to perform well-defined operations on portions of an input chain
or conversation that otherwise uses the base model by default. We train a set of
aLoRA-based intrinsics models, demonstrating competitive accuracy with standard
LoRA while significantly improving inference efficiency. We contributed our
Activated LoRA implementation to the Huggingface PEFT library.1

1

Introduction

The rapid adoption of large language models (LLMs) has catalyzed significant advancements in
natural language processing tasks, from text generation to knowledge extraction. However, adapting
these models to specific tasks or domains often demands finetuning their immense parameter space,
a process that is computationally expensive and difficult to scale. Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)[13]
has addressed these challenges by introducing a parameter-efficient method for fine-tuning [12],
enabling highly customized model behavior without the need to retrain or modify the entire model.
By optimizing a small subset of low-rank matrices, LoRA has emerged as a widely-used lightweight
and effective alternative for task-specific customization [25], particularly for large foundation models
such as LLMs, and popular LoRA finetuning services are offered by both corporate and open-source
LLM providers [26, 36, 28]. While large models perhaps have less need for finetuning, small models
continue to see strong benefits from LoRA adapters [40, 5].
Motivated by this, significant work has been done to enable highly efficient serving of and inference
with LoRAs, e.g. [34, 2], with vLLM [16] incorporating and further optimizing many of these
algorithms in its popular, state-of-the-art inference engine. Yet, while LoRA excels in static or
single-task scenarios, in modern applications a wide mix of skills is typically needed, e.g. in multiturn
interactions and agentic applications [41, 44]. Crucially, LoRAs often must be carefully tuned to
avoid forgetting/degradation of performance on the wide variety of tasks the base model already
performs well on. In applications where dynamic switching between multiple specialized skills
would be advantageous (e.g. agentic or reasoning pipelines), this strategy breaks down. Additionally,
multi-task LoRA training is significantly more difficult than training a LoRA for a single task, and
1

https://github.com/huggingface/peft

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

