Neural B-frame Video Compression with
Bi-directional Reference Harmonization
Yuxi Liu1,2∗ Dengchao Jin2 Shuai Huo2† Jiawen Gu2‡
Chao Zhou2 Huihui Bai3 Ming Lu1† Zhan Ma1
1

Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China

yuxiliu@smail.nju.edu.cn, {jindengchao, huoshuai, gujiawen, zhouchao}@kuaishou.com
hhbai@bjtu.edu.cn, {minglu, mazhan}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural video compression (NVC) has made significant progress in recent years,
while neural B-frame video compression (NBVC) remains underexplored compared to P-frame compression. NBVC can adopt bi-directional reference frames
for better compression performance. However, NBVC’s hierarchical coding may
complicate continuous temporal prediction, especially at some hierarchical levels
with a large frame span, which could cause the contribution of the two reference
frames to be unbalanced. To optimize reference information utilization, we propose a novel NBVC method, termed Bi-directional Reference Harmonization
Video Compression (BRHVC), with the proposed Bi-directional Motion Converge
(BMC) and Bi-directional Contextual Fusion (BCF). BMC converges multiple
optical flows in motion compression, leading to more accurate motion compensation on a larger scale. Then BCF explicitly models the weights of reference
contexts under the guidance of motion compensation accuracy. With more efficient motions and contexts, BRHVC can effectively harmonize bi-directional
references. Experimental results indicate that our BRHVC outperforms previous
state-of-the-art NVC methods, even surpassing the traditional coding, VTM-RA
(under random access configuration), on the HEVC datasets. The source code is
released at https://github.com/kwai/NVC.

1

Introduction

Lossy video compression is a cornerstone technology in the digital era, enabling efficient storage and
transmission of overwhelming video information across modern communication systems. To support
a wide range of compression scenarios, various video coding schemes have been developed [6, 10],
with low-delay (LD) P-frame coding and random access (RA) B-frame coding being the most
prominent. These two schemes are widely used in global video coding systems.
In LD mode, only the preceding frame is referenced during each coding process. In contrast, RA
coding uses a bi-directional hierarchical coding structure, which naturally utilizes more reference
information and achieves better compression performance than LD. So RA is widely used in scenarios
where compression efficiency is more important than latency. The coding processes of LD and RA
are shown in Figure 1, within a coding scenario with an Intra Period (IP) of 4 frames, an I-frame is
∗

This work was done when Yuxi Liu was a full-time intern at Kuaishou Technology.
Corresponding author.
‡
Project leader.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

