Turbocharging Gaussian Process Inference with
Approximate Sketch-and-Project

Pratik Rathore
Stanford University
pratikr@stanford.edu

Zachary Frangella
Stanford University
zfran@stanford.edu

Sachin Garg
University of Michigan
sachg@umich.edu

Shaghayegh Fazliani
Stanford University
fazliani@stanford.edu

Michał Dereziński
University of Michigan
derezin@umich.edu

Madeleine Udell
Stanford University
udell@stanford.edu

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) play an essential role in biostatistics, scientific machine
learning, and Bayesian optimization for their ability to provide probabilistic predictions and model uncertainty. However, GP inference struggles to scale to large
datasets (which are common in modern applications), since it requires the solution
of a linear system whose size scales quadratically with the number of samples in
the dataset. We propose an approximate, distributed, accelerated sketch-and-project
algorithm (ADASAP) for solving these linear systems, which improves scalability.
We use the theory of determinantal point processes to show that the posterior mean
induced by sketch-and-project rapidly converges to the true posterior mean. In particular, this yields the first efficient, condition number-free algorithm for estimating
the posterior mean along the top spectral basis functions, showing that our approach
is principled for GP inference. ADASAP outperforms state-of-the-art solvers based
on conjugate gradient and coordinate descent across several benchmark datasets
and a large-scale Bayesian optimization task. Moreover, ADASAP scales to a dataset
with > 3 · 108 samples, a feat which has not been accomplished in the literature.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are a mainstay of modern machine learning and scientific computing, due
to their ability to provide probabilistic predictions and handle uncertainty quantification. Indeed,
GPs arise in applications spanning Bayesian optimization [Hernández-Lobato et al., 2017], genetics
[McDowell et al., 2018], health care analytics [Cheng et al., 2020], materials science [Frazier and
Wang, 2016], and partial differential equations [Chen et al., 2025].
GP inference for a dataset with n samples requires the solution of a dense n × n linear system,
which is challenging to solve at large scale. Direct methods like Cholesky decomposition require
O(n3 ) computation, limiting them to n ∼ 104 . Consequently, two main approaches have arisen for
large-scale inference: (i) exact inference based on iterative methods for solving linear systems [Wang
et al., 2019, Lin et al., 2023, 2024] and (ii) approximate inference based on inducing points and
variational methods [Titsias, 2009, Hensman et al., 2013]. The state-of-the-art approaches for largescale inference are preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) [Wang et al., 2019] and stochastic dual
descent (SDD) [Lin et al., 2024]. PCG offers strong convergence guarantees and good performance
on ill-conditioned problems, but is slow when n ∼ 106 . In contrast, SDD scales to n ≫ 106 , but
lacks strong theoretical guarantees, can slow down in the face of ill-conditioning, and introduces
a stepsize parameter which can be challenging to tune. Inducing points and variational methods
[Titsias, 2009, Hensman et al., 2013] scale to large datasets, but are often outperformed by exact
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

