Alleviating Hallucinations in Large Language Models
through Multi-Model Contrastive Decoding and
Dynamic Hallucination Detection

Chenyu Zhu♠♡ YeFeng Liu♡∗ Hao Zhang♠♡ Aowen Wang♠ Xue Yang♡
Guanhua Chen♢ Longyue Wang♡ Weihua Luo♡ Kaifu Zhang♡
♠
Zhejiang University
♡
Alibaba International Digital Commerce
♢
Southern University of Science and Technology
{cyzhu,waw}@zju.edu.cn,
fengzhi.lyf@antgroup.com

Abstract
Despite their outstanding performance in numerous applications, large language
models (LLMs) remain prone to hallucinations, generating content inconsistent
with their pretraining corpora. Currently, almost all contrastive decoding approaches alleviate hallucinations by introducing a model susceptible to hallucinations and appropriately widening the contrastive logits gap between hallucinatory
tokens and target tokens. However, although existing contrastive decoding methods
mitigate hallucinations, they lack enough confidence in the factual accuracy of the
generated content. In this work, we propose Multi-Model Contrastive Decoding
(MCD), which integrates a pretrained language model with an evil model and a
truthful model for contrastive decoding. Intuitively, a token is assigned a high
probability only when deemed potentially hallucinatory by the evil model while
being considered factual by the truthful model. This decoding strategy significantly
enhances the model’s confidence in its generated responses and reduces potential hallucinations. Furthermore, we introduce a dynamic hallucination detection
mechanism that facilitates token-by-token identification of hallucinations during
generation and a tree-based revision mechanism to diminish hallucinations further.
Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate that our MCD strategy effectively
reduces hallucinations in LLMs and outperforms state-of-the-art methods across
various benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Despite significant advancements [1, 2] in natural language generation tasks, Large Language Models
(LLMs) continue to suffer from hallucinations, generating statements inconsistent with factual
knowledge or their training corpus [3]. This problematic behavior limits their deployment in critical
domains and remains a significant research challenge [4]. Therefore, addressing hallucinations is
essential to ensure the reliability and accuracy of LLM-driven applications, especially since these
models are increasingly adopted for sensitive and high-stakes tasks.
Extensive research efforts have been dedicated to mitigating hallucinations in Large Language Models
(LLMs) [5, 6, 7, 8]. Various decoding strategies have been developed to reduce hallucinations by contrasting the outputs of pretrained LLMs with those of auxiliary models or external knowledge sources
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. These approaches attempt to alleviate hallucinatory tendencies by introducing
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

