Self-Assembling Graph Perceptrons

Jialong Chen1 B, Tong Wang1,2 B, Bowen Deng1 B, Luonan Chen3,4 B,
Zibin Zheng1 B, Chuan Chen1∗ B
1

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Texas A&M University,
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Inspired by the workings of biological brains, humans have designed artificial
neural networks (ANNs), sparking profound advancements across various fields.
However, the biological brain possesses high plasticity, enabling it to develop simple, efficient, and powerful structures to cope with complex external environments.
In contrast, the superior performance of ANNs often relies on meticulously crafted
architectures, which can make them vulnerable when handling complex inputs.
Moreover, overparameterization often characterizes the most advanced ANNs. This
paper explores the path toward building streamlined and plastic ANNs. Firstly, we
introduce the Graph Perceptron (GP), which extends the most fundamental ANN,
the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). Subsequently, we incorporate a self-assembly
mechanism on top of GP called Self-Assembling Graph Perceptron (SAGP). During training, SAGP can autonomously adjust the network’s number of neurons
and synapses and their connectivity. SAGP achieves comparable or even superior
performance with only about 5% of the size of an MLP. We also demonstrate the
SAGP’s advantages in enhancing model interpretability and feature selection.

1

Introduction

With the exceptional intelligence of the brain, humanity has created a remarkable modern civilization.
This intelligence stems from the brain’s intricate structure, resulting from long-term environmental
adaptation and natural selection. Research shows that the survival environment profoundly impacts
shaping the brain, which in turn indirectly shapes human cognitive and emotional abilities [1].
On the other hand, since the 1940s, researchers have been exploring how to simulate the behavior
of the biological brain using computers to build artificial intelligence agents. It was only in recent
decades that a framework known as artificial neural networks (ANNs) has indeed demonstrated
significant potential in this field. ANNs simulate neurons and their synaptic connections in the brain,
determining each neuron’s output by the strength of the input signals they receive.
Despite the powerful capabilities of ANNs, their design seems to deviate from the initial intent
of mimicking the biological brain. In ANNs, the number of neurons and synaptic connection
patterns are predefined, resulting in noticeable vulnerabilities when the network faces complex
environments. [2] and [3] have demonstrated, from theoretical and experimental perspectives,
respectively, the significant impact of the number of hidden layers and neurons on the ability of MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs). Moreover, modern deep models are often over-parameterized, with the
most advanced large language models reaching a parameter scale of trillions. In contrast, biological
brains continually self-assemble throughout their lifecycle, developing remarkable capabilities. For
instance, a nematode can manage all its behaviors with fewer than 500 neurons [4].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

