BetaConform: Efficient MAP Estimation of LLM
Ensemble Judgment Performance with Prior Transfer

Huaizhi Qu1 , Inyoung Choi2 , Zhen Tan3 , Song Wang4 , Sukwon Yun1 ,
Qi Long2 , Faizan Siddiqui5 , Kwonjoon Lee5 , Tianlong Chen1
1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2 University of Pennsylvania
3
Arizona State University 4 University of Virginia 5 Honda Research Institute USA
{huaizhiq, tianlong}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
LLM ensembles are widely used for LLM judges. However, how to estimate their
accuracy, especially in an efficient way, is unknown. In this paper, we present a
principled maximum a posteriori (MAP) framework for an economical and precise
estimation of the performance of LLM ensemble judgment. We first propose a
mixture of Beta-Binomial distributions to model the judgment distribution, revising
from the vanilla Binomial distribution. Next, we introduce a conformal predictiondriven approach that enables adaptive stopping during iterative sampling to balance
accuracy with efficiency. Furthermore, we design a prior transfer mechanism that
utilizes learned distributions on open-source datasets to improve estimation on
a target dataset when only scarce annotations are available. Finally, we present
BetaConform, a framework that integrates our distribution assumption, adaptive
stopping, and the prior transfer mechanism to deliver a theoretically guaranteed
distribution estimation of LLM ensemble judgment with minimum labeled samples.
BetaConform is also validated empirically. For instance, with only 10 samples
from the TruthfulQA dataset, for a Llama ensembled judge, BetaConform gauges
its performance with an error margin as small as 3.37%.

1

Introduction

With the improving performance of large lanEnsemble
Hallucination:
Wrong Judgment:
guage models (LLMs), there is a proliferation
"Elephant is the
By majority voting,
of adopting LLMs as judges for various tasks
biggest animal"
it is correct
Judge 1 Judge 2 Judge 3
[Liang et al., 2023, Yuan et al., 2024b, Zhang
How many
How many
samples
judges are
et al., 2025]. In applications of LLM judge enneeded?
correct?
sembles, the judgment distribution is critical to
Ensemble
Num.
the service quality [Chen et al., 2024, SchoenegQuestions
samples
ger et al., 2024, Qiu et al., 2025]. Many datasets
Correct
Judge 1 Judge 2 Judge 3
[Zheng et al., 2023, Zeng et al., 2023, Yuan
Judges
et al., 2024a] have been employed to evaluate
the performance of LLM judges. However, these Figure 1: In this paper, we aim to answer (1) how
datasets rely on human annotations, which are to estimate the judgment distribution of LLM enimpractical at a large scale due to the substan- semble on a dataset, and (2) how to achieve effitial time and financial costs of annotating. This cient estimation to reduce annotation effort.
challenge highlights the need of how to estimate the LLM ensemble judging performance efficiently.
In this work, we consider the following judgment distribution estimation problem:
P(# correct judgments = n | k LLMs judge sample x).
We propose an efficient method for MAP estimation of the distribution of LLM ensemble judgment
to answer two research questions shown in Figure 1.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

