LLM-DAMVC: A Large Language Model Assisted
Dynamic Agent for Multi-View Clustering

Haiming Xu1 Qianqian Wang1∗
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
24011211044@stu.xidian.edu.cn, qqwang@xidian.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Multi-view clustering integrates the consistency and complementarity of different
views to achieve unsupervised data grouping. Existing multi-view clustering methods primarily confront two challenges: i) they generally perform feature extraction
in the feature domain, which is sensitive to noise and may neglect cluster-specific
information that is indistinguishable in the original space; ii) current dynamic
fusion methods adopt static strategies to learn weights, lacking capability to adjust
strategies adaptively under complex scenarios according to variations in data distribution and view quality. To address these issues, we propose a large language
model assisted dynamic agent for multi-view clustering (LLM-DAMVC), a novel
framework that recasts multi-view clustering as a dynamic decision-making problem orchestrated by a large language model. Specifically, each view is equipped
with complementary agents dedicated to feature extraction. A dual-domain contrastive module is introduced to optimize feature consistency and enhance cluster
separability in both the feature domain and frequency domain. Additionally, an
LLM-assisted view fusion mechanism provides a flexible fusion weight learning
strategy that can be adaptively applied to complex scenarios and significantly different views. Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness and superiority
of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, data from different sources or modalities (i.e., multi-view data) have become increasingly
ubiquitous, such as user profiles and behavioral data in social networks, multi-modal scanning results
in medical imaging, and multi-variate sensor data generated by IoT devices (1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6). These
multi-view data often contain richer and more comprehensive information than single-view data
but also pose challenges such as heterogeneity, noise interference, and missing labels. Multi-View
Clustering (MVC), which aims to effectively partition unlabeled data by leveraging the consistent
and complementary information across views, has become a core technology in multi-view analysis,
data mining, and pattern recognition (7; 8; 9; 10).
To effectively fuse multi-view information, researchers have proposed various MVC methods. Early
approaches primarily relied on non-negative matrix factorization, subspace learning, or spectral
clustering (11; 12; 13; 9; 14; 15). With the advancement of deep learning, deep MVC methods (e.g.,
those based on autoencoders, graph neural networks, or contrastive learning) have made significant
progress in representation learning and exploring nonlinear relationships (16; 17; 18; 19; 20; 21).
Notably, some studies have attempted to address view fusion by using attention mechanisms to
adaptively aggregate view features (22; 23). Additionally, to learn a consistent representation with
discriminative information, contrastive learning has been widely adopted to improve clustering
performance by maximizing the similarity between positive samples and meanwhile minimizing that
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

