Understanding and Enhancing Message Passing on
Heterophilic Graphs via Compatibility Matrix

Zhuonan Zheng⋆♠ , Yuanchen Bei♠ , Zhiyao Zhou♠ , Sheng Zhou⋆‡∗,
Yao Ma† , Ming Gu⋆♠ , Hongjia Xu⋆♠ , Jiawei Chen♠ , Jiajun Bu⋆♠
⋆
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems, Zhejiang University
♠
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
‡
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
†
School of Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) excel in graph mining tasks thanks to their
message-passing mechanism, which aligns with the homophily assumption. However, connected nodes can also exhibit inconsistent behaviors, termed heterophilic
patterns, sparking interest in heterophilic GNNs (HTGNNs). Although the messagepassing mechanism seems unsuitable for heterophilic graphs owing to the propagation of dissimilar messages, it is still popular in HTGNNs and consistently achieves
notable success. Some efforts have investigated such an interesting phenomenon,
but are limited in the data perspective. The model-perspective understanding remains largely unexplored, which is conducive to guiding the designs of HTGNNs.
To fill this gap, we build the connection between node discriminability and the
compatibility matrix (CM). We reveal that the effectiveness of the message passing
in HTGNNs may be credited to increasing the proposed Compatibility Matrix
Discriminability (CMD). However, the issues of sparsity and noise pose great challenges to leveraging CM. Thus, we propose CMGNN, a novel approach to alleviate
these issues while enhancing the CM and node embeddings explicitly. A thorough evaluation involving 13 datasets and comparison against 20 well-established
baselines highlights the superiority of CMGNN.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown remarkable performance in graph mining tasks, such as
social network analysis [1, 2] and recommender systems [3, 4]. The widely used message-passing
mechanism is typically based on the homophily assumption [5], which assumes that nodes are
inclined to behave similarly to their neighbors [6]. However, this assumption is often violated in
real-world graphs, where connected nodes exhibit a contrasting tendency called heterophily [7]. In
response to the challenges of heterophily, heterophilic GNNs (HTGNNs) have attracted considerable
interest [6, 8, 9], with numerous innovative approaches [10–13]. However, the majority of them
continue to employ a message-passing mechanism and remain successful, which was not originally
designed for heterophilic graphs, as they tend to incorporate excessive messages from disparate
classes. This raises a question: Why does message passing remain effective on heterophilic graphs?
Some efforts [6, 9, 14, 15] have begun to investigate this question and reveal that vanilla messagepassing (VMP) can still work on heterophilic graphs under certain conditions. However, these
works are limited in studying what kind of data is suitable for VMP. A large part of HTGNNs have
modified the message-passing mechanism in response to heterophily, namely heterophilic messagepassing (HTMP), which outperforms VMP on heterophilic graphs. How HTMP works effectively in
∗

Corresponding Author: zhousheng_zju@zju.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

