Can Class-Priors Help Single-Positive Multi-Label
Learning?

Biao Liu, Ning Xu* , Jie Wang, Xin Geng
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and
Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
*
Corresponding author: xning@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Single-positive multi-label learning (SPMLL) is a weakly supervised multi-label
learning problem, where each training example is annotated with only one positive
label. Existing SPMLL methods typically assign pseudo-labels to unannotated
labels with the assumption that prior probabilities of all classes are identical.
However, the class-prior of each category may differ significantly in real-world
scenarios, which makes the predictive model not perform as well as expected due to
the unrealistic assumption on real-world application. To alleviate this issue, a novel
framework named C RISP, i.e., Class-pRiors Induced Single-Positive multi-label
learning, is proposed. Specifically, a class-priors estimator is introduced, which can
estimate the class-priors that are theoretically guaranteed to converge to the groundtruth class-priors. In addition, based on the estimated class-priors, an unbiased risk
estimator for classification is derived, and the corresponding risk minimizer can
be guaranteed to approximately converge to the optimal risk minimizer on fully
supervised data. Experimental results on ten MLL benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of our method over existing SPMLL approaches.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning (MLL) is a learning paradigm that aims to train a model on examples associated
with multiple labels to accurately predict relevant labels for unknown instances [43, 25]. Over the
past decade, MLL has been successfully applied to various real-world applications, including image
annotation [30], text classification [24], and facial expression recognition [2].
Compared with multi-class-single-label learning, where each example is associated with a unique
label, MLL involves instances that are assigned multiple labels. As the number of examples or
categories is large, accurately annotating each label of an example becomes exceedingly challenging.
To address the high annotation cost, single-positive multi-label learning (SPMLL) has been proposed
[5, 38], where each training example is annotated with only one positive label. Moreover, since
many examples in multi-class datasets, such as ImageNet [42], contain multiple categories but are
annotated with a single label, employing SPMLL allows for the derivation of multi-label predictors
from existing numerous multi-class datasets, thereby expanding the applicability of MLL.
To address the issue that model tends to predict all labels as positive if trained with only positive
labels, existing SPMLL methods typically assign pseudo-labels to unannotated labels. Cole et al.
updates the pseudo-labels as learnable parameters with a regularization to constrain the number of
expected positive labels [5]. Xu et al. recovers latent soft pseudo-labels by employing variational
label enhancement [38]. Zhou et al. adopts asymmetric-tolerance strategies to update pseudo-labels
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

