Exploring Neural Granger Causality with xLSTMs:
Unveiling Temporal Dependencies in Complex Data

Harsh Poonia1,∗
1

Felix Divo2,∗

Kristian Kersting2,3,4,5

Devendra Singh Dhami6

Carnegie Mellon University 2 AI & ML Group, TU Darmstadt 3 hessian.AI
4
DFKI 5 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt 6 TU Eindhoven
hpoonia@cs.cmu.edu d.s.dhami@tue.nl
{felix.divo,kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Causality in time series can be challenging to determine, especially in the presence
of non-linear dependencies. Granger causality helps analyze potential relationships between variables, thereby offering a method to determine whether one
time series can predict—Granger cause—future values of another. Although successful, Granger causal methods still struggle with capturing long-range relations
between variables. To this end, we leverage the recently successful Extended
Long Short-Term Memory (xLSTM) architecture and propose Granger causal xLSTMs (GC-xLSTM). It first enforces sparsity between the time series components
by using a novel dynamic loss penalty on the initial projection. Specifically, we
adaptively improve the model and identify sparsity candidates. Our joint optimization procedure then ensures that the Granger causal relations are recovered
robustly. Our experimental evaluation on six diverse datasets demonstrates the
overall efficacy of GC-xLSTM.

1

Introduction

Finding cause and effect among and within a group of multivariate time series can lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of the involved time series. For instance, in computational neuroscience
and medicine, discovering brain connectivity assists in better understanding natural cognition [Smith
et al., 2011]. Discovering inter-dependencies between time series also has a critical impact on many
other research areas, such as finance [Masini et al., 2023], climate science [Mudelsee, 2019], and
industrial applications [Strem et al., 2025]. Although efforts have recently been made to improve
the interpretability of time series models [Ismail et al., 2020, Turbé et al., 2023], most methods are
restricted to finding post-hoc interpretations and only focus on short-term dependencies.
The framework of Granger causality (GC) [Granger, 1969] was introduced to address the challenge
of determining whether one variable’s past values can help forecast another’s future values, without
implying direct causality. GC can be established using statistical hypothesis tests, determining
whether one time series can predict another. The test traditionally involves estimating a vector
autoregressive model and examining whether lagged values of a time series improve or degrade
the prediction of the other, while controlling the past behavior of both series. Although GC does
not imply a direct cause-and-effect relationship between the involved time series [Heckman, 2008],
recognizing these interdependencies can lead to a better understanding of the dynamic relationships
between variables over time [Marcinkevičs and Vogt, 2021, Shojaie and Fox, 2022].
∗

Authors contributed equally.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

