GuideFlow3D: Optimization-Guided Rectified Flow
For Appearance Transfer

Sayan Deb Sarkar
Stanford University

Sinisa Stekovic
ENPC, IP Paris

Vincent Lepetit
ENPC, IP Paris

Iro Armeni
Stanford University

Abstract
Transferring appearance to 3D assets using different representations of the appearance object–such as images or text–has garnered interest due to its wide range of
applications in industries like gaming, augmented reality, and digital content creation. However, state-of-the-art methods still fail when the geometry between the
input and appearance objects is significantly different. A straightforward approach
is to directly apply a 3D generative model, but we show that this ultimately fails
to produce appealing results. Instead, we propose a principled approach inspired
by universal guidance. Given a pretrained rectified flow model conditioned on
image or text, our training-free method interacts with the sampling process by
periodically adding guidance. This guidance can be modeled as a differentiable
loss function, and we experiment with two different types of guidance including
part-aware losses for appearance and self-similarity. Our experiments show that
our approach successfully transfers texture and geometric details to the input 3D
asset, outperforming baselines both qualitatively and quantitatively. We also show
that traditional metrics are not suitable for evaluating the task due to their inability
of focusing on local details and comparing dissimilar inputs, in absence of ground
truth data. We thus evaluate appearance transfer quality with a GPT-based system
objectively ranking outputs, ensuring robust and human-like assessment, as further
confirmed by our user study. Beyond showcased scenarios, our method is general
and could be extended to different types of diffusion models and guidance functions.
Project Page: https://sayands.github.io/guideflow3d

1

Introduction

Transferring appearance–including both texture and fine geometric detail–to a 3D object is a challenging and increasingly relevant problem across applications in gaming, augmented reality, and digital
content creation. While style transfer has seen substantial progress in the 2D domain [20, 64, 65, 68],
extending it to 3D introduces unique challenges due to the irregular, sparse, and diverse nature
of 3D representations [26, 40, 22, 85]. Style cues may originate from 3D shapes, 2D images, or
natural language, further increasing task complexity. An additional challenge lies in transferring the
appearance across objects with substantial geometric differences, required in practical 3D design.
Several existing methods address 3D generation by reformulating it as a multi-view task, leveraging
2D diffusion models and conditioning on, e.g., rendered depth images to preserve input geometry [47,
36, 84]. However, these methods often produce geometrically inconsistent results due to discrepancies
across different views. Recent advances in 3D generative modeling–particularly denoising-based
approaches–enable high-quality synthesis of shapes and appearances conditioned on inputs like
text [54, 5, 72]. Still, these models are constrained by conditioning signals and data distributions
used during training. As a result, direct application to appearance transfer yields poor generalization
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

