StarTrail: Concentric Ring Sequence Parallelism for
Efficient Near-Infinite-Context Transformer Model
Training

Ziming Liu∗
National University of Singapore
liuziming@comp.nus.edu.sg

Shaoyu Wang∗
University of Southern California
wangshao@usc.edu

Shenggan Cheng
National University of Singapore
shenggan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Zhongkai Zhao
National University of Singapore
zhongkai.zhao@u.nus.edu

Kai Wang
National University of Singapore
kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg

Xuanlei Zhao
National University of Singapore
xuanlei@comp.nus.edu.sg

James Demmel
University of California, Berkeley
demmel@berkeley.edu

Yang You
National University of Singapore
youy@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Training Transformer models on long sequences in a distributed setting poses
significant challenges in terms of efficiency and scalability. Current methods are
either constrained by the number of attention heads or excessive communication
overheads. To address this problem, we propose StarTrail, a multi-dimensional
concentric distributed training system for long sequences, fostering an efficient
communication paradigm and providing additional tuning flexibility for communication arrangements. Specifically, StarTrail introduces an extra parallel dimension
and divides the peer-to-peer communication into sub-rings to substantially reduce
communication volume and avoid bandwidth bottlenecks. Through comprehensive
experiments across diverse hardware environments and on both Natural Language
Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) tasks, we demonstrate that our approach significantly surpasses state-of-the-art methods that support Long sequence
lengths, achieving performance improvements of up to 77.12% on GPT-style models and up to 114.33% on DiT (Diffusion Transformer) models without affecting
the computation results.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, Transformer[38] models have made remarkable strides in diverse fields,
including computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP). As the technology has
evolved, the ability to efficiently process long sequences with Transformer has emerged as a pivotal
challenge. For instance, in text summarization, the ability to handle extensive sequences is vital, as
the content to be summarized can range from lengthy chapters to entire books [17, 3]. Similarly,
chat-based applications, such as ChatGPT [1], require the capacity to process extensive dialogue
∗

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

