Uncertainty Quantification for Deep Regression
using Contextualised Normalizing Flows

Adriel Sosa Marco‡ , John Daniel Kirwan‡ , Alexia Toumpa§ , Simos Gerasimou§∗
‡
Arquimea Research Center, Spain
§
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York, UK
∗
Department of Elect. Eng., and Computer Science and Eng., Cyprus University of Technology, Cyprus
{asosa, jkirwan}@arquimea.com
{alexia.toumpa,simos.gerasimou}@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Quantifying uncertainty in deep regression models is important both for understanding the confidence of the model and for safe decision-making in high-risk
domains. Existing approaches that yield prediction intervals overlook distributional information, neglecting the effect of multimodal or asymmetric distributions
on decision-making. Similarly, full or approximated Bayesian methods, while
yielding the predictive posterior density, demand major modifications to the model
architecture and retraining. We introduce MCNF, a novel post hoc uncertainty
quantification method that produces both prediction intervals and the full conditioned predictive distribution. MCNF operates on top of the underlying trained
predictive model; thus, no predictive model retraining is needed. We provide experimental evidence that the MCNF-based uncertainty estimate is well calibrated, is
competitive with state-of-the-art uncertainty quantification methods, and provides
richer information for downstream decision-making tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep regression models have been widely used in applications involving the prediction of continuous
variables [1], including drug discovery [2], credit scoring [3] and energy forecasting [4]. Despite their
broad adoption, safety-critical applications, like medical diagnostics [5], entail high-stake decisions,
mandating the development of robust deep regression techniques that equip decision-makers with
complementary knowledge about the predictive uncertainty of a regression model.
Uncertainty quantification methods (UQ) are fundamental in establishing the predictive uncertainty
of regression models [6]. Recent advances target primarily the investigation of epistemic uncertainty (caused by the lack of evidence or knowledge during training) and aleatoric uncertainty (the
irreducible uncertainty due to data stochasticity). Building on the foundational work in quantile
regression [7], Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD) [8] and deep ensembles [9] leverage dropout layers
and multiple functionally-equivalent models, respectively, to approximate at inference time a deep
Gaussian process and estimate the predictive distribution. Both methods, however, incur extra computational overheads and suffer from inefficient sampling, particularly at the predictive distribution
tails [10]. Bayesian-based approaches that perform full Bayesian estimation [11] or its variational
counterpart [12], albeit rigorous in uncertainty incorporation in the posterior distribution, incur
prohibitive computational costs for any modern deep learning model. Conformal prediction (CP) [13]
yields statistically rigorous uncertainty intervals that contain the ground truth based on a user-defined
error rate [14], but its reliance on a calibration dataset restricts its applicability.
Motivated by the need for rigorous UQ in safety-critical applications, we introduce MCNF, a post hoc
distribution-free UQ method for deep regression models underpinned by contextualized normalizing
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

