Repurposing AlphaFold3-like Protein Folding Models
for Antibody Sequence and Structure Co-design

Nianzu Yang†1 , Songlin Jiang†1 , Jian Ma†1 , Huaijin Wu1 , Shuangjia Zheng3 ,
Wengong Jin∗2 , Junchi Yan∗1
1
School of CS & School of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University
3
School of AI & GIFT , Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yangnianzu,clorf6,majian7,shuangjia.zheng,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
w.jin@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models hold great potential for accelerating antibody design, but their
performance is so far limited by the number of antibody-antigen complexes
used for model training. Meanwhile, AlphaFold3-like protein folding models,
pre-trained on a large corpus of crystal structures, have acquired a broad understanding of biomolecular interaction. Based on this insight, we develop a
new antigen-conditioned antibody design model by adapting the diffusion module of AlphaFold3-like models for sequence-structure co-diffusion. Specifically,
we extend their structure diffusion module with a sequence diffusion head and
fine-tune the entire protein folding model for antibody sequence-structure codesign. Our benchmark results show that sequence-structure co-diffusion models
not only surpass state-of-the-art antibody design methods in performance but also
maintain structure prediction accuracy comparable to the original folding model.
Notably, in the antibody co-design task, our method achieves a CDR-H3 recovery rate of 65% for typical antibodies, outperforming the baselines by 87%, and
attains a remarkable 63% recovery rate for nanobodies. Our code is available at
https://github.com/yangnianzu0515/MFDesign.

1

Introduction

Monoclonal antibodies are Y-shaped proteins that specifically recognize and neutralize the pathogens
(commonly known as antigens) during immune responses [Janeway et al., 2001]. The binding
specificity is determined by their complementarity-determining regions (CDRs), whose sequences
and structures exhibit significant variability. Recent work on generative models have shown great
potential in designing CDRs that bind to an antigen [Jin et al., 2022a, Luo et al., 2022, Kong et al.,
2023a, Martinkus et al., 2024, Zhu et al., 2024]. However, their performance is limited by the scarcity
of antibody-antigen complex data, as highlighted by Zhu et al..
To address this issue, we seek to leverage foundation models, such as protein folding models, that
have learned general knowledge of biomolecular interaction from a large corpus of general protein
interaction data. Our hypothesis is that the general knowledge of protein-protein interaction learned
by protein folding models, such as AlphaFold3 (AF3) [Abramson et al., 2024], Chai-1 [Discovery
et al., 2024], Boltz-1 [Wohlwend et al., 2024], and Protenix [Chen et al., 2025], are transferrable to
the task of modeling of antibody-antigen complexes, a specialized type of protein interaction.
Correspondence author. † denotes equal contribution. This work was partly supported by NSFC (92370201,
62222607) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

