Attention on the Sphere

Boris Bonev†* , Max Rietmann†* , Andrea Paris, Alberto Carpentieri, Thorsten Kurth†*
NVIDIA Corporation, 95051 Santa Clara, CA, USA
{bbonev, mrietmann, aparis, acarpentieri, tkurth}@nvidia.com

Abstract
We introduce a generalized attention mechanism for spherical domains, enabling
Transformer architectures to natively process data defined on the two-dimensional
sphere - a critical need in fields such as atmospheric physics, cosmology, and
robotics, where preserving spherical symmetries and topology is essential for
physical accuracy. By integrating numerical quadrature weights into the attention
mechanism, we obtain a geometrically faithful spherical attention that is approximately rotationally equivariant, providing strong inductive biases and leading to
better performance than Cartesian approaches. To further enhance both scalability
and model performance, we propose neighborhood attention on the sphere, which
confines interactions to geodesic neighborhoods. This approach reduces computational complexity and introduces the additional inductive bias for locality, while
retaining the symmetry properties of our method. We provide optimized CUDA
kernels and memory-efficient implementations to ensure practical applicability.
The method is validated on three diverse tasks: simulating shallow water equations
on the rotating sphere, spherical image segmentation, and spherical depth estimation. Across all tasks, our spherical Transformers consistently outperform their
planar counterparts, highlighting the advantage of geometric priors for learning on
spherical domains.

1

Introduction

The two-dimensional sphere embedded in three dimensions (S 2 ) plays a crucial role in a variety of
scientific and engineering domains such as geophysics, cosmology, chemistry, and computer graphics.
All of these domains require the processing of functions defined on the surface of the sphere. With
the advent and increased success of machine-learning in these domains, there is a growing demand
to generalize state-of-the-art architectures to spherical data [13, 18, 19, 34, 6]. This is particularly
important in scientific applications which require the solution of time-dependent partial differential
equations which are often approximated with auto-regressive models. These models are particularly
sensitive to spurious artifacts which arise from a non-geometrical treatment as these tend to build up
and compromise stability [6].
While spherical convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and other geometric deep learning models
have advanced the state of the art for learning on the sphere by respecting its symmetries and
topology, these architectures are primarily designed for capturing local interactions and equivariant
representations [13, 34, 30]. However, many scientific and engineering problems on the sphere, such
as weather and climate modeling, 360°perception, and cortical surface analysis, require modeling
complex, long-range dependencies that are not efficiently handled by convolutional approaches
[7, 3, 9]. Transformers, with their global attention mechanism, have revolutionized learning in
Euclidean domains by enabling flexible, data-driven modeling of both local and global relationships
* Corresponging author.
†

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

