Pseudo-Riemannian Graph Transformer

1

Viet Quan Le1 Viet Cuong Ta2∗
Department of Computer Science 2 Human-Machine Interaction Laboratory
VNU University of Engineering and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam
{lvquan, cuongtv}@vnu.edu.vn

Abstract
Many real-world graphs exhibit diverse and complex topological structures that
are not well captured by geometric manifolds with uniform global curvature, such
as hyperbolic or spherical spaces. Recently, there has been growing interest in
embedding graphs into pseudo-Riemannian manifolds, which generalize both
hyperbolic and spherical geometries. However, existing approaches face three
significant limitations, including the ineffective pseudo-Riemannain framework,
the shallow architectures, and the absence of clear guideline for selecting suitable
pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. To address these issues, we introduce a novel
diffeomorphic framework for graph embedding that aligns with the nature of
pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. Subsequently, we propose the pseudo-Riemannian
Graph Transformer for learning representations of complex graph structures. Our
diffeomorphic framework in pseudo-Riemannian geometry enables the principled
definitions of core transformer components, including linear attention, residual
connection, and layer normalization. Finally, we develop a lightweight space
searching algorithm to automatically identify the most suitable pseudo-Riemannian
manifold for an input graph. Extensive experiments on diverse real-world graphs
demonstrate that our model consistently outperforms other baselines in both node
classification and link prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Many real-world graphs have diverse topological structures (Boguñá et al., 2021), which are better
captured using varying geometrical curvatures. Geometric manifolds with uniform global structure,
such as hyperbolic or spherical manifolds, do not provide enough flexibility to model these complex
graphs (Gu et al., 2018). Instead of using a single manifold with a constant curvature, researchers
employ the Cartesian product of constant curvature manifolds to embed graphs of mixed topologies
(Gu et al., 2018; Bachmann et al., 2020). However, explicit distances in product manifolds may
emphasize either the spherical or hyperbolic component while overlooking the other, which limits
their ability to embed heterogeneous graphs (Law, 2021). Moreover, because Riemannian manifolds
like spherical manifolds use a positive definite metric, they cannot accurately capture the negative
eigenvalues present in input similarity data (Laub and Müller, 2004).
Recently, pseudo-Riemannian manifolds (also called semi-Riemannian manifolds), which generalize
Riemannian manifolds, have gained increasing attention for embedding mixed topological graphs
(Law and Stam, 2020; Law, 2021; Xiong et al., 2022). Pseudo-Riemannian manifolds equipped with
indefinite metrics not only extend hyperbolic and spherical geometries but also include hyperbolic
and spherical submanifolds, allowing them to capture relationships unique to these geometries.
Law and Stam (2020) proposed an efficient method to learn nonparametric embeddings with a
novel optimization tool on pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. Later, Law (2021) employed pseudoRiemannian geometry to graph neural networks by using the quotient manifold, which imposes
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

