SQL-R1: Training Natural Language to SQL
Reasoning Model By Reinforcement Learning

Peixian Ma1,2, , Xialie Zhuang1,3 , Chengjin Xu1,4,∗, Xuhui Jiang1,4 , Ran Chen1 , Jian Guo1
1
IDEA Research, International Digital Economy Academy
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
DataArc Tech Ltd.
pma929@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, xuchengjin@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
Natural Language to SQL (NL2SQL) enables intuitive interactions with databases
by transforming natural language queries into structured SQL statements. Despite
recent advancements in enhancing human-computer interaction within database
applications, significant challenges persist, particularly regarding the reasoning
performance in complex scenarios involving multi-table joins and nested queries.
Current methodologies primarily utilize supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to train the
NL2SQL model, which may limit adaptability and interpretability in new environments (e.g., finance and healthcare). In order to enhance the reasoning performance
of the NL2SQL model in the above complex situations, we introduce SQL-R1, a
novel NL2SQL reasoning model trained by the reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. We design a specialized RL-based reward function tailored for NL2SQL
tasks and discussed the impact of cold start and synthetic data on the effectiveness
of intensive training. In addition, we achieve competitive accuracy using only a tiny
amount of synthetic NL2SQL data for augmented training and further explore data
engineering for RL. In existing experiments, SQL-R1 achieves execution accuracy
of 88.6% and 67.1% on the benchmark Spider and BIRD, respectively. The code is
available at https://github.com/IDEA-FinAI/SQL-R1.

1

Introduction

Natural Language to SQL (NL2SQL, or Text2SQL) converts natural language questions (NL) into
structured SQL statements, simplifying database interaction without requiring database expertise [1,
2]. Recent advancements in NL2SQL have significantly enhanced the level of human-computer
interaction within database query applications and contribute to a wide range of data science analysis
tasks [3, 4]. Current NL2SQL models mainly focus on optimizing workflows and their components,
such as schema linking [5, 6], content retrieval [7], generation correction [8–12].
Despite these advancements, improving the NL2SQL system’s reasoning performance in complex
database scenarios remains a considerable challenge. As shown in Figure 1, schema complexity may
lead to generation errors in processing multi-table joins and nested queries, and it is difficult for
individually trained models to think and process complex semantics. Currently, a significant portion
of NL2SQL research is devoted to training open-source large language models (LLMs) by supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) [13–15] to achieve accuracy at a smaller model scale compared to approaches using
closed-source LLMs (e.g., GPT-4, GPT-4o) [8, 10, 16]. However, SFT relies on the database schema
structure and the training data scale. This may lead to the existing model’s instability in domain
adaptation and generalization in new database environments. Additionally, the lack of interpretability
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

