Solving Asymmetric Traveling Salesman Problem via
Trace-Guided Cost Augmentation

Zhen Zhang
Responsible AI Research Centre
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
2
The University of Adelaide & 3 CSRIO
zhen@zzhang.org
1

Javen Qingfeng Shi
Responsible AI Research Centre
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
2
The University of Adelaide
javen.shi@adelaide.edu.au
1

Wee Sun Lee
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
leews@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The Asymmetric Traveling Salesman Problem (ATSP) is one of the most fundamental and notoriously challenging problems in combinatorial optimization. We
propose a novel continuous relaxation framework for ATSP that leverages differentiable constraints to encourage acyclic structures and valid permutations. Our
approach integrates a differentiable trace-based Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
constraint with a doubly stochastic matrix relaxation of the assignment problem,
enabling gradient-based optimization over soft permutations. We further develop
a projected exponentiated-gradient method with adaptive step size to minimize
tour cost while satisfying the relaxed constraints. To recover high-quality discrete
tours, we introduce a greedy post-processing procedure that iteratively eliminates
subtours through cost-aware cycle merging. Empirically, our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on standard asymmetric TSP benchmarks and demonstrates strong scalability and accuracy, particularly on large or highly asymmetric
instances where heuristic solvers such as LKH-3 often struggle.

1

Introduction

The Asymmetric Traveling Salesman Problem (ATSP) is one of the most fundamental and notoriously
challenging problems in combinatorial optimization. Many important combinatorial optimization
(CO) problems are theoretically reducible to ATSP. Recent work by Pan et al. [22] has shown that
such reductions are not only of theoretical interest but can also be practically feasible for certain
small-scale CO tasks, suggesting that advances in ATSP solvers could yield broad benefits across the
CO landscape.
Although the symmetric TSP is a special case of ATSP, solvers designed specifically for the asymmetric case often perform poorly on symmetric instances. Conversely, any ATSP instance can be
transformed into a symmetric TSP by doubling the number of nodes [9], enabling symmetric solvers
to be applied to asymmetric problems. Consequently, much of the CO community has focused on the
symmetric TSP [1, 8, 20, 26], leading to the development of increasingly effective handcrafted and
learning-based heuristics. Recently, methods such as those proposed by Drakulic et al. [4, 5], Pan
et al. [22] have employed reinforcement learning to directly search for optimal ATSP tours. These
approaches provide faster inference compared to state-of-the-art heuristics such as LKH-3 [8], but typ39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

