Finding separatrices of dynamical flows with Deep
Koopman Eigenfunctions

Kabir V. Dabholkar
Faculty of Mathematics
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
kabir@campus.technion.ac.il
Omri Barak
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Network Biology Research Laboratory
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
omri.barak@gmail.com

Abstract
Many natural systems, including neural circuits involved in decision making, are
modeled as high-dimensional dynamical systems with multiple stable states. While
existing analytical tools primarily describe behavior near stable equilibria, characterizing separatrices—the manifolds that delineate boundaries between different
basins of attraction—remains challenging, particularly in high-dimensional settings.
Here, we introduce a numerical framework leveraging Koopman Theory combined
with Deep Neural Networks to effectively characterize separatrices. Specifically,
we approximate Koopman Eigenfunctions (KEFs) associated with real positive
eigenvalues, which vanish precisely at the separatrices. Utilizing these scalar KEFs,
optimization methods efficiently locate separatrices even in complex systems. We
demonstrate our approach on synthetic benchmarks, ecological network models,
and high-dimensional recurrent neural networks trained on either neuroscienceinspired tasks or fit to real neural data. Moreover, we illustrate the practical utility
of our method by designing optimal perturbations that can shift systems across
separatrices, enabling predictions relevant to optogenetic stimulation experiments
in neuroscience. Our code is available on GitHub and we share an interactive
description of the work and its extensions in a UniReps blog.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are widely used in neuroscience as models of computation
arising from the coordinated dynamics of many neurons, motivating efforts to reverse-engineer their
underlying dynamical mechanisms [1, 2]. In particular, many cognitive tasks such as decision-making
[3] and associative memory [4] can be modeled as multistable dynamical systems, where distinct
decisions or memories correspond to different stable attractor states in phase space. Transitions
between these attractors are governed by the geometry of the basins of attraction and, crucially, by
the separatrix: the manifold that delineates the boundary between basins (Figure 1A).
A reverse-engineering method that has yielded significant insights about RNN computations involves
finding approximate fixed points and linearising around them [5]. This involves minimizing a scalar
function—the kinetic energy q(x) = ∥f (x)∥2 —to locate these points (Figure 1B). Once found, the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

