Parallelization of Non-linear State-Space Models:
Scaling Up Liquid-Resistance Liquid-Capacitance
Networks for Efficient Sequence Modeling

Mónika Farsang
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria

Radu Grosu
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria

monika.farsang@tuwien.ac.at

radu.grosu@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We present LrcSSM, a non-linear recurrent model that processes long sequences
as fast as today’s linear state-space layers. By forcing its Jacobian matrix to be diagonal, the full sequence can be solved in parallel, giving O (T D) computational
work and memory and only O (log T ) sequential depth, for input-sequence length
T and a state dimension D. Moreover, LrcSSM offers a formal gradient-stability
guarantee that other input-varying systems such as Liquid-S4 and Mamba do
not provide. Importantly, the diagonal Jacobian structure of our model results in
no performance loss compared to the original model with dense Jacobian, and
the approach can be generalized to other non-linear recurrent models, demonstrating broader applicability. On a suite of long-range forecasting tasks, we
demonstrate that LrcSSM outperforms Transformers, LRU, S5, and Mamba.

1 Introduction
With the advent of linear structured state space models (SSMs), more and more architectures
have emerged, with increasingly better accuracy and efficiency. While they can be efficiently
parallelized, for example with the aid of the parallel scan operator, this is considerably more
difficult for traditional, non-linear models. This led to a decreasing interest in non-linear recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), although these should arguably capture input correlations in a more
refined way through their state.
Fortunately, recent work has shown how to apply the parallel scan operator to non-linear RNNs, by
linearizing them in every time step, and by implementing this idea in their DEER framework [27].
Unfortunately, the state-transition matrix (the Jacobian of the model) was not diagonal, which
precluded scaling it up to very long sequences. Subsequent work however, succeeded to scale up
non-linear RNNs by simply taking the diagonal of the Jacobian matrix, and stabilizing the DEER
updates with trust regions. They called this method ELK (evaluating Levenberg-Marquardt via
Kalman) [8].
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach to scaling up non-linear RNNs. Instead of
disregarding the non-diagonal elements of the model’s Jacobian, which might contain important
information about the multistep interaction among neurons along feedback loops, we learn a
model whose Jacobian matrix is constrained to be diagonal, and whose entries depend on both
the current state and current input. As for linear SSMs, our main intuition is that intricate loops
of the non-linear SSM state (neural connectivity) matrix can be well summarized by its complex
eigenvalues. After all, the synaptic parameters define constant matrices that can be themselves
diagonalized.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

