Ridge Boosting is Both Robust and Efficient

David Bruns-Smith
(Stanford University)

Zhongming Xie
(UC Berkeley)

Avi Feller
(UC Berkeley)

Abstract
Estimators in statistics and machine learning must typically trade off between
efficiency, having low variance for a fixed target, and distributional robustness,
such as multiaccuracy, or having low bias over a range of possible targets. In
this paper, we consider a simple estimator, ridge boosting: starting with any
initial predictor, perform a single boosting step with (kernel) ridge regression.
Surprisingly, we show that ridge boosting simultaneously achieves both efficiency
and distributional robustness: for target distribution shifts that lie within an RKHS
unit ball, this estimator maintains low bias across all such shifts and has variance
at the semiparametric efficiency bound for each target. In addition to bridging
otherwise distinct research areas, this result has immediate practical value. Since
ridge boosting uses only data from the source distribution, researchers can train
a single model to obtain both robust and efficient estimates for multiple target
estimands at the same time, eliminating the need to fit separate semiparametric
efficient estimators for each target. We assess this approach through simulations
and an application estimating the age profile of retirement income.

1

Introduction

Estimators in statistics and machine learning must typically trade off between efficiency and robustness. Efficient estimators, largely developed in semiparametric statistics and econometrics, focus
on having the smallest asymptotic variance (the “efficient variance”) among unbiased estimates
for a single target estimand. Importantly, such estimators provide valid asymptotically Normal
confidence intervals—critical in many empirical applications—and these intervals have the smallest
possible width. By contrast, robust estimators, the focus of an active literature in Distributionally
Robust Optimization (DRO) and other subfields, instead aim to have good performance for many,
possibly unspecified targets. For example, Kim et al. [2022] show that a class of “multi-accurate”
estimators—based on boosting an initial predictor—constrains worst-case bias for predicting the
unknown mean in a large class of covariate shift problems. In general, we expect that controlling
worst-case bias across many estimands would come at the cost of increased variance.
Surprisingly, we show that a simple version of boosting, once-boosting with ridge regression, is
simultaneously robust over a large set of possible distribution shifts, while also achieving the efficient
variance and smallest possible confidence interval for each estimation target separately. Constructing
this ridge boosting predictor is simple: we start with any initial predictor, and then perform one step
of boosting using ridge regression in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). For all target
populations whose density ratio with respect to the source population is well-approximated by the
RKHS, the resulting estimator is approximately unbiased and achieves the semiparametric efficiency
bound. This is a very general (but not completely general) class of distribution shifts: it includes any
shift whose density ratio can be expressed as linear in a fixed transformation of the covariates, even
infinite-dimensional transformations. For example, this includes distribution shifts whose density
ratio can be approximated as linear in the last-layer embedding of a pre-trained large language model,
but not the more general class that would involve fine-tuning the neural network.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

