LinEAS: End-to-end Learning of Activation Steering
with a Distributional Loss
Pau Rodríguez∗
Apple

Michal Klein
Apple

Luca Zappella
Apple

Eleonora Gualdoni
Apple

Valentino Maiorca
Sapienza, Apple

Arno Blaas
Apple

Xavier Suau∗
Apple

Marco Cuturi
Apple

Abstract
The growing use of generative models in daily life calls for efficient mechanisms
to control their generation, to e.g., produce safe content or provide users with tools
to explore style changes. Ideally, such mechanisms should require low volume of
unpaired data (i.e., without explicit preference), and should be cheap, both at train
and inference time, while preserving output quality. Recent research has shown that
such mechanisms can be obtained by intervening exclusively on model activations,
with the goal of correcting distributional differences between activations seen
when using prompts from a source vs. a target set (e.g., toxic and non-toxic
sentences). While cheap, these fast methods are inherently crude: their maps are
tuned locally, not accounting for their impact on downstream layers, resulting in
interventions that cause unintended shifts when used out-of-sample. We propose
in this work linear end-to-end activation steering (LinEAS), an approach trained
with a global loss that accounts simultaneously for all layer-wise distributional
shifts. In addition to being more robust, the loss used to train LinEAS can be
regularized with sparsifying norms, which can automatically carry out neuron
selection. LinEAS only requires a handful of unpaired samples to be effective,
and beats similar baselines on toxicity mitigation in language models, becoming
competitive with oracle-dependent methods that have access to strong supervision.
LinEAS is modality-agnostic and we empirically find that it outperforms existing
activation steering methods at mitigating and including new concepts at the output
of single-step text-to-image generation models.
Prompt: A fox running along a riverbank.
Generic
Source distribution

Ukiyo-e

Kid’s drawing

3D polygons

Fantasy

Ukiyo-e

T2I Generation
+
LinEAS

Fantasy

3D polygons
Target distributions
Kid’s drawing
*Each

contains only ~30 sentences

Actionable knobs

Figure 1: LinEAS learns lightweight maps to steer pretrained model activations. With LinEAS, we
gain fine-grained control on text-to-image generation to induce precise styles (in the figure) or remove
objects (e.g., Section 4.4). The same procedure also allows controlling LLMs (e.g., Section 4.1).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

