TrajAgent: An LLM-Agent Framework for Trajectory
Modeling via Large-and-Small Model Collaboration

Yuwei Du∗, Jie Feng∗†, Jie Zhao, Yong Li†
Department of Electronic Engineering, BRNist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{fengjie,liyong07}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Trajectory modeling, which includes research on trajectory data pattern mining
and future prediction, has widespread applications in areas such as life services,
urban transportation, and public administration. Numerous methods have been
proposed to address specific problems within trajectory modeling. However, the
heterogeneity of data and the diversity of trajectory tasks make effective and reliable
trajectory modeling an important yet highly challenging endeavor, even for domain
experts. In this paper, we propose TrajAgent, a agent framework powered by
large language models (LLMs), designed to facilitate robust and efficient trajectory
modeling through automation modeling. This framework leverages and optimizes
diverse specialized models to address various trajectory modeling tasks across
different datasets effectively. In TrajAgent, we first develop UniEnv, an execution
environment with a unified data and model interface, to support the execution
and training of various models. Building on UniEnv, we introduce an agentic
workflow designed for automatic trajectory modeling across various trajectory
tasks and data. Furthermore, we introduce collaborative learning schema between
LLM-based agents and small speciallized models, to enhance the performance
of the whole framework effectively. Extensive experiments on four tasks using
four real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of TrajAgent in automated
trajectory modeling, achieving a performance improvement of 2.38%-69.91% over
baseline methods. The codes and data can be accessed via https://github.
com/tsinghua-fib-lab/TrajAgent.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of web services and mobile devices [68, 6], large-scale trajectory data,
such as check-in data from social network [58], have been collected, greatly facilitating research
in trajectory modeling. Trajectory modeling involves the processing, mining and prediction of
trajectory data, with widespread applications in urban transportation, location services and public
management. The typical areas of trajectory modeling [6, 22] can be classified into five main
categories: trajectory representation [21], trajectory classification [29], trajectory prediction [60],
trajectory recovery [44], and trajectory generation [51]. Each category encompasses various subtasks; for instance, the trajectory prediction task can be further divided into next location prediction
task [31], final destination prediction task [66], and travel time estimation task [48], among others.
Given the huge value of trajectory modeling in diverse practical applications, various algorithms and
models [22] have been proposed to address these tasks, particularly deep learning-based models in
recent years. This has facilitated significant advancements in the field, with many tasks achieving a
high level of performance.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

