Holistic Large-Scale Scene Reconstruction
via Mixed Gaussian Splatting

Chuandong Liu1

Huijiao Wang3

Lei Yu2,3,∗

Gui-Song Xia2,4,5,∗

1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
3
School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University
4
State Key Lab. of LIESMARS, Wuhan University
5
Institute for Math & AI, Wuhan University
2

∗

Corresponding Authors

Project Page: mixgs.github.io

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting have shown remarkable potential for
novel view synthesis. However, most existing large-scale scene reconstruction
methods rely on the divide-and-conquer paradigm, which often leads to the loss of
global scene information and requires complex parameter tuning due to scene partitioning and local optimization. To address these limitations, we propose MixGS,
a novel holistic optimization framework for large-scale 3D scene reconstruction.
MixGS models the entire scene holistically by integrating camera pose and Gaussian attributes into a view-aware representation, which is decoded into fine-detailed
Gaussians. Furthermore, a novel mixing operation combines decoded and original
Gaussians to jointly preserve global coherence and local fidelity. Extensive experiments on large-scale scenes demonstrate that MixGS achieves state-of-the-art
rendering quality and competitive speed, while significantly reducing computational requirements, enabling large-scale scene reconstruction training on a single
24GB VRAM GPU.

1

Introduction

Accurate 3D scene representation is fundamental for a wide range of applications, including aerial
surveying [4], autonomous driving [26, 66], environmental monitoring [33, 65], and AR/VR [18, 20],
all of which demand high-fidelity visual quality and real-time rendering. In recent years, implicit
representations such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) [40, 63, 53] have achieved impressive results in
novel view synthesis, but often suffer from limited detail reconstruction and slow rendering speed.
More recently, explicit representations like 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [22] have demonstrated
superior performance in both visual quality and computational efficiency, enabling real-time rendering
and showing strong adaptability to dynamic scenes [62, 67] and content generation [75, 28].
Nevertheless, directly applying naive 3DGS to large-scale scene reconstruction faces significant
challenges, such as out-of-memory issues and degraded novel view synthesis quality [30]. To
address these limitations, most existing 3DGS-based methods [34, 10] adopt a divide-and-conquer
strategy, inspired by its success in previous NeRF-based approaches [52, 53]. As illustrated in Fig. 1
(left), the large scene is partitioned into multiple independent blocks, enabling parallel training and
optimization across multiple GPUs. After optimization, these blocks are merged to produce the final
reconstruction for novel view rendering. Various improvements, such as progressive partitioning [30],
recursive scene splitting [10], and adaptive data selection [34], have been proposed to enhance
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

