Eluder dimension: localise it!
Alireza Bakhtiari
University of Alberta
sbakhtia@ualberta.ca

Alex Ayoub
University of Alberta
aayoub@ualberta.ca

David Janz
University of Oxford
david.janz@stats.ox.ac.uk

Samuel Robertson
University of Alberta
smrobert@ualberta.ca

Csaba Szepesvári
University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We establish a lower bound on the eluder dimension of generalised linear model
classes, showing that standard eluder dimension-based analysis cannot lead to
first-order regret bounds. To address this, we introduce a localisation method for
the eluder dimension; our analysis immediately recovers and improves on classic
results for Bernoulli bandits, and allows for the first genuine first-order bounds for
finite-horizon reinforcement learning tasks with bounded cumulative returns.

1

Introduction

We study decision-making problems where the regret admits a first-order (small-cost) bound of the
form
p
Rn ≤ nη(a⋆ )Γn + Γ′n ,
with η(a⋆ ) the optimal mean per-round cost and Γn , Γ′n instance and model dependent complexities.
The challenge in obtaining first-order bounds is in how we measure the complexity of the task. The
(global) eluder dimension (Russo and Van Roy, 2013) is a standard complexity measure used to
provide worst-case guarantees, but, as we shall argue, it ignores the local structure of the problem:
analyses based on the global eluder dimension often introduce a factor in Γn that scales like a perstep worst-case information/curvature parameter (denoted κ), which cancels out η(a⋆ ) and destroys
first-order gains. This subtle issue is present in much of the previous work on first-order bounds.
We show that by localising the eluder dimension—restricting it to a small neighbourhood of the
optimal model—these κ terms can be moved into the lower-order Γ′n term. This tightens the link
between exploration and the actual difficulty of the instance and yields genuinely first-order bounds.
Our contributions may be summarised as follows:
1. Localised ℓ1 -eluder dimension. We define a localised ℓ1 -eluder dimension (in the sense of
Liu et al., 2022) over a small-excess-loss neighbourhood, which avoids the κ dependency in
the classic generalised linear bandit setting (Filippi et al., 2010; Faury et al., 2020).
2. Necessity of localisation. We prove lower bounds showing that the global ℓ1 - and ℓ2 -eluder
dimensions (Russo and Van Roy, 2013; Liu et al., 2022) must scale with κ in the generalised
linear setting, and that this negates small-cost or variance-dependent improvements.
3. Stochastic bandits. We propose a version-space optimistic algorithm, ℓ-UCB, which takes
a loss ℓ and builds confidence sets for the cost function. Under (a) bounded loss, (b) a
Bernstein variance condition, and (c) a triangle condition (Foster and Krishnamurthy, 2021),
ℓ-UCB achieves a small-cost bound using analysis based on our localised eluder dimension.
4. Reinforcement learning. We extend our method to online RL, giving ℓ-GOLF, and obtain
the first κ-free first-order regret bound for finite-horizon RL with bounded rewards/costs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

