Tight analyses of first-order methods with error
feedback
Daniel Berg Thomsen1,2∗
Adrien Taylor1
Aymeric Dieuleveut2
INRIA, D.I. École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France
2
CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 91120 Palaiseau, France
1

Abstract
Communication between agents often constitutes a major computational bottleneck
in distributed learning. One of the most common mitigation strategies is to compress the information exchanged, thereby reducing communication overhead. To
counteract the degradation in convergence associated with compressed communication, error feedback schemes—most notably EF and EF21 —were introduced.
In this work, we provide a tight analysis of both of these methods. Specifically,
we find the Lyapunov function that yields the best possible convergence rate for
each method—with matching lower bounds. This principled approach yields sharp
performance guarantees and enables a rigorous, apples-to-apples comparison between EF, EF21 , and compressed gradient descent. Our analysis is carried out in
the simplified single-agent setting, which allows for clean theoretical insights and
fair comparison of the underlying mechanisms.
Remark: proof certificates
To consolidate and support our theoretical results, we complement each theoretical statement
with analytical or numerical validation. Specifically, we provide certificates of correctness
generated either with a Computer Algebra System (CAS), using a WolframScript, for symbolic
verification, or using Performance Estimation Problems (PEP) for numerical validation. CAS
enable verification of algebraic identities, while PEP annotations indicate numerical validation
of complete statements. These certificates are highlighted in the paper using
and
markers, which are direct links to the corresponding Jupyter notebook or WolframScript in
our public GitHub repository. a

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, distributed optimization has become a cornerstone of large-scale machine
learning. This shift is driven by major increases in the size of models and training data, as well as
increasing societal concerns about data ownership and privacy. Ultimately, solutions in which training
is distributed across a network of n agents, each retaining its own local data, under the coordination of
a central server, have emerged as one of the most natural and efficient solutions to this problem [1, 2].
∗

Correspondence to daniel.berg-thomsen@inria.fr
While these certificates do not replace the mathematical proofs presented in the paper, they serve as an
additional layer of transparency and error checking, analogous to unit tests in software development. This
practice provides a reproducible, independently verifiable basis for our theoretical claims, thereby reducing the
risk of oversights in complex derivations.
a

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

