RoME: Domain-Robust Mixture-of-Experts for
MILP Solution Prediction across Domains
Tianle Pu1 , Zijie Geng2 , Haoyang Liu2 , Shixuan Liu3,1 , Jie Wang2 , Li Zeng1 ,
Chao Chen1∗, Changjun Fan1∗
1
Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, College of Systems Engineering,
National University of Defense Technology
2
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
{putl22, liushixuan, zengli24, chenc1997, fanchangjun}@nudt.edu.cn
{zijiegeng, dgyoung}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) is a fundamental and powerful framework for modeling complex optimization problems across diverse domains. Recently, learning-based methods have shown great promise in accelerating MILP
solvers by predicting high-quality solutions. However, most existing approaches
are developed and evaluated in single-domain settings, limiting their ability to
generalize to unseen problem distributions. This limitation poses a major obstacle
to building scalable and general-purpose learning-based solvers. To address this
challenge, we introduce RoME, a domain-Robust Mixture-of-Experts framework
for predicting MILP solutions across domains. RoME dynamically routes problem
instances to specialized experts based on learned task embeddings. The model
is trained using a two-level distributionally robust optimization strategy: interdomain to mitigate global shifts across domains, and intra-domain to enhance
local robustness by introducing perturbations on task embeddings. We reveal that
cross-domain training not only enhances the model’s generalization capability to
unseen domains but also improves performance within each individual domain by
encouraging the model to capture more general intrinsic combinatorial patterns.
Specifically, a single RoME model trained on three domains achieves an average
improvement of 67.7% then evaluated on five diverse domains. We further test the
pretrained model on MIPLIB in a zero-shot setting, demonstrating its ability to
deliver measurable performance gains on challenging real-world instances where
existing learning-based approaches often struggle to generalize.

1

Introduction

Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) is a fundamental and expressive framework for modeling
a wide range of real-world optimization problems, including logistics optimization [1], network
design [2], scheduling [3], and industrial planning [4]. Due to its strong modeling capacity, MILP has
become a cornerstone of operation research and combinatorial optimization [5–7]. However, MILPs
are well known to be NP-hard, and solving large-scale instances with thousands of variables and
constraints remains computationally intensive. Even state-of-the-art solvers such as Gurobi [8] and
SCIP [9], which integrate advanced techniques like branch-and-bound, cutting planes, and heuristics,
can struggle to deliver timely and scalable solutions as problem complexity grows.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

