Adjacent Words, Divergent Intents: Jailbreaking
Large Language Models via Task Concurrency

Yukun Jiang, Mingjie Li, Michael Backes, Yang Zhang∗
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarbrucken, Germany 66123
{yukun.jiang, mingjie.li, director, zhang}@cispa.de

Abstract
Despite their superior performance on a wide range of domains, large language
models (LLMs) remain vulnerable to misuse for generating harmful content, a
risk that has been further amplified by various jailbreak attacks. Existing jailbreak
attacks mainly follow sequential logic, where LLMs understand and answer each
given task one by one. However, concurrency, a natural extension of the sequential
scenario, has been largely overlooked. In this work, we first propose a wordlevel method to enable task concurrency in LLMs, where adjacent words encode
divergent intents. Although LLMs maintain strong utility in answering concurrent
tasks, which is demonstrated by our evaluations on mathematical and general
question-answering benchmarks, we notably observe that combining a harmful
task with a benign one significantly reduces the probability of it being filtered by
the guardrail, showing the potential risks associated with concurrency in LLMs.
Based on these findings, we introduce JAIL-CON, an iterative attack framework
that JAILbreaks LLMs via task CONcurrency. Experiments on widely-used LLMs
demonstrate the strong jailbreak capabilities of JAIL-CON compared to existing
attacks. Furthermore, when the guardrail is applied as a defense, compared to
the sequential answers generated by previous attacks, the concurrent answers in
our JAIL-CON exhibit greater stealthiness and are less detectable by the guardrail,
highlighting the unique feature of task concurrency in jailbreaking LLMs.1
Disclaimer: This paper contains unsafe information. Reader discretion is advised.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT, DeepSeek, and LLaMA have become foundational
components of modern AI systems, demonstrating surprising performance on tasks spanning question
answering, math problem solving, and creative writing [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. However, this rapid progress
comes with a corresponding growth in security and safety concerns. Even with safety alignment and
content filtering (i.e., guardrails), advanced LLMs can be forced (jailbroken) to generate unwanted
harmful content by well-designed methods [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Existing work
on LLMs, including jailbreak attacks, mainly adopts a sequential interaction paradigm (left part of
Figure 1b), which aligns with human cognition patterns [19, 20] and thus appears intuitive. However,
concurrency, a natural extension of sequential interaction, has not been well explored in LLMs.
Inspired by previous studies [21, 22, 23, 24] on the reliability and robustness of concurrency in
non-LLM domains (e.g., operating systems), we aim to investigate whether concurrency would
introduce new safety vulnerabilities into LLMs. As illustrated in Figure 1a, a processor that executes
two tasks sequentially completes one before starting the other, whereas in concurrency, the processor
∗
1

Corresponding author
Our Code is available at https://github.com/TrustAIRLab/JAIL-CON.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

