Sim-LLM: Optimizing LLM Inference at the Edge
through Inter-Task KV Reuse

Ruikun Luo1234 , Changwei Gu1234 , Qiang He1234∗, Feifei Chen5 ,
Song Wu1234 , Hai Jin1234 , Yun Yang6
1
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
2
Services Computing Technology and System Lab 3 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
Deakin University 6 Swinburne University of Technology
{rkluo, gumorming, heqiang, wusong, hjin}@hust.edu.cn,
fefei.chen@deakin.edu.au, yyang@swin.edu.au

Abstract
KV cache technology, by storing key-value pairs, helps reduce the computational
overhead incurred by large language models (LLMs). It facilitates their deployment
on resource-constrained edge computing nodes like edge servers. However, as
the complexity and size of tasks increase, KV cache usage leads to substantial
GPU memory consumption. Existing research has focused on mitigating KV cache
memory usage through sequence length reduction, task-specific compression, and
dynamic eviction policies. However, these methods are computationally expensive
for resource-constrained edge computing nodes. To tackle this challenge, this
paper presents Sim-LLM, a novel inference optimization mechanism that leverages
task similarity to reduce KV cache memory consumption for LLMs. By caching
KVs from processed tasks and reusing them for subsequent similar tasks during
inference, Sim-LLM significantly reduces memory consumption while boosting
system throughput and increasing maximum batch size, all with minimal accuracy
degradation. Evaluated on both A40 and A100 GPUs, Sim-LLM achieves a
system throughput improvement of up to 39.40% and a memory reduction of up to
34.65%, compared to state-of-the-art approaches. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/CGCL-codes/SimLLM.

1

Introduction

The deployment of edge applications, such as autonomous vehicles and smart traffic management, has
generated massive real-time data from numerous edge devices [1, 2]. In recent years, edge intelligence
has further highlighted the advantages of edge computing in privacy preserving and latency reduction.
Large language models (LLMs) can be deployed on edge servers close to users to improve their
experiences [3]. However, as the number of tasks increases, the memory overhead required for
processing these tasks increases rapidly, making it difficult to process on time. This problem becomes
even more pronounced on edge servers, where resources are inherently constrained [2, 4].
The memory consumption of LLMs during inference primarily arises from the model parameters and
the key-value (KV) cache [5, 6]. KV cache is a common technique for accelerating LLM inference.
The core idea is to store previously computed key and value vectors from the attention mechanism for
reuse in subsequent token generations. Since the size of KV cache grows linearly with the sequence
length, batch size, and the number of model layers, it consumes a lot of GPU memory [7, 8].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

