Rethinking Neural Combinatorial Optimization for
Vehicle Routing Problems with Different
Constraint Tightness Degrees

Fu Luo1,2 , Yaoxin Wu3 , Zhi Zheng4 , Zhenkun Wang1,2∗
1
School of Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fully Actuated System Control Theory and Technology,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences,
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
4
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
luof2023@mail.sustech.edu.cn, y.wu2@tue.nl,
zhi.zheng@u.nus.edu, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) methods have shown promising
problem-solving ability without requiring domain-specific expertise. Most existing
NCO methods use training and testing data with a fixed constraint value and lack
research on the effect of constraint tightness on the performance of NCO methods.
This paper takes the capacity-constrained vehicle routing problem (CVRP) as an
example to empirically analyze the NCO performance under different tightness
degrees of the capacity constraint. Our analysis reveals that existing NCO methods overfit the capacity constraint, and they can only perform satisfactorily on
a small range of the constraint values but poorly on other values. To tackle this
drawback of existing NCO methods, we develop an efficient training scheme that
explicitly considers varying degrees of constraint tightness and propose a multiexpert module to learn a generally adaptable solving strategy. Experimental results
show that the proposed method can effectively overcome the overfitting issue,
demonstrating superior performance on the CVRP and CVRP with time windows
(CVRPTW) with various constraint tightness degrees. The code is available at
https://github.com/CIAM-Group/Rethinking_Constraint_Tightness.

1

Introduction

The vehicle routing problem (VRP) is an important category of combinatorial optimization problems
and is encountered in many real-world applications, including transportation [1], navigation [2],
and robotics [3]. Due to the NP-hard nature [4], it is prohibitively expensive to obtain exact VRP
solutions. Traditional methods typically employ problem-specific heuristic algorithms, which require
extensive domain-specific expertise. As an alternative, neural combinatorial optimization (NCO)
methods have received widespread attention recently [5–8]. These methods can automatically learn
problem-solving strategies from data using neural networks. Some advanced NCO methods can even
obtain near-optimal VRP solutions without the need for expert knowledge [9–17].
VRP instances are typically defined with some numeric constraints. For example, the solution of
a capacity-constrained VRP (CVRP) should meet the capacity constraint of each vehicle, and the
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

