With Limited Data for Multimodal Alignment,
Let the STRUCTURE Guide You
Fabian Gröger1,2,3,∗ , Shuo Wen1,∗ , Huyen Le1 , Maria Brbić1
1
EPFL 2 University of Basel 3 HSLU
brbiclab.epfl.ch/projects/structure

Abstract
Multimodal models have demonstrated powerful capabilities in complex tasks
requiring multimodal alignment, including zero-shot classification and cross-modal
retrieval. However, existing models typically rely on millions of paired multimodal
samples, which are prohibitively expensive or infeasible to obtain in many domains.
In this work, we explore the feasibility of building multimodal models with limited
amount of paired data by aligning pretrained unimodal foundation models. We
show that high-quality alignment is possible with as few as tens of thousands of
paired samples—less than 1% of the data typically used in the field. To achieve this,
we introduce STRUCTURE, an effective regularization technique that preserves
the neighborhood geometry of the latent space of unimodal encoders. Additionally,
we show that aligning last layers is often suboptimal and demonstrate the benefits
of aligning the layers with the highest representational similarity across modalities. These two components can be readily incorporated into existing alignment
methods, yielding substantial gains across 24 zero-shot image classification and
retrieval benchmarks, with average relative improvement of 51.6% in classification
and 91.8% in retrieval tasks. Our results highlight the effectiveness and broad
applicability of our framework for limited-sample multimodal learning and offer a
promising path forward for resource-constrained domains.

1

Introduction

Unimodal foundation models (FMs) have achieved remarkable progress in recent years, demonstrating high performance on a variety of complex tasks across diverse domains. Large language
models (LLMs) [1, 2] have shown unparalleled abilities across a wide range of natural language understanding and generation tasks, reaching human-level performance on many complex reasoning and
comprehension tasks. In parallel, vision FMs [3, 4] have delivered similar breakthroughs in visual perception, enabling systems to perform tasks such as object recognition and segmentation with minimal
supervision. In scientific domains, models such as AlphaFold [5] and ESM2 [6] have demonstrated
the potential of large-scale models to solve highly specialized and complex problems, including
accurate protein structure prediction and sequence-based modeling of biomolecular functions.
While these models are highly effective within their respective modalities, many applications involve
multimodal data, where it is important to map different modalities into a shared representation space
to enable meaningful cross-modal comparison, retrieval, and classification. Pioneering multimodal
models like CLIP [7] and CLAP [8] align visual and auditory inputs with language through contrastive
learning and achieve strong zero-shot performance across a broad spectrum of multimodal tasks.
However, these powerful multimodal models rely on vast amounts of paired training data (e.g., CLIP
uses 400M pairs), which are often unavailable in many domains like healthcare and biology, where
collecting high-quality multimodal data is expensive and labor-intensive.
∗

Joint first authorship

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

