Kernel von Mises Formula of the Influence Function
Yaroslav Mukhin
Cornell University
kif@ymx.io

Abstract
The influence function (IF) of a statistical functional is the Riesz representer of
its derivative, also known as its first variation and Fisher-Rao gradient. It is a
key object for numerical optimization over probability measures, semiparametric
efficiency theory, standard constructions of efficient estimators, and an arsenal of
inference methods for these estimators. Yet, deriving the IF analytically is often an
obstruction for practitioners. To automate this task, we develop a novel spectral
representation of the IF that lends itself to a low-rank functional estimator in a
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (rkHs). Our estimator (i) does not require analytic
derivations by the user, (ii) relies on kernel Principal Component Analysis and
numerical pathwise derivatives along these components. We present the derivation
of the representation and prove consistency of the low-rank rkHs estimator.

1

Introduction

The target θ of a statistical learning procedure often takes the form of a mapping P 7→ θ(P ) of the
probability measure P on a sample space X ⊂ Rd governing the training data X1:n . The difficulty of
learning θ from data depends on the combination of structural properties of all possible P and
R the
local variability of θ at the unknown true P . For example, estimating the mean θ1 (P ) := x dP
is easy even if P is unrestricted beyond having finite moments. By contrast, estimating the density
f (x0 ) of P at a point x0 is easy in a model for P that is smoothly parametrized by a subset of Rp ,
but much harder in nonparametric settings. The rate of convergence of an estimator θ̂n (X1:n ) to the
target θ(P ) as the sample size n increases is a measure
of the statistical difficulty of estimating θ.
√
The rate of estimating θ1 with the sample mean
is
n
by
the
Central Limit Theorem (CLT), whereas
√
the rate of estimating f (x0 ) can range from n to arbitrarily slow, depending on the regularity of P .
If f (x) is smooth in a neighborhood of x0 for all P , then observations close to x0 can be aggregated,
as for estimating θ1 , resulting in a fast rate; if f (x) varies roughly near x0 and as P is perturbed, then
aggregation leads to bias and must be limited at the expense of precision.
√
We consider scalar functionals θ(P ) that can be estimated at the parametric n rate in nonparametric
models for P , like the mean θ1 . This Rincludes scalar and vector estimands that depend on averages
of nuisance functions, e.g., θ0 (P ) := f dP and estimands of causal inference, but not f (x0 ). For
these parameters the rate is fixed and the difficulty of estimation is characterized in terms of a lower
bound on the asymptotic variance. The object that determines
R this bound is the influence function
(IF) of θ at P , denoted ψP : X → R; the bound is the norm ψP2 dP of this function. Setting aside
the √
interpretation of ψP (x) until Theorem 2.1, recall when one can expect θ(P ) to be estimable at
the n rate and to have an IF. This requires that θ(P ) varies smoothly with P . Specifically, the map
P 7→ θ(P ) must have a derivative DθP that maps perturbations to P into infinitesimal changes in
θ(P ) [Mis47; Ste56; KL76; IH81; Vaa91]. When DθP exists and is a bounded linear map on L2 (P ), Riesz’s
theorem guarantees the existence of a function
ψP ∈ L2 (P ) such that for any perturbation ϕ to P ,
R
the effect on θ(P ) is given by DθP [ϕ] = ϕψP dP ; we review this further in Theorem 2.1. If θ(P )
is not smooth in P , so the derivative DθP doesn’t
√ exist or is unbounded and has no IF, then the
estimation rate for θ(P ) is typically slower than n.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

