Train to Defend: First Defense Against Cryptanalytic
Neural Network Parameter Extraction Attacks
Aydin Aysu
Department of ECE
North Carolina State University
aaysu@ncsu.edu

Ashley Kurian
Department of ECE
North Carolina State University
akurian@ncsu.edu

Abstract
Neural networks are valuable intellectual property due to the significant computational cost, expert labor, and proprietary data involved in their development.
Consequently, protecting their parameters is critical not only for maintaining a
competitive advantage but also for enhancing the model’s security and privacy.
Prior works have demonstrated the growing capability of cryptanalytic attacks
to scale to deeper models. In this paper, we present the first defense mechanism
against cryptanalytic parameter extraction attacks. Our key insight is to eliminate
the neuron uniqueness necessary for these attacks to succeed. We achieve this by a
novel, extraction-aware training method. Specifically, we augment the standard loss
function with an additional regularization term that minimizes the distance between
neuron weights within a layer. Therefore, the proposed defense has zero areadelay overhead during inference. We evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in
mitigating extraction attacks while analyzing the model accuracy across different
architectures and datasets. When re-trained with the same model architecture, the
results show that our defense incurs a marginal accuracy change of less than 1%
with the modified loss function. Moreover, we present a theoretical framework
to quantify the success probability of the attack. When tested comprehensively
with prior attack settings, our defense demonstrated empirical success for sustained
periods of extraction, whereas unprotected networks are extracted between 14
minutes to 4 hours.

1

Introduction

Neural networks hold significant value as their training process is computationally intensive, requires
skilled labor, involves proprietary intellectual property, and demands extensive effort in dataset
collection. Today, neural networks are ubiquitous, powering a wide range of applications due to their
superior performance in various machine-learning tasks. The rise of machine learning as a service
(MLaaS) has made it common for users to query models by providing input and receiving output, while
model providers seek to obfuscate model parameters to protect their intellectual property. However,
the increasing adoption of neural networks has also led to a rise in model-stealing attacks [25, 19, 17],
which aim to create high-fidelity [11] replicas of the original models. These attacks target various
components of the neural network, including hyperparameters [1, 26, 12] (such as layer types and
configurations) and learned parameters [4, 9](trained weights and biases). The significant cost and
effort savings compared to training a model from scratch make model theft an appealing strategy for
adversaries. Moreover, model extraction eases other attacks, such as membership inference [22, 23]
and input poisoning [5], further exacerbating security concerns.
Various attacks have demonstrated the feasibility of extracting neural network parameters through
cryptanalytic techniques [4, 2, 21, 8]. These attacks treat parameter recovery as a structured mathematical problem, enabling the extraction of weights using a polynomial number of queries and
within polynomial time with respect to model size on deep models [8]. Despite their effectiveness,
cryptanalytic extraction attacks remain a major threat that has not been addressed to date, with their
capabilities growing rapidly.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

