Predicting the Performance of Black-box Language
Models with Follow-up Queries

Dylan Sam∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Marc Finzi
Carnegie Mellon University

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Reliably predicting the behavior of language models—such as whether their outputs
are correct or have been adversarially manipulated—is a fundamentally challenging
task. This is often made even more difficult as frontier language models are offered
only through closed-source APIs, providing only black-box access. In this paper,
we predict the behavior of black-box language models by asking follow-up questions and taking the probabilities of responses as representations to train reliable
predictors. We first demonstrate that training a linear model on these responses
reliably and accurately predicts model correctness on question-answering and
reasoning benchmarks. Surprisingly, this can even outperform white-box linear
predictors that operate over model internals or activations. Furthermore, we demonstrate that these follow-up question responses can reliably distinguish between
a clean version of an LLM and one that has been adversarially influenced via a
system prompt to answer questions incorrectly or to introduce bugs into generated
code. Finally, we show that they can also be used to differentiate between blackbox LLMs, enabling the detection of misrepresented models provided through an
API. Overall, our work shows promise in monitoring black-box language model
behavior, supporting their deployment in larger, autonomous systems.

1

Introduction

Reliably predicting the behavior of a language model (e.g., whether its outputs are correct, or whether
it has been adversarially manipulated) is a fundamentally challenging task. This is made even more
challenging as many of the most capable large language models (LLMs) lie beyond closed-source
APIs [Achiam et al., 2023, Team et al., 2023], providing only black-box access through inputs and
outputs. As a result, recent advances in understanding these models through model internals or
from mechanistic viewpoints [Olsson et al., 2022, Nanda et al., 2022] are no longer applicable. The
inability to rely on LLMs remains a roadblock for their widespread deployment in high-stakes settings
or in agentic and autonomous frameworks [Xi et al., 2023, Robey et al., 2024].
In spite of only having black-box access, a promising direction in understanding LLMs is to leverage
their ability to interact with human queries and provide useful responses. Recent work in the whitebox setting (i.e., having access to model internals) has demonstrated that a language model’s hidden
state contains low-dimensional features of truthfulness or harmfulness [Zou et al., 2023a], and has
analyzed learning sparse dictionaries and activations on certain input tokens [Bricken et al., 2023].
While significant progress has been made on these fronts, these approaches all require white-box
access to these models. This raises the question, “How well can we predict a language model’s
behavior with only black-box access?"
In this paper, we propose to predict model behavior by looking at their responses to follow-up
questions. After receiving an initial generation or answer from an LLM, we ask a set of follow-up
∗

Correspondance to dylansam@andrew.cmu.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

