GeneMAN: Generalizable Single-Image 3D Human
Reconstruction from Multi-Source Human Data
∗

∗

Wentao Wang1 , Hang Ye2 , Fangzhou Hong3 , Xue Yang4 , Jianfu Zhang4 ,
†
Yizhou Wang2 , Ziwei Liu3 , Liang Pan1
1

3

Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Peking University
Nanyang Technological University 4 SAIS & SCS, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Head Shot

(b) Human with Objects

Half-body Shot

Full-body Shot

(a) Human with Varying Body Proportions

(c) Human Reconstruction with Natural
Poses and Textures

Figure 1: GeneMAN is a generalizable framework for single-view-to-3D human reconstruction,
built on a collection of multi-source human data. Given a single in-the-wild image of a person,
GeneMAN could reconstruct a high-quality 3D human model, regardless of its clothing, pose, or body
proportions (e.g., a full-body, a half-body, or a close-up shot) in the given image. The anonymous
project page of GeneMAN is: https://roooooz.github.io/GeneMAN/.

Abstract
Given a single in-the-wild human photo, it remains a challenging task to reconstruct
a high-fidelity 3D human model. Existing methods face difficulties including a)
the varying body proportions captured by in-the-wild human images; b) diverse
personal belongings within the shot; and c) ambiguities in human postures and inconsistency in human textures. In addition, the scarcity of high-quality human data
intensifies the challenge. To address these problems, we propose a Generalizable
image-to-3D huMAN reconstruction framework, dubbed GeneMAN, building
upon a comprehensive multi-source collection of high-quality human data, including 3D scans, multi-view videos, single photos, and our generated synthetic human
data. GeneMAN encompasses three key modules. 1) Without relying on parametric
human models (e.g., SMPL), GeneMAN first trains a human-specific text-to-image
diffusion model and a view-conditioned diffusion model, serving as GeneMAN 2D
human prior and 3D human prior for reconstruction, respectively. 2) With the help
of the pretrained human prior models, the Geometry Initialization-&-Sculpting
pipeline is leveraged to recover high-quality 3D human geometry given a single
image. 3) To achieve high-fidelity 3D human textures, GeneMAN employs the
* Equal contributions.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

