Bigram Subnetworks: Mapping to Next Tokens in
Transformer Language Models

Tyler A. Chang
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California San Diego
tachang@ucsd.edu

Benjamin K. Bergen
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California San Diego
bkbergen@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In Transformer language models, activation vectors transform from current token
embeddings to next token predictions as they pass through the model. To isolate
a minimal form of this transformation, we identify language model subnetworks
that make bigram predictions, naive next token predictions based only on the
current token. We find that bigram subnetworks can be found in fully trained
language models up to 1B parameters, and these subnetworks are critical for
model performance even when they consist of less than 0.2% of model parameters.
Bigram subnetworks are concentrated in the first Transformer MLP layer, and they
overlap significantly with subnetworks trained to optimally prune a given model.
Mechanistically, the bigram subnetworks often recreate a pattern from the full
models where the first layer induces a sharp change that aligns activations with next
token predictions rather than current token representations. Our results demonstrate
that bigram subnetworks comprise a minimal subset of parameters that are both
necessary and sufficient for basic next token predictions in language models,
and they help drive the transformation from current to next token activations in
the residual stream. These subnetworks can lay a foundation for studying more
complex language model circuits by building up from a minimal circuit.1

1

Introduction

Modern Transformer language models predict next tokens from text. However, developing reliable and
interpretable explanations for how they do this is an open area of research. In particular, mechanistic
interpretability research aims to identify features in model activations and operations in model
parameters that explain how language models process text to make predictions. Ideally, it would be
possible to decompose language model behavior into component circuits, each of which performs
some interpretable operation in the model that can be isolated from other operations. Indeed, an
extensive body of research has sought to identify interpretable circuits in language models, including
induction heads, name mover heads, copy suppression heads, indirect object identification (IOI)
circuits, and other types of reasoning circuits (Olsson et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Geva et al.,
2023; Lepori et al., 2023b; McDougall et al., 2024; Merullo et al., 2024a,b; Lindsey et al., 2025).
Circuit behaviors are often verified through ablations or interventions, where a target behavior should
change when the circuit is ablated or modified in the full model (e.g. Finlayson et al., 2021; Meng
et al., 2022; Stolfo et al., 2023; McDougall et al., 2024; Tigges et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Todd
et al., 2024; Sankaranarayanan et al., 2024; AlKhamissi et al., 2025). This evaluates the necessity of
the circuit for the target behavior, but not its sufficiency: the circuit should also induce the behavior
when added to a minimal circuit whose behavior is already understood. Both necessity and sufficiency
1

Code and trained bigram subnetworks at: https://github.com/tylerachang/bigram-subnetworks.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

