DLoFT: Gradient-Decoupled Fine-Tuning for
Generalizable Long Chain-of-Thought Reasoning

Sitong Wu1,∗ Haoru Tan2,∗ Jingyao Li1 Shaofeng Zhang3
Xiaojuan Qi2,† Bei Yu1† Jiaya Jia1,4,†
1

3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Long chain-of-thought (LongCoT) has emerged as a powerful reasoning paradigm
for enabling large language models (LLMs) to solve complex tasks through a
systematic and thorough thinking phase. Although supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
on high-quality LongCoT traces has proven effective to activate LongCoT abilities,
we find that models trained in this way tend to overfit problem-specific knowledge
and heuristics, leading to degraded out-of-distribution performance. To address
this issue, we propose a Decoupled LongCoT Fine-Tuning (DLoFT) algorithm,
which enables the model to learn generalizable LongCoT reasoning abilities while
preventing overfitting to the reasoning content with problem-specific information.
The key idea is to decouple the gradient into two orthogonal components: 1) a
paradigm-relevant gradient corresponding to the general LongCoT paradigm and
2) a content-relevant gradient reflecting the problem-specific information, where
only the former gradient is used to update model parameters. Specifically, by
leveraging the unique two-phase composition (thinking and solution) of the LongCoT response, our gradient decoupling mechanism isolates the content-relevant
gradient via a projection operation and separates the paradigm-relevant gradient through orthogonalization. Our DLoFT ensures the model concentrate on
internalizing the LongCoT paradigm rather than memorizing problem-specific
knowledge and heuristics. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our DLoFT
significantly improves the generalization behavior of LongCoT abilities compared
to SFT while maintaining strong in-distribution performance. The code is available
at https://github.com/dvlab-research/DLoFT.

1

Introduction

Recent large language models (LLMs), for example, OpenAI o1-o3 [1–3], have achieved remarkable
breakthroughs in difficult reasoning tasks [4–6]. A key technique driving these advances is the long
chain-of-thought (LongCoT) reasoning paradigm, which encourages models to conduct a systematic
and thorough thinking process involving reflection on intermediate steps, error correction, feasibility
assessment, and exploration of alternative ideas.
Following these breakthroughs, the community has attempted to replicate such LongCoT reasoning
abilities, which remains a significant challenge. Recent efforts typically rely on imitating high-quality
LongCoT traces via supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [7–9] or conducting costly reinforcement learning
(RL) on tasks with deterministic final answer [10]. Notably, existing works are predominantly focused
∗
†

Equal contribution (stone-wu@link.cuhk.edu.hk, hrtan@eee.hku.hk)
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

