Conditional Gradient Methods with Standard LMO
for Stochastic Simple Bilevel Optimization

Khanh-Hung Giang-Tran
Cornell University
tg452@cornell.edu

Soroosh Shafiee
Cornell University
shafiee@cornell.edu

Nam Ho-Nguyen
The University of Sydney
nam.ho-nguyen@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We propose efficient methods for solving stochastic simple bilevel optimization
problems with convex inner levels, where the goal is to minimize an outer stochastic objective function subject to the solution set of an inner stochastic optimization
problem. Existing methods often rely on costly projection or linear optimization
oracles over complex sets, limiting their scalability. To overcome this, we propose
an iteratively regularized conditional gradient approach that leverages linear optimization oracles exclusively over the base feasible set. Our proposed methods employ a vanishing regularization sequence that progressively emphasizes the inner
problem while biasing towards desirable minimal outer objective solutions. In the
one-sample stochastic setting and under standard convexity assumptions, we establish non-asymptotic convergence rates of Õ(t−1/4 ) for both the outer and inner
objectives. In the finite-sum setting with a mini-batch scheme, the corresponding
rates become Õ(t−1/2 ). When the outer objective is nonconvex, we prove nonasymptotic convergence rates of Õ(t−1/7 ) for both the outer and inner objectives
in the one-sample stochastic setting, and Õ(t−1/4 ) in the finite-sum setting. Experimental results on over-parametrized regression and dictionary learning tasks
demonstrate the practical advantages of our approach over existing methods, confirming our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

We consider stochastic simple bilevel optimization problems, where the goal is to minimize an outer
stochastic objective function subject to the solution set of an inner stochastic convex optimization
problem. Formally, the problem is defined as
Fopt := min {F (x) := E[f (x, θ)] : x ∈ Xopt } , where Xopt := arg min {G(z) := E[g(z, ξ)]} .
x∈Rd

z∈X

(1)
Here X ⊂ Rd is a compact convex set, and both F and G are smooth with G is additionally
convex, making the optimization problem (1) a possibly nonconvex problem with convex domain.
This framework has broad applicability, including hyper-parameter optimization [16, 17, 39], metalearning [17, 42], reinforcement learning [32] and game theory [50]. In particular, problem (1) arises
in learning applications where G is the prediction error of a model x on data, and F is an auxiliary
objective (e.g., regularization, or a validation data set). The dependence on data is through the
expectation operators and the random variables θ, ξ. The bilevel formulation provides a tuning-free
alternative to the usual regularization approach where we optimize σF (x) + G(x) for a carefully
tuned parameter σ.
Despite its wide applications in machine learning there are three primary challenges in solving (1).
First, we do not have an explicit representation of the optimal set Xopt in general, preventing us
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

