Quantization-Free Autoregressive Action Transformer

Ziyad Sheebaelhamd
University of Tübingen

Michael Tschannen
Google DeepMind

Michael Muehlebach
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Claire Vernade
University of Tübingen

Abstract
Current transformer-based imitation learning approaches introduce discrete action
representations and train an autoregressive transformer decoder on the resulting
latent code. However, the initial quantization breaks the continuous structure of
the action space thereby limiting the capabilities of the generative model. We
propose a quantization-free method instead that leverages Generative InfiniteVocabulary Transformers (GIVT) as a direct, continuous policy parametrization for
autoregressive transformers. This simplifies the imitation learning pipeline while
achieving state-of-the-art performance on a variety of popular simulated robotics
tasks. We enhance our policy roll-outs by carefully studying sampling algorithms,
further improving the results.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling lies at the heart of modern machine learning, enabling the production of outputs
that adhere to user-specified objectives and constraints by navigating high-dimensional spaces of
potential outcomes. Fundamentally, this process can be understood as a form of search where
naive or exhaustive strategies are computationally intractable due to the size of the space. We
consider imitation learning for robotic systems as an extreme example, where the search space has
uncountable cardinality and a complex structure arising from nonlinear dynamics, interactions with
the environment and the fundamental multimodality in human or robot behavior. In many real-world
robotics applications, the control signals involved are continuous in nature [33, 59, 28]. Current
state-of-the-art methods for modeling policies in continuous control tasks broadly fall into two
categories: autoregressive transformer models [26, 45] and diffusion models [7, 54, 40], which will
be discussed in the next two paragraphs.
Existing autoregressive policies, on the one hand, ignore the challenge of learning in a continuous
domain by discretizing actions [26, 45]. This discretization can introduce several drawbacks: It
discards the inherent structure of the continuous space, increases complexity by adding a separate
quantization step, and may limit expressiveness or accuracy when fine-grained control is required.
Furthermore, the popular approach of learning a VQ-VAE [52] of the action space involves nondifferentiable operations and therefore requires advanced tricks during representation learning to sidestep
optimization difficulties and instabilities [24, 20, 18, 31]. Hence, our goal is to design autoregressive
transformers that preserve the continuous nature of the action space, leveraging the smooth and
potentially multimodal behavior patterns that experts exhibit.
Diffusion policies, on the other hand, are adept at capturing continuous action distributions, but
face two critical challenges in control tasks. First, real-time applications like robotics demand fast,
efficient inference, yet diffusion models rely on iterative sampling, requiring dozens of forward passes
Correspondence: Ziyad Sheebaelhamd <ziyad.sheebaelhamd@uni-tuebingen.de>
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

