Unlocking hidden biomolecular conformational
landscapes in diffusion models at inference time

Daniel D. Richman∗
Stanford University
ddrichma@stanford.edu

Jessica Karaguesian∗
Stanford University
jkara@stanford.edu

Carl-Mikael Suomivuori†
Stanford University
carl-mikael.suomivuori@yale.edu

Ron O. Dror
Stanford University
rondror@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The function of biomolecules such as proteins depends on their ability to interconvert between a wide range of structures or “conformations.” Researchers have
endeavored for decades to develop computational methods to predict the distribution of conformations, which is far harder to determine experimentally than
a static folded structure. We present ConforMix, an inference-time algorithm
that enhances sampling of conformational distributions using a combination of
classifier guidance, filtering, and free energy estimation. Our approach upgrades
diffusion models—whether trained for static structure prediction or conformational generation—to enable more efficient discovery of conformational variability
without requiring prior knowledge of major degrees of freedom. ConforMix is
orthogonal to improvements in model pretraining and would benefit even a hypothetical model that perfectly reproduced the Boltzmann distribution. Remarkably,
when applied to a diffusion model trained for static structure prediction, ConforMix
captures structural changes including domain motion, cryptic pocket flexibility, and
transporter cycling, while avoiding unphysical states. Case studies of biologically
critical proteins demonstrate the scalability, accuracy, and utility of this method.

1

Introduction

Biology depends on molecular flexibility. Proteins, RNA, DNA, and other components of biological
systems adopt dynamic 3D conformations, which are key to function [7, 8]. Understanding and modeling these dynamics informs both basic biology research and applications to medicine, agriculture,
and other areas, and is therefore a major aim of both experimental and computational scientists. The
statistical distribution of the atomic configurations of a molecular system in equilibrium at a given
temperature is determined by their potential energies. Specifically, a state with lower potential energy
is exponentially more probable than a higher potential energy state, as determined by the Boltzmann
distribution [31]. To sample this distribution, scientists have invested decades of effort in creating
methods such as Monte Carlo samplers and molecular dynamics simulations (MD), but these methods
are typically extremely slow and suffer from accuracy problems [25, 31, 32].
More recently, machine learning models have revolutionized biomolecular structure prediction, and
efforts are underway to extend these advances to train models that do not merely predict static
structures but generate diverse conformations from the true Boltzmann distribution [1, 11, 12, 17,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Present affiliation: Yale School of Medicine.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

