DUAL: Learning Diverse Kernels for Aggregated
Two-sample and Independence Testing

Zhijian Zhou∗ § Xunye Tian∗§ Liuhua Peng§ Chao Lei§
Antonin Schrab† Danica J. Sutherland‡ Feng Liu§
University of Melbourne§ University of Cambridge† UBC & Amii‡
{zhijianzhou.ml, xunyetian.ml}@gmail.com
liuhua.peng@unimelb.edu.au
clei1@student.unimelb.edu.au
afls2@cam.ac.uk
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca
fengliu.ml@gmail.com

Abstract
To adapt kernel two-sample and independence testing to complex structured data,
aggregation of multiple kernels is frequently employed to boost testing power
compared to single-kernel tests. However, we observe a phenomenon that directly
maximizing multiple kernel-based statistics may result in highly similar kernels that
capture highly overlapping information, limiting the effectiveness of aggregation.
To address this, we propose an aggregated statistic that explicitly incorporates
kernel diversity based on the covariance between different kernels. Moreover, we
identify a fundamental challenge: a trade-off between the diversity among kernels
and the test power of individual kernels, i.e., the selected kernels should be both
effective and diverse. This motivates a testing framework with selection inference,
which leverages information from the training phase to select kernels with strong
individual performance from the learned diverse kernel pool. We provide rigorous
theoretical statements and proofs to show the consistency on the test power and
control of Type-I error, along with asymptotic analysis of the proposed statistics.
Lastly, we conducted extensive empirical experiments demonstrating the superior
performance of our proposed approach across various benchmarks for both twosample and independence testing.¶

1

Introduction

In modern machine learning, non-parametric hypothesis tests have become essential for comparing
probability distributions and detecting statistical dependencies without imposing restrictive model
assumptions. Kernel-based methods provide a powerful framework for these tasks by embedding
probability distributions into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS), enabling rigorous yet flexible measures of discrepancy and dependence [1, 2]. For example, the Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) is a prominent kernel two-sample test metric used to determine whether two sets of observations originate from the same distribution [1, 3–12]. Similarly, the Hilbert–Schmidt Independence
Criterion (HSIC) is a related method designed to measure statistical dependence between random
variables, thus serving as a test of independence [2, 13–16]. They use kernel methods to enhance statistical power and are widely adopted in machine learning fields including domain adaptation [17, 18],
generative modeling [19], adversarial learning [20], machine-generated text detection [21, 22], causal
discovery [23], semi-supervised representation learning [24], continual learning [25], and more.
Related works. Kernel aggregation, combining multiple kernels into a single test procedure, has
proven to be highly effective in non-parametric hypothesis testing, often yielding substantial gains
∗

Equal contribution. ¶ Code: https://github.com/tmlr-group/MMD-HSIC-DUAL.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

