Reinforcement learning for one-shot DAG scheduling
with comparability identification and dense reward

Xumai Qi1,2
Dongdong Zhang1∗
Taotao Liu1
Hongcheng Wang1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Urban Renewal and Spatial Optimization Technology, CAUP, Tongji
University

Abstract
In recent years, many studies proposed to generate solutions for Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG) scheduling problem in one shot by combining reinforcement learning
and list scheduling heuristic. However, these existing methods suffer from biased
estimation of sampling probabilities and inefficient guidance in training, due to
redundant comparisons among node priorities and the sparse reward challenge. To
address these issues, we analyze of the limitations of these existing methods, and
propose a novel one-shot DAG scheduling method with comparability identification
and dense reward signal, based on the policy gradient framework. In our method,
a comparable antichain identification mechanism is proposed to eliminate the
problem of redundant nodewise priority comparison. We also propose a dense
reward signal for node level decision-making optimization in training, effectively
addressing the sparse reward challenge. The experimental results show that the
proposed method can yield superior results of scheduling objectives compared to
other learning-based DAG scheduling methods.

1

Introduction

The Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) scheduling problem is a class of NP-hard [Kan, 2012] Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COP). DAG scheduling problem arises in the emerging cloud
manufacturing and distributed computing, involving production and computation workflow scheduling. The jobs, operations, or tasks are modeled into nodes of DAG, and the directed edges represent
the precedence constraints among them. The goal is to achieve the best possible performance by
determining an optimal node execution order and allocating resources accordingly.
DAG scheduling has attracted extensive research attention, with many heuristic, metaheuristic and
Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods proposed to solve it. Among them, RL has already shown
promise in solving generic COPs [Kwon et al., 2020, Hottung et al., 2022, Choo et al., 2022, Zhang
et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2025]. Specifically for DAG scheduling, early studies tended construct the
solution (i.e., the order of node execution) incrementally [Mao et al., 2019, Zhou et al., 2022, Song
et al., 2023]. They utilized graph neural networks (GNN) to guide the policy network to select the
optimal schedulable node at each step, until the complete solution is constructed.
Considering that the incremental solution construction methods are computationally consuming
and less efficient in training, some studies proposed RL-based one-shot DAG scheduling, which is
motivated by list scheduling [Lee et al., 2020, 2021, Jeon et al., 2023]. They attempted to enable
network to infer the entire solution through a single forward propagation process. List scheduling is
a classic and effective heuristic rule for DAG scheduling. As shown in Fig.1a, they generate a full
schedule of the DAG by leveraging GNN to assign a fixed priority list for all task nodes in one single
step, and iteratively learn to optimize the network according to the objective cost as the feedback
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

