Enhancing Compositional Reasoning in CLIP via
Reconstruction and Alignment of Text Descriptions

Jihoon Kwon
Seoul National University
kog0712@snu.ac.kr

Kyle Min∗
Oracle
kyle.min@oracle.com

Jy-yong Sohn†
Yonsei University
jysohn1108@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite recent advances, vision-language models trained with standard contrastive
objectives still struggle with compositional reasoning – the ability to understand
structured relationships between visual and linguistic elements. This shortcoming
is largely due to the tendency of the text encoder to focus on individual words rather
than their relations, a limitation reinforced by contrastive training that primarily
aligns words with visual objects. In this paper, we introduce REconstruction and
Alignment of text Descriptions (READ), a fine-tuning method designed to enhance
compositional reasoning by adding two auxiliary objectives to the contrastive
learning: (1) a token-level reconstruction objective, where a frozen pre-trained
decoder reconstructs alternative captions based on the embedding of the original
caption; and (2) a sentence-level alignment objective, which explicitly aligns paraphrased sentences in the embedding space. We show that READ-CLIP, a model
derived by applying the READ method to the pre-trained CLIP model, achieves
the state-of-the-art performance across five major compositional reasoning benchmarks, outperforming the strongest conventional fine-tuning baseline by up to 4.1%.
Furthermore, applying the READ to existing CLIP variants (including NegCLIP
and FSC-CLIP) also improves performance on these benchmarks. Quantitative
and qualitative analyses reveal that our proposed objectives – reconstruction and
alignment – offer complementary benefits: the former encourages the encoder
to capture relationships between words within a caption, while the latter ensures
consistent representations for paraphrases expressed with different wording.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have significantly enhanced the ability to align
images with text descriptions [8, 67]. A key driver of this progress is contrastive pre-training, such as
CLIP [45], which learns to embed images and texts into a shared multi-modal space, in a way that
the distance in the embedding space represents the semantic similarity of image-text pairs. VLMs
trained with this standard contrastive objective have been widely applied to diverse downstream tasks,
including open-vocabulary object detection [17, 72], semantic segmentation [15, 30, 34], cross-modal
retrieval [12, 36, 71], and multi-modal generation [1, 47, 53].
Despite their remarkable progress, current VLMs still face challenges with compositional reasoning –
the ability to understand structured relationships between visual and linguistic elements [37, 56, 64].
Numerous studies have shown that VLMs commonly fail on even simple compositional tasks that
humans find straightforward [11, 19, 24, 28, 40, 42, 58, 66, 69]. For instance, when given an image of
a horse eating grass, VLMs often assign a higher similarity score to the incorrect caption “the grass is
eating the horse” than to the correct caption “the horse is eating the grass”, highlighting the limitation
of the VLMs in capturing syntactic and relational structures [64]. These failures underscore the
need for further research on compositional reasoning to achieve reliable and robust vision-language
understanding in real-world applications [4, 9, 29, 33, 39, 56, 57, 60].
∗

Work partially done while at Intel Labs. † Corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

