Video Perception Models for 3D Scene Synthesis

Rui Huang1∗ Guangyao Zhai2,4∗ Zuria Bauer3 Marc Pollefeys3,5
Federico Tombari2 Leonidas Guibas6 Gao Huang1† Francis Engelmann6
1

4

Tsinghua University 2 Technical University of Munich 3 ETH Zurich
Munich Center for Machine Learning 5 Microsoft 6 Stanford University
https://vipscene.github.io
3D Reconstruction
and 3D Object Detections
Asset
Retriever

Text or Image
Condition

Synthesized
3D Scene
Video
Generator

2D Object
Detector
& Tracker

3D Reconstructor

Figure 1: Schematic of VIPS CENE. Conditioned on text or image prompts, VIPS CENE generates scenes by
leveraging the commonsense priors of video generation models for scene layout and object placements. From
the generated video, we reconstruct the 3D scene and extract individual objects. The final scene is synthesized
by replacing detected objects with high-quality 3D assets from an object database.

Abstract
Automating the expert-dependent and labor-intensive task of 3D scene synthesis
would significantly benefit fields such as architectural design, robotics simulation,
and virtual reality. Recent approaches to 3D scene synthesis often rely on the
commonsense reasoning of large language models (LLMs) or strong visual priors
from image generation models. However, current LLMs exhibit limited 3D spatial
reasoning, undermining the realism and global coherence of synthesized scenes,
while image-generation-based methods often constrain viewpoint control and introduce multi-view inconsistencies. In this work, we present Video Perception
models for 3D Scene synthesis (VIPS CENE), a novel framework that exploits the
encoded commonsense knowledge of the 3D physical world in video generation
models to ensure coherent scene layouts and consistent object placements across
views. VIPS CENE accepts both text and image prompts and seamlessly integrates
video generation, feedforward 3D reconstruction, and open-vocabulary perception
models to semantically and geometrically analyze each object in a scene. This
enables flexible scene synthesis with high realism and structural consistency. For
a more sufficient evaluation on coherence and plausibility, we further introduce
First-Person View Score (FPVS CORE), utilizing a continuous first-person perspective to capitalize on the reasoning ability of multimodal large language models.
Extensive experiments show that VIPS CENE significantly outperforms existing
methods and generalizes well across diverse scenarios.
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

