Failure by Interference: Language Models Make
Balanced Parentheses Errors When Faulty
Mechanisms Overshadow Sound Ones
Daking Rai
George Mason University
drai2@gmu.edu

Samuel Miller
George Mason University
smille20@gmu.edu

Kevin Moran
University of Central Florida
kpmoran@ucf.edu

Ziyu Yao
George Mason University
ziyuyao@gmu.edu

Abstract
Despite remarkable advances in coding capabilities, language models (LMs) still
struggle with simple syntactic tasks such as generating balanced parentheses. In
this study, we investigate the underlying mechanisms behind the persistence of
these errors across LMs of varying sizes (124M–7B) to both understand and mitigate the errors. Our study reveals that LMs rely on a number of components
(attention heads and FF neurons) that independently make their own predictions.
While some components reliably predict correct answers across a generalized range
of inputs (i.e., implementing “sound mechanisms”), others are less reliable and
introduce noise by promoting incorrect tokens (i.e., implementing “faulty mechanisms”). Errors occur when the faulty mechanisms overshadow the sound ones and
dominantly affect the predictions. Motivated by this insight, we introduce R A STEER, a steering method to systematically identify and increase the contribution of
reliable components for improving model performance. R A S TEER substantially
improves performance on balanced parentheses tasks, boosting accuracy of some
models from 0% to around 100%, without impairing the models’ general coding
ability. We further demonstrate its broader applicability in arithmetic reasoning
tasks, achieving performance gains of up to around 20%.1

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen remarkable progress in the code generation capabilities of language models
(LMs), driven by an increase in model size, training data, and improvements in overall training
methodologies [17, 2, 27, 24, 15, 36, 2, 40]. Yet, despite these advances, LMs continue to struggle
with basic syntactic tasks such as generating balanced parentheses and correct indentation [12, 45].
The failure of LMs to perform these seemingly simple tasks stands in stark contrast to their improved
performance on more complex coding benchmarks [21, 9, 4], raising an important interpretability question: How do LMs internally compute predictions for syntactic tasks and why do these
computations sometimes fail?
In this work, we seek to understand this failure by investigating the internal mechanisms of seven
LMs, ranging in size from 124M to 7B parameters, while they perform the balanced parentheses
1
The source code and dataset for the paper is available at https://github.com/Ziyu-Yao-NLP-Lab/
failure-by-interference

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

