Visual Thoughts: A Unified Perspective of
Understanding Multimodal Chain-of-Thought

Zihui Cheng1,4∗ Qiguang Chen2∗ Xiao Xu2 Jiaqi Wang5 Weiyun Wang6 Hao Fei7
Yidong Wang8 Alex Jinpeng Wang1 Zhi Chen9 Wanxiang Che2 Libo Qin1,3,4†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
2
Research Center for Social Computing and Interactive Robotics, Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Institute of Computing and Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
4
Text Computing and Cognitive Intelligence Ministry of Education Engineering Research Center,
Guizhou University 5 Chinese University of Hong Kong 6 Shanghai AI Laboratory
7
National University of Singapore 8 Peking University 9 ByteDance Seed (China)
czh_up@csu.edu.cn, qgchen@ir.hit.edu.cn, qinlibo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved significant success in
multimodal tasks, with multimodal chain-of-thought (MCoT) further enhancing
performance and interpretability. Recent MCoT methods fall into two categories:
(i) Textual-MCoT (T-MCoT), which takes multimodal input and produces textual
output; and (ii) Interleaved-MCoT (I-MCoT), which generates interleaved imagetext outputs. Despite advances in both approaches, the mechanisms driving these
improvements are not fully understood. To fill this gap, we first reveal that MCoT
boosts LVLMs by incorporating visual thoughts, which convey image information
to the reasoning process regardless of the MCoT format, depending only on clarity
and conciseness of expression. Furthermore, to explore visual thoughts systematically, we define four distinct forms of visual thought expressions and analyze
them comprehensively. Our findings demonstrate that these forms differ in clarity
and conciseness, yielding varying levels of MCoT improvement. Additionally, we
explore the internal nature of visual thoughts, finding that visual thoughts serve as
intermediaries between the input image and reasoning to deeper transformer layers,
enabling more advanced visual information transmission. We hope that the visual
thoughts can inspire further breakthroughs for future MCoT research.

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have made remarkable advancements in tackling
various multimodal tasks [57, 22, 52]. Inspired by the success of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning [45, 17, 3], LVLMs have integrated Multi-modal CoT (MCoT) reasoning, enabling step-by-step
generation of reasoning paths in multimodal contexts. This advancement has enhanced their reasoning
abilities, facilitating more sophisticated interactions with multimodal inputs [54, 4]. Specifically,
current MCoT techniques are generally divided into two paradigms: (1) Textual-MCoT (T-MCoT):
This approach adheres to the traditional CoT framework, generating text-based rationales from multimodal inputs (see Figure 1 (a)). For example, some methods require LVLMs to interpret and describe
visual elements before producing an answer [55, 51], while others enhance reasoning by integrating
json-format scene graphs derived from images [30, 31]. (2) Interleaved-MCoT (I-MCoT): A more
recent approach, such as o3-mini [33] and Visual Sketchpad [15], generates interleaved image-text
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

