Multivariate Latent Recalibration for
Conditional Normalizing Flows

Victor Dheur
Department of Computer Science
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
victor.dheur@umons.ac.be

Souhaib Ben Taieb∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
souhaib.bentaieb@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
A reliable estimate of the full conditional distribution of a multivariate response
given a set of covariates is essential in many decision-making applications. However, misspecified or miscalibrated models can lead to poor approximations of
the joint distribution, resulting in unreliable predictions and suboptimal decisions.
Standard recalibration methods are largely restricted to univariate settings, and
while conformal prediction techniques yield multivariate regions with coverage
guarantees, they do not provide an explicit form of the underlying probability distribution. We address this gap by first introducing a novel notion of latent calibration,
which assesses probabilistic calibration in the latent space of conditional invertible
generative models such as normalizing flows and flow matching. Second, we
propose latent recalibration (LR), a post-hoc model recalibration method that learns
a transformation of the latent space with finite-sample bounds on latent calibration.
Unlike existing recalibration methods, LR produces a recalibrated distribution
with an explicit multivariate density function while remaining computationally
efficient. Extensive experiments on both tabular and image datasets show that LR
consistently improves latent calibration error and the negative log-likelihood of the
recalibrated models.

1

Introduction

Generating reliable uncertainty estimates is essential for trustworthy decision-making across a wide
range of applications (Gawlikowski et al., 2023). Multi-output regression problems, in particular,
arise frequently in domains such as weather forecasting (Setiawan et al., 2024), energy consumption
prediction (Makaremi, 2025), and healthcare resource utilization (Cui et al., 2018). While flexible
models like neural networks can achieve high predictive accuracy, their uncertainty estimates are
often poorly calibrated, meaning predicted probabilities or confidence regions do not align with
empirical frequencies (Guo et al., 2017; Dheur and Ben Taieb, 2023). Furthermore, most recalibration
methods are designed for the single-output setting (Gneiting et al., 2007; Song et al., 2019; Sahoo
et al., 2021; Kuleshov and Deshpande, 2021; Dewolf et al., 2022; Fakoor et al., 2023; Marx et al.,
2023; Chung et al., 2023; Gneiting and Resin, 2023).
Noting the general lack of methods for assessing and recalibrating multi-output models, Chung et al.
(2024) leveraged highest-density regions (HDRs) (Hyndman, 1996) to introduce the notion of HDR
calibration and propose the sampling-based HDR recalibration (HDR-R) method. Recently, multioutput conformal prediction (CP) methods have also been developed to construct joint prediction
sets (Wang et al., 2023; Feldman et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2025; Dheur et al., 2025). However, both
HDR-R and CP approaches fail to provide an explicit form for the underlying recalibrated probability
∗

Also affiliated with the Department of Computer Science, University of Mons.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

