Towards Unsupervised Domain Bridging via
Image Degradation in Semantic Segmentation

Wangkai Li1 , Rui Sun1 , Huayu Mai1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2∗
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
{lwklwk, issunrui, mai556}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Semantic segmentation suffers from significant performance degradation when the
trained network is applied to a different domain. To address this issue, unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) has been extensively studied. Despite the effectiveness
of selftraining techniques in UDA, they still overlook the explicit modeling of
domain-shared feature extraction. In this paper, we propose DiDA, an unsupervised
domain bridging approach for semantic segmentation. DiDA consists of two key
modules: (1) Degradation-based Intermediate Domain Construction, which creates
continuous intermediate domains through simple image degradation operations
to encourage learning domain-invariant features as domain differences gradually
diminish; (2) Semantic Shift Compensation, which leverages a diffusion encoder
to disentangle and compensate for semantic shift information with degraded timesteps, preserving discriminative representations in the intermediate domains. As a
plug-and-play solution, DiDA supports various degradation operations and seamlessly integrates with existing UDA methods. Extensive experiments on multiple
domain adaptive semantic segmentation benchmarks demonstrate that DiDA consistently achieves significant performance improvements across all settings. Code
is available at https://github.com/Woof6/DiDA.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation, a fine-grained pixel-wise classification task, assigns semantic class labels
to each pixel, facilitating high-level image analysis. Despite the remarkable progress made in this
field [56, 6, 18, 17], networks trained within source domain often encounter significant performance
degradation when applied to a target dataset due to domain discrepancies. Mitigating this issue to
enhance the generalization capability of networks remains a formidable challenge. To address this
problem, extensive research has resorted to unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), which aims to
transfer knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
In previous works, to fully exploit the abundance of unlabeled target domain data, self-training
techniques have been naturally incorporated into UDA tasks and have emerged as a mainstream
paradigm. The core idea of this paradigm lies in constructing a teacher network via temporal
ensembling mechanisms, which generates pseudo-labels by predicting the target domain images.
These pseudo-labels are then used to progressively guide the student network’s learning on the target
domain. Despite achieving impressive results, these methods still overlook the explicit modeling
of domain-shared feature extraction, which remains a central challenge in UDA. To illustrate this,
we refer to the classic notion of causal representation learning [36, 74]: any observed feature can
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

