ROOT: Rethinking Offline Optimization as
Distributional Translation via Probabilistic Bridge

Manh Cuong Dao∗
National University of Singapore
cuongdao@nus.edu.sg

The Hung Tran∗
Washington State University
hung.t.tran@wsu.edu

Phi Le Nguyen
Hanoi University of Science and Technology
lenp@soict.hust.edu.vn
Thao Nguyen Truong
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
nguyen.truong@aist.go.jp
Trong Nghia Hoang†
Washington State University
trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the black-box optimization task which aims to find the maxima
of a black-box function using a static set of its observed input-output pairs. This is
often achieved via learning and optimizing a surrogate function with that offline
data. Alternatively, it can also be framed as an inverse modeling task that maps a
desired performance to potential input candidates that achieve it. Both approaches
are constrained by the limited amount of offline data. To mitigate this limitation,
we introduce a new perspective that casts offline optimization as a distributional
translation task. This is formulated as learning a probabilistic bridge transforming
an implicit distribution of low-value inputs (i.e., offline data) into another distribution of high-value inputs (i.e., solution candidates). Such probabilistic bridge can
be learned using low- and high-value inputs sampled from synthetic functions that
resemble the target function. These synthetic functions are constructed as the mean
posterior of multiple Gaussian processes fitted with different parameterizations on
the offline data, alleviating the data bottleneck. The proposed approach is evaluated on an extensive benchmark comprising most recent methods, demonstrating
significant improvement and establishing a new state-of-the-art performance. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/cuong-dm/ROOT.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization arises in scientific and engineering domains where evaluating each candidate
solution is costly, often requiring extensive physical experiments or high-fidelity simulations [61]. For
instance, designing energy-efficient hardware accelerators [5, 9, 37] involves numerous cycle-accurate
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors: Manh Cuong Dao, The Hung Tran, Trong Nghia Hoang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

