IF-G UIDE: Influence Function-Guided
Detoxification of LLMs
Zachary Coalson1 , Juhan Bae2 , Nicholas Carlini3 , Sanghyun Hong1
1
Oregon State University, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Anthropic

Abstract
We study how training data contributes to the emergence of toxic behaviors in
large language models. Most prior work on reducing model toxicity adopts reactive approaches, such as fine-tuning pre-trained (and potentially toxic) models
to align them with human values. In contrast, we propose a proactive approach—
IF-G UIDE—that leverages influence functions to identify and suppress harmful
tokens in the training data. To this end, we first show that standard influence
functions are ineffective at discovering harmful training records. We then present
a novel adaptation that measures token-level attributions from training data to
model toxicity, along with techniques for selecting toxic training documents and
a learning objective that can be integrated into both pre-training and fine-tuning.
Moreover, IF-G UIDE does not rely on human-preference data, which is typically
required by existing alignment methods. In our evaluation, we demonstrate that
IF-G UIDE substantially reduces both explicit and implicit toxicity—by up to 10×
compared to uncensored models, and up to 3× compared to baseline alignment
methods such as DPO and RAD—across both pre-training and fine-tuning scenarios. IF-G UIDE is computationally efficient: a billion-parameter model is not
necessary for computing influence scores; a million-parameter model—with 7.5×
fewer parameters—can effectively serve as a proxy for identifying harmful data.
Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/ztcoalson/IF-Guide.

1

Introduction

Large-language models (LLMs) are trained on massive corpora of human-generated text, from which
they learn not only grammar and reasoning patterns but also biases, values, and, at times, toxic
behaviors. In consequence, LLMs can generate outputs that range from explicitly harmful content—
such as hate speech, sexual material, or violent language [14, 20]—to more subtle and implicit forms
of toxicity, including manipulation, microaggressions, and disrespect veiled in humor [28, 81].
Current efforts to address LLM toxicity predominantly follow a paradigm of learning and mitigating:
models are first pre-trained on massive datasets (often containing toxic content), and then fine-tuned
through alignment strategies, such as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [58] or
direct preference optimization (DPO) [65]. While shown effective, these alignment techniques rely
heavily on human-labeled preference data, which is difficult to collect at scale. Moreover, they are
inherently reactive—designed to suppress toxic outputs rather than prevent toxic knowledge from
being learned in the first place. As a result, aligned models may still harbor toxic associations that
manifest during ordinary use or even under adversarial pressure (as shown in our results in §4.7).
Contributions. In this work, we study an orthogonal approach: preventing models from learning
toxic behaviors upfront. Specifically, we ask the research question: How can we identify toxic content
in the training data and suppress its influence during training? We focus on an emerging technique for
analyzing the relationship between training data and model behavior—influence functions [9, 25, 35,
40, 61, 70]—which estimate how individual training examples contribute to specific model outputs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

