The Bias-Variance Tradeoff in Data-Driven
Optimization: A Local Misspecification Perspective

Haixiang Lan1∗ , Luofeng Liao1∗ , Adam N. Elmachtoub1 ,
Christian Kroer1 , Henry Lam1 , Haofeng Zhang1,2
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University
2
Morgan Stanley
{hl3725,ll3530,ae2516,ck2945,khl2114,hz2553}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Data-driven stochastic optimization is ubiquitous in machine learning and
operational decision-making problems. Sample average approximation (SAA)
and model-based approaches such as estimate-then-optimize (ETO) or integrated
estimation-optimization (IEO) are all popular, with model-based approaches being
able to circumvent some of the issues with SAA in complex context-dependent
problems. Yet the relative performance of these methods is poorly understood,
with most results confined to the dichotomous cases of the model-based approach
being either well-specified or misspecified. We develop the first results that allow
for a more granular analysis of the relative performance of these methods under
a local misspecification setting, which models the scenario where the modelbased approach is nearly well-specified. By leveraging tools from contiguity
theory in statistics, we show that there is a bias-variance tradeoff between SAA,
IEO, and ETO under local misspecification, and that the relative importance
of the bias and the variance depends on the degree of local misspecification.
Moreover, we derive explicit expressions for the decision bias, which allows
us to characterize (un)impactful misspecification directions, and provide further
geometric understanding of the variance.

1

Introduction

Data-driven stochastic optimization arises ubiquitously in machine learning and operational decisionmaking problems. Generally, this problem takes the form argminw EQ [c(w, z)] where w represents
the decision that we aim to optimize, and z is a random variable (or vector) drawn from an unknown
distribution Q. The non-linear cost function c is given and can represent a loss function in machine
learning, financial portfolio losses, or resource allocation costs. In this paper, we focus on the setting
where the expectation EQ is unknown, but we observe data from Q.
A natural approach is to use empirical optimization, known as sample average approximation (SAA)
[Shapiro et al., 2021], which approximates the unknown expectation with the empirical counterpart
from the data. This approach is straightforward, but may not be suitable for complex scenarios in
constrained and contextual optimization, when one needs to obtain a feature-dependent decision (i.e.,
a decision as a “function" of the features) and maintain feasibility [Hu et al., 2022]. In such cases,
model-based approaches provide a workable alternative. A model-based approach fits a parametric
distribution class to the data, say {Pθ : θ ∈ Θ}, and this fitted distribution is then injected into the
downstream optimization to obtain a decision. Just as in standard machine-learning problems, this
parametrization helps maintain generalizability from supervised data.
* Equal Contribution and Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

