Reinforcing the Diffusion Chain of Lateral Thought
with Diffusion Language Models

Zemin Huang1,2,∗

Zhiyang Chen2,4,∗ Zijun Wang1,2

Tiancheng Li1,2

Guo-Jun Qi2,3,4,†

1

Zhejiang Univeristy
MAPLE Lab, Westlake University
3
Matterwave Intelligence
4
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
2

{huangzemin,chenzhiyang,wangzijun63,litiancheng}@westlake.edu.cn, guojunq@gmail.com

https://github.com/maple-research-lab/LLaDOU

Abstract
We introduce the Diffusion Chain of Lateral Thought (DCoLT), a reasoning framework for diffusion language models. DCoLT treats each intermediate step in the
reverse diffusion process as a latent "thinking" action and optimizes the entire reasoning trajectory to maximize the reward on the correctness of the final answer with
outcome-based Reinforcement Learning (RL). Unlike traditional Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) methods that follow a causal, linear thinking process, DCoLT allows bidirectional, non-linear reasoning with no strict rule on grammatical correctness amid
its intermediate steps of thought. We implement DCoLT on two representative
Diffusion Language Models (DLMs). First, we choose SEDD as a representative
continuous-time discrete diffusion model, where its concrete score derives a probabilistic policy to maximize the RL reward over the entire sequence of intermediate
diffusion steps. We further consider the discrete-time masked diffusion language
model – LLaDA, and find that the order to predict and unmask tokens plays an
essential role to optimize its RL action resulting from the ranking-based Unmasking
Policy Module (UPM) defined by the Plackett-Luce model. Experiments on both
math and code generation tasks show that using only public data and 16 H800
GPUs, DCoLT-reinforced DLMs outperform other DLMs trained by SFT or RL or
even both. Notably, DCoLT-reinforced LLaDA boosts its reasoning accuracy by
+9.8%, +5.7%, +11.4%, +19.5% on GSM8K, MATH, MBPP, and HumanEval.

1

Introduction

To enable complex reasoning, most large language models (LLMs) [15, 20] learn to decompose
problems into simpler sub-steps and generate intermediate reasoning in natural language. Chainof-Thought (CoT) [40] first reveals that step-by-step reasoning facilitates language models, as the
outputs from previous steps could be rationales for more accurate next step prediction. Based on
that, OpenAI’s PRM [23] supervises these intermediate reasoning steps with progressive rewards, to
ensure the correctness of each single step. More recently, DeepSeek-R1 [15] eliminates the need of
the reward model and verifies only the correctness of the final answer, relaxing the constraints on
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
This project was initiated and supported by MAPLE Lab at Westlake University.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

