AliO: Output Alignment Matters
in Long-Term Time Series Forecasting

Kwangryeol Park
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
Ulsan National Institute of Science & Technology (UNIST), South Korea
pkr7098@unist.ac.kr
Jaeho Kim∗
Artificial Intelligence
Korea University, South Korea
kjh3690@korea.ac.kr
Seulki Lee†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Ulsan National Institute of Science & Technology (UNIST), South Korea
seulki.lee@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Long-term Time Series Forecasting (LTSF) tasks, which leverage the current data
sequence as input to predict the future sequence, have become increasingly crucial
in real-world applications such as weather forecasting and planning of electricity
consumption. However, state-of-the-art LTSF models often fail to achieve prediction output alignment for the same timestamps across lagged input sequences.
Instead, these models exhibit low output alignment, resulting in fluctuation in
prediction outputs for the same timestamps, undermining the model’s reliability. To
address this, we propose AliO (Align Outputs), a novel approach designed to improve the output alignment of LTSF models by reducing the discrepancies between
prediction outputs for the same timestamps in both the time and frequency domains.
To measure output alignment, we introduce a new metric, TAM (Time Alignment
Metric), which quantifies the alignment between prediction outputs, whereas existing metrics such as MSE only capture the distance between prediction outputs
and ground truths. Experimental results show that AliO effectively improves the
output alignment, i.e., up to 58.2% in TAM, while maintaining or enhancing the
forecasting performance (up to 27.5%). This improved output alignment increases
the reliability of the LTSF models, making them more applicable in real-world
scenarios. The code implementation is on the GitHub repository3 .

1

Introduction

The task of long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) is essential in various fields such as prediction of
electricity demand [13], weather forecasting [37], health data [20], and so on. Recently, deep neural
network models [40, 30, 33, 43] have shown strong performance in predicting long-term time series
∗
†
3

Work done at UNIST
Corresponding author
https://github.com/eai-lab/AliO

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

