MesaTask: Towards Task-Driven Tabletop Scene
Generation via 3D Spatial Reasoning
Jinkun Hao1∗, Naifu Liang2∗ , Zhen Luo3,4∗ , Xudong Xu2‡ , Weipeng Zhong2 , Ran Yi1† ,
Yichen Jin5 , Zhaoyang Lyu2 , Feng Zheng4 , Lizhuang Ma1†, Jiangmiao Pang2
1
2
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
SII
4
5
Southern University of Science and Technology
Peking University
Project page: https://mesatask.github.io/

Abstract
The ability of robots to interpret human instructions and execute manipulation
tasks necessitates the availability of task-relevant tabletop scenes for training.
However, traditional methods for creating these scenes rely on time-consuming
manual layout design or purely randomized layouts, which are limited in terms of
plausibility or alignment with the tasks. In this paper, we formulate a novel task,
namely task-oriented tabletop scene generation, which poses significant challenges
due to the substantial gap between high-level task instructions and the tabletop
scenes. To support research on such a challenging task, we introduce MesaTask10K, a large-scale dataset comprising approximately 10,700 synthetic tabletop
scenes with manually crafted layouts that ensure realistic layouts and intricate
inter-object relations. To bridge the gap between tasks and scenes, we propose
a Spatial Reasoning Chain that decomposes the generation process into object
inference, spatial interrelation reasoning, and scene graph construction for the final
3D layout. We present MesaTask, an LLM-based framework that utilizes this
reasoning chain and is further enhanced with DPO algorithms to generate physically
plausible tabletop scenes that align well with given task descriptions. Exhaustive
experiments demonstrate the superior performance of MesaTask compared to
baselines in generating task-conforming tabletop scenes with realistic layouts.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in robotic manipulation is enabling robots to accurately interpret human
instructions and successfully execute complex tasks accordingly. The conventional pipeline for
achieving this involves task definition, simulatable tabletop scene construction, and policy training.
However, traditional scene construction methods, which rely on manual design or purely randomized
layouts, are limited by their labor-intensive nature and the resulting constraints on diversity and
plausibility, ultimately hindering the generalization of learned policies. Therefore, automatic taskoriented tabletop scene generation emerges as a promising approach for effectively bridging the gap
between task descriptions and scenes. Crucially, tabletop scene generation must satisfy three key
requirements: covering task variables, enabling scene interactivity, and ensuring realistic layouts,
thereby facilitating the learning of robust policies.
Existing scene generation methods [27, 6, 11] often start from a single scene image and attempt
to recover the corresponding tabletop scene through object retrieval and layout optimization. Unfortunately, their ability to understand under-specified task instructions still requires empirical
corroboration. Other approaches [37, 35, 2] leverage powerful language models (LLMs) to interpret
∗
†

Equal contribution, ‡ Project lead
Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

