Mamba Modulation
On the Length Generalization of Mamba
Peng Lu∗
Université de Montréal
peng.lu@umontreal.ca
Qiuhao Zeng
Western University
qzeng53@uwo.ca

Jerry Huang∗
Université de Montréal & Mila - Quebec AI Institute
jerry.huang@mila.quebec

Xinyu Wang
McGill University
xinyu.wang5@mail.mcgill.ca

Boxing Chen
Noah’s Ark Lab
boxing.chen@huawei.com

Yufei Cui†
Noah’s Ark Lab
yufei.cui@huawei.com

Philippe Langlais
Université de Montréal
felipe@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
The quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism in Transformer models has
motivated the development of alternative architectures with sub-quadratic scaling,
such as state-space models. Among these, Mamba has emerged as a leading architecture, achieving state-of-the-art results across a range of language modeling
tasks. However, Mambas performance signiﬁcantly deteriorates when applied to
contexts longer than those seen during pre-training, revealing a sharp sensitivity
to context length extension. Through detailed analysis, we attribute this limitation
to the out-of-distribution behavior of its state-space dynamics, particularly within
the parameterization of the state transition matrix A. Unlike recent works which
attribute this sensitivity to the vanished accumulation of discretization time steps,
PN
exp(− t=1 ∆t ), we establish a connection between state convergence behavior
as the input length approaches inﬁnity and the spectrum of the transition matrix
A, offering a well-founded explanation of its role in length extension. Next, to
overcome this challenge, we propose an approach that applies spectrum scaling to
pre-trained Mamba models to enable robust long-context generalization by selectively modulating the spectrum of A matrices in each layer. We show that this can
signiﬁcantly improve performance in settings where simply modulating ∆t fails,
validating our insights and providing avenues for better length generalization of
state-space models with structured transition matrices. Our code is available at
https://github.com/gnepul-ace/mamba_modulation.

1

Introduction

In the new age of deep learning, the Transformers [129] architecture has spurred a new age of research into large language models (LLMs) [31, 141, 25, 92, 148] that has largely dominated the space
of natural language processing (NLP) research since their introduction. Their surprising capabilities
and rapid development have led to their wide application across various domains, including chatbots,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

