On topological descriptors for graph products

Mattie Ji
University of Pennsylvania
mji13@sas.upenn.edu

Amauri H. Souza
Federal Institute of Ceará
amauriholanda@ifce.edu.br

Vikas Garg
Aalto University
YaiYai Ltd
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Topological descriptors have been increasingly utilized for capturing multiscale
structural information in relational data. In this work, we consider various filtrations
on the (box) product of graphs and the effect on their outputs on the topological descriptors - the Euler characteristic (EC) and persistent homology (PH). In particular,
we establish a complete characterization of the expressive power of EC on general
color-based filtrations. We also show that the PH descriptors of (virtual) graph products contain strictly more information than the computation on individual graphs,
whereas EC does not. Additionally, we provide algorithms to compute the PH diagrams of the product of vertex- and edge-level filtrations on the graph product. We
also substantiate our theoretical analysis with empirical investigations on runtime
analysis, expressivity, and graph classification performance. Overall, this work
paves way for powerful graph persistent descriptors via product filtrations. Code is
available at https://github.com/Aalto-QuML/tda_graph_product.

1

Introduction

Message-passing GNNs are prominent models for graph representation learning [19]. However, they
are bounded in expressivity by the WL hierarchy [33–35, 50] and cannot compute fundamental graph
properties such as cycles or connected components [10, 18]. Topological descriptors (TDs) such
as those based on persistent homology (PH) and the Euler characteristics (EC) can provide such
information and thus are being increasingly employed to augment GNNs, boosting their empirical
performance [7–9, 24, 48, 51].
In this work, we study two prominent types of topological descriptors based on PH [1, 13] and EC
[40, 42, 46] respectively. Both descriptors are defined with respect to a fixed filtration of a graph.
On a high level, PH keeps track of the birth and death times of topological features (e.g., connected
components and loops) in a (parameterized) graph filtration. EC is a simpler, less expensive invariant
that keeps track of the number of vertices minus the number of edges in the filtration. Both PH and
EC have found use across a wide range of applications in GNNs [16, 36, 42].
A precise characterization of PH has been established for graphs based on color-based filtrations in
[26]. Here, we offer a complete characterization of the expressivity of EC in terms of combinatorial
data on the colors of the graph. EC also compares favorably with other TDs in terms of computation,
which is another important aspect we explore here. In particular, we streamline PH and EC with
what we call their “max" versions. We show that the vertex death times, as well as the cycle birth
times, of vertex-level and edge-level max PH are the same. We also establish that max EC retains
the expressivity of EC, but is even more-cost effective than EC. Interestingly, we show that this
expressivity equivalence on graphs extends to a more general equivalence for color filtrations on
finite higher-dimensional simplicial complexes. This immediately opens avenues for integrating
max EC as an economical alternative to PH-based TDs into Topological Neural Networks, which
generalize GNNs through higher-order message-passing [5, 6, 15, 37, 38] and have recently been
shown to benefit from TDs both theoretically and empirically [47].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

