Towards Principled Unsupervised Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Riccardo Zamboni
Politecnico di Milano
riccardo.zamboni@polimi.it

Mirco Mutti
Technion

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, we typically refer to unsupervised pre-training when
we aim to pre-train a policy without a priori access to the task specification, i.e.,
rewards, to be later employed for efficient learning of downstream tasks. In singleagent settings, the problem has been extensively studied and mostly understood.
A popular approach casts the unsupervised objective as maximizing the entropy
of the state distribution induced by the agent’s policy, from which principles and
methods follow. In contrast, little is known about state entropy maximization in
multi-agent settings, which are ubiquitous in the real world. What are the pros
and cons of alternative problem formulations in this setting? How hard is the
problem in theory, how can we solve it in practice? In this paper, we address these
questions by first characterizing those alternative formulations and highlighting
how the problem, even when tractable in theory, is non-trivial in practice. Then, we
present a scalable, decentralized, trust-region policy search algorithm to address
the problem in practical settings. Finally, we provide numerical validations to both
corroborate the theoretical findings and pave the way for unsupervised multi-agent
reinforcement learning via state entropy maximization in challenging domains,
showing that optimizing for a specific objective, namely mixture entropy, provides
an excellent trade-off between tractability and performances.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning [MARL, Albrecht et al., 2024] recently showed promising
results in learning complex behaviors, such as coordination and teamwork [Samvelyan et al., 2019],
strategic planning in the presence of imperfect knowledge [Perolat et al., 2022], and trading [Johanson
et al., 2022]. Just like in single-agent RL, however, most of the efforts are focused on tabula rasa
learning, that is, without exploiting any prior knowledge gathered from offline data and/or policy
pre-training. Despite its generality, learning tabula rasa hinders MARL from addressing real-world
situations, where training from scratch is slow, expensive, and arguably unnecessary [Agarwal et al.,
2022]. In this regard, some progress has been made on techniques specific to the multi-agent setting,
ranging from ad hoc teamwork [Mirsky et al., 2022] to zero-shot coordination [Hu et al., 2020], but
our understanding of what can be done instead of learning tabula rasa is still limited.
In single-agent RL, unsupervised pre-training frameworks [Laskin et al., 2021] have emerged as a
viable solution: a policy is pre-trained without a priori access to the task specification, i.e., rewards,
to be later employed for efficient learning of downstream tasks. Among others, state-entropy
maximization [Hazan et al., 2019, Lee et al., 2019] was shown to be a useful tool for policy pretraining [Hazan et al., 2019, Mutti et al., 2021] and data collection for offline learning [Yarats et al.,
2022]. In this setting, the unsupervised objective is cast as maximizing the entropy of the state
distribution induced by the agent’s policy. Recently, the potential of entropy objectives in MARL was
empirically corroborated by a plethora of works [Liu et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2021b, Yang et al., 2021,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

