How to Learn a Star:
Binary Classification with Starshaped Polyhedral Sets

Marie-Charlotte Brandenburg
Ruhr Universität Bochum
Universitätsstr. 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany
marie-charlotte.brandenburg@rub.de

Katharina Jochemko
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
100 44 Stockholm, Sweden
jochemko@kth.se

Abstract
We consider binary classification restricted to a class of continuous piecewise
linear functions whose decision boundaries are (possibly nonconvex) starshaped
polyhedral sets, supported on a fixed polyhedral simplicial fan. We investigate
the expressivity of these function classes and describe the combinatorial and
geometric structure of the loss landscape, most prominently the sublevel sets, for
two loss-functions: the 0/1-loss (discrete loss) and a log-likelihood loss function.
In particular, we give explicit bounds on the VC dimension of this model, and
concretely describe the sublevel sets of the discrete loss as chambers in a hyperplane
arrangement. For the log-likelihood loss, we give sufficient conditions for the
optimum to be unique, and describe the geometry of the optimum when varying
the rate parameter of the underlying exponential probability distribution.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of binary classification from a geometric and combinatorial perspective. Given
a finite labeled data-set and a prescribed loss-function, we focus on characterizing the structure
of those parameters that yield perfect classification – namely, the set of global minimizers of the
loss function. More generally, we investigate the geometry and combinatorics of the entire loss
landscape in parameter space. Understanding the geometry is central to analyze the behavior of
learning algorithms, as, for example, the arrangement of critical points and the connectivity of
minimizers influence optimization efficiency and generalization. Combinatorial structures, such as
polyhedral decompositions, provide insights into how parameter spaces partition into regions of
similar behavior. Naturally, these subdivisions interact with the subdivision into sets of classifiers
which induce the same classification on the data, and is therefore intimately related to the VC
dimension (the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension) of binary classifiers [Vapnik and Chervonenkis,
1971].
In order to make rigorous statements, we fix the function class used for classification to be a class
which is suitable for the specific learning task. Fixing a large set of classifiers can lead to practical
difficulties due to the complexity of the space of allowed classifiers, while a small set of classifiers
may not be able to capture the nature of the underlying problem. A natural function class consists
of those functions whose decision boundary – the geometric object separating the two classes – is
the boundary of a convex polyhedron. Such function classes have been previously considered, for
example, in Astorino and Gaudioso [2002], Manwani and Sastry [2010] and Kantchelian et al. [2014],
where the optimal separating convex polyhedron is found through iteratively solving LPs, minimizing
a logistic loss function and finding a large margin convex separator, respectively.
While polyhedral classifiers form a well-structured function class, they are also highly restrictive.
In particular, the region enclosed by the decision boundary is necessarily convex, which may not
always align with the structure of the underlying classification problem. Maintaining the piecewise
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

