PurpCode: Reasoning for Safer Code Generation
Jiawei Liu∗
Nirav Diwan∗
Zhe Wang∗
Haoyu Zhai
Xiaona Zhou
Kiet A. Nguyen
Tianjiao Yu
Muntasir Wahed
Yinlin Deng
Hadjer Benkraouda Yuxiang Wei
Lingming Zhang
Ismini Lourentzou
Gang Wang

arXiv:2507.19060v4 [cs.CR] 15 Nov 2025

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{jiawei6,ndiwan2,zhe36,lingming,lourent2,gangw}@illinois.edu
Winner Defender Team at Amazon Nova AI Challenge 2025
code
collection

Abstract
We introduce PurpCode, the first post-training recipe for training safe code reasoning models towards generating secure code and defending against malicious cyberactivities. PurpCode trains a reasoning model in two stages: (i) Rule Learning, which
explicitly teaches the model to reference cybersafety rules to generate vulnerabilityfree code and to avoid facilitating malicious cyberactivities; and (ii) Reinforcement
Learning, which optimizes model safety and preserves model utility through diverse, multi-objective reward mechanisms. To empower the training pipelines with
comprehensive cybersafety data, we conduct internal red-teaming to synthesize comprehensive and high-coverage prompts based on real-world tasks for inducing unsafe
cyberactivities in the model. Based on PurpCode, we develop a reasoning-based coding model, namely PurpCode-32B, which demonstrates state-of-the-art cybersafety,
outperforming various frontier models. Moreover, our alignment method decreases
the model overrefusal rates in both general and cybersafety-specific scenarios, while
preserving model utility in both code generation and common security knowledge.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) empowered coding assistance have been increasingly used in daily
software development, ranking as the leading application of existing commercial models such as
Claude Sonnet [7]. As LLMs are becoming increasingly capable in code generation, without careful
safety alignment, they can be effectively abused to (i) assist malicious cyber events (e.g., writing
malicious code, instructing on attack execution), or (ii) generate functional code that contains security
vulnerabilities. Therefore, it is crucial to ensure the cybersafety of code LLMs.
While traditional safety alignment focuses on rejecting prompts with malicious intent, cybersafety
training additionally requires models to generate vulnerability-free code that complies with security
best practices. In prior methods [30, 31], models learn to generate secure code implicitly via contrastive
samples and specialized loss functions. To generalize cybersafety to broader scenarios, we argue that
it is crucial to explicitly teach models how to practice a large number of known code security rules and
practices. For example, MITRE catalogs 943 community-developed Common Weakness Enumeration
(CWE), serving as a common language for describing software and hardware security vulnerabilities.
Meanwhile, various code analyzers, such as AWS CodeGuru [2] and GitHub CodeQL [22], implement
hundreds of static analysis rules to detect (and even fix) vulnerability patterns, covering popular CWEs
and their specialized code weaknesses.
∗

Equal contribution. Team contributions are detailed in §A.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

