Stochastic Shortest Path with Sparse Adversarial Costs

Emmeran Johnson1˚
1

Alberto Rumi2,3˚

Ciara Pike-Burke1

Patrick Rebeschini4

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London
2
Università degli Studi di Milano
3
CENTAI Institute
4
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford

Abstract
We study the adversarial Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) problem with sparse costs
under full-information feedback. In the known transition setting, existing bounds
based?on Online Mirror Descent (OMD) with negative-entropy regularization scale
with log SA, where SA is the size of the state-action space. While we show
that this is optimal in the worst-case, this bound fails to capture the benefits of
sparsity when only a small number M ! SA of state-action pairs incur cost. In
fact, we also show that the negative-entropy
? is inherently non-adaptive to sparsity:
it provably incurs regret scaling with log S on sparse problems. Instead, we
propose a family of ℓr -norm regularizers
(r P p1, 2q)?that adapts to the sparsity
?
and achieves regret scaling with log M instead of log SA. We show this is
optimal via a matching lower bound, highlighting that M captures the effective
dimension of the problem instead of SA. Finally, in the unknown transition setting
the benefits of sparsity are limited: we prove that even on sparse problems, the
minimax regret for any learner scales polynomially with SA.

1

Introduction

The Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) problem is a fundamental model in reinforcement learning [1, 32],
which describes tasks where an agent interacts with an environment over episodes and must reach a
designated goal state within each episode while minimizing accumulated costs. This covers problems
such as car navigation while trying to avoid traffic jams, or internet routing. Recently, this classical
setting has been extended to the adversarial regime, where costs may vary arbitrarily between episodes
[28, 8, 6, 38] and the goal is to obtain theoretical guarantees robust to any cost-generation mechanism.
Under full-information feedback where the full cost vector is observed
`?after each episode ˘and known
transitions, current algorithms achieve regret bounds that scale as O DKT‹ log SAT‹ , where D
is the diameter (the smallest expected hitting time of any policy from any state), T‹ is the expected
hitting time of the optimal policy, S is the number of states, A is the number of actions, and K is
the number of episodes. These bounds are independent of any cost structure and are shown to be
minimax optimal up to logarithmic factors in [8].
In SSP, the size of the state-action space SA ?
– which we consider and refer to as the dimension of the
problem – appears in the minimax regret as log SA. While in the worst-case this is unimprovable
(we show this in Theorem 3.1), many real-world problems have costs with structural properties that
may be leveraged for improved regret. A common property often considered in the statistics and
machine learning literature [36] is sparsity, which can naturally arise for SSP problems. For instance,
in the car navigation example, the number of traffic jams is usually much smaller than the number
of roads. Motivated by this, we consider sparse SSP problems where M , the maximum number of
state-action pairs with non-zero cost in an episode, can be much smaller than SA.
In such scenarios, the regret bounds should capture some dependence on M , reflecting an improvement in performance on easier sparse problems as M Ñ 1 and recovering the standard bounds on
˚

Equal contribution, corresponding author: emmeran.johnson17@imperial.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

