FoGE: Fock Space inspired encoding for graph
prompting

Sotirios Panagiotis Chytas1

Rudrasis Chakraborty2

Vikas Singh1

1

University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Lawrence Livermore National Lab
chytas@wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu rudrasischa@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent results show that modern Large Language Models (LLM) are capable
of understanding and answering questions about structured data such as graphs.
Existing proposals often use some description of the graph to create an “augmented”
prompt fed to the LLM. For a chosen class of graphs, if a well-tailored graph
encoder is deployed to play together with a pre-trained LLM, the model can answer
graph-related questions well. Current solutions to graph-based prompts range from
graph serialization to graph transformers. In this work, we show that the use of
a parameter-free graph encoder based on Fock space representations, a concept
borrowed from physics, is remarkably versatile in this problem setting. The simple
construction, with a few small adjustments, can provide rich and informative graph
encodings, for a wide range of different graphs. We investigate the use of this idea
for prefix-tuned prompts leveraging the capabilities of a pre-trained, frozen LLM.
The modifications lead to a model that can answer graph-related questions – from
simple graphs to proteins to hypergraphs – effectively and with minimal, if any,
adjustments to the architecture. Our work significantly simplifies existing solutions
and generalizes well to multiple different graph-based structures effortlessly.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at tasks like question
answering, sentence completion, translation, and even solving
undergraduate-level math problems [1, 2]. However, they sometimes need additional data unavailable during training. For instance,
a model trained on data up to a specific date may struggle with
the ever-changing news cycle [3, 4]. To prevent responses from
becoming outdated, or to integrate non-public/proprietary data and
domain-specific terminology, models need extra context. Retrieval
Augmented Generation (RAG) describes this process of retrieving
and integrating extra information to an LLM during its generation
process. While multiple different approaches have been proposed Figure 1: Augmenting LLM’s cafor the retrieval piece, a common solution for integrating additional pabilities by prompting them with
carefully encoded graphs.
information is In-Context Learning (ICL) [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. ICL allows
additional information to be included with a prompt, guiding the model to generate responses aligned
with the extra context. This method is useful as it does not require retraining the LLM and can be
applied to proprietary models like GPT [10] by adding a text description of the extra information.
ICL-type ideas are also being studied for utilizing not just additional/new data but also novel input
formats/modalities, such as tables and graphs [11, 12, 13, 14]. While specialized models will still
perform better at specific tasks, LLMs can serve as general-purpose reasoning machines, capable of
answering questions about the provided modality beyond the training labels. Several recent results
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

