Efficient Adaptive Federated Optimization

Su Hyeong Lee
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago

Sidharth Sharma
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University

Manzil Zaheer∗
Google DeepMind

Tian Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago

Abstract
Adaptive optimization is critical in federated learning, where enabling adaptivity
on both the server and client sides has proven essential for achieving optimal
performance. However, the scalability of such jointly adaptive systems is often
hindered by resource limitations in communication and memory. In this paper, we
introduce a class of efficient adaptive algorithms, named FedAda2 and its enhanced
version FedAda2 ++, designed specifically for large-scale, cross-device federated
environments. FedAda2 optimizes communication efficiency by avoiding the
transfer of preconditioners between the server and clients. Additionally, FedAda2 ++
extends this approach by incorporating memory-efficient adaptive optimizers on
the client side, further reducing on-device memory usage. Theoretically, we
demonstrate that FedAda2 and FedAda2 ++ achieve the same convergence rates for
general, non-convex objectives as its more resource-intensive counterparts that
directly integrate joint adaptivity. Extensive empirical evaluations on image and text
datasets demonstrate both the advantages of joint adaptivity and the effectiveness
and efficiency of FedAda2 /FedAda2 ++.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a distributed learning paradigm which aims to train statistical models across
multiple clients while minimizing raw data exposure [1, 2, 3]. In vanilla federated learning, a
central server orchestrates the training process by distributing the global model to a subsample of
thousands or even millions of clients. These clients collaboratively perform local stochastic gradient
descent while drawing from their private data streams. After several epochs have elapsed, each client
communicates their aggregate updates to the server, which averages this information to make an
informed adjustment to the global model. This algorithm, using non-adaptive weight updates, is
called FedAvg [1]. A recent trend is to investigate utilizing adaptive optimizers to support federated
learning [4]. Adaptivity can be employed in either the server-side or the client-side, where joint
adaptivity (consisting of global and local adaptive updates) has been shown to play a pivotal role in
accelerating convergence and enhancing accuracy [5, 6].
Nevertheless, efficiency challenges remain for the successful deployment of jointly adaptive algorithms in practice, especially in cross-device federated settings [7]. The server, which collects
pseudogradients pushed by participating clients, consolidates a global approximation of the preconditioners for adaptive model updates. Typically, the server sends the preconditioners back to the clients
to precondition local adaptive updates. However, this can lead to significant communication overhead
that detracts from the advantages offered by adaptivity [8]. Furthermore, dynamically varying client
∗

Work done while at Google DeepMind.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

