NeuroGenPoisoning: Neuron-Guided Attacks on
Retrieval-Augmented Generation of LLM via Genetic
Optimization of External Knowledge

Hanyu Zhu1 Lance Fiondella1 Jiawei Yuan1 Kai Zeng2 Long Jiao1∗
1
2
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
George Mason University
1
2
{hzhu2,lfiondella,jyuan,ljiao}@umassd.edu
kzeng2@gmu.edu

Abstract
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) empowers Large Language Models
(LLMs) to dynamically integrate external knowledge during inference, improving
their factual accuracy and adaptability. However, adversaries can inject poisoned
external knowledge to override the model’s internal memory. While existing attacks
iteratively manipulate retrieval content or prompt structure of RAG, they largely
ignore the model’s internal representation dynamics and neuron-level sensitivities.
The underlying mechanism of RAG poisoning has not been fully studied and the
effect of knowledge conflict with strong parametric knowledge in RAG is not considered. In this work, we propose NeuroGenPoisoning, a novel attack framework
that generates adversarial external knowledge in RAG guided by LLM internal
neuron attribution and genetic optimization. Our method first identifies a set of
Poison-Responsive Neurons whose activation strongly correlates with contextual
poisoning knowledge. We then employ a genetic algorithm to evolve adversarial
passages that maximally activate these neurons. Crucially, our framework enables
massive-scale generation of effective poisoned RAG knowledge by identifying
and reusing promising but initially unsuccessful external knowledge variants via
observed attribution signals. At the same time, Poison-Responsive Neurons guided
poisoning can effectively resolves knowledge conflict. Experimental results across
models and datasets demonstrate consistently achieving high Population Overwrite
Success Rate (POSR) of over 90% while preserving fluency. Empirical evidence
shows that our method effectively resolves knowledge conflict.

1

Introduction

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [10, 12, 17, 21] has emerged as a powerful framework
to improve large language models (LLMs) with access to dynamic external knowledge sources
such as Wikipedia, news articles, and research publications [1, 5, 25]. By combining vector-based
retrieval with text generation, RAG enables more factually grounded and up-to-date outputs than
parameter-only models [3, 39, 47]. However, as RAG systems are increasingly deployed in LLM’s
applications, from chatbots to domain-specific assistants, their security and robustness become critical
concerns [11, 31, 48].
Recent studies [15, 20] have revealed that LLMs are highly sensitive to the content and structure
of retrieved documents. In particular, when faced with conflicting knowledge, LLMs often exhibit
a strong preference for either parametric knowledge or retrieved content depending on various
latent factors such as textual fluency, similarity, and completeness [38, 40, 42, 49]. This opens
up a dangerous attack surface. Specifically, adversaries may craft malicious external contexts that
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

