3BASiL: An Algorithmic Framework for
Sparse plus Low-Rank Compression of LLMs

Mehdi Makni
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mmakni@mit.edu

Xiang Meng
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mengx@mit.edu

Rahul Mazumder
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
rahulmaz@mit.edu

Abstract
Sparse plus Low-Rank (S + LR) decomposition of Large Language Models
(LLMs) has emerged as a promising direction in model compression, aiming to
decompose pre-trained model weights into a sum of sparse and low-rank matrices W ≈ S + LR. Despite recent progress, existing methods often suffer from
substantial performance degradation compared to dense models. In this work, we
introduce 3BASiL-TM, an efficient one-shot post-training method for (S + LR)
decomposition of LLMs that addresses this gap. Our approach first introduces
a novel 3-Block Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) method,
termed 3BASiL, to minimize the layer-wise reconstruction error with convergence
guarantees. We then design an efficient transformer-matching (TM) refinement
step that jointly optimizes the sparse and low-rank components across transformer
layers. This step minimizes a novel memory-efficient loss that aligns outputs at
the transformer level. Notably, the TM procedure is universal as it can enhance
any (S + LR) decomposition, including pure sparsity. Our numerical experiments show that 3BASiL-TM reduces the WikiText2 perplexity gap relative to
dense LLaMA-8B model by over 30% under a (2:4 Sparse + 64 LR) configuration, compared to prior methods. Moreover, our method achieves over 2.5x faster
compression runtime on an A100 GPU compared to SOTA (S + LR) method.
Our code is available at https://github.com/mazumder-lab/3BASiL.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across diverse tasks
including complex reasoning [Xu et al., 2025], text generation [Achiam et al., 2023], mathematical
problem-solving [Romera-Paredes et al., 2024], and code synthesis [Roziere et al., 2023]. However, state-of-the-art LLMs [Achiam et al., 2023, Dubey et al., 2024, Google, 2023] with billions of
parameters face substantial deployment challenges due to their computational and memory requirements. These constraints substantially limit real-time applications and deployment on resourceconstrained devices. Consequently, model compression techniques have emerged as an essential
research direction to increase LLM accessibility while preserving their accuracy and functionality.
Established methods for model compression primarily include neural network pruning [LeCun et al.,
1989, Hassibi and Stork, 1992, Han et al., 2015b] and quantization [Han et al., 2015a, 2016]. For
LLMs, recent research has focused on one-shot post-training compression methods [Frantar and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

