GPAS: Accelerating Convergence of LLM Pretraining
via Gradient-Preserving Activation Scaling
Tianhao Chen1∗ , Xin Xu1∗ , Zijing Liu2 , Pengxiang Li3 , Xinyuan Song4 ,
Ajay Kumar Jaiswal5 , Fan Zhang1 , Jishan Hu1 , Yang Wang1 , Hao Chen1 ,
Shizhe Diao6 , Shiwei Liu7 , Yu Li2 , Lu Yin8† , Can Yang1†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 International Digital Economy Academy
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Emory University 5 University of Texas at Austin
6
NVIDIA 7 University of Oxford 8 University of Surrey
{tchenbb, xxuca}@connect.ust.hk, l.yin@surrey.ac.uk, macyang@ust.hk

Abstract
Modern Large Language Models, such as the LLaMA, Qwen and DeepSeek
series, predominantly adopt the Pre-LayerNorm (Pre-LN) Transformer architecture.
While being stable during pretraining and scalable to large model sizes, Pre-LN
suffers from an exponential growth in activation variance across layers, causing
the shortcut to dominate over sub-layer outputs in the residual connection and
limiting the learning capacity of deeper layers. To mitigate this issue, we propose
Gradient-Preserving Activation Scaling (GPAS), a simple technique that can
be used in combination with existing approaches. GPAS works by scaling down
the intermediate activations while keeping their gradients unchanged. This leaves
information in the activations intact, and avoids the gradient vanishing problem
associated with gradient downscaling. Extensive experiments across various model
sizes from 71M to 1B show that GPAS achieves consistent performance gains.
Beyond enhancing Pre-LN Transformers, GPAS also shows promise in improving
alternative architectures such as Sandwich-LN and DeepNorm, demonstrating its
versatility and potential for improving training dynamics in a wide range of settings.
Our code is available at https://github.com/dandingsky/GPAS.

1

Introduction

The pursuit of more cost-effective and performant architectures is a central theme in the development
of Large Language Models (LLMs). The introduction of the Transformer architecture [1] laid a
solid foundation for modern language modeling and has since become the backbone of most state-ofthe-art LLMs. To facilitate stable and scalable training, recent models such as the LLaMA, Qwen
and DeepSeek series [2, 3, 4] adopt the Pre-LayerNorm (Pre-LN) Transformer architecture [5, 6, 7],
enabling training models with up to hundreds of billions of parameters.
Although Pre-LN Transformers offer strong scalability and stability, they remain suboptimal in terms
of convergence speed and parameter efficiency. Prior studies [8, 9, 10] have shown that deeper
layers of Pre-LN Transformers can often be pruned or removed entirely with minimal impact on
performance. While this creates opportunities for reducing inference costs, it also highlights a
significant inefficiency in the training process—where most of the computational budget is spent.
One of the core reasons for the underutilization of deep layers lies in the accumulation of activation variance in Pre-LN Transformers. While the original Transformer architecture places Layer
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

