Policy Gradient Methods Converge Globally in
Imperfect-Information Extensive-Form Games

Fivos Kalogiannis
UCSD CSE
La Jolla, CA 92093
fkalogiannis@ucsd.edu

Gabriele Farina
MIT EECS
Cambridge, MA 02139
gfarina@mit.edu

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has long been seen as inseparable from
Markov games (Littman, 1994). Yet, the most remarkable achievements of practical
MARL have arguably been in extensive-form games (EFGs)—spanning games
like Poker, Stratego, and Hanabi. At the same time, little is known about provable
equilibrium convergence for MARL algorithms applied to EFGs as they stumble
upon the inherent nonconvexity of the optimization landscape and the failure of the
value-iteration subroutine in EFGs. To this goal, we utilize contemporary advances
in nonconvex optimization theory to prove that regularized alternating policy
gradient with (i) direct policy parametrization, (ii) softmax policy parametrization,
and (iii) softmax policy parametrization with natural policy gradient updates
converge to an approximate Nash equilibrium (NE) in the last-iterate in imperfectinformation perfect-recall zero-sum EFGs. Namely, we observe that since the
individual utilities are concave with respect to the sequence-form strategy, they
satisfy gradient dominance with respect to the behavioral strategy—or, policy,
in reinforcement learning terms. We exploit this structure to further prove that
the regularized utility satisfies the much stronger proximal Polyak-Łojasiewicz
condition. In turn, we show that the different flavors of alternating policy gradient
methods converge to an ϵ-approximate NE with a number of iterations and trajectory
samples that are polynomial in 1/ϵ and the natural parameters of the game. Our
work is a preliminary—yet principled—attempt in bridging the conceptual gap
between the theory of Markov and imperfect-information EFGs while it aspires to
stimulate a deeper dialogue between them.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) dominates contemporary applied and theoretical research. The flagship
of RL, policy optimization methods, appears to lend reasoning capabilities to language models (Shao
et al., 2024), defeats human Go world champions (Silver et al., 2016), and navigates real-world
roads safely (Lu et al., 2023; Cusumano-Towner et al., 2025). As is evident from even more examples (Vinyals et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2020), machine gameplay has transformed by
incorporating RL techniques into its algorithmic arsenal. Although theoretical literature (Littman,
1994) posits that the canonical model of MARL are Markov games (MGs), MARL has handled
imperfect-information extensive-form games (EFGs) with commendable success (Brown and Sandholm, 2019b; Bard et al., 2020; Perolat et al., 2022).
At first, the theory and practice of imperfect-information EFGs can seem saturated. Exhaustive research in the properties of EFGs has exposed its convex structure using sequence-form strategies (Romanovskii, 1962; Koller et al., 1996; Von Stengel, 1996) and yielded the different counterfactual-regret
minimization algorithms (CFR) (Zinkevich et al., 2007; Tammelin, 2014; Brown and Sandholm,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

