The Unseen Threat: Residual Knowledge in
Machine Unlearning under Perturbed Samples

Hsiang Hsu1∗, Pradeep Niroula1 , Zichang He1
Ivan Brugere2 , Freddy Lecue2 , and Chun-Fu Chen1
1
JPMorganChase Global Technology Applied Research
2
JPMorganChase AI Research

Abstract
Machine unlearning offers a practical alternative to avoid full model re-training by
approximately removing the influence of specific user data. While existing methods
certify unlearning via statistical indistinguishability from re-trained models, these
guarantees do not naturally extend to model outputs when inputs are adversarially
perturbed. In particular, slight perturbations of forget samples may still be correctly
recognized by the unlearned model—even when a re-trained model fails to do
so—revealing a novel privacy risk: information about the forget samples may
persist in their local neighborhood. In this work, we formalize this vulnerability as
residual knowledge and show that it is inevitable in high-dimensional settings. To
mitigate this risk, we propose a fine-tuning strategy, named RURK, that penalizes
the model’s ability to re-recognize perturbed forget samples. Experiments on vision
benchmarks with deep neural networks demonstrate that residual knowledge is
prevalent across existing unlearning methods and that our approach effectively
prevents residual knowledge.

1

Introduction

The widespread use of user data in training machine learning (ML) models has raised significant
privacy concerns, particularly when user data is memorized by models such as deep neural networks,
and can later be extracted or reconstructed (Carlini et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). This memorization
violates regulations such as the “Right to be Forgotten” in EU’s GDPR (Voigt and Von dem Bussche,
2017), which mandates that, upon a user’s removal request, an ML service provider must not only
delete the user data from databases but also ensure its removal from the ML models themselves
(Shastri et al., 2019). As a result, simply deleting the data is often insufficient; instead, re-training the
model from scratch without the specific user data is necessary. However, this re-training process is
computationally expensive and impractical in real-time or large-scale settings (Ginart et al., 2019).
To address this challenge, machine unlearning has been proposed as a more scalable alternative
that approximately removes the influence of the specific data (referred to as forget samples) from
a pre-trained model, as a substitute for avoiding full re-training (Cao and Yang, 2015; Bourtoule
et al., 2021). This approach, known as approximate unlearning, is often certified through statistical
indistinguishability between the unlearned model and one re-trained without the forget samples (Guo
et al., 2020; Chourasia and Shah, 2023).
Theoretical formulations of approximate unlearning (cf. § 2) suggest that an unlearned model should
behave similarly to a re-trained model on forget samples, for example, by producing similar predictions or classification accuracy. However, these guarantees typically apply only to the original samples
and do not extend to their proximities, especially under imperceptible adversarial perturbations. In
complex hypothesis spaces, even minor input changes can cause the unlearned and re-trained models
∗

Correspondence to: Hsiang Hsu <hsiang.hsu@jpmchase.com>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

