RNNs perform task computations by
dynamically warping neural representations

Arthur Pellegrino
The Gatsby Unit
University College London
a.pellegrino@ucl.ac.uk

Angus Chadwick
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
angus.chadwick@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Analysing how neural networks represent data features in their activations can help
interpret how they perform tasks. Hence, a long line of work has focused on mathematically characterising the geometry of such “neural representations.” In parallel,
machine learning has seen a surge of interest in understanding how dynamical
systems perform computations on time-varying input data. Yet, the link between
computation-through-dynamics and representational geometry remains poorly understood. Here, we hypothesise that recurrent neural networks (RNNs) perform
computations by dynamically warping their representations of task variables. To
test this hypothesis, we develop a Riemannian geometric framework that enables
the derivation of the manifold topology and geometry of a dynamical system from
the manifold of its inputs. By characterising the time-varying geometry of RNNs,
we show that dynamic warping is a fundamental feature of their computations.

1

Introduction

Understanding the low-dimensional neural representations
used by biological and artificial neural networks to solve
complex tasks is a key challenge in machine learning.1,2 For
example, low-dimensional activity manifolds have been observed in neural systems performing vision3,4 or language
tasks.5 More generally, data from the natural world often
lie on low-dimensional manifolds,6 and the computations
performed by neural networks trained on these data can be
interpreted as transformations of these data manifolds into
neural activation manifolds.
Figure 1: Dynamical systems receiving inputs on a low-dimensional manifold of functions are constrained to
low-dimensional manifold of states.
The Riemannian geometry of this manifold can provide insights into dynamiDynamical system models, described as differential equa- cal representations and computations.
tions, are ubiquitous in science and machine learning. The
development and application of methods to infer dynamical
systems from data8–10 or train dynamical systems to solve tasks11 are now central to computational
neuroscience,12–14 physics,15 chemistry16 and genomics.17,18 In machine learning, diffusion models based on stochastic differential equations achieve state-of-the-art performance for generative
modelling of images.19 In computational neuroscience, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) defined
using differential equations are used routinely to investigate neural computations underlying various
behavioural tasks.20
However, existing work on the geometry of neural representations has focused on the static, time-independent, setting.7
In contrast, the geometry of the dynamic representations
formed by neural networks driven by time-varying inputs
remains largely unexplored.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

