SynLogic: Synthesizing Verifiable Reasoning Data at
Scale for Learning Logical Reasoning and Beyond
Junteng Liu1,2 , Yuanxiang Fan2 , Zhuo Jiang2 , Han Ding2 , Yongyi Hu2 , Chi Zhang2 ,
Yiqi Shi2 , Shitong Weng2 , Aili Chen2 , Shiqi Chen3 , Yunan Huang2 , Mozhi Zhang2 ,
Pengyu Zhao2 , Junjie Yan2 , Junxian He1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
The City University of Hong Kong
{jliugi, junxianh}@cse.ust.hk

2

MiniMax

Abstract
Recent advances such as OpenAI-o1 and DeepSeek R1 have demonstrated the
potential of Reinforcement Learning (RL) to enhance reasoning abilities in Large
Language Models (LLMs). While open-source replication efforts have primarily focused on mathematical and coding domains, methods and resources for developing
general reasoning capabilities remain underexplored. This gap is partly due to the
challenge of collecting diverse and verifiable reasoning data suitable for RL. We
hypothesize that logical reasoning is critical for developing general reasoning capabilities, as logic forms a fundamental building block of reasoning. In this work, we
present S YN L OGIC, a data synthesis framework and dataset that generates diverse
logical reasoning data at scale, encompassing 35 diverse logical reasoning tasks.
The S YN L OGIC approach enables controlled synthesis of data with adjustable
difficulty and quantity. Importantly, all examples can be verified by simple rules,
making them ideally suited for RL with verifiable rewards. In our experiments, we
validate the effectiveness of RL training on the S YN L OGIC dataset based on 7B and
32B models. S YN L OGIC leads to state-of-the-art logical reasoning performance
among open-source datasets, surpassing DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B by 6
points on BBEH. Furthermore, mixing S YN L OGIC data with mathematical and
coding tasks improves the training efficiency of these domains and significantly
enhances reasoning generalization. Notably, our mixed training model outperforms DeepSeek-R1-Zero-Qwen-32B across multiple benchmarks. These findings
position S YN L OGIC as a valuable resource for advancing the broader reasoning
capabilities of LLMs. We open-source both the data synthesis pipeline and the
S YN L OGIC dataset in https://github.com/MiniMax-AI/SynLogic.

1

Introduction

The success of Deepseek R1 [DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025] and OpenAI-o1 [Jaech et al., 2024] demonstrates the great potential of post-training in advancing strong reasoning capabilities. These works
reveal that the core methodology behind these advancements is reinforcement learning with verifiable
rewards (RLVR), inspiring numerous replication efforts focused on RL training. However, most
of these works have concentrated on the mathematics and coding domains, primarily because it is
straightforward to design binary reward rules in these areas [Zeng et al., 2025b,a, Yu et al., 2025, Hu
et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2025]. To foster more general and comprehensive reasoning abilities, it is
essential to utilize diverse tasks and examples with verifiable rewards. In this work, we concentrate
on logical reasoning as a promising domain for this objective, hypothesizing that logical reasoning
serves as a fundamental building block for developing general reasoning skills. Although prior work
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

