How Different from the Past?
Spatio-Temporal Time Series Forecasting with
Self-Supervised Deviation Learning

Haotian Gao1∗, Zheng Dong1∗, Jiawei Yong2
Shintaro Fukushima2 , Kenjiro Taura1 , Renhe Jiang1†
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 Toyota Motor Corporation
{gaoht6, zhengdong00}@outlook.com
{jiawei_yong, s_fukushima}@mail.toyota.co.jp
tau@eidos.ic.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, jiangrh@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Spatio-temporal forecasting is essential for real-world applications such as traffic management and urban computing. Although recent methods have shown
improved accuracy, they often fail to account for dynamic deviations between
current inputs and historical patterns. These deviations contain critical signals
that can significantly affect model performance. To fill this gap, we propose STSSDL, a Spatio-Temporal time series forecasting framework that incorporates a
Self-Supervised Deviation Learning scheme to capture and utilize such deviations.
ST-SSDL anchors each input to its historical average and discretizes the latent
space using learnable prototypes that represent typical spatio-temporal patterns.
Two auxiliary objectives are proposed to refine this structure: a contrastive loss that
enhances inter-prototype discriminability and a deviation loss that regularizes the
distance consistency between input representations and corresponding prototypes
to quantify deviation. Optimized jointly with the forecasting objective, these components guide the model to organize its hidden space and improve generalization
across diverse input conditions. Experiments on six benchmark datasets show
that ST-SSDL consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines across multiple
metrics. Visualizations further demonstrate its ability to adaptively respond to
varying levels of deviation in complex spatio-temporal scenarios. Our code and
datasets are available at https://github.com/Jimmy-7664/ST-SSDL.

1

Introduction

Accurately forecasting the spatio-temporal time series generated from various sensors is essential
for a wide range of applications like traffic flow regulation, energy demand estimation, and climate
impact analysis. Due to the complex dependencies across time and space, considerable efforts have
been made to learn rich spatio-temporal patterns [7, 14, 44, 49, 63, 77, 78, 83, 24, 21, 58, 56, 57, 19,
20, 52, 34, 16, 74, 75, 11, 15, 12].
However, a crucial aspect still remains overlooked by current models: the deviation between current
observations and their historical states. In real-world transportation systems, the present time
series frequently differ from historical states due to policy interventions, special events, or external
incidents. These deviations can provide valuable insights for forecasting, as they often signal changes
that impact future behaviors. Although some recent efforts [40, 42, 24, 54] attempt to incorporate
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

