Panacea: Mitigating Harmful Fine-tuning for Large
Language Models via Post-fine-tuning Perturbation

Yibo Wang1 , Tiansheng Huang, Li Shen2†, Huanjin Yao1 , Haotian Luo2 , Rui Liu3
Naiqiang Tan3 , Jiaxing Huang4 , Dacheng Tao4 ,
1
Tsinghua University; 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University;
3
Didichuxing Co. Ltd; 4 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Harmful fine-tuning attack introduces significant security risks to the fine-tuning
services. Main-stream defenses aim to vaccinate the model such that the later
harmful fine-tuning attack is less effective. However, our evaluation results show
that such defenses are fragile– with a few fine-tuning steps, the model still can
learn the harmful knowledge. To this end, we do further experiment and find
that an embarrassingly simple solution– adding purely random perturbations to
the fine-tuned model, can recover the model from harmful behaviors, though
it leads to a degradation in the model’s fine-tuning performance. To address
the degradation of fine-tuning performance, we further propose Panacea, which
optimizes an adaptive perturbation that will be applied to the model after fine-tuning.
Panacea maintains model’s safety alignment performance without compromising
downstream fine-tuning performance. Comprehensive experiments are conducted
on different harmful ratios, fine-tuning tasks and mainstream LLMs, where the
average harmful scores are reduced by up-to 21.2%, while maintaining fine-tuning
performance. As a by-product, we analyze the adaptive perturbation and show that
different layers in various LLMs have distinct safety affinity, which coincide with
finding from several previous study. Source code available at https://github.
com/w-yibo/Panacea.

1

Introduction

Alignment Data

Fine-tuning Data
contain harmful data!

Fine-tuning-as-a-service [1] is a popular business service to enhance model’s performance for
customized datasets, domain-specific tasks, and
Fine-tuning
Alignment
private needs. However, recent studies [2–7]
Aligned LLMs
Fine-tuned LLMs
identify a safety issue, the harmful fine-tuning Pretrained LLMs
attack (Figure 1), where the model’s safety
alignment is compromised when the fine-tuning Figure 1: The harmful fine-tuning attack for
dataset contains harmful data, even a small fine-tuning-as-a-service scenarios. Pretrained
amount of harmful data can introduce signifi- LLMs are aligned using alignment data to procant security vulnerabilities. Moreover, harmful duce aligned LLMs. Aligned LLMs are further
fine-tuning is often unintentional, as datasets fine-tuned using fine-tuning data that may contain
may contain latent unsafe data that is difficult harmful data, leading to unsafe fine-tuned models.
for users to detect. Since service providers are responsible for the harmful outputs generated by the
model, there is a clear need for effective solutions.
Vaccine [8] and RepNoise [9] are two representative defenses against the harmful fine-tuning attack.
Vaccine improves the aligned model’s resistance towards harmful knowledge learning by solving a
†

Corresponding Author: Li Shen (shenli6@mail.sysu.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

