Sketched Adaptive Distributed Deep Learning:
A Sharp Convergence Analysis

Zhijie Chen
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
lucmon@illinois.edu

Qiaobo Li
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
qiaobol2@illinois.edu

Arindam Banerjee
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
arindamb@illinois.edu

Abstract
Combining gradient compression with adaptive optimizers is a highly desirable
goal in distributed learning, with potential benefits in both fewer communication rounds and less per-round communication. In spite of preliminary empirical
promise, certain major challenges in the convergence analysis of such methods
have stayed open: handling compression based approximation of both first and
second moments (pre-conditioner) which appear as a ratio; avoiding dependence
on the number of parameters, which is extremely large in modern deep models; and
providing high-probability guarantees instead of in-expectation, which can hide
high variance behavior. In this work, we introduce a family of Sketched Adaptive
Distributed Learning (SADL) algorithms which can use suitable unbiased gradient
sketching for compression with suitable adaptive optimization algorithms. As our
main contribution, we provide theoretical convergence guarantees of SADL algorithms which addresses all of the existing challenges. In particular, our guarantees
hold with high probability, picks up only a logarithmic dependence on the number
of parameters, and the first and second moment approximation is handled precisely
yielding a dependence on the intrinsic dimension of the loss Hessian, which is
significantly smaller than the full dimensionality of deep learning models. Empirically, the SADL algorithms are shown to be competitive with and often outperform
baselines on both vision and language tasks, in both supervised fine-tuning and
training-from-scratch regimes. Further, the SADL algorithms are also competitive
with the state-of-the-art communication-efficient distributed learning algorithms
based on error feedback.

1

Introduction

Despite the recent progress in distributed deep learning (Liu et al., 2022), the cost of communication
arguably remains the main challenge. Wang et al. (2023) showed that a 20 Gbps network bandwidth
is necessary to bring the communication overhead to a suitable scale for finetuning GPT-J-6B, which
is unrealistic in distributed settings. Even with good network conditions, reduction of communication
complexity means one can train much larger models given the same communication budget.
The communication cost of vanilla distributed learning can be represented as O(dT ), where d is the
ambient dimension of the parameter space, i.e., the number of parameters, and T is the number of
communication rounds for convergence. Various methods have been proposed to minimize T , e.g.,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

