Flow based approach for Dynamic Temporal Causal
models with non-Gaussian or Heteroscedastic Noises
Pascal Frossard
LTS4, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abdellah Rahmani
LTS4, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
abdellah.rahmani@epfl.ch

Abstract
Understanding causal relationships in multivariate time series is crucial in many
scenarios, such as those dealing with financial or neurological data. Many such
time series exhibit multiple regimes, i.e., consecutive temporal segments with
a priori unknown boundaries, with each regime having its own causal structure.
Inferring causal dependencies and regime shifts is critical for analyzing the underlying processes. However, causal structure learning in this setting is challenging
due to (1) non-stationarity, i.e., each regime can have its own causal graph and
mixing function, and (2) complex noise distributions, which may be non-Gaussian
or heteroscedastic. Existing causal discovery approaches cannot address these
challenges, since generally assume stationarity or Gaussian noise with constant
variance. Hence, we introduce FANTOM, a unified framework for causal discovery
that handles non-stationary processes along with non-Gaussian and heteroscedastic
noises. FANTOM simultaneously infers the number of regimes and their corresponding indices and learns each regime’s Directed Acyclic Graph. It uses a
Bayesian Expectation Maximization algorithm that maximizes the evidence lower
bound of the data log-likelihood. On the theoretical side, we prove, under mild
assumptions, that temporal heteroscedastic causal models, introduced in FANTOM’s formulation, are identifiable in both stationary and non-stationary settings.
In addition, extensive experiments on synthetic and real data show that FANTOM
outperforms existing methods.

1

Introduction

Causal structure learning from multivariate time series (MTS) is a fundamental problem with diverse
applications in traffic modeling [9], biology [44], climate science [43], or healthcare [47]. However,
identifying causal relationships in MTS poses several challenges. First, real-world time series are
often non-stationary, exhibiting multiple unknown regimes, each potentially governed by different
causal relationships. Examples include changing dependencies across climate conditions [27],
financial markets [21], and epileptic seizure stages [56]. Second, many MTS display complex noises,
e.g., non-Gaussian or even heteroscedastic noise, whose variance depends on both instantaneous and
lagged causes. This occurs in fMRI data [46], EEG measurements [22], or financial data [18].
Recent causal discovery methods capture linear and nonlinear interactions with instantaneous
and lagged effects [41, 35, 51]. More recently, Gong et al. [15] and Wang et al. [55] explored
structural equation models for a single stationary regime governed by a one causal graph with
historically dependent noise, where noise variance depends solely on time-lagged variables,
neglecting heteroscedasticity. Existing multi-regime methods include RPCMCI [45], which identifies
only linear, time-lagged interactions and requires prior knowledge of regime numbers and transitions;
and CD-NOD [21], which handles causal discovery from non-stationary MTS, but is limited to
homoscedastic noise, cannot infer individual causal graph for each regime, and is incapable of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

