Stability and Oracle Inequalities for Optimal
Transport Maps between General Distributions
Shubo Li
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16803
skl6034@psu.edu

Yizhe Ding
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16803
yvd5212@psu.edu

Lingzhou Xue
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
lzxue@psu.edu

Runze Li
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
rzli@psu.edu

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) provides a powerful framework for comparing and transforming probability distributions, with wide applications in generative modeling,
AI4Science and statistical inference. However, existing estimation theory typically
requires stringent smoothness conditions on the underlying Brenier potentials and
assumes bounded distribution supports, limiting practical applicability. In this paper, we introduce a unified theoretical framework for semi-dual OT map estimation
that relaxes both of these restrictions. Building on sieved convex conjugate, our
framework has two key contributions: (i) a new map stability bounds that holds
without any second-order regularity assumptions on the true Brenier potentials, and
(ii) an oracle inequality that cleanly decomposes the estimation error into statistical
error, sieved bias, and approximation error. Specifically, our approximation error is
measured in the L1 norm rather than Sobolev norm in the existing results, aligning
more naturally with classical approximation theory. Leveraging these tools, we
provide statistical error of semi-dual estimators with mild and verifiable conditions
on the true OT map. Moreover, we establish the first theoretical guarantee for
deep neural network OT map estimator between general distributions, with Tanh
network function class as an example.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) provides a powerful framework for transforming one probability measure into
another. Concretely, given two distributions µ and ⌫ on Rd , the OT problem seeks a map T : Rd ! Rd
that transports µ to ⌫ while minimizing a cost function. Beyond its elegant mathematical foundation,
OT has found broad applications in Ai4Science [39, 7, 29], computer vision [3, 23, 43, 12], and
nonparametric statistical inference [10, 26, 24, 18], powering advances in scientific discovery and
machine/deep learning. Despite its broad impact, rigorous theoretical guarantees for OT estimators
under mild and realistic regularity conditions remain limited.
This paper aims to contribute to this direction by focusing on the dual-type OT map estimators,
formally introduced in Section 2, which are based on the characterization of the optimal transport
map as the gradient of a convex function (the so-called Brenier potential). The seminal work of [27]
established minimax optimality for a wavelet-truncated dual-type OT estimator, but under restrictive
conditions: µ is supported on [0, 1]d with a bounded density, ⌫ is compactly supported, and the true
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

