Improved Representation Steering for
Language Models
Zhengxuan Wu∗ Qinan Yu∗ Aryaman Arora
Christopher D. Manning Christopher Potts
Stanford University
{wuzhengx,qinanyu,aryamana}@stanford.edu
{manning,cgpotts}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Steering methods for language models (LMs) seek to provide fine-grained and
interpretable control over model generations by variously changing model inputs,
weights, or representations to adjust behavior. Recent work has shown that adjusting weights or representations is often less effective than steering by prompting,
for instance when wanting to introduce or suppress a particular concept. We
demonstrate how to improve representation steering via our new Reference-free
Preference Steering (RePS), a bidirectional preference-optimization objective that
jointly does concept steering and suppression. We train three parameterizations of
RePS and evaluate them on A X B ENCH, a large-scale model steering benchmark.
On Gemma models with sizes ranging from 2B to 27B, RePS outperforms all existing
steering methods trained with a language modeling objective and substantially
narrows the gap with prompting – while promoting interpretability and minimizing
parameter count. In suppression, RePS matches the language-modeling objective
on Gemma-2 and outperforms it on the larger Gemma-3 variants while remaining
resilient to prompt-based jailbreaking attacks that defeat prompting. Overall, our
results suggest that RePS provides an interpretable and robust alternative to prompting for both steering and suppression.
github.com/stanfordnlp/axbench

1

Introduction

As language models (LMs) proliferate, they raise new challenges in reliability and user control.
Prompting and fine-tuning are widely used to ensure LMs align with human goals; however, prompting
is brittle and requires extensive manual trial and error [Chang et al., 2024], while fine-tuning brings
high costs and produces artifacts that are hard to audit [Han et al., 2024]. Interpretability researchers
have explored intervention-based methods (e.g., steering vectors and sparse autoencoders; SAEs)
to overcome these limitations. Similarly to parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods (PEFTs), these
lightweight and interpretable methods manipulate model forward passes in place at inference time to
steer model behavior [Hu et al., 2022, Turner et al., 2023b].
However, intervention-based methods consistently underperform prompting and finetuning, as evidenced by A X B ENCH, a large-scale model steering benchmark [Wu et al., 2025]. This shortfall
likely stems from their training objectives neglecting the human preference signals that guide instructtuned LM optimization. Early attempts to use preference-based objectives for steering vectors have
struggled to scale to large, production-scale models [Cao et al., 2024, Turner et al., 2025].
* Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

