SING: SDE Inference via Natural Gradients
Amber Hu∗
Stanford University
amberhu@stanford.edu

Henry D. Smith∗
Stanford University
smithhd@stanford.edu

Scott W. Linderman
Stanford University
swl1@stanford.edu

Abstract
Latent stochastic differential equation (SDE) models are important tools for the
unsupervised discovery of dynamical systems from data, with applications ranging
from engineering to neuroscience. In these complex domains, exact posterior
inference of the latent state path is typically intractable, motivating the use of
approximate methods such as variational inference (VI). However, existing VI
methods for inference in latent SDEs often suffer from slow convergence and
numerical instability. Here, we propose SDE Inference via Natural Gradients
(SING), a method that leverages natural gradient VI to efficiently exploit the underlying geometry of the model and variational posterior. SING enables fast and
reliable inference in latent SDE models by approximating intractable integrals
and parallelizing computations in time. We provide theoretical guarantees that
SING approximately optimizes the intractable, continuous-time objective of interest. Moreover, we demonstrate that better state inference enables more accurate
estimation of nonlinear drift functions using, for example, Gaussian process SDE
models. SING outperforms prior methods in state inference and drift estimation
on a variety of datasets, including a challenging application to modeling neural
dynamics in freely behaving animals. Altogether, our results illustrate the potential
of SING as a tool for accurate inference in complex dynamical systems, especially
those characterized by limited prior knowledge and non-conjugate structure.1

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) are powerful tools for modeling complex, time-varying
systems in scientific domains such as physics, engineering, and neuroscience [1, 2]. In many realworld settings, we do not observe the state of the system directly, but instead must infer it from
noisy measurements. For example, in neuroscience, we often wish to uncover continuously evolving
internal brain states underlying high-dimensional neural recordings [3]. Latent SDE models address
this problem by positing a continuous-time stochastic latent process that generates observations
through a measurement model.
A key challenge in latent SDE modeling is posterior inference over the latent state trajectory. Accurate
inference enables principled understanding and prediction of the underlying state, but it is often
computationally intractable to perform analytically due to non-conjugate model structure. Methods
for approximating the intractable posterior include Markov chain Monte Carlo [4, 5], approximate
Bayesian smoothing [2, 6], and variational inference (VI) [7–11]. In particular, VI offers a flexible
and scalable framework for approximate inference in latent SDE models. In their seminal work,
Archambeau et al. [7, 8] formulate the VI problem for latent SDEs as constrained optimization over
the family of linear, time-varying SDEs. While variants of this approach have been widely employed
[9, 12–15], they often suffer from slow convergence and numerical instability. These shortcomings
motivate the need for more efficient and robust VI methods in this setting.
∗
1

Equal contribution
Code: https://github.com/lindermanlab/sing

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

