Multi-Agent Collaboration via Evolving Orchestration

Yufan Dang⋆† Chen Qian♣† Xueheng Luo⋆ Jingru Fan⋆ Zihao Xie⋆
Ruijie Shi⋆ Weize Chen⋆ Cheng Yang♠ Xiaoyin Che♢ Ye Tian♡
Xuantang Xiong♡ Lei Han♡ Zhiyuan Liu⋆B Maosong Sun⋆B
⋆
Tsinghua University ♣ Shanghai Jiao Tong University
♠
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
♢
Siemens ♡ Tencent Robotics X
dangyf25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn qianc@sjtu.edu.cn
liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn sms@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable results across diverse
downstream tasks, but their monolithic nature restricts scalability and efficiency
in complex problem-solving. While recent research explores multi-agent collaboration among LLMs, most approaches rely on static organizational structures
that struggle to adapt as task complexity and agent numbers grow, resulting in
coordination overhead and inefficiencies. To this end, we propose a puppeteer-style
paradigm for LLM-based multi-agent collaboration, where a centralized orchestrator ("puppeteer") dynamically directs agents ("puppets") in response to evolving
task states. This orchestrator is trained via reinforcement learning to adaptively
sequence and prioritize agents, enabling flexible and evolvable collective reasoning.
Experiments on closed- and open-domain scenarios show that this method achieves
superior performance with reduced computational costs. Analyses further reveal
that the key improvements consistently stem from the emergence of more compact,
cyclic reasoning structures under the orchestrator’s evolution. Our code is available
at https://github.com/OpenBMB/ChatDev/tree/puppeteer.

Puppeteer
i.e., Policy

Manupilate
i.e., Orchestrate

Puppet
i.e., Agent

Environment
i.e., Reinforcing

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed multi-agent collaboration framework. A central policy ("puppeteer") dynamically orchestrates which agent ("puppet") should reason at each step based on the
evolving state of the task. As the task progresses, the orchestrator adaptively promotes more effective
agents while removing those that are less useful, analogous to a puppeteer learning to skillfully pull
or cut strings to direct a performance.
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

B

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

