FLAME: Fast Long-context Adaptive Memory for
Event-based Vision
Biswadeep Chakraborty
Georgia Institute of Technology,
Mercuria Energy Trading
bchakraborty6@gatech.edu

Saibal Mukhopadhyay
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
We propose Fast Long-context Adaptive Memory for Event (FLAME), a novel
scalable architecture that combines neuro-inspired feature extraction with robust
structured sequence modeling to efficiently process asynchronous and sparse event
camera data. As a departure from conventional input encoding methods, FLAME
presents Event Attention Layer, a novel feature extractor that leverages neuromorphic dynamics (Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF)) to directly capture multi-timescale
features from event streams. The feature extractor integrates with a structured
state-space model with a novel Event-Aware HiPPO (EA-HiPPO) mechanism that
dynamically adapts memory retention based on inter-event intervals to understand
relationship across varying temporal scales and event sequences. A Normal Plus
Low Rank (NPLR) decomposition reduces the computational complexity of state
update from O(N 2 ) to O(N r), where N represents the dimension of the core
state vector and r is the rank of a low-rank component (with r ≪ N ). FLAME
demonstrates state-of-the-art accuracy for event-by-event processing on complex
event camera datasets.

1

Introduction

Neuromorphic cameras promise low operation power by generating asynchronous and sparse event
data instead of dense pixel maps. Although spatial and temporal resolutions of event cameras
are increasing [1, 2, 3], extracting features from long sequence of events remains challenging and
computationally expensive [4, 5]. One class of event camera algorithms aggregate events over a
period of time into a volumetric representation [6, 7, 8, 9]. They show higher accuracy but incur
higher computational cost and longer decision latency. Alternatively, event-by-event processing
methods maintains a spatiotemporal representation and updates that for every new event[10, 4, 11].
They require less computation and lower latency, but often achieve lower accuracy on complex
datasets, simultaneously achieving low computational cost, event-by-event processing, and high
accuracy for complex event camera data remains challenging.
Recent approaches for computationally efficient event camera processing primarily include methods
based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), Transformers, and Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs).
While GNNs and Transformers can model complex inter-event relationships to achieve high accuracy,
their core operations (e.g., graph convolution and attention mechanisms) typically process events in
aggregated batches or windows [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. This operational paradigm fundamentally
limits their ability to perform continuous, low-latency event-by-event updates and often incurs
high computational and memory demands, especially with large event volumes and long sequences
[18, 19, 20]. Conversely, SNN-based methods inherently support event-by-event processing with
promising computational efficiency. However, they often exhibit lower accuracy on complex tasks
involving high spatial and temporal resolutions (i.e., longer event sequences). This performance gap
for SNNs frequently stems from challenges in effectively training very deep architectures and the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

