Neural Evolution Strategy for
Black-box Pareto Set Learning

Chengyu Lu1,2 , Zhenhua Li3,4,∗ , Xi Lin1,2 , Ji Cheng1,2 , Qingfu Zhang1,2,∗
City University of Hong Kong, 2 City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
4
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{chengyulu3-c, xi.lin, J.Cheng}@my.cityu.edu.hk, zhenhua.li@nuaa.edu.cn
qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

1

Abstract
Multi-objective optimization problems (MOPs) are prevalent in numerous realworld applications. Recently, Pareto Set Learning (PSL) has emerged as a powerful
paradigm for solving MOPs. PSL can produce a neural network for modeling
the set of all Pareto optimal solutions. However, applying PSL to black-box
objectives, particularly those exhibiting non-separability, high dimensionality,
and/or other complex properties, remains very challenging. To address this issue,
we propose leveraging evolution strategies (ESs), a class of specialized blackbox optimization algorithms, within the PSL paradigm. Traditional ESs capture
the complex dimensional dependencies less efficiently, which can significantly
hinder their performance in PSL. To tackle this issue, we suggest encapsulating the
dependencies within a neural network, which is then trained using a novel gradient
estimation method. The proposed method, termed Neural-ES, is evaluated using a
bespoke benchmark suite for black-box PSL. Experimental comparisons with other
methods demonstrate the efficiency of Neural-ES, underscoring its ability to learn
the Pareto sets of challenging black-box MOPs.

1

Introduction

Many real-life applications need to consider multiple conflicting objectives simultaneously [1–3].
Since these objectives can rarely be optimized by a single solution simultaneously, a commonly used
approach is to find the Pareto set (PS) [4], which contains all solutions with different optimal tradeoffs among the objectives. Traditional methods [5–8] approximate the PS using only a finite number
of solutions, risking not aligning with users’ trade-off preferences determined after optimization.
Recently, a novel paradigm called Pareto Set Learning (PSL) has attracted increasing attention [9–
15]. PSL formulates a multi-objective optimization problem (MOP) [4] as a set learning task by
decomposing the problem into an infinite number of single-objective subproblems and resolving the
optimal solutions for all of them. In this process, a set model, typically a neural network, learns the
mapping from an input preference to its corresponding Pareto optimal solution. Consequently, the
Pareto set is recovered in both the objective and solution spaces. Unlike traditional multi-objective
methods, which only accommodate a limited number of predefined user preferences [16, 5], a trained
PSL model can provide a tailored optimal solution for any valid decision-maker preference trade-off
without requiring re-optimization from scratch.
Despite the rapid development of PSL, it remains largely unclear how to apply this paradigm to a
black-box MOP where both the analytic expression and derivatives of the objectives are unknown. On
∗

Correspondence to: Qingfu Zhang and Zhenhua Li

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

