Absolute Zero:
Reinforced Self-play Reasoning with Zero Data

Andrew Zhao1 Yiran Wu3 Yang Yue1 Tong Wu2 Quentin Xu1 Matthieu Lin1
Shenzhi Wang1 Qingyun Wu3 Zilong Zheng2∗ Gao Huang1∗
1
Tsinghua University 2 BIGAI 3 Penn State University
zqc21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn yiran.wu@psu.edu
zlzheng@bigai.ai gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) has shown promise in
enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models by learning directly
from rule-based outcome rewards. Recent RLVR works that operate under the
zero setting avoid supervision in labeling the reasoning process, but still depend on
manually curated collections of questions and answers for training. The scarcity
of high-quality, human-produced examples raises concerns about the long-term
scalability of relying on human supervision, a challenge already evident in the
domain of language model pretraining. Furthermore, in a hypothetical future where
AI surpasses human intelligence, tasks provided by humans may offer limited
learning potential for a superintelligent system. To address these concerns, we
propose a new RLVR paradigm called Absolute Zero, in which a single model learns
to propose tasks that maximize its own learning progress and improves reasoning
by solving them, without relying on any external human or distillation data. Under
this paradigm, we introduce the Absolute Zero Reasoner (AZR), a system that
self-evolves its training curriculum and reasoning ability. AZR uses a code executor
to both validate self-proposed code reasoning tasks and verify answers, serving as
an unified source of verifiable feedback to guide open-ended yet grounded learning.
Despite being trained entirely without external data, AZR achieves overall SOTA
performance on coding and mathematical reasoning tasks, outperforming existing
zero-setting models that rely on tens of thousands of in-domain human-curated
examples. Furthermore, we demonstrate that AZR can be effectively applied across
different model scales and is compatible with various model classes.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently achieved remarkable improvements in reasoning
capabilities by employing Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) [37]. Unlike
methods that explicitly imitate intermediate reasoning steps, RLVR uses only outcome-based feedback,
enabling large-scale reinforcement learning over vast task datasets [22, 75, 33, 52, 51, 81]. A
particularly compelling variant is the “zero” RLVR paradigm [22], which forgoes any cold-start
distillation data, using neither human-generated nor AI-generated reasoning traces, and applies RLVR
directly on the base model with task rewards. However, these methods still depend heavily on
expertly curated distributions of reasoning question–answer pairs, which raises serious concerns
about their long-term scalability [76]. As reasoning models continue to advance, the effort required to
construct large-scale, high-quality datasets may soon become unsustainable [97]. A similar scalability
bottleneck has already been identified in the domain of LLM pretraining [73]. Furthermore, as AI
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

