Fit the Distribution: Cross-Image/Prompt Adversarial
Attacks on Multimodal Large Language Models

Hai Yan1∗, Haijian Ma1∗, Xiaowen Cai1∗, Daizong Liu2† , Zenghui Yuan1 , Xiaoye Qu1 ,
Jianfeng Dong3 , Runwei Guan4 , Xiang Fang5 , Hongyang He6 , Yulai Xie1 , Pan Zhou1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Wuhan University
3
Zhejiang Gongshang University 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
Nanyang Technological University 6 University of Warwick
{yanhai,mhj,xwcai,zenghuiyuan,xiaoye,ylxie,panzhou}@hust.edu.cn
daizongliu@whu.edu.cn,runwei.guan@liverpool.ac.uk,xfang9508@gmail.com

Abstract
Although Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated remarkable achievements in recent years, they remain vulnerable to adversarial
examples that result in harmful responses. Existing attacks typically focus on
optimizing adversarial perturbations for a certain multimodal image-prompt pair or
fixed training dataset, which often leads to overfitting. Consequently, these perturbations fail to remain malicious once transferred to attack unseen image-prompt
pairs, suffering from significant resource costs to cover the diverse multimodal
inputs in complicated real-world scenarios. To alleviate this issue, this paper
proposes a novel adversarial attack on MLLMs based on distribution approximation theory, which models the potential image-prompt input distribution and adds
the same distribution-fitting adversarial perturbation on multimodal input pairs
to achieve effective cross-image/prompt transfer attacks. Specifically, we exploit
the Laplace approximation to model the Gaussian distribution of the image and
prompt inputs for the MLLM, deriving an estimate of the mean and covariance
parameters. By sampling from this approximated distribution with Monte Carlo
mechanism, we efficiently optimize and fit a single input-agnostic perturbation over
diverse image-prompt pairs, yielding strong universality and transferability. Extensive experiments are conducted to verify the strong adversarial capabilities of our
proposed attack against prevalent MLLMs spanning a spectrum of images/prompts.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated promising versatile capabilities in
a range of applications, such as image classification, image captioning, visual question answering
(VQA) and text-to-image generation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Despite their significant success, the increased
complexity and widespread deployment of MLLMs have also exposed them to various security
threats and vulnerabilities. Recent studies [7, 8, 9, 10] have proven that MLLMs are susceptible to
adversarial examples, which involve adding subtle yet invisible perturbations to image inputs. These
perturbations can guide the MLLMs to generate harmful responses, posing critical safety issues.
Most of the existing attacks [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 7, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26] generally
optimize adversarial image perturbations against MLLMs’ reasoning abilities with benign prompts to
produce erroneous or jailbreak responses. Although these attacks achieve significant performance
and present noticeable security risks, their optimized perturbations are specific to a certain imageprompt input pair, limiting their transferability to unseen image-prompt pairs. This issue becomes
∗

Equal contributions.

†

Corresponding author: Daizong Liu (daizongliu@whu.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

