Latent Principle Discovery for
Language Model Self-Improvement

Keshav Ramji∗, Tahira Naseem, Ramón Fernandez Astudillo
IBM Research AI

Abstract
When language model (LM) users aim to improve the quality of its generations,
it is crucial to specify concrete behavioral attributes that the model should strive
to reflect. However, curating such principles across many domains, even nonexhaustively, requires a labor-intensive annotation process. To automate this
process, we propose eliciting these latent attributes that guide model reasoning
toward human-preferred responses by explicitly modeling them in a self-correction
setting. Our approach mines new principles from the LM itself and compresses
the discovered elements to an interpretable set via clustering. Specifically, we
employ a form of posterior-regularized Monte Carlo Expectation-Maximization
to both identify a condensed set of the most effective latent principles and teach
the LM to strategically invoke them in order to intrinsically refine its responses.
We demonstrate that bootstrapping our algorithm over multiple iterations enables
smaller language models (7-8B parameters) to self-improve, achieving +8-10% in
AlpacaEval win-rate, an average of +0.3 on MT-Bench, and +19-23% in principlefollowing win-rate on IFEval. We also show that clustering the principles yields
interpretable and diverse model-generated constitutions while retaining model performance. The gains that our method achieves highlight the potential of automated,
principle-driven post-training recipes toward continual self-improvement.

1

Introduction

Modern language models (Grattafiori et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) have
achieved striking fluency and coherence in open-ended generation, yet guiding them to satisfy
multiple, possibly overlapping human-defined criteria remains a core challenge. Conventional
approaches to align language models (LMs) rely on human annotations distinguishing between a
chosen and rejected generation, even when their gap in quality may be nuanced and multi-faceted.
Constitutional AI and other related paradigms (Bai et al., 2022b; Guan et al., 2025) consider a humancurated "constitution" of high-level attributes which models’ responses should follow. While these
frameworks enable models to be steered toward safer behavior, the static nature of their constitutions
requires experts to anticipate nuances in advance and update rules manually as edge cases surface.
As use cases proliferate, new failure modes arise – reliably synthesizing task-specific "amendments"
and collecting annotations is a costly and time-consuming process – leading to brittleness and limited
adaptability. We aim to automate the process of discovering these attributes for model improvement,
obviating the need for human intervention or explicit domain adaptation.
Automatically discovering behaviors for self-improvement can be seen as a meta-level reasoning
process. Recent efforts to induce reasoning capabilities in LMs have often focused on domains
such as math and code where a gold reference answer exists and candidate answers are more easily
verifiable (DeepSeek-AI, 2025). The availability of verifiable responses has also been capitalized for
teaching self-correction (Kumar et al., 2025). However, in this work, we focus on open-ended text
∗

Correspondence to keshav.ramji@ibm.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

