Is Your Diffusion Model Actually Denoising?

Daniel Pfrommer
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
dpfrom@mit.edu

Zehao Dou
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
zehao.dou@yale.edu

Max Simchowitz
CMU
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
msimchow@andrew.cmu.edu

Christopher Scarvelis
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
scarv@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the inductive biases of diffusion models with a conditioning-variable, which have
seen widespread application as both text-conditioned generative image models and observationconditioned continuous control policies. We observe that when these models are queried
conditionally, their generations consistently deviate from the idealized “denoising” process
upon which diffusion models are formulated, inducing disagreement between popular sampling
algorithms (e.g. DDPM, DDIM). We introduce Schedule Deviation, a rigorous measure which
captures the rate of deviation from a standard denoising process, and provide a methodology
to compute it. Crucially, we demonstrate that the deviation from an idealized denoising
process occurs irrespective of the model capacity or amount of training data. We posit that this
phenomenon occurs due to the difficulty of bridging distinct denoising flows across different
parts of the conditioning space and show theoretically how such a phenomenon can arise
through an inductive bias towards smoothness.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) have seen widespread adoption in domains as diverse as robotic control,
molecule design, and image generation from text prompts. The diffusion formalism is popular both
because it enables stable training of neural generative models, via the denoising training objective,
and because it offers a broad menu of mathematical and algorithmic techniques for inference [Albergo
et al., 2023]. For example, inference can be conducted via both Stochastic Differential Equation
(SDE) [Ho et al., 2020] and Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) [Karras et al., 2022] formalisms,
the latter of which can be distilled further for accelerated sampling [Song et al., 2023]. The design
of these inference strategies hinges on the following fact: for a given (forward) diffusion process,
there are many distinct “reverse” stochastic processes, each of which can produce the same marginal
distribution over generated samples. Hence, from a sampling perspective, the various stochastic
processes are in effect equivalent.
A trained diffusion model is only an imperfect neural approximation to the idealized reverse processes.
Nevertheless, we might hope that this approximation is not too inaccurate. For example, even if a
diffusion model does not perfectly capture the target training distribution, one might conjecture that
the denoising training objective ensures that the model is at least consistent, in some appropriate
sense, with the forward processes mapping its own generated samples to noise. At the very least,
one would hope that as a diffusion model is trained on more data, or is conditioned on contexts
that are well-represented in a training dataset, a learned diffusion model will converge towards its
mathematical idealization.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

