The VLLM Safety Paradox: Dual Ease in Jailbreak
Attack and Defense
Yangyang Guo
National University of Singapore
guoyang.eric@gmail.com

Fangkai Jiao
Nanyang Technological University
I2 R, A*STAR

Liqiang Nie
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)

Mohan Kankanhalli
National University of Singapore

Abstract
The vulnerability of Vision Large Language Models (VLLMs) to jailbreak attacks
appears as no surprise. However, recent defense mechanisms against these attacks
have reached near-saturation performance on benchmark evaluations, often with
minimal effort. This dual high performance in both attack and defense gives rise
to a fundamental and perplexing paradox. To gain a deep understanding of this
issue and thus further help strengthen the trustworthiness of VLLMs, this paper
makes three key contributions: i) One tentative explanation for VLLMs being
prone to jailbreak attacks–inclusion of vision inputs, as well as its in-depth analysis. ii) The recognition of a largely ignored problem in existing VLLM defense
mechanisms–over-prudence. The problem causes these defense methods to exhibit
unintended abstention, even in the presence of benign inputs, thereby undermining
their reliability in faithfully defending against attacks. iii) A simple safety-aware
method–LLM-Pipeline. Our method repurposes the more advanced guardrails
of LLMs on the fly, serving as an effective alternative detector prior to VLLM
response. Last but not least, we find that the two representative evaluation methods
for jailbreak often exhibit chance agreement. This limitation makes it potentially
misleading when evaluating attack strategies or defense mechanisms. We believe
the findings from this paper offer useful insights to rethink the foundational development of VLLM safety with respect to benchmark datasets, defense strategies,
and evaluation methods.
Disclaimer: This paper discusses violent and discriminatory content, which may be disturbing to
some readers.

1

Introduction

The pervasiveness of Large Language Models (LLMs) concurrently ushers in varied challenges for
both researchers and practitioners [1]. Among these, protecting the trustworthiness of free-form
outputs, as defined by the 3H criterion [2], has grown increasingly critical in recent years [3, 4].
Beyond important considerations of Helpfulness and Honesty, the need for Harmlessness is far more
urgent given its potential social implications.
Jailbreak attacks, the core of red-teaming [5], serve as the most common method for assessing the
harmlessness of LLMs and Vision-LLMs (VLLMs) [6, 7, 8]. They are designed to circumvent the
built-in restrictions or safeguards within models [9], nudging them to produce malicious outputs,
such as content related to illegal activities, hate speech, and pornography. Compared to their
LLM counterparts, the vulnerability of VLLMs to jailbreak attacks has garnered attention only
very recently [10, 11]. Some initial methods [12, 13, 14] inject high-risk content into images
through typography or generative techniques like stable diffusion [15]. Leveraging such methods,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

