Reconstructing Heterogeneous Biomolecules via
Hierarchical Gaussian Mixtures and Part Discovery
Shayan Shekarforoush1,2 David B Lindell1,2 Marcus A Brubaker1,2,3 David J Fleet1,2
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 York University
{shayan,lindell,fleet}@cs.toronto.edu mab@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
Cryo-EM is a transformational paradigm in molecular biology where computational methods are used to infer 3D molecular structure at atomic resolution from
extremely noisy 2D electron microscope images. At the forefront of research is
how to model the structure when the imaged particles exhibit non-rigid conformational flexibility and compositional variation where parts are sometimes missing.
We introduce a novel 3D reconstruction framework with a hierarchical Gaussian
mixture model, inspired in part by Gaussian Splatting for 4D scene reconstruction.
In particular, the structure of the model is grounded in an initial process that infers
a part-based segmentation of the particle, providing essential inductive bias in
order to handle both conformational and compositional variability. The framework,
called CryoSPIRE, is shown to reveal biologically meaningful structures on complex experimental datasets, and establishes a new state-of-the-art on CryoBench, a
benchmark for cryo-EM heterogeneity methods. Project Webpage.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

14

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

1

Introduction

Single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is a computationally driven experimental
paradigm that is transforming molecular biology by enabling 3D structure determination of
biomolecules, such as proteins and viruses, at near-atomic resolutions [3, 18, 38]. The core computational task is estimating a 3D structure from 2D images with unknown orientation and position,
under extremely low signal-to-noise conditions. Essential to their biological function, biomolecules
exhibit varying degrees of conformational flexibility, where structures deform non-rigidly, and compositional variation, where parts of a structure may be present in some images and absent in others
(see Fig. 1). Accordingly, a major challenge in cryo-EM is the estimation of 3D structures from
such heterogeneous data and, to that end, how to infer meaningful representations of structures such
as parts that capture their heterogeneity. The crux of this challenge is how to effectively represent
and regularize this variability without overfitting to the noise in cryo-EM images. Existing methods,
while encouraging, are generally limited in either expressiveness, interpretability, or efficiency.
Here, we propose CryoSPIRE, a new method for heterogeneous reconstruction. We leverage a
part-based Gaussian mixture model (GMM) of 3D density that enables CryoSPIRE to represent
both conformational and compositional heterogeneity, unlike some existing deformation-based
methods [13, 33]. Further, it provides a naturally interpretable and physically plausible, part-based
structure in contrast to existing latent variable methods based on linear density subspaces [10, 32] or
neural field models [19, 20, 47]. A key challenge with part-based GMMs concerns initialization and
the discovery of parts. We propose a novel method for part discovery which estimates a coarse-grained
GMM with per-Gaussian learnable features (c.f., [2]) and an MLP which defines Gaussian locations
and amplitudes. We show that these learned features naturally encode characteristics of structural
heterogeneity, which we leverage to infer a part-based segmentation of the structure. Inspired in
part by Scaffold-GS [21], we define CryoSPIRE (Scaffold Part-Aware Mixture of Gaussians), a
hierarchical model which estimates a Gaussian mixture wherein the composition of components
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

