Deliberation on Priors: Trustworthy Reasoning of
Large Language Models on Knowledge Graphs

Jie Ma*1† , Ning Qu*1,2 , Zhitao Gao1,2 , Rui Xing1 , Jun Liu2,3 , Hongbin Pei1 ,
Jiang Xie4 , Lingyun Song5 , Pinghui Wang1 , Jing Tao1 , Zhou Su1
1
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Chongqing University of Post and Telecommunications
5
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
*
Equal contribution
†
Corresponding Author
jiema@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge graph-based retrieval-augmented generation seeks to mitigate hallucinations in Large Language Models (LLMs) caused by insufficient or outdated knowledge. However, existing methods often fail to fully exploit the prior knowledge
embedded in knowledge graphs (KGs), particularly their structural information
and explicit or implicit constraints. The former can enhance the faithfulness of
LLMs’ reasoning, while the latter can improve the reliability of response generation.
Motivated by these, we propose a trustworthy reasoning framework, termed Deliberation over Priors (DP), which sufficiently utilizes the priors contained in KGs.
Specifically, DP adopts a progressive knowledge distillation strategy that integrates
structural priors into LLMs through a combination of supervised fine-tuning and
Kahneman-Tversky optimization, thereby improving the faithfulness of relation
path generation. Furthermore, our framework employs a reasoning-introspection
strategy, which guides LLMs to perform refined reasoning verification based on
extracted constraint priors, ensuring the reliability of response generation. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that DP achieves new
state-of-the-art performance, especially a H@1 improvement of 13% on the ComplexWebQuestions dataset, and generates highly trustworthy responses. We also
conduct various analyses to verify its flexibility and practicality. Code is available
at https://github.com/mira-ai-lab/Deliberation-on-Priors.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–4], distinguished by their massive parameter scale and training
on vast amounts of diverse, unlabeled data, have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a wide
range of natural language understanding and generation tasks. They have also achieved substantial
success in practical applications, such as intelligent virtual assistants and customer service systems.
However, recent research [5–7] has revealed that LLMs are prone to hallucinations, producing
plausible-sounding but incorrect or outdated responses, especially in real-world scenarios. This
issue, often stemming from insufficient or obsolete knowledge, can lead to serious consequences and
undermine the reliability of LLMs in high-stakes domains such as legal decision-making and medical
diagnosis [8, 9].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

