Continuous Diffusion Model for Language Modeling

Jaehyeong Jo1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , DeepAuto.ai2
{ harryjo97, sjhwang82 }@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as a promising alternative to autoregressive models
in modeling discrete categorical data. However, diffusion models that directly work
on discrete data space fail to fully exploit the power of iterative refinement, as
the signals are lost during transitions between discrete states. Existing continuous
diffusion models for discrete data underperform compared to discrete methods, and
the lack of a clear connection between the two approaches hinders the development
of effective diffusion models for discrete data. In this work, we propose a continuous diffusion model for language modeling that incorporates the geometry of the
underlying categorical distribution. We establish a connection between the discrete
diffusion and continuous flow on the statistical manifold, and building on this
analogy, introduce a simple diffusion process that generalizes existing discrete diffusion models. We further propose a simulation-free training framework based on
radial symmetry, along with a simple technique to address the high dimensionality
of the manifold. Comprehensive experiments on language modeling benchmarks
and other modalities show that our method outperforms existing discrete diffusion
models and approaches the performance of autoregressive models. The code is
available at https://github.com/harryjo97/RDLM.

1

Introduction

Discrete diffusion models [2, 39] emerged as a promising competitor to autoregressive models for the
generative modeling of discrete data. These models have demonstrated competitive performance on
tasks such as language modeling [49, 52] and code generation [20]. Unlike autoregressive models
that generate data sequentially, diffusion models generate the sequence in parallel, allowing for
bidirectional controllable generation and faster sampling.
However, discrete diffusion models do not fully harness the power of iterative refinement, which
is the key to generative modeling of continuous data such as image synthesis [19, 48] and video
generation [5, 46]. In these models, the forward process progressively corrupts data through stochastic
jumps between discrete states, modeled as a Markov chain. Denoising is achieved through transitions
between these discrete states, which results in the loss of informative signals during refinement. Hence,
discrete diffusion models often exhibit limited generative performance and reduced controllability.
Several efforts have been made to adapt continuous diffusion models for discrete data, motivated by
their advantages in controllability [26], efficient sampling [40, 41], optimized design choices [10, 34],
and the potential to unify different modalities [35, 56]. However, their performance often significantly
lags behind that of discrete diffusion models. Early methods [24, 36] extended image diffusion models
to discrete domains by applying unconstrained continuous relaxation. Other approaches [3, 54] project
discrete data onto the probability simplex using the Dirichlet distribution as its prior over categorical
distributions, but often fail to capture complex patterns. Recent works [12, 15] apply flow matching
on the statistical manifold to learn categorical distributions, but these methods are limited to short
sequences and small vocabularies. In particular, the connection between discrete and continuous
diffusion remains poorly understood, hindering the development of a unified diffusion framework.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

