How Does Label Noise Gradient Descent Improve
Generalization in the Low SNR Regime?

Wei Huang1,2∗, Andi Han3,1∗, Yujin Song4,1 , Yilan Chen5 , Denny Wu6,7 ,
Difan Zou8 , Taiji Suzuki4,1
1
RIKEN AIP 2 The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
3
The University of Sydney 4 The University of Tokyo 5 University of California San Diego
6
New York University 7 Flatiron Institute 8 The University of Hong Kong
wei.huang.vr@riken.jp; andi.han@sydney.edu.au;
y.song.research@gmail.com; yic031@ucsd.edu; dennywu@nyu.edu;
dzou@hku.hk; taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The capacity of deep learning models is often large enough to both learn the
underlying statistical signal and overfit to noise in the training set. This noise
memorization can be harmful especially for data with a low signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), leading to poor generalization. Inspired by prior observations that label
noise provides implicit regularization that improves generalization, in this work, we
investigate whether introducing label noise to the gradient updates can enhance the
test performance of neural network (NN) in the low SNR regime. Specifically, we
consider training a two-layer NN with a simple label noise gradient descent (GD)
algorithm, in an idealized signal-noise data setting. We prove that adding label
noise during training suppresses noise memorization, preventing it from dominating
the learning process; consequently, label noise GD enjoys rapid signal growth while
the overfitting remains controlled, thereby achieving good generalization despite
the low SNR. In contrast, we also show that NN trained with standard GD tends to
overfit to noise in the same low SNR setting and establish a non-vanishing lower
bound on its test error, thus demonstrating the benefit of introducing label noise in
gradient-based training.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning across various domains [34, 48, 7] is often attributed to their ability to
extract features [20, 15] via gradient-based training [14, 3]. One desirable property of gradient-based
feature learning is the algorithmic regularization that prioritizes learning of the underlying signal
instead of overfitting to noise: real-world data contains noise due to mislabeling, data corruption, or
inherent ambiguity, yet despite having the capacity to memorize noise, neural networks (NNs) trained
by gradient descent (GD) tend to identify informative features and “low-complexity” solutions that
generalize [57, 43].
To understand this behavior, recent theoretical works considered data models that partition the features
into signal and noise components [19, 5, 54], and studied the performance of gradient-based training
in different signal-noise conditions. Among existing theoretical settings, the signal-noise model
proposed in [2, 8] has been extensively studied in the feature learning theory literature. In this
model, input features are constructed by combining a label-dependent signal with label-independent
noise. The signal represents meaningful patterns relevant to the predictive task while the noise
∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

