TrackingWorld: World-centric Monocular 3D
Tracking of Almost All Pixels

Jiahao Lu1 Weitao Xiong1,5
Jiacheng Deng2
Peng Li1
3
4
6
Tianyu Huang
Zhiyang Dou
Cheng Lin
Sai-Kit Yeung1
Yuan Liu1†
1

HKUST

2

USTC

3

CUHK

4

HKU

5

XMU

6

MUST

https://github.com/IGL-HKUST/TrackingWorld

Abstract
Monocular 3D tracking aims to capture the long-term motion of pixels in 3D
space from a single monocular video and has witnessed rapid progress in recent
years. However, we argue that the existing monocular 3D tracking methods still
fall short in separating the camera motion from foreground dynamic motion and
cannot densely track newly emerging dynamic subjects in the videos. To address
these two limitations, we propose TrackingWorld, a novel pipeline for dense 3D
tracking of almost all pixels within a world-centric 3D coordinate system. First,
we introduce a tracking upsampler that efficiently lifts the arbitrary sparse 2D
tracks into dense 2D tracks. Then, to generalize the current tracking methods
to newly emerging objects, we apply the upsampler to all frames and reduce the
redundancy of 2D tracks by eliminating the tracks in overlapped regions. Finally,
we present an efficient optimization-based framework to back-project dense 2D
tracks into world-centric 3D trajectories by estimating the camera poses and the
3D coordinates of these 2D tracks. Extensive evaluations on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate that our system achieves accurate and dense 3D
tracking in a world-centric coordinate frame.

1

Introduction

Estimating long-term motion in dynamic videos remains a persistent challenge in computer vision [1,
2, 3, 4]. Fine-grained motion tracking is crucial for understanding object dynamics, modeling camera
motion, and facilitating the generation of temporally and geometrically consistent videos [5, 6, 7].
In recent years, dense 2D pixel tracking [8, 9, 10, 1, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] has emerged as an active
research topic, with notable advancements such as CoTrackers [17, 1], which employs transformers
to iteratively update 2D tracks and has driven progress in 2D motion analysis. This development also
motivates many recent works for 3D tracking. Early 3D tracking works like OmniMotion [2, 18]
adopt optimization-based approaches to estimate 3D motion, while subsequent feedforward methods
such as SpatialTracker [3] and DELTA [4] leverage extracted features to directly estimate the 3D
tracking in a feedforward manner without per-sequence optimization. These 3D tracking methods
demonstrate substantial potential for downstream applications, including detailed 3D motion analysis
and high-fidelity novel view synthesis, highlighting the growing importance of monocular 3D tracking
as a critical research frontier.
Upon analyzing all existing 3D tracking methods, we observe that these existing methods still suffer
from two noticeable shortcomings. First, these methods [4, 3, 2] cannot distinguish the camera
†

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

