Agnostic Active Learning Is Always Better
Than Passive Learning

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Abstract
This work resolves a long-standing open question of central importance to the
theory of active learning, closing a qualitative and quantitative gap in our understanding of active learning in the non-realizable case. We provide the first sharp
characterization of the optimal first-order query complexity of agnostic active
learning, and propose a new general active learning algorithm which achieves it.
Remarkably, the optimal query complexity admits a leading term which is always
strictly smaller than the sample complexity of passive supervised learning (by a
factor proportional to the best-in-class error rate). This was not previously known
to be possible. For comparison, in all previous general analyses, the leading term
exhibits an additional factor, such as the disagreement coefficient or related complexity measures, and therefore only provides improvements over passive learning
in restricted cases. The present work completely removes such factors from the
leading term, implying that every concept class benefits from active learning in
the non-realizable case. Whether such benefits are possible has been the driving
question underlying the past two decades of research on the theory of agnostic
active learning. This work finally settles this fundamental question.

1

Introduction

Active learning is a well-known powerful variant of supervised learning, in which the learning
algorithm interactively participates in the process of labeling the training examples. In this setting,
there is a pool (or stream) of unlabeled examples, and the learning algorithm selects individual
examples and queries an oracle (typically a human labeler) to observe their labels. This happens
sequentially, so that the learner has observed previously-queried labels before deciding which example
to query next. The intended purpose of active learning is to reduce the overall number of labels
necessary for learning to a given accuracy, called the query complexity. We are therefore particularly
interested in using active learning in scenarios where its query complexity is significantly smaller
than the number of randomly-sampled training examples which would be needed to achieve the same
accuracy, called the sample complexity of passive supervised learning.
Active learning has not only been incredibly useful for many practical machine learning problems
(e.g., Cohn et al., 1996; Tong and Koller, 2001; Zhu et al., 2003; Olsson, 2009; Settles, 2012; Ren et al.,
2021; Mosqueira-Rey et al., 2023) but has also given rise to a rich and nuanced theoretical literature
(e.g., Dasgupta, 2005, 2011; Balcan et al., 2009; Hanneke, 2007b, 2014; Zhang and Chaudhuri,
2014; Hanneke and Yang, 2015; see Appendix A for a detailed survey). Moreover, the insights
and techniques discovered in this literature have had tremendous influence on other branches of the
learning theory literature (e.g., Awasthi et al., 2014; Foster et al., 2021; Hanneke, 2009b, 2016a,b,
2024; Zhivotovskiy and Hanneke, 2018; Simon, 2015; Balcan and Long, 2013; El-Yaniv and Wiener,
2010; Balcan et al., 2022).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

