Offline Guarded Safe Reinforcement Learning for
Medical Treatment Optimization Strategies

Runze Yan1∗

Xun Shen2∗ Akifumi Wachi3 Sebastien Gros4 Anni Zhao1
Emory University, 2 Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology,
3
LY Corporation, 4 Norwegian University of Science and Technology
runze.yan@emory.edu, shen@go.tuat.ac.jp

Xiao Hu1

1

Abstract
When applying offline reinforcement learning (RL) in healthcare scenarios, the
out-of-distribution (OOD) issues pose significant risks, as inappropriate generalization beyond clinical expertise can result in potentially harmful recommendations.
While existing methods like conservative Q-learning (CQL) attempt to address the
OOD issue, their effectiveness is limited by only constraining action selection by
suppressing uncertain actions. This action-only regularization imitates clinician
actions that prioritize short-term rewards, but it fails to regulate downstream state
trajectories, thereby limiting the discovery of improved long-term treatment strategies. To safely improve policy beyond clinician recommendations while ensuring
that state-action trajectories remain in-distribution, we propose Offline Guarded
Safe Reinforcement Learning (OGSRL), a theoretically grounded model-based
offline RL framework. OGSRL introduces a novel dual constraint mechanism for
improving policy with reliability and safety. First, the OOD guardian is established
to specify clinically validated regions for safe policy exploration. By constraining
optimization within these regions, it enables the reliable exploration of treatment
strategies that outperform clinician behavior by leveraging the full patient state
history, without drifting into unsupported state-action trajectories. Second, we
introduce a safety cost constraint that encodes medical knowledge about physiological safety boundaries, providing domain-specific safeguards even in areas where
training data might contain potentially unsafe interventions. Notably, we provide
theoretical guarantees on safety and near-optimality: policies that satisfy these
constraints remain in safe and reliable regions and achieve performance close to
the best possible policy supported by the data. When evaluated on the MIMIC-III
sepsis treatment dataset, OGSRL demonstrated significantly better OOD handling
than baselines. OGSRL achieved a 78% reduction in mortality estimates and a 51%
increase in reward compared to clinician decisions.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been widely applied in many safety-critical domains, such
as fine-tuning of language models [9, 35], robotics [7, 8], and autonomous driving [21]. Given its
capacity to learn from large-scale real-world datasets, there is growing interest in leveraging deep RL
for decision support in medical treatment. Notably, deep RL has been explored for treatment optimization in various clinical conditions, including sepsis [22, 37], cancer [47], and type 2 diabetes [56].
In medical applications, unlike conventional RL, two additional challenges must be addressed. First,
medical treatment optimization is not amenable to learning via active interaction; that is, online
exploration of treatment alternatives for patients is strictly prohibited. Second, medical treatments are
∗

R. Yan and X. Shen contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

