Are Language Models Efficient Reasoners?
A Perspective from Logic Programming

Andreas Opedalα,β,∗
Yanick Zengaffinenα Haruki Shirakamiγ,δ Clemente Pastiα
α
Mrinmaya Sachan
Abulhair Saparovϵ Ryan Cotterellα Bernhard Schölkopfα,β
α
ETH Zürich β MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
γ
EPFL δ Idiap Research Institute ϵ Purdue University

Abstract
Modern language models (LMs) exhibit strong deductive reasoning capabilities,
yet standard evaluations emphasize correctness while overlooking a key aspect of
reasoning: efficiency. In real-world reasoning scenarios, much of the available
information is irrelevant, and effective deductive inference requires identifying and
ignoring such distractions. We propose a framework for assessing LM reasoning
efficiency through the lens of logic programming, introducing a simple method to
align proofs written in natural language—as generated by an LM—with shortest
proofs found by executing the logic program. Efficiency is quantified by measuring
how well a model avoids unnecessary inference. Empirically, we construct a dataset
of math word problems injected with various number of irrelevant axioms that
vary in semantic overlap with the goal theorem. We find that current LMs show
marked accuracy declines under such conditions—even with minimal, domainconsistent distractions—and the proofs they generate frequently exhibit detours
through irrelevant inferences.2

1

Introduction

Large language models (LMs) appear capable of solving a wide range of tasks that rely on deductive reasoning, particularly when post-trained with reinforcement learning (Lightman et al., 2024;
DeepSeek-AI, 2025) and scaled to use more compute at test time (Wang et al., 2024; Muennighoff
et al., 2025; Snell et al., 2025). However, emerging findings suggest recent reasoning models often generate more tokens than necessary to solve problems, even for simple deductive tasks (Chen et al., 2025;
Pu et al., 2025). Such findings point towards a key dimension of deductive reasoning that standard evaluations of LMs’ reasoning abilities fail to systematically assess—efficiency. Indeed, more abstractly,
in most real-world reasoning tasks, more information is available than is necessary to solve the problem. This spurious information is not random: it often interacts with relevant information, enabling
the derivation of true but irrelevant conclusions. Crucially, it is unknown a priori which pieces of information will be relevant for determining whether a desired conclusion is supported by the evidence.
An efficient solution to a problem uses only necessary information and takes as few steps as possible.
To characterize efficiency, we adopt a formalization of deductive reasoning based on logic
programming (Kowalski, 1974). Our perspective is that logic programming provides a clean and
flexible framework for reasoning within a well-understood proof system. Given a logic program—that
is, a set of inference rules and axioms—a proof of some goal theorem can be viewed as a path in
a hypergraph induced by the inference rules, starting from vertices corresponding to axioms and
terminating at a vertex corresponding to the goal theorem. Then, the most efficient proof is simply
a shortest such path. Using this machinery, the goal of this paper is to evaluate a language model’s
reasoning efficiency. Thus, we require an additional mechanism to bridge the gap between reasoning
∗

Please direct correspondence to andreas.opedal@inf.ethz.ch, ryan.cotterell@inf.ethz.ch, and
asaparov@purdue.edu.
2
Code for this project is available at https://github.com/rycolab/reasoning-efficiency.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

