Learning-Augmented Online Bidding in Stochastic
Settings

Spyros Angelopoulos

Bertrand Simon

CNRS and International Laboratory

Université Grenoble Alpes

on Learning Systems

CNRS, INRIA, Grenoble INP, LIG

Montreal, Canada

Grenoble, France

spyros.angelopoulos@lip6.fr

bertrand.simon@cnrs.fr

Abstract
Online bidding is a classic optimization problem, with several applications in
online decision-making, the design of interruptible systems, and the analysis of
approximation algorithms. In this work, we study online bidding under learningaugmented settings that incorporate stochasticity, in either the prediction oracle
or the algorithm itself. In the first part, we study bidding under distributional
predictions, and find Pareto-optimal algorithms that offer the best-possible tradeoff
between the consistency and the robustness of the algorithm. In the second part, we
study the power and limitations of randomized bidding algorithms, by presenting
upper and lower bounds on the consistency/robustness tradeoffs. Previous works
focused predominantly on oracles that do not leverage stochastic information on
the quality of the prediction, and deterministic algorithms.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in machine learning have led to the development of powerful tools for efficiently
learning patterns in various types of data. These advances spearheaded a novel computational
framework, in which the algorithm designer has the ability to integrate a prediction oracle into the
algorithm’s design, theoretical analysis, and empirical evaluation. This paradigm shift has led to the
emergence of the field of learning-augmented algorithms, which aims to leverage ML approaches
towards the development of more efficient algorithms with data-driven capabilities.
Learning-augmented algorithms have witnessed significant growth in recent years, starting with the
seminal works [45] and [46]. They have been particularly impactful in the context of sequential and
online decision making, in which the algorithm must act on incoming pieces of the input, or adapt its
strategy judiciously at appropriately chosen time steps. The defining characteristic of such settings
is that the algorithm operates in a state of incomplete information about the input, thus making the
application of ML techniques particularly appealing. Specifically, they allow for a more nuanced,
and beyond the worst-case performance evaluation than the standard, and often overly pessimistic
approaches such as competitive analysis [23].
In this work, we focus on a simple, yet important problem of incomplete information, known as
online bidding. In this problem, faced with some unknown target (or “threshold”) u, a player submits
a sequence of bids until one is greater than or equal to u, paying the sum of its bids up to that
point. Formally, the objective is to find an increasing sequence X = (xi )i≥0 of positive numbers of

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

