CORE: Reducing UI Exposure in Mobile Agents via
Collaboration Between Cloud and Local LLMs
Gucongcong Fan1 Chaoyue Niu1∗ Chengfei Lyu2 Fan Wu1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Alibaba Group

Guihai Chen1

Abstract
Mobile agents rely on Large Language Models (LLMs) to plan and execute tasks
on smartphone user interfaces (UIs). While cloud-based LLMs achieve high
task accuracy, they require uploading the full UI state at every step, exposing
unnecessary and often irrelevant information. In contrast, local LLMs avoid UI
uploads but suffer from limited capacity, resulting in lower task success rates. We
propose CORE, a COllaborative framework that combines the strengths of cloud
and local LLMs to Reduce UI Exposure, while maintaining task accuracy for
mobile agents. CORE comprises three key components: (1) Layout-aware block
partitioning, which groups semantically related UI elements based on the XML
screen hierarchy; (2) Co-planning, where local and cloud LLMs collaboratively
identify the current sub-task; and (3) Co-decision-making, where the local LLM
ranks relevant UI blocks, and the cloud LLM selects specific UI elements within the
top-ranked block. CORE further introduces a multi-round accumulation mechanism
to mitigate local misjudgment or limited context. Experiments across diverse
mobile apps and tasks show that CORE reduces UI exposure by up to 55.6%
while maintaining task success rates slightly below cloud-only agents, effectively
mitigating unnecessary privacy exposure to the cloud.2

1

Introduction

Task automation on smartphones aims to enable a mobile agent to autonomously execute tasks based
on user-provided descriptions, thereby freeing the user’s hands and enhancing the user experience.
Recent studies have introduced various mobile agents driven by large language models (LLMs)
[31, 36, 33, 32, 46, 14]. These agents operate in a human-like manner. Typically, they receive user
commands, sequentially assess the page state, generate the corresponding sub-task, and determine
how to interact with the graphical user interface (GUI) until the task is completed.
In practice, most agents rely on cloud-based proprietary LLMs [31, 36, 14], such as GPT-4o accessed
via OpenAI’s paid API. These models contain at least hundreds of billions of parameters and
demonstrate powerful reasoning capabilities, enabling mobile agents to achieve high success rates
on a variety of simple tasks. Despite the promising results, several limitations remain. In mobile
automation tasks, the agent must capture the page information at every step and upload it to the
cloud-based LLM. We find that the information uploaded for decision-making is excessive, with only
a small portion being relevant and the rest redundant. For many sub-tasks executed on smartphone
interfaces, the only required action is to click a functional button, which relies solely on the local
information of specific UI elements rather than on the full page context. However, current mobile
agents do not take advantage of this property, they routinely upload the complete page to the cloudbased LLM, thereby transmitting a large amount of redundant information that may even contain
sensitive user data. As shown in Figure 1, if the user query is to search something, only the search
∗
2

Chaoyue Niu is the corresponding author (rvince@sjtu.edu.cn).
The code is available at https://github.com/Entropy-Fighter/CORE.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

