HQA-VLAttack: Towards High Quality Adversarial
Attack on Vision-Language Pre-Trained Models

Han Liu
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
liu.han.dut@gmail.com

Jiaqi Li
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
li.jiaqi.dut@gmail.com

Zhi Xu
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
xu.zhi.dut@gmail.com

Xiaotong Zhang∗
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
zxt.dut@hotmail.com

Xiaoming Xu
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
xu.xm.dut@gmail.com

Fenglong Ma
The Pennsylvania State University
Pennsylvania, USA
fenglong@psu.edu

Yuanman Li
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
yuanmanli@szu.edu.cn

Hong Yu
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
hongyu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Black-box adversarial attack on vision-language pre-trained models is a practical
and challenging task, as text and image perturbations need to be considered simultaneously, and only the predicted results are accessible. Research on this problem
is in its infancy, and only a handful of methods are available. Nevertheless, existing
methods either rely on a complex iterative cross-search strategy, which inevitably
consumes numerous queries, or only consider reducing the similarity of positive
image-text pairs but ignore that of negative ones, which will also be implicitly
diminished, thus inevitably affecting the attack performance. To alleviate the above
issues, we propose a simple yet effective framework to generate high-quality adversarial examples on vision-language pre-trained models, named HQA-VLAttack,
which consists of text and image attack stages. For text perturbation generation, it
leverages the counter-fitting word vector to generate the substitute word set, thus
guaranteeing the semantic consistency between the substitute word and the original
word. For image perturbation generation, it first initializes the image adversarial
example via the layer-importance guided strategy, and then utilizes contrastive
learning to optimize the image adversarial perturbation, which ensures that the
similarity of positive image-text pairs is decreased while that of negative image-text
pairs is increased. In this way, the optimized adversarial images and texts are more
likely to retrieve negative examples, thereby enhancing the attack success rate. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that HQA-VLAttack
significantly outperforms strong baselines in terms of attack success rate.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

