Query-Efficient Locally Private Hypothesis Selection
via the Scheffe Graph∗

Gautam Kamath
University of Waterloo and Vector Institute
g@csail.mit.edu

Alireza F. Pour
University of Waterloo
alireza.fathollahpour@uwaterloo.ca

Matthew Regehr
University of Waterloo
matt.regehr@uwaterloo.ca

David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose an algorithm with improved query-complexity for the problem of
hypothesis selection under local differential privacy constraints. Given a set of k
probability distributions Q, we describe an algorithm that satisfies local differential
privacy, performs Õ(k 3/2 ) non-adaptive queries to individuals who each have
samples from a probability distribution p, and outputs a probability distribution
from the set Q which is nearly the closest to p. Previous algorithms required either
Ω(k 2 ) queries or many rounds of interactive queries. Technically, we introduce a
new object we dub the Scheffé graph, which captures structure of the differences
between distributions in Q, and may be of more broad interest for hypothesis
selection tasks.

1

Introduction

Hypothesis selection refers to the following statistical question: given n samples from a distribution
p, and descriptions of k distributions Q, output a distribution q̂ which is as close to p as possible.
More precisely, for an α > 0, the goal is to output a distribution q̂ such that
∥q̂ − p∥1 ≤ O(1) · min ∥q − p∥1 + α.
q∈Q

In other words, the ℓ1 -distance between p and the output distribution q̂ is at most a constant factor
larger than that of the closest distribution q ∗ ∈ Q, up to some additional additive error α. How many
samples are needed for this task, and what algorithms do we use to do it? This fundamental primitive
serves as an important building block for many other statistical estimation tasks. Furthermore, it
generalizes one of the most classic problems in statistics, simple hypothesis testing, wherein the
distribution p is promised to be exactly equal to one of the distributions q ∈ Q.
Many classical works (e.g., [Yat85, DL96, DL97, DL01]) address and resolve these questions,
showing that n = O(log k) samples suffice. That is, we require only logarithmically-many samples
in order to identify the (near-)best distribution. Subsequently, many other works have studied
hypothesis selection subject to other constraints and desiderata, including computational efficiency,
robustness, weaker access to hypotheses, and more (see, e.g., [MS08, DDS12, DK14, SOAJ14,
AJOS14, DKK+ 16, AFJ+ 18, BKM19, BKSW19, GKK+ 20]).
We focus on the constraint of differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06], a rigorous notion of data privacy
that guarantees that a procedure will not leak too much information about individual points in the
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

