Counterfactual reasoning:
an analysis of in-context emergence

1

Moritz Miller12 ∗ Bernhard Schölkopf12 Siyuan Guo13
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2 ETH Zurich 3 University of Cambridge

Abstract
Large-scale neural language models exhibit remarkable performance in in-context
learning: the ability to learn and reason about the input context on the fly. This work
studies in-context counterfactual reasoning in language models, that is, the ability
to predict consequences of a hypothetical scenario. We focus on a well-defined,
synthetic linear regression task that requires noise abduction. Accurate prediction
is based on (1) inferring an unobserved latent concept and (2) copying contextual
noise from factual observations. We show that language models are capable of
counterfactual reasoning. Further, we enhance existing identifiability results and reduce counterfactual reasoning for a broad class of functions to a transformation on
in-context observations. In Transformers, we find that self-attention, model depth
and pre-training data diversity drive performance. Moreover, we provide mechanistic evidence that the latent concept is linearly represented in the residual stream and
we introduce designated noise abduction heads central to performing counterfactual reasoning. Lastly, our findings extend to counterfactual reasoning under SDE
dynamics and reflect that Transformers can perform noise abduction on sequential
data, providing preliminary evidence on the potential for counterfactual story generation. Our code is available under https://github.com/mrtzmllr/iccr.

1

Introduction
Thinking is acting in an imagined space. – Konrad Lorenz [Lorenz, 1973]

Large language models demonstrate remarkable capability in task-agnostic, few-shot performance,
such as in-context learning and algorithmic reasoning [Brown et al., 2020]. Despite their success,
one of the grand challenges of artificial general intelligence remains the ability to unearth novel
knowledge. This requires principled reasoning over factual observations instead of inventing
information when uncertain, a phenomenon termed hallucination [Achiam et al., 2023].
Thinking, in Konrad Lorenz’s words, is acting in an imagined space. Counterfactual imagination/reasoning, studied in early childhood cognition development [Southgate and Vernetti, 2014] and
formalized in causality [Schölkopf, 2022, Pearl, 2009, Hernan, 2024], predicts the consequences of
changes in hypothetical scenarios. It answers "what if" questions and predicts potential outcomes
that could have occurred had different actions been taken. Such principled thinking enables fast
and responsible learning, e.g., efficient reinforcement learning [Mesnard et al., 2021, Lu et al.,
2020], counterfactual generative networks [Sauer and Geiger, 2021], responsible decision-making in
complex systems [Wachter et al., 2017], and fairness [Kusner et al., 2017].
In precision healthcare, one may ask what would have happened had a patient not received treatment
to assess the individualized treatment effect. One step further, in-context counterfactual reasoning pertains the hypothetical consequence for an individual after observing the effect of different treatments
∗

Correspondence to moritz.miller@tuebingen.mpg.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

