Collaborative Reasoner: Self-Improving Social Agents
with Synthetic Conversations

Ansong Ni∗

Ruta Desai∗

Yang Li

Ramya Raghavendra

Xinjie Lei

Gargi Ghosh

Dong Wang
Daniel Li

Jiemin Zhang

Jane Yu

Asli Celikyilmaz

Meta FAIR
{ansongni, rutadesai, aslic}@meta.com

Abstract
With increasingly powerful large language models (LLMs) and LLM-based agents
tackling an ever-growing list of tasks, we envision a future where numerous LLM
agents work seamlessly with other AI agents and humans to solve complex problems and enhance daily life. To achieve these goals, LLM agents must develop
collaborative skills such as effective persuasion, assertion and disagreement, which
are often overlooked in the prevalent single-turn training and evaluation of LLMs.
In this work, we present Collaborative Reasoner (Coral ), a framework to
evaluate and improve the collaborative reasoning abilities of language models. In
particular, tasks and metrics in Coral necessitate agents to disagree with incorrect
solutions, convince their partners of a correct solution, and ultimately agree as a
team to commit to a final solution, all through a natural multi-turn conversation.
Through comprehensive evaluation on six collaborative reasoning tasks covering
domains of coding, math, scientific QA and social reasoning, we show that current models cannot effectively collaborate due to undesirable social behaviors,
collapsing even on problems that they can solve singlehandedly. To improve the
collaborative reasoning capabilities of LLMs, we propose a self-play method to generate synthetic multi-turn preference data and further train the language models to
be better collaborators. Experiments with Llama-3.1, Ministral and Qwen-2.5
models show that our proposed self-improvement approach consistently outperforms finetuned chain-of-thought performance of the same base model, yielding
gains up to 16.7% absolute. Human evaluations show that the models exhibit more
effective disagreement and produce more natural conversations after training on
our synthetic interaction data. 1

1

Introduction

Modern large language models (LLMs) and LLM-based agents are tackling a wide-range of tasks,
spanning from virtual assistants [20, 53] and online shopping [50, 60], to autonomous software
engineering [32, 45, 56] and the mastering of strategic games [10, 44, 62]. As these individual
LLM-agents become more powerful, we foresee a future where AI and human agents with different specialties and information access work seamlessly with each other, all through the common
communication media of natural language conversations. To realize this vision, our goal is to
develop conversational agents that can collaborate with other AI agents and humans to complete tasks
∗

1

Equal contribution.
Code for Coral exps: https://github.com/facebookresearch/collaborative-reasoner.
Code for Matrix infra: https://github.com/facebookresearch/matrix.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

