Decomposing Interventional Causality into Synergistic,
Redundant, and Unique Components

Abel Jansma
Dutch Institute for Emergent Phenomena, the Netherlands
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam
Institute of Physics, University of Amsterdam
a.a.a.jansma@uva.nl

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for decomposing interventional causal effects into
synergistic, redundant, and unique components, building on the intuition of Partial
Information Decomposition (PID) and the principle of Möbius inversion. While
recent work has explored a similar decomposition of an observational measure,
we argue that a proper causal decomposition must be interventional in nature. We
develop a mathematical approach that systematically quantifies how causal power
is distributed among variables in a system, using a recently derived closed-form
expression for the Möbius function of the redundancy lattice. The formalism is
then illustrated by decomposing the causal power in logic gates, cellular automata,
chemical reaction networks, and a transformer language model. Our results reveal
how the distribution of causal power can be context- and parameter-dependent.
The decomposition provides new insights into complex systems by revealing how
causal influences are shared and combined among multiple variables, with potential
applications ranging from attribution of responsibility in legal or AI systems, to the
analysis of biological networks or climate models.

1

Introduction

Causal language is ubiquitous throughout the natural and social sciences. A ball falls towards the earth
because of a gravitational force, inflation rises because of excessive money supply, climate changes
because of greenhouse gas emissions. In each case, we seek not just to describe what happens, but to
understand why it happens—to identify the causal mechanisms underlying the observed phenomenon.
Implicit in causal language are claims about the effect of interventions or counterfactual scenarios
(we can mitigate climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and inflation would not be as
high if there had been no excessive money supply). When we study something that is embedded in a
web of complex causal interactions, attributing causality can become more difficult, so sophisticated
mathematical and computational techniques have been developed that all rely on one of two things:
either one is able to directly intervene in the system and study its response, or one requires a priori
knowledge of the causal dependencies in the system. In this study, we focus on situations in which
causal effects are identifiable, and address the question of causal attribution [20, 7]. Given that we
know the effect of interventions on various variables, how do we attribute the causal power to the
different variables? In particular, we are interested in distinguishing between three types of attribution:
unique, redundant, or synergistic causal power. Decomposition into these three classes is commonly
done in information theory, where it is known as the Partial Information Decomposition (PID, [25]).
Given two coin flips, for example, the answer to the question ‘was there an even number of heads’ is
carried purely synergistically by the pair of coins, since each coin individually carries no information
whatsoever about the answer.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

