Focus-Then-Reuse: Fast Adaptation in Visual
Perturbation Environments

1

Jiahui Wang1,2∗, Chao Chen1,2∗, Jiacheng Xu3 , Zongzhang Zhang1,2†, Yang Yu1,2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wangjh,chenc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, jiacheng005@e.ntu.edu.sg,
{zzzhang,yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual reinforcement learning has shown promise in various real-world applications. However, deploying policies in complex real-world environments with visual perturbations remains a signiﬁcant challenge. We notice that humans tend to
ﬁlter information at the object level prior to decision-making, facilitating efﬁcient
skill transfer across different contexts. Inspired by this, we introduce Focus-ThenReuse (FTR), a method utilizing a novel object selection mechanism to focus on
task-relevant objects, and directly reuse the simulation-trained policy on them.
The training of the object selection mechanism integrates prior knowledge from
a vision-language model and feedback from the environment. Experimental results on challenging tasks based on DeepMind Control Suite and Franka Emika
Robotics demonstrate that FTR enables rapid adaptation in visual perturbation
environments and achieves state-of-the-art performance. The source code is available at https://github.com/LAMDA-RL/FTR.

1

Introduction

Visual Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved breakthroughs in a wide range of real-world applications, including robotic manipulation [1–3] and autonomous navigation [4, 5]. However, bridging the gap between simulation and real-world environments remains a pivotal challenge. In this
work, we focus on distracting background, which is a typical form of visual disturbance. Taking
robotic grasping as an example, although existing methods can achieve good performance in simulation [6, 7], directly deploying the learned policies in the real world may suffer from performance
degradation when there exists complex backgrounds [8, 9].
Recent studies have explored ways to address the challenge of deploying policies in complex environments with visual perturbations. Existing approaches can be categorized into three groups:
(1) training policies directly in noisy real-world environments [10–12]; (2) learning generalizable
policies that are robust to environment variations [13–22]; and (3) adapting pre-trained policies to
target environments with visual perturbations [23–25]. Each of these approaches presents potential
limitations. First, policies trained directly in visually disturbed environments often incur high costs
and risks, and the policy may generalize poorly to unseen settings. Second, generalization-based
methods rely on techniques such as data augmentation to simulate real-world variations during training [26]. However, if the training process fails to capture the diversity of the deployment environment, severe performance degradation may occur. Lastly, existing adaptation methods struggle to
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Zongzhang Zhang is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

