CroPe: Cross-Modal Semantic Compensation
Adaptation for All Adverse Scene Understanding

Qin Xu1,2 , Qihang Wu1,2 , Hongtao Lu1,2 , Xiaoxia Cheng1,3∗, Bo Jiang1,2∗
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Anhui University
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, Anhui University
3
College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
xuqin@ahu.edu.cn, {e23301339, e24301204}@stu.ahu.edu.cn
zjucxx@zju.edu.cn, zeyiabc@163.com
Project website: https://github.com/wqh011128/CroPe

Abstract
Scene understanding in adverse conditions, such as fog, snow, and night, is challenging due to the visual appearance degeneration. In this context, we propose a
Cross-modal Semantic Compensation Adaptation method (CroPe) for scene understanding. Distinct from the existing methods, which only use the visual information
to learn the domain-invariant features, CroPe establishes a visual-textual paradigm
which provides textual semantic compensation for visual features, enabling the
model to learn more consistent representations. We propose the Complementary
Perceptual Text Generation (CPTG) module which generates a set of multi-level
complementary-perceptive text embeddings incorporating both generalization and
domain awareness. To achieve cross-modal semantic compensation, the Reverse
Chain Text-Visual Fusion (RCTVF) module is developed. By the unified attention
and reverse decoding chain, compensation information is successively fused to the
visual features from the deep (semantic dense) to shallow (semantic sparse) features,
maximizing compensation gain. CroPe yields competitive results under all adverse
conditions and significantly improves the state-of-the-art performance by 6.5 mIoU
for ACDC-Night dataset and 1.2 mIoU for ACDC-All dataset, respectively.

1

Introduction

Scene understanding under adverse weather conditions serves an essential task for outdoor applications, such as autonomous driving, surveillance systems, and disaster response. However, due to the
extreme changes in illumination, texture, and occlusion patterns under various adverse conditions,
the large domain discrepancies across diverse scenes pose a significant challenge, making it difficult
for existing methods to effectively address segmentation under all adverse weather conditions.
Existing methods can be divided into two groups. One is scene-specific framework [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6],
which is tailored to particular adverse conditions. For example, BWG [3] enhances the generalization
ability for foggy scenes through content enhancement and style decorrelation. S2R2 [2] jointly
optimizes deraining and segmentation tasks using contrastive learning. Despite the successes in
certain scenarios, the model’s performance declines when confronted with more complex and diverse
scenes. Another group is scene-agnostic framework [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] which offers a more unified
solution. For instance, PASS [13] utilizes an implicit visual prompt strategy to enhance cross-domain
consistency by eliminating domain-specific weather features. MIC [9] captures contextual information
of the scene through mask reconstruction. However, whether scene-specific or scene-agnostic
∗

Corresponding authors: Xiaoxia Cheng and Bo Jiang

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

