ChA-MAEViT: Unifying Channel-Aware Masked
Autoencoders and Multi-Channel Vision Transformers
for Improved Cross-Channel Learning

Chau Pham
Boston University
chaupham@bu.edu

Juan C. Caicedo
Morgridge Institute, UW–Madison
juan.caicedo@wisc.edu

Bryan A. Plummer
Boston University
bplum@bu.edu

Abstract
Prior work using Masked Autoencoders (MAEs) typically relies on random patch
masking based on the assumption that images have significant redundancies across
different channels, allowing for the reconstruction of masked content using crosschannel correlations. However, this assumption does not hold in Multi-Channel
Imaging (MCI), where channels may provide complementary information with
minimal feature overlap. Thus, these MAEs primarily learn local structures within
individual channels from patch reconstruction, failing to fully leverage crosschannel interactions and limiting their MCI effectiveness. In this paper, we present
ChA-MAEViT, an MAE-based method that enhances feature learning across MCI
channels via four key strategies: (1) dynamic channel-patch masking, which compels the model to reconstruct missing channels in addition to masked patches,
thereby enhancing cross-channel dependencies and improving robustness to varying channel configurations; (2) memory tokens, which serve as long-term memory
aids to promote information sharing across channels, addressing the challenges of
reconstructing structurally diverse channels; (3) hybrid token fusion module, which
merges fine-grained patch tokens with a global class token to capture richer representations; and (4) Channel-Aware Decoder, a lightweight decoder utilizes channel
tokens to effectively reconstruct image patches. Experiments on satellite and microscopy datasets, CHAMMI, JUMP-CP, and So2Sat, show that ChA-MAEViT
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art MCI-ViTs by 3.0-21.5%, highlighting the
importance of cross-channel interactions in MCI. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/chaudatascience/cha_mae_vit.

1

Introduction

Visual encoders generally process fixed-channel inputs, such as RGB, during both training and testing
phases [2–9]. However, in satellite imaging [10], robotic sensing [11], cell microscopy [12, 13],
and medical imaging [14], the input data can vary in both the number and type of channels. These
varying channel configurations arise from differences in sensor modalities, acquisition settings,
or experimental conditions. Multi-Channel Imaging (MCI) models are designed to learn feature
representations from heterogeneous channels whose type and number vary during both training
and testing [12, 13]. This adaptability allows a single model to effectively support diverse channel
configurations, thereby reducing computational costs and minimizing the risk of overfitting [12].
Prior MCI-Masked Autoencoder (MAE) models (e.g., [1, 15]) demonstrated promise in capturing
local spatial structures by learning to reconstruct randomly masked patches in multi-channel images.
These approaches assume that images exhibit significant redundancy across channels, enabling
the reconstruction of masked patches using unmasked patches from similar channels. While this
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

