VADTree: Explainable Training-Free Video Anomaly
Detection via Hierarchical Granularity-Aware Tree

Yifei Xu1,4 ∗ Yuan Rao1 Zhenhua Wang2 Shuiguang Deng3
1
School of Software, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
China Railway Xi’an Group
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Xi’an Jiaotong University Suzhou Institute
wenlongli@stu.xjtu.edu.cn belonxu_1@xjtu.edu.cn

Wenlong Li1

Abstract
Video anomaly detection (VAD) focuses on identifying anomalies in videos. Supervised methods demand substantial in-domain training data and fail to deliver
clear explanations for anomalies. In contrast, training-free methods leverage
the knowledge reserves and language interactivity of large pre-trained models
to detect anomalies. However, the current fixed-length temporal window sampling approaches struggle to accurately capture anomalies with varying temporal
spans. Therefore, we propose VADTree that utilizes a Hierarchical Granularityaware Tree (HGTree) structure for flexible sampling in VAD. VADTree leverages
the knowledge embedded in a pre-trained Generic Event Boundary Detection
(GEBD) model to characterize potential anomaly event boundaries. Specifically,
VADTree decomposes the video into generic event nodes based on boundary
confidence, and performs adaptive coarse-fine hierarchical structuring and redundancy removal to construct the HGTree. Then, the multi-dimensional priors
are injected into the visual language models (VLMs) to enhance the node-wise
anomaly perception, and anomaly reasoning for generic event nodes is achieved
via large language models (LLMs). Finally, an inter-cluster node correlation
method is used to integrate the multi-granularity anomaly scores. Extensive
experiments on three challenging datasets demonstrate that VADTree achieves
state-of-the-art performance in training-free settings while drastically reducing
the number of sampled video segments. The code will be available at https:
//github.com/wenlongli10/VADTree.

1

Introduction

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims at temporally locating unexpected and unusual events in
videos, thereby facilitating widespread applications including autonomous driving [49, 23] and
industrial manufacturing [28]. Most traditional VAD approaches primarily locate anomalous frames
by learning the normal or abnormal patterns from training samples with either fully-supervised [1, 39],
weakly-supervised [34, 2, 48, 46, 25] or unsupervised learning [51, 62, 22].
While the aforementioned methods perform competitively on experimental VAD benchmarks, their
inherent drawbacks limit the capabilities of interpretability, generalization, and interaction in realworld applications. The rapid development of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) and Visual
Language Models (VLMs) facilitates the combination of visual comprehending and language interaction, which are particularly well-suited for explainable VAD in real-world surveillance scenarios.
Recent research on explainable VAD generates semantic segments of long-term videos with temporal
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

