Quantum speedup of non-linear Monte Carlo
problems

Jose Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Yassine Hamoudi
Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, LaBRI
ys.hamoudi@gmail.com

Mario Szegedy
Rutgers University
szegedy@cs.rutgers.edu

Guanyang Wang
Rutgers University
guanyang.wang@rutgers.edu

Abstract
The mean of a random variable can be understood as a linear functional on the space
of probability distributions. Quantum computing is known to provide a quadratic
speedup over classical Monte Carlo methods for mean estimation. In this paper,
we investigate whether a similar quadratic speedup is achievable for estimating
non-linear functionals of probability distributions. We propose a quantum-insidequantum algorithm that achieves this speedup for the broad class of nonlinear
estimation problems known as nested expectations. Our algorithm improves upon
the direct application of the quantum-accelerated multilevel Monte Carlo algorithm
introduced by An et al. (2021). The existing lower bound indicates that our
algorithm is optimal up to polylogarithmic factors. A key innovation of our
approach is a new sequence of multilevel Monte Carlo approximations specifically
designed for quantum computing, which is central to the algorithm’s improved
performance.

1

Introduction

From classic problems like Buffon’s needle (Ramaley, 1969) to modern Bayesian computations
(Martin et al., 2023), Monte Carlo methods have proven to be powerful tools for estimating the
expected value
R of a given function. Specifically, the classical Monte Carlo method involves estimating
EP [f (X)] = f (x) dP(x) by sampling, where the samples are drawn from P. Assuming f has finite
variance, the number of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples required to produce
an estimate of EP [f (X)] with an additive error of ϵ and a given degree (say 95%) of confidence
is O(1/ϵ2 ) 1 . In the quantum computing setting, using a Grover-type algorithm, it is known (Heinrich,
2002; Montanaro, 2015; Hamoudi and Magniez, 2019; Hamoudi, 2021; Kothari and O’Donnell,
2023) that a quantum-accelerated version of the Monte Carlo technique achieves a quadratic speedup,
resulting in a cost of O(1/ϵ) for the same task. For broader links between quantum algorithms and
classical stochastic simulation, see Blanchet et al. (2025).
A typical expectation EP [f (X)] functions as a linear functional on the space of distributions, mapping one distribution P to its corresponding expected value. However, many important quantities
cannot be written as
psuch linear functionals. For instance, the standard deviation maps a distribution P to sd(P) := EP [X2 ] − (EP [X])2 . This mapping is nonlinear because the expectations are
subsequently transformed by quadratic and square-root operations.
1
Throughout this paper, we use f (n) = O(g(n)) to mean f (n) ≤ M g(n) for all n and some constant M .
We write f (n) = e
O(g(n)) to ignore polylogarithmic factors, meaning f (n) = O(g(n) logk g(n)) for some k.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

