The Good, the Bad and the Ugly: Meta-Analysis of
Watermarks, Transferable Attacks and Adversarial
Defenses
Grzegorz Głuch
UC Berkeley
gluch@berkeley.edu
Sai Ganesh Nagarajan
University of Southern Denmark
sgnagarajan@imada.sdu.dk

Berkant Turan
Zuse Institute Berlin
turan@zib.de
Sebastian Pokutta
Zuse Institute Berlin and TU Berlin
pokutta@zib.de

Abstract
We formalize and analyze the trade-off between backdoor-based watermarks and
adversarial defenses, framing it as an interactive protocol between a verifier and a
prover. While previous works have primarily focused on this trade-off, our analysis extends it by identifying transferable attacks as a third, counterintuitive, but
necessary option. Our main result shows that for all learning tasks, at least one of
the three exists: a watermark, an adversarial defense, or a transferable attack. By
transferable attack, we refer to an efficient algorithm that generates queries indistinguishable from the data distribution and capable of fooling all efficient defenders.
Using cryptographic techniques, specifically fully homomorphic encryption, we
construct a transferable attack and prove its necessity in this trade-off. Finally, we
show that tasks of bounded VC-dimension allow adversarial defenses against all
attackers, while a subclass allows watermarks secure against fast adversaries.

1

Introduction

Backdoor attacks and adversarial robustness are closely related: the former embeds hidden behaviors
via subtle input changes, while the latter seeks to ensure stable predictions against worst-case input
modifications. Recent works [Weng et al., 2020, Sun et al., 2020, Niu et al., 2024, Fowl et al.,
2021, Tao et al., 2024] have empirically explored the trade-offs between adversarial robustness and
backdoor attacks. Their general observation is that “models that are made to be robust against certain
types of adversarial attacks may become more vulnerable to backdoor attacks.”
Outside classic methods such as adversarial training Madry et al. [2018], which apply generally, provable defenses against general adversaries are known only for restricted function classes—particularly
when the defense focuses on detecting, rather than classifying, attacks. Provided the attacks are not
indistinguishable from the data distribution, rejection-based methods can effectively defend against
arbitrarily crafted adversarial examples (beyond ℓp -norm perturbations) Goldwasser et al. [2020].
Other studies show that backdoors can be planted using cryptographic schemes Goldwasser et al.
[2022], making their detection computationally intractable. Conversely, standard post-hoc defenses
such as randomized smoothing may inadvertently remove such backdoors Cohen et al. [2019].
Formally analyzing these trade-offs must account for the full spectrum of strategies available to
attackers and defenders—each with potentially different computational capacities and resources
Bubeck et al. [2019], Garg et al. [2020]—which presents a significant challenge. Recently, Christiano
et al. [2024] attempted to characterize function classes for which one can provably defend against
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

