3D Interaction Geometric Pre-training for
Molecular Relational Learning

Namkyeong Lee1 , Yunhak Oh1 , Heewoong Noh1 , Gyoung S. Na1,2 ,
Minkai Xu3 , Hanchen Wang3,4 , Tianfan Fu5 , Chanyoung Park1∗
1
KAIST 2 KRICT 3 Stanford University 4 Genentech 5 Nanjing University

Abstract
Molecular Relational Learning (MRL) is a rapidly growing field that focuses on
understanding the interaction dynamics between molecules, which is crucial for
applications ranging from catalyst engineering to drug discovery. Despite recent
progress, earlier MRL approaches are limited to using only the 2D topological structure of molecules, as obtaining the 3D interaction geometry remains prohibitively
expensive. This paper introduces a novel 3D geometric pre-training strategy for
MRL (3DMRL) that incorporates a 3D virtual interaction environment, overcoming
the limitations of costly traditional quantum mechanical calculation methods. With
the constructed 3D virtual interaction environment, 3DMRL trains 2D MRL model
to learn the global and local 3D geometric information of molecular interaction.
Extensive experiments on various tasks using real-world datasets, including out-ofdistribution and extrapolation scenarios, demonstrate the effectiveness of 3DMRL,
showing up to a 24.93% improvement in performance across 40 tasks. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/Namkyeong/3DMRL.

1

Introduction

Molecular relational learning (MRL) focuses on
understanding the interaction dynamics between
molecules and has gained significant attention
from researchers thanks to its diverse applications [21, 32]. Despite recent advancements in
MRL, previous works tend to ignore molecules’
(a) Single Molecule
(b) Molecular Interaction Environment
3D geometric information and instead focus
solely on their 2D topological structures. HowFigure 1: 3D geometry of (a) an individual
ever, in molecular science, the 3D geometric
molecule and (b) the molecular interaction enviinformation of molecules (Figure 1 (a)) is cruronment.
cial for understanding and predicting molecular
behavior across various contexts, ranging from
physical properties [1] to biological functions [10]. This is particularly important in MRL, as geometric information plays a key role in molecular interactions by determining how molecules recognize,
interact, and bind with one another in their interaction environment [35]. In traditional molecular
dynamics simulations, explicit solvent models, which directly consider the detailed environment of
molecular interaction, have demonstrated superior performance compared to implicit solvent models,
which simplify the solvent as a continuous medium, highlighting the significance of modeling the
complex geometries of interaction environments [47].
However, acquiring stereochemical structures of molecules is often very costly, resulting in limited
availability of such 3D geometric information for downstream tasks [24]. Consequently, in the
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

