P ROFI X: Improving Profile-Guided Optimization in
Compilers with Graph Neural Networks

Huiri Tan1
Juyong Jiang1,2
Jiasi Shen1∗
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{htanaj, sjs}@cse.ust.hk, jjiang472@connect.ust.hk
1

Abstract
Profile-guided optimization (PGO) advances the frontiers of compiler optimization
by leveraging dynamic runtime information to generate highly optimized binaries.
Traditional instrumentation-based profiling collects accurate profile data but often
suffers from heavy runtime overhead. In contrast, sampling-based profiling is
more efficient and scalable when collecting profile data while avoiding intrusive
source code modifications. However, accurately collecting execution profiles
via sampling remains challenging, especially when applied to fully optimized
binaries. Such inaccurate profile data can restrict the benefits of PGO. This paper
presents P ROFI X, a machine learning-guided approach based on hybrid GNN
architecture that addresses the problem of profile inference, aiming to correct
inaccuracies in the profiles collected by sampling. Experiments on the SPEC
2017 benchmarks demonstrate that P ROFI X achieves up to a 9.15% performance
improvement compared to the state-of-the-art traditional algorithm and an average
6.26% improvement over the baseline machine learning models. These results
highlight the effectiveness of P ROFI X in optimizing real-world application profiles.

1

Introduction

Compilers play a critical role in transforming Table 1: High-level comparison of S Samplinghigh-level source code into efficient machine- based and I Instrumentation-based PGO. Advanlevel instructions. Beyond basic translation, tages are highlighted and annotated with checkmodern compilers employ numerous optimiza- marks. Sampling-based PGO offers high perfortion techniques to improve program perfor- mance with low overhead, without requiring intrumance, reduce memory usage, and ensure faster sive modifications of code, making it well-suited
execution [33, 37, 47, 48]. Compiler optimiza- for scalable deployment, but is limited in accuracy.
tions, such as loop unrolling, function inlining,
Type Efficiency Non-Intrusive Scalable Accuracy
and instruction scheduling, aim to exploit hard✓
✓
✓
✗
S
ware features effectively and improve overall
I
✗
✗
✗
✓
program efficiency [14, 17, 24, 46, 55]. Profileguided optimization (PGO) has emerged as a
powerful optimization technique for improving program performance by incorporating runtime execution profiles into the optimization pipeline of compilers [8, 18]. By identifying frequently executed
hot regions of code, PGO enables compilers to focus on optimizing the most frequently executed
parts of a program, thereby significantly enhancing performance [17, 21, 23].
PGO is practiced in two main flavors: instrumentation-based and sampling-based, which are summarized in Table 1. Instrumentation-based PGO collects precise profile data by injecting counters and
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

