Tool-Augmented Spatiotemporal Reasoning for
Streamlining Video Question Answering Task

Sunqi Fan, Jiashuo Cui, Meng-Hao Guo, Shuojin Yang†
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
fansq20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {gmh, yangshuojin}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) task serves as a critical playground for
evaluating whether foundation models can effectively perceive, understand, and
reason about dynamic real-world scenarios. However, existing Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) struggle with simultaneously modeling spatial relationships within video frames and understanding the causal dynamics of temporal evolution on complex and reasoning-intensive VideoQA task. In this work,
we equip MLLM with a comprehensive and extensible Video Toolkit, to enhance MLLM’s spatiotemporal reasoning capabilities and ensure the harmony
between the quantity and diversity of tools. To better control the tool invocation sequence and avoid toolchain shortcut issues, we propose a Spatiotemporal
Reasoning Framework (STAR) that strategically schedules temporal and spatial
tools, thereby progressively localizing the key area in the video. Our STAR
framework enhances GPT-4o using lightweight tools, achieving an 8.2% gain
on VideoMME and 4.6% on LongVideoBench. We believe that our proposed
Video Toolkit and STAR framework make an important step towards building
autonomous and intelligent video analysis assistants. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/fansunqi/VideoTool.

1

Introduction
“Man is a tool-using animal. Without tools he is nothing, with tools he is all.”
– Thomas Carlyle

The key to the VideoQA task lies in the model’s capacity to accurately perceive and reason over both
the temporal logic and spatial layout of video content. This renders VideoQA a compelling arena
for assessing whether foundation models can comprehend dynamic, multidimensional real-world
scenarios in a manner akin to human cognition. With the rapid development of Large Language
Models (LLMs), existing approaches to VideoQA can be broadly classified into two categories:
Video-centric Large Language Models (Video-LLMs) [2, 15, 50, 88, 93] and Tool-augmented Large
Language Models (Tool-augmented LLMs) [10, 82, 85].
Video-LLMs, represented by Qwen-VL [2], are typically required to process a large number of video
frames, resulting in a redundant and inefficient pipeline. Tool-augmented LLMs, represented by
DoreamonGPT [82], have several fundamental limitations: (1) Unidimensional tool utilization.
Existing tool-augmented large language models primarily focus on the use of tools along a single
dimension—either spatial or temporal, failing to simultaneously ensure the ability to model spatial
relationships within video frames and to understand the causal dynamics of temporal evolution. This
limitation hinders the model’s capacity for deep understanding and reasoning. (2) Unbalanced
number and diversity of tools. As we know, increasing the number of tools can help compensate for
†

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

