Towards Understanding Safety Alignment:
A Mechanistic Perspective from Safety Neurons

Jianhui Chen1∗ , Xiaozhi Wang2∗ , Zijun Yao1 , Yushi Bai1 , Lei Hou1,3† , Juanzi Li1,3
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist;
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School;
3
KIRC, Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
chenjian22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xzwang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) excel in various capabilities but pose safety risks
such as generating harmful content and misinformation, even after safety alignment. In this paper, we explore the inner mechanisms of safety alignment through
the lens of mechanistic interpretability, focusing on identifying and analyzing
safety neurons within LLMs that are responsible for safety behaviors. We propose inference-time activation contrasting to locate these neurons and dynamic
activation patching to evaluate their causal effects on model safety. Experiments
on multiple prevalent LLMs demonstrate that we can consistently identify about
5% safety neurons, and by only patching their activations we can restore over
90% of the safety performance across various red-teaming benchmarks without
influencing general ability. The finding of safety neurons also helps explain the
“alignment tax” phenomenon by revealing that the key neurons for model safety
and helpfulness significantly overlap, yet they require different activation patterns
for the same neurons. Furthermore, we demonstrate an application of our findings
in safeguarding LLMs by detecting unsafe outputs before generation. The source
code is available at https://github.com/THU-KEG/SafetyNeuron.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are celebrated for their sophisticated capabilities in natural language
processing and various downstream applications (Touvron et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Jiang
et al., 2024; Team et al., 2023). However, as they increase in complexity and influence, LLMs pose
safety risks such as generating misinformation, harmful content, and biased responses, which could
cause profound negative social impacts (Ganguli et al., 2022; Mazeika et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2023).
Although advanced alignment algorithms have significantly improved the safety of LLMs (Bai et al.,
2022a; Rafailov et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024), research indicates that these aligned models
remain highly vulnerable to malicious attacks (Huang et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). Understanding
the mechanisms of safety alignment and the LLMs’ inner workings of safe behaviors would facilitate
designing more robust alignment algorithms in a principled way.
In this work, we aim to demystify the mechanisms behind safety alignment from the perspective of
mechanistic interpretability (MI), which focuses on reverse-engineering neural models into humanunderstandable algorithms and concepts (Elhage et al., 2021). A typical MI pipeline includes
attributing model behaviors to specific model components and verifying that the localized components
have causal effects on model behaviors with causal mediation analysis techniques like activation
∗
†

indicates equal contribution.
Corresponding author: L.Hou (houlei@tsinghua.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

