Strassen Attention, Split VC Dimension and
Compositionality in Transformers

Alexander Kozachinskiy
CENIA
alexander.kozachinskyi@cenia.cl

Felipe Urrutia
University of Chile & CENIA
furrutia@dim.uchile.cl

Hector Jimenez
University of Chile & CENIA
hjimenez@dcc.uchile.cl

Tomasz Steifer
Institute of Fundamental Technological
Research, Polish Academy of Sciences
tsteifer@ippt.pan.pl

Germán Pizarro
CENIA
german.pizarro@cenia.cl

Matías Fuentes
IMC, Pontifical Catholic University of Chile
mdfuentes4@uc.cl

Francisco Meza
IMC, Pontifical Catholic University of Chile
fjmeza1@uc.cl

Cristian B. Calderon
CENIA
cristian.buc@cenia.cl

Cristóbal Rojas
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering
Pontifical Catholic University of Chile & CENIA
luis.rojas@uc.cl

Abstract
We propose the first method to show theoretical limitations for one-layer softmax
transformers with arbitrarily many precision bits (even infinite). We establish those
limitations for three tasks that require advanced reasoning. The first task, Match
3 (Sanford et al., 2023), requires looking at all possible token triplets in an input
sequence. The second and third tasks address compositionality-based reasoning:
function composition (Peng et al., 2024) and binary relations composition, respectively. We formally prove the inability of one-layer softmax Transformers to
solve any of these tasks. To overcome these limitations, we introduce Strassen
attention and prove that, equipped with this mechanism, a one-layer transformer
can in principle solve all these tasks. Importantly, we show that it enjoys sub-cubic
running-time complexity, making it more scalable than similar previously proposed
mechanisms, such as higher-order attention (Sanford et al., 2023). To complement
our theoretical findings, we experimentally studied Strassen attention and compared
it against standard (Vaswani et al, 2017), higher-order attention (Sanford et al.,
2023), and triangular attention (Bergen et al. 2021). Our results help to disentangle
all these attention mechanisms, highlighting their strengths and limitations. In
particular, Strassen attention outperforms standard attention significantly on all
the tasks. Altogether, understanding the theoretical limitations can guide research
towards scalable attention mechanisms that improve the reasoning abilities of
Transformers.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

