Bézier Splatting for Fast and Differentiable Vector
Graphics Rendering

Xi Liu1∗ , Chaoyi Zhou1∗ , Nanxuan Zhao2 , Siyu Huang1
1
Clemson University, 2 Adobe Research

Raster input

DiffVG (2K open curves)
Forward: 141ms, Backward: 707ms

Bézier Splatting (2K open curves)
Forward: 4.6ms, Backward: 4.8ms

DiffVG (1K closed curves)
Forward: 51.9ms, Backward: 380ms

Bézier Splatting (1K closed curves)
Forward: 12.2ms, Backward: 23.6ms

Figure 1: This work proposes Bézier Splatting, a new differentiable vector graphics (VGs) renderer
that achieves an order-of-magnitude computational speedup in comparison with the state-of-the-art
method DiffVG [15] (tested on a NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU).

Abstract
Differentiable vector graphics (VGs) are widely used in image vectorization and
vector synthesis, while existing representations are costly to optimize and struggle
to achieve high-quality rendering results for high-resolution images. This work
introduces a new differentiable VG representation, dubbed Bézier Splatting, that
enables fast yet high-fidelity VG rasterization. Bézier Splatting samples 2D Gaussians along Bézier curves, which naturally provide positional gradients at object
boundaries. Thanks to the efficient splatting-based differentiable rasterizer, Bézier
Splatting achieves 30× and 150× faster per forward and backward rasterization
step for open curves compared to DiffVG. Additionally, we introduce an adaptive
pruning and densification strategy that dynamically adjusts the spatial distribution
of curves to escape local minima, further improving VG quality. Furthermore, our
new VG representation supports conversion to standard XML-based SVG format,
enhancing interoperability with existing VG tools and pipelines. Experimental
results show that Bézier Splatting significantly outperforms existing methods with
better visual fidelity and significant optimization speedup. The project page is
xiliu8006.github.io/Bezier_splatting_project.

1

Introduction

Vector graphics (VGs) represent images through parametric primitives such as points, curves, and
shapes. Unlike raster images, they enable structured representations, lossless resizing, compact
storage, and precise content editing, making them crucial for various applications such as user
interfaces and animation.
Recently, differentiable VG rasterization gains significant attention, as it allows raster-based algorithms to edit or synthesize VGs through gradient-based optimization. DiffVG [15] is the first
differentiable VG framework that leverages the anti-aliasing algorithm to differentiate the vector
curves that are inherently discontinuous in pixel space. However, it suffers from slow training
and low-fidelity rendering, particularly for high-resolution images. LIVE [18] further introduces a
Corresponding author: Siyu Huang
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

