Inductive Domain Transfer In Misspecified
Simulation-Based Inference
Ortal Senouf ∗
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
Cédric Vincent-Cuaz
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Antoine Wehenkel
Apple
Zürich, Switzerland

Emmanuel Abbé
EPFL, Apple
Lausanne, Switzerland

Pascal Frossard
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
Simulation-based inference (SBI) of latent parameters in physical systems is often hindered by model misspecification–the mismatch between simulated and
real-world observations caused by inherent modeling simplifications. RoPE, a
recent SBI approach, addresses this challenge through a two-stage domain transfer
process that combines semi-supervised calibration with optimal transport (OT)based distribution alignment. However, RoPE operates in a fully transductive
setting, requiring access to a batch of test samples at inference time, which limits
scalability and generalization. We propose a fully inductive and amortized SBI
framework that integrates calibration and distributional alignment into a single,
end-to-end trainable model called FRISBI. Our method leverages mini-batch OT
with a closed-form coupling to align real and simulated observations that correspond to the same latent parameters, using both paired calibration data and unpaired
samples. A conditional normalizing flow is then trained to approximate the OTinduced posterior, enabling efficient inference without simulation access at test
time. Across a range of synthetic and real-world benchmarks–including complex
medical biomarker estimation–our approach matches or exceeds the performance
of RoPE, while offering improved scalability and applicability in challenging,
misspecified environments.

1

Introduction

Inference of latent variables that describe important properties of physical systems is a fundamental
problem in many domains, including environmental [1, 2], mechanical [3, 4, 5], and physiological [6,
7, 8] systems. Traditionally, this problem has been approached by formulating a mathematical model
that relates the observations x to the latent parameters of interest θ, and solving the corresponding
inverse problem to infer θ from x [9, 10].
Modern machine learning (ML) has achieved remarkable success in complex tasks, sparking interest
in its application to inferring latent parameters from observations. However, standard supervised
learning is often impractical in this context, as ground truth parameter data is typically expensive
or infeasible to obtain, such as in medical applications where direct measurement may require
invasive procedures. To address this, two prominent approaches have emerged: simulation-based
inference (SBI) [11] and hybrid learning [12, 13, 14]. SBI trains ML models on simulated data to
directly estimate parameters while capturing uncertainty through posterior estimation, becoming a
∗

Corresponding Author, ortal.senouf@epfl.ch

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

