Smart Surrogate Losses for Contextual Stochastic
Linear Optimization with Robust Constraints

Hyungki Im
Wyame Benslimane
Paul Grigas
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
{hyungki.im, wyame.benslimane, pgrigas}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study an extension of contextual stochastic linear optimization (CSLO) that, in
contrast to most of the existing literature, involves inequality constraints that depend
on uncertain parameters predicted by a machine learning model. To handle the
constraint uncertainty, we use contextual uncertainty sets constructed via methods
like conformal prediction. Given a contextual uncertainty set method, we introduce
the “Smart Predict-then-Optimize with Robust Constraints” (SPO-RC) loss, a
feasibility-sensitive adaptation of the SPO loss that measures decision error of
predicted objective parameters. We also introduce a convex surrogate, SPO-RC+,
and prove Fisher consistency with SPO-RC. To enhance performance, we train on
truncated datasets where true constraint parameters lie within the uncertainty sets,
and we correct the induced sample selection bias using importance reweighting
techniques. Through experiments on fractional knapsack and alloy production
problem instances, we demonstrate that SPO-RC+ effectively handles uncertainty
in constraints and that combining truncation with importance reweighting can
further improve performance.

1

Introduction

Large-scale optimization problems are prevalent across various domains, from supply chain management and financial planning to energy systems and transportation. These problems often involve
uncertain parameters, which may appear in both the objective function and the constraints. In practice,
these unknown parameters are often influenced by contextual data, which can be leveraged to improve
decision-making. While integrating contextual data to estimate uncertain parameters in optimization
models has gained significant interest in recent years (see surveys by Sadana et al. (2024) and Mandi
et al. (2024) and references therein), most of the existing literature focuses on scenarios where these
parameters only appear in the objective function. However, in practice, uncertain parameters often
arise within the constraints of the optimization problem as well (Wang et al., 2023; Rahimian and
Pagnoncelli, 2023). Uncertainty in constraints introduces additional layers of complexity, as the
feasibility of solutions with respect to the true parameters is no longer guaranteed.
In this paper, we study an extension of contextual stochastic linear optimization (CSLO) where both
the objective function and constraints involve uncertain parameters, each of which can be predicted
from contextual feature data. We propose a “Smart Predict-then-Optimize with Robust Constraints”
(SPO-RC) approach, a framework that provides a reliable method for handling these uncertainties
by using robust constraints. Our approach begins by constructing contextual uncertainty sets for the
uncertain constraint parameters using existing techniques such as conformal prediction (Romano et al.,
2019; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2021; Fontana et al., 2023). We then formulate a contextual robust
optimization problem, which provides a safe approximation to a corresponding contextual chance
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

