Progress Reward Model for Reinforcement Learning
via Large Language Models

Xiuhui Zhang, Ning Gao, Xingyu Jiang,
Yihui Chen, Yuheng Pan, Mohan Zhang, Yue Deng∗
Beihang University
37 Xueyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing
{zhangxiuhui, gaoning_ai, jxy33zrhd}@buaa.edu.cn
{21375399, fzxl2003, zmh666, ydeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms face significant limitations in
handling long-term tasks with sparse rewards. Recent advancements have leveraged
large language models (LLMs) to enhance RL by utilizing their world knowledge
for task planning and reward generation. However, planning-based approaches
often depend on pre-defined skill libraries and fail to optimize low-level control
policies, while reward-based methods require extensive human feedback or exhaustive searching due to the complexity of tasks. In this paper, we propose the
Progress Reward Model for RL (PRM4RL), a novel framework that integrates
task planning and dense reward to enhance RL. For high-level planning, a complex task is decomposed into a series of simple manageable subtasks, with a
subtask-oriented, fine-grained progress function designed to monitor task execution
progress. For low-level reward generation, inspired by potential-based reward shaping, we use the progress function to construct a Progress Reward Model (PRM),
providing theoretically grounded optimality and convergence guarantees, thereby
enabling effective policy optimization. Experimental results on robotics control
tasks demonstrate that our approach outperforms both LLM-based planning and
reward methods, achieving state-of-the-art performance. The code is available at
https://github.com/deng-ai-lab/PRM4RL

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown exceptional potential in solving sequential decision-making
problems. However, in real-world scenarios involving complex, long-term tasks with sparse rewards,
agents face significant challenges in planning and decision-making due to insufficient feedback
signals[1, 2]. Traditional RL frameworks address these challenges primarily by focusing on two
strategies: task decomposition and reward shaping. Hierarchical RL[3, 4] simplifies decision-making
by autonomously decomposing complex tasks into hierarchical subtasks, while reward shaping
techniques provide dense training signals through the reconstruction of reward functions, such as
inverse RL[5, 6, 7] and intrinsic reward mechanisms[8]. Despite their advantages, both approaches
heavily rely on expert data for priors[9] or supervision[10], and the large-scale acquisition of such
data is often challenging, limiting the scalability and applicability of these methods.
Recent advancements in large language model (LLM) research have made significant progress in
areas such as dialogue[11, 12], sequential decision-making[13, 14], and coding[15, 16, 17]. By
leveraging the extensive and diverse human knowledge acquired during the pre-training phase, LLMs
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

