Can NeRFs “See” without Cameras?
Chaitanya Amballa1
amballa2@illinois.edu

Sattwik Basu1∗
sattwik2@illinois.edu

Yu-Lin Wei1∗
yulinlw2@illinois.edu

Zhijian Yang2
yzhijian@amazon.com

Mehmet Ergezer2
mergezer@amazon.com

Romit Roy Choudhury1,2
croy@illinois.edu

1

University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign

2

Amazon

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have been remarkably successful at synthesizing
novel views of 3D scenes by optimizing a volumetric scene function. This scene
function models how optical rays bring color information from a 3D object to the
camera pixels. Radio frequency (RF) or audio signals can also be viewed as a
vehicle for delivering information about the environment to a sensor. However,
unlike camera pixels, an RF/audio sensor receives a mixture of signals that contain
many environmental reflections (also called “multipath”). Is it still possible to infer
the environment using such multipath signals? We show that with redesign, NeRFs
can be taught to learn from multipath signals, and thereby “see” the environment.
As a grounding application, we aim to infer the indoor floorplan of a home from
sparse WiFi measurements made at multiple locations inside the home. Although
a difficult inverse problem, our implicitly learnt floorplans look promising, and
enables forward applications, such as indoor signal prediction and basic ray tracing.

1

Introduction

NeRFs [25, 43, 2, 45] have delivered impressive results in solving inverse problems, resulting in 3D
scene rendering. While NeRFs have mostly used pictures (from cameras or LIDARs) to infer a 3D
scene, we ask if the core ideas can generalize to the case of wireless signals (such as RF or audio).
Unlike camera pixels that receive line-of-sight (LoS) rays, a wireless receiver (e.g., a WiFi antenna
on a smartphone) would receive a mixture of LoS and many reflections, called multipath. If the
receiver moves, it receives a sequence of N measurements. Using these N wireless measurements, is
it possible to learn a representation of the scene, such as the floorplan of the user’s home? A vanilla
NeRF understandably fails since it is not equipped to handle multipath. This paper is focused on
redesigning NeRFs so they can learn to image the environment, thereby solving the inverse problem
from ambient wireless signals.
A growing body of work [3, 26, 47, 22, 23, 19] is investigating connections between NeRFs and
wireless. While none have concentrated on imaging, NeRF2 [47] and NeWRF [22] have augmented
NeRFs to correctly synthesize WiFi signals at different locations inside an indoor space. However,
correct synthesis is possible without necessarily learning the correct signal propagation models. We
find that NeRFs with adequate model complexity can overfit a function to correctly predict signals at
test locations, but this function does not embed the true behavior of multipath signal propagation. We
re-design the NeRF’s objective function so that it learns the environment through line-of-sight (LoS)
paths and reflections. This teaches the NeRF an implicit representation of the scene, which can then
be utilized for various forward tasks, including WiFi signal prediction and ray tracing.
In our model, EchoNeRF, each voxel is parameterized by its opacity δ ∈ [0, 1] and orientation
ω ∈ [−π, π]. When trained perfectly, free-space air voxels should be transparent (δ = 0), wall voxels
should be opaque (δ = 1), and each opaque voxel’s orientation should match its wall’s orientation.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

