Preserving LLM Capabilities through Calibration
Data Curation: From Analysis to Optimization

Bowei He1 , Lihao Yin2 , Huiling Zhen2 , Shuqi Liu2 , Han Wu2 ,
Xiaokun Zhang1,† , Mingxuan Yuan2 , Chen Ma1,†
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, 2 Huawei, Hong Kong
†
dawnkun1993@gmail.com, chenma@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Post-training compression has been a widely employed approach to scale down
large language model (LLM) and facilitate efficient inference. In various proposed
compression methods, including pruning and quantization, calibration data plays
a vital role by informing the weight importance and activation dynamic ranges.
However, how calibration data impacts the LLM capability after compression is
less explored. Few of the existing works, though recognizing the significance of
this study, only investigate the language modeling or commonsense reasoning performance degradation from limited angles, like the data sources or sample amounts.
More systematic research is still needed to examine the impacts on different LLM
capabilities in terms of compositional properties and domain correspondence of
calibration data. In this work, we aim at bridging this gap and further analyze
underlying influencing mechanisms from the activation pattern perspective. Especially, we explore the calibration data’s impacts on high-level complex reasoning
capabilities, like math problem solving and code generation. Delving into the underlying mechanism, we find that the representativeness and diversity in activation
space more fundamentally determine the quality of calibration data. Finally, we
propose a calibration data curation framework based on such observations and
analysis, enhancing the performance of existing post-training compression methods
on preserving critical LLM capabilities. Our code is provided in Link.

1

Introduction

Recent large language models (LLMs) like GPT4 [Achiam et al., 2023], LLaMA2/3 [Touvron et al.,
2023, Dubey et al., 2024], Qwen2.5 [Yang et al., 2024], Phi-3 [Abdin et al., 2024], have achieved the
remarkable performance on human-level challenging tasks and found great application potentials.
However, due to the fast expansion of model scales and energy consumptions, most of them can
only be deployed to the server clusters currently. Post-training LLM compression methods like
pruning [Ma et al., 2023] and quantization [Xiao et al., 2023], aiming at reducing the model memory
usage and improving inference speed, have paved the way for on-device deployment of such powerful
LLMs. Due to the training-free property, these methods exhibit obvious advantages on efficiency
and convenience compared with other schemes like sparsity-aware training [Jaiswal et al., 2022] and
quantization-aware training [Liu et al., 2024], thus gaining widespread adoption[Tan et al., 2024].
In the post-training LLM compression, calibration data serves as a small set of sampled inputs
used to analyze layer activations and guide the compression process to minimize capability degradation [Williams and Aletras, 2024]. In detail, for pruning, calibration data enables the evaluation of
weight importance with activation-aware metrics, helping determine which connections to remove.
For quantization, this data is vital for identifying the dynamic ranges of activations, thus informing the
adjustment of quantization parameters and quantization strategies regarding symmetry and granularity.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

