Plug-and-Play Context Feature Reuse for Efficient
Masked Generation
Xuejie Liu1,4 , Anji Liu2 , Guy Van den Broeck3 , Yitao Liang1∗
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
3
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
xjliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, anjiliu@comp.nus.edu.sg
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu, yitaol@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Masked generative models (MGMs) have emerged as a powerful framework for
image synthesis, combining parallel decoding with strong bidirectional context
modeling. However, generating high-quality samples typically requires many iterative decoding steps, resulting in high inference costs. A straightforward way to
speed up generation is by decoding more tokens in each step, thereby reducing the
total number of steps. However, when many tokens are decoded simultaneously, the
model can only estimate the univariate marginal distributions independently, failing
to capture the dependency among them. As a result, reducing the number of steps
significantly compromises generation fidelity. In this work, we introduce ReCAP
(Reused Context-Aware Prediction), a plug-and-play module that accelerates inference in MGMs by constructing low-cost steps via reusing feature embeddings from
previously decoded context tokens. ReCAP interleaves standard full evaluations
with lightweight steps that cache and reuse context features, substantially reducing
computation while preserving the benefits of fine-grained, iterative generation. We
demonstrate its effectiveness on top of three representative MGMs (MaskGIT [5],
MAGE [27], and MAR [29]), including both discrete and continuous token spaces
and covering diverse architectural designs. In particular, on ImageNet256 [7]
class-conditional generation, ReCAP achieves up to 2.4× faster inference than
the base model with minimal performance drop, and consistently delivers better
efficiency–fidelity trade-offs under various generation settings. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/liebenxj/ReCAP.

1

Introduction

The remarkable success of sequence modeling in language generation [41, 42] has inspired
its adoption in image modeling, where transformer-based models [51, 8, 17] learn the joint
distribution over sequences of visual tokens using either autoregressive [11, 10, 48, 22, 44]
or non-autoregressive [15, 58, 5, 40] strategies. Among them, Masked Generative Models
(MGMs) [27, 29, 54, 52, 56] have emerged as a particularly compelling framework, achieving
competitive generation quality while supporting efficient parallel decoding. The advantages in both
performance and efficiency have positioned MGMs as a promising alternative to latent diffusion
models [45, 39, 2] for high-resolution image generation, with recent work also extending their success
to text-to-image synthesis [4, 12].
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

