InvFusion: Bridging Supervised and Zero-shot
Diffusion for Inverse Problems
Noam Elata∗
Technion
Haifa, Israel
noamelata@campus.technion.ac.il
Jong Chul Ye
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr

Hyungjin Chung∗
EverEx
Seoul, South Korea
hj.chung@everex.ac.kr

Tomer Michaeli
Technion
Haifa, Israel
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Michael Elad
Technion
Haifa, Israel
elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Diffusion Models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in handling inverse
problems, offering high-quality posterior-sampling-based solutions. Despite significant advances, a fundamental trade-off persists regarding the way the conditioned
synthesis is employed: Zero-shot approaches can accommodate any linear degradation but rely on approximations that reduce accuracy. In contrast, training-based
methods model the posterior correctly, but cannot adapt to the degradation at testtime. Here we introduce InvFusion, the first training-based degradation-aware
posterior sampler. InvFusion combines the best of both worlds – the strong performance of supervised approaches and the flexibility of zero-shot methods. This
is achieved through a novel architectural design that seamlessly integrates the
degradation operator directly into the diffusion denoiser. We compare InvFusion
against existing general-purpose posterior samplers, both degradation-aware zeroshot techniques and blind training-based methods. Experiments on the FFHQ and
ImageNet datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art performance. Beyond posterior
sampling, we further demonstrate the applicability of our architecture, operating
as a general Minimum Mean Square Error predictor, and as a Neural Posterior
Principal Component estimator.1

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [49, 52, 28] have emerged as a leading class of generative machine learning
techniques [16, 44]. Since their inception, diffusion models have gained significant traction in solving
complex inverse problems, such as super-resolution [47] or in-painting [37], where the goal is to
reconstruct or estimate an underlying image from partial or degraded observations.
Diffusion models can be trained to solve inverse problems using a simple conditioning framework,
in which the measurements are supplied to the network [46, 47]. Although powerful, these trainingbased methods are typically restricted to handling a limited set of degradations per trained network, as
they must learn the connection between clean images and their degraded versions. Moreover, existing
training-based models cannot accept the degradation as an input and must rely on the measurements
provided at test-time to infer which among the possible degradations to restore. This forces a blind
∗
1

Equal Contribution
Code implementation available at https://github.com/noamelata/InvFusion

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

