T-S HIRT: Token-Selective Hierarchical Data Selection
for Instruction Tuning
Yanjun Fu Faisal Hamman Sanghamitra Dutta
University of Maryland, College Park
{yanjunfu, fhamman, sanghamd}@umd.edu

Abstract
Instruction tuning is essential for Large Language Models (LLMs) to effectively
follow user instructions. To improve training efficiency and reduce data redundancy, recent works use LLM-based scoring functions, e.g., Instruction-Following
Difficulty (IFD), to select high-quality instruction-tuning data with scores above a
threshold. While these data selection methods often lead to models that can match
or even exceed the performance of models trained on the full datasets, we identify
two key limitations: (i) they assess quality at the sample level, ignoring token-level
informativeness; and (ii) they overlook the robustness of the scoring method, often
selecting a sample due to superficial lexical features instead of its true quality. In
this work, we propose Token-Selective HIeRarchical Data Selection for Instruction
Tuning (T-S HIRT), a novel data selection framework that introduces a new scoring
method to include only informative tokens in quality evaluation and also promotes
robust and reliable samples whose neighbors also show high quality with less local
inconsistencies. We demonstrate that models instruction-tuned on a curated dataset
(only 5% of the original size) using T-S HIRT can outperform those trained on the
entire large-scale dataset by up to 5.48 points on average across eight benchmarks.
Across various LLMs and training set scales, our method consistently surpasses
existing state-of-the-art data selection techniques, while also remaining both costeffective and highly efficient. For instance, by using GPT-2 for score computation,
we are able to process a dataset of 52k samples in 40 minutes on a single GPU. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Dynamite321/T-SHIRT.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable success in various tasks [1–5]. One key
component of adapting these powerful LLMs for practical use is instruction tuning (also known
as supervised fine-tuning, SFT) [6] that fine-tunes pre-trained LLMs on instruction–response pairs.
During this stage, researchers often use millions of samples [3, 4, 7]. However, LIMA [8] challenges
this norm with the Superficial Alignment Hypothesis, which indicates that instruction tuning might
not need to be data-intensive, shifting the focus from data quantity to data quality. Fine-tuned on
just 1,000 manually selected instruction-tuning samples, LIMA achieves strong performance. Data
selection for instruction tuning offers several key benefits. First, full-dataset tuning is extremely
time-consuming and costly. Furthermore, as synthesized data becomes more common [9–12], datasets
often include redundancy and noise, making data selection for instruction tuning absolutely essential.
To select instruction tuning data, it is common to use scoring functions to assess sample quality and
only keep samples with high scores. LIMA [8] relies on manual annotation, while others [13–15]
prompt proprietary LLMs via APIs to assign quality scores. However, both methods are costly. An
alternative is Instruction-Following Difficulty (IFD) score [16, 17] (elaborated in Equation (1)), which
measures the ratio of a response’s perplexity when conditioned on the instruction to its unconditioned
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

