Energy Loss Functions for Physical Systems

Sékou-Oumar Kaba∗ , Kusha Sareen∗ , Daniel Levy, Siamak Ravanbakhsh
McGill University
Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute

Abstract
Effectively leveraging prior knowledge of a system’s physics is crucial for applications of machine learning to scientific domains. Previous approaches mostly
focused on incorporating physical insights at the architectural level. In this paper,
we propose a framework to leverage physical information directly into the loss
function for prediction and generative modeling tasks on systems like molecules
and spins. We derive energy loss functions assuming that each data sample is in
thermal equilibrium with respect to an approximate energy landscape. By using
the reverse KL divergence with a Boltzmann distribution around the data, we
obtain the loss as an energy difference between the data and the model predictions. This perspective also recasts traditional objectives like MSE as energybased, but with a physically meaningless energy. In contrast, our formulation
yields physically grounded loss functions with gradients that better align with
valid configurations, while being architecture-agnostic and computationally efficient. The energy loss functions also inherently respect physical symmetries.
We demonstrate our approach on molecular generation and spin ground-state prediction and report significant improvements over baselines. Code is available at
https://github.com/kushasareen/energy_loss.

1

Introduction

A key challenge in applications of machine learning to the physical sciences is that data can often be
scarce and expensive to generate. However, we often have some prior knowledge of the physics of the
system of interest, which can be used to design useful inductive biases. A common learning problem
involves training a machine learning model to predict configurations of physical systems based on
data collected close to equilibrium such as protein folding [Noé et al., 2020, Jumper et al., 2021,
Abramson et al., 2024], crystal structure prediction [Ryan et al., 2018, Jiao et al., 2023, Zeni et al.,
2025], calculation of ground states given Hamiltonian parameters [Carrasquilla and Melko, 2017], or
generative modeling of physical systems [Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018, Sanchez-Lengeling and
Aspuru-Guzik, 2018]. A significant body of work has focused on implementing physical inductive
biases, such as equivariance at the level of architectures (see e.g. Zhang et al. [2023] for a review).
This work explores a complementary direction: embedding physical principles directly into the loss
function. The fundamental question we ask is: can loss functions grounded in physical principles provide more effective training signals and yield models that better reflect physically valid configurations
compared to generic losses such as the mean-squared error (MSE) and the cross-entropy loss?
As a response, we propose a framework for deriving energy loss functions tailored for physical
systems in the thermal equilibrium regime. This is motivated by the fact that loss functions can be
obtained from a distribution representing the uncertainty around each prediction or data sample. For
physical systems in thermal equilibrium, the sensible choice is the Boltzmann distribution. Employing
the reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence leads to loss functions that take the form of approximate
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence: kabaseko@mila.quebec.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

