Missing Data Imputation by Reducing Mutual
Information with Rectified Flows
Jiahao Yu∗
Qizhen Ying∗
Leyang Wang∗
University of Cambridge
University of Oxford
University College London
Ziyue Jiang
Song Liu†
University of Bristol
University of Bristol

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel iterative method for missing data imputation that
sequentially reduces the mutual information between data and the corresponding
missingness mask. Inspired by GAN-based approaches that train generators to
decrease the predictability of missingness patterns, our method explicitly targets
this reduction in mutual information. Specifically, our algorithm iteratively minimizes the KL divergence between the joint distribution of the imputed data and
missingness mask, and the product of their marginals from the previous iteration.
We show that the optimal imputation under this framework can be achieved by
solving an ODE whose velocity field minimizes a rectified flow training objective.
We further illustrate that some existing imputation techniques can be interpreted as
approximate special cases of our mutual-information-reducing framework. Comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets validate the efficacy of our
proposed approach, demonstrating its superior imputation performance. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/yujhml/MIRI-Imputation.

1

Introduction

The problem of missing data, referring to absent components (NaNs) in a dataset, can arise in a
wide range of scenarios [31, 18]. For example, in a survey dataset, respondents might skip some
questions accidentally or intentionally, resulting in missing values. In fMRI data, there can be missing
voxels due to incomplete brain coverage and spatial variations in images acquired across subjects
[36]. Simple “one-shot” methods replace missing entries with summary statistics, such as the sample
mean or median of the observed data. In contrast, approaches like MICE [37], MissForest [34],
and HyperImpute [12] employ an iterative, dimension-wise scheme. In each iteration, they model
one feature conditional on all others and sample from that model to replace the feature’s missing
entries, cycling through all features repeatedly until the imputations stabilize. Because their updates
are sequential and dimension-wise, these methods are difficult to parallelize and scale poorly to
high-dimensional data such as images [3]. Their accuracy is also highly sensitive to the choice of
per-variable models [37, 15].
In recent years, research on generative modeling has made huge progress. Since imputation is
naturally a data-generating task, generative models have been increasingly applied to impute missing
data. [30] proposes to maximize the likelihood of the imputed data using an EM algorithm, where the
likelihood function is modeled using a normalizing flow [29, 6]. GAIN [38] leverages Generative
Adversarial Nets (GANs) [8] to impute missing components. It trains a generator (a neural network) so
that a binary classifier cannot distinguish whether a given component is imputed or not. However, both
GANs and normalizing flows come with their own challenges. GANs rely on unstable adversarial
* Work partially completed at the University of Bristol.
†

Correspondence to Song Liu <song.liu@bristol.ac.uk>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

