Vanish into Thin Air: Cross-prompt Universal
Adversarial Attacks for SAM2
Ziqi Zhou1,2,3∗ , Yifan Hu1,2,4,5† , Yufei Song† , Zijing Li‡ , Shengshan Hu1,2,4,5† ,
Leo Yu Zhang§ , Dezhong Yao1,2,3∗ , Long Zheng1,2,3∗ , Hai Jin1,2,3∗
1
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
2
Services Computing Technology and System Lab 3 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
5
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
∗ School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
† School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
‡ School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
§ School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
{zhouziqi,hyf1009,yufei17,lizijing,hushengshan,dyao,longzh,hjin}@hust.edu.cn
leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Recent studies reveal the vulnerability of the image segmentation foundation
model SAM to adversarial examples. Its successor, SAM2, has attracted significant
attention due to its strong generalization capability in video segmentation. However,
its robustness remains unexplored, and it is unclear whether existing attacks on
SAM can be directly transferred to SAM2. In this paper, we first analyze the
performance gap of existing attacks between SAM and SAM2 and highlight two key
challenges arising from their architectural differences: directional guidance from
the prompt and semantic entanglement across consecutive frames. To address these
issues, we propose UAP-SAM2, the first cross-prompt universal adversarial attack
against SAM2 driven by dual semantic deviation. For cross-prompt transferability,
we begin by designing a target-scanning strategy that divides each frame into k
regions, each randomly assigned a prompt, to reduce prompt dependency during
optimization. For effectiveness, we design a dual semantic deviation framework that
optimizes a UAP by distorting the semantics within the current frame and disrupting
the semantic consistency across consecutive frames. Extensive experiments on
six datasets across two segmentation tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method for SAM2. The comparative results show that UAP-SAM2
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) attacks by a large margin. Our
codes are available at: https://github.com/CGCL-codes/UAP-SAM2.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have led to the emergence of large segmentation foundation
models [4, 16, 33, 40, 43] with impressive generalization capabilities, enabling object segmentation
from unseen images. Among them, Segment Anything Model (SAM) [4] can output a class-free
mask by leveraging prompts (e.g., points or boxes) to accurately localize target objects. Despite its
strong segmentation ability, SAM is limited to images. Therefore, SAM2 [28] is recently proposed
to integrate a memory mechanism to store features of previous frames, extending SAM to generalpurpose video segmentation. Given a prompt (typically on the first frame), SAM2 can continuously
track and segment the target object across subsequent frames [11, 32, 49].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

