FIPER: Factorized Features for Robust Image
Super-Resolution and Compression

1

Yang-Che Sun1 Cheng Yu Yeo1 Ernie Chu2 Jun-Cheng Chen3 Yu-Lun Liu1
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 Academia Sinica

Abstract
In this work, we propose using a unified representation, termed Factorized Features, for low-level vision tasks, where we test on Single Image Super-Resolution
(SISR) and Image Compression. Motivated by the shared principles between
these tasks, they require recovering and preserving fine image details, whether
by enhancing resolution for SISR or reconstructing compressed data for Image
Compression. Unlike previous methods that mainly focus on network architecture, our proposed approach utilizes a basis-coefficient decomposition as well
as an explicit formulation of frequencies to capture structural components and
multi-scale visual features in images, which addresses the core challenges of both
tasks. We replace the representation of prior models from simple feature maps with
Factorized Features to validate the potential for broad generalizability. In addition,
we further optimize the compression pipeline by leveraging the mergeable-basis
property of our Factorized Features, which consolidates shared structures on multiframe compression. Extensive experiments show that our unified representation
delivers state-of-the-art performance, achieving an average relative improvement
of 204.4% in PSNR over the baseline in Super-Resolution (SR) and 9.35% BD-rate
reduction in Image Compression compared to the previous SOTA. Project page:
https://jayisaking.github.io/FIPER/

1

Introduction

Single-image super-resolution (SISR) aims to recover high-quality images from low-resolution inputs,
with accuracy depending on precise restoration of fine details and geometric correspondences (e.g.,
stripes, grids, textures). CNN pioneers [24, 59] were followed by GAN-based methods for perceptual
realism [47] and Transformer networks for long-range context [14]. Swin-based variants further
boosted performance [22, 18, 19, 71], inspiring ever-heavier architectures. These prior works optimize
network design while neglecting the underlying image-content representations themselves. On the
other hand, decomposition-based methods[66, 44, 39] seek to model the frequency components
directly through adding Fourier- or Wavelet-like bottlenecks in the middle. Although these designs
can indeed better capture the recurring visual patterns in learning effective SR representations than
aforementationed methods, as illustrated in fig. 1, they still suffer from poor perceptual quality.
This raises a critical question: beyond a simple network output, can we derive a formulation that
more effectively captures these patterns and aligns with the goals of SISR?
Conventional multi-scale pyramids aggregate features at several resolutions, but they store all activations densely, do not disentangle frequency content, and cannot be shared directly across tasks.
Instead, our factorized descriptor decomposes images into generalizable basis × coefficient pairs,
providing an explicit multi-frequency handle through different modulations.
On the other hand, image compression serves as a fundamental task in low-level vision applications,
where the traditional compression standards [41, 95, 92] lay the groundwork. The emerging learned
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

