Vad-R1: Towards Video Anomaly Reasoning via
Perception-to-Cognition Chain-of-Thought

Chao Huang1

Benfeng Wang1 Wei Wang1∗ Jie Wen2 Chengliang Liu3
Li Shen1,4 Xiaochun Cao1
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
Shenzhen Loop Area Institute
{huangch253, wangwei29, caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn wangbf23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
wenjie@hit.edu.cn liucl1996@163.com mathshenli@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in reasoning capability of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) demonstrate its effectiveness in tackling complex visual tasks.
However, existing MLLM-based Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) methods remain
limited to shallow anomaly descriptions without deep reasoning. In this paper,
we propose a new task named Video Anomaly Reasoning (VAR), which aims to
enable deep analysis and understanding of anomalies in the video by requiring
MLLMs to think explicitly before answering. To this end, we propose Vad-R1, an
end-to-end MLLM-based framework for VAR. Specifically, we design a Perceptionto-Cognition Chain-of-Thought (P2C-CoT) that simulates the human process of
recognizing anomalies, guiding the MLLMs to reason about anomalies step-by-step.
Based on the structured P2C-CoT, we construct Vad-Reasoning, a dedicated dataset
for VAR. Furthermore, we propose an improved reinforcement learning algorithm
AVA-GRPO, which explicitly incentivizes the anomaly reasoning capability of
MLLMs through a self-verification mechanism with limited annotations. Experimental results demonstrate that Vad-R1 achieves superior performance, outperforming both open-source and proprietary models on VAD and VAR tasks. Codes
and datasets will be released at https://github.com/wbfwonderful/Vad-R1.

1

Introduction

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) focuses on identifying abnormal events in videos, and has been
widely applied in a range of domains like surveillance systems [53] and autonomous driving [39, 79].
Traditional VAD methods typically fall into two paradigms: semi-supervised and weakly-supervised
VADs. The semi-supervised VAD methods [79, 34, 20, 36, 19, 17, 22] aim at modeling the features
of normal events, while there are only video-level annotations available for weakly-supervised VAD
methods [71, 53, 18, 17, 86, 26, 21, 70]. With the development of vision-language models, some
studies introduce semantic information into VAD [64, 73, 72, 80, 7, 23]. However, traditional VAD
methods only remain at the level of detection, lacking understanding and explanation of anomalies.
Recently, the reasoning capability of large language models has emerged as a key frontier [44, 9, 58].
Unlike daily dialogue, reasoning requires models to think before answering, enabling them to perform
causal analysis and further understanding. In particular, DeepSeek-R1 demonstrates the effectiveness
of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in stimulating and refining reasoning capability [9]. Concurrently,
parallel efforts have begun to extend reasoning to the multimodal domain [57, 60].
* Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

