Credal Prediction based on Relative Likelihood
Timo Löhr∗
LMU Munich, MCML
timo.loehr@ifi.lmu.de

Paul Hofman∗
LMU Munich, MCML
paul.hofman@ifi.lmu.de

Felix Mohr
Universidad de La Sabana
felix.mohr@unisabana.edu.co

Eyke Hüllermeier
LMU Munich, MCML, DFKI
eyke@lmu.de

Abstract
Predictions in the form of sets of probability distributions, so-called credal sets,
provide a suitable means to represent a learner’s epistemic uncertainty. In this
paper, we propose a theoretically grounded approach to credal prediction based
on the statistical notion of relative likelihood: The target of prediction is the set
of all (conditional) probability distributions produced by the collection of plausible models, namely those models whose relative likelihood exceeds a specified
threshold. This threshold has an intuitive interpretation and allows for controlling
the trade-off between correctness and precision of credal predictions. We tackle
the problem of approximating credal sets defined in this way by means of suitably
modified ensemble learning techniques. To validate our approach, we illustrate
its effectiveness by experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrating superior
uncertainty representation without compromising predictive performance. We also
compare our method against several state-of-the-art baselines in credal prediction.

1

Introduction

The distinction between two types of uncertainty, referred to as aleatoric and epistemic, is receiving
increasing interest in machine learning [Hüllermeier and Waegeman, 2021]. Roughly speaking, the
aleatoric uncertainty of a predictive model is caused by the inherent randomness of the data-generating
process, whereas epistemic uncertainty is caused by the learner’s lack of knowledge about the true
(or best) predictive model. While aleatoric uncertainty is irreducible, epistemic uncertainty can be
reduced on the basis of additional information, e.g., by collecting more training data. *
Aleatoric uncertainty can be captured adequately in terms of (conditional) probability distributions,
whereas the representation of epistemic uncertainty requires “second-order” formalisms more general
than (single) probability distributions. In the Bayesian approach to machine learning, second-order
probability distributions are used for this purpose [Depeweg et al., 2018, Kendall and Gal, 2017]:
The learner maintains a probability distribution over the model space, which, if each model is a
probabilistic predictor, results in predictions in the form of probability distributions of probability
distributions (on outcomes). The Bayesian approach is theoretically appealing but computationally
demanding, and commonly criticized for the need to specify a prior distribution (strongly influencing
prediction and uncertainty quantification) [Gawlikowski et al., 2023].
An alternative second-order formalism is offered by credal sets [Walley, 1991], i.e., sets (instead
of distributions) of probability distributions that are commonly assumed to be closed and convex
[Cozman, 2000]. Although a set appears to provide weaker information than a distribution, a setbased representation also has advantages. In particular, it can be argued that sets are more apt at
*∗

equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

