E NIGMATA: Scaling Logical Reasoning in Large
Language Models with Synthetic Verifiable Puzzles

Jiangjie Chen1,5,∗, Qianyu He1,2,∗,†, Siyu Yuan1,2,∗,† , Aili Chen2,∗
Zhicheng Cai3,5 , Weinan Dai1,3,5,† , Hongli Yu1,3,5,† , Qiying Yu1,3,5,† , Xuefeng Li1,4,†
Jiaze Chen1,5 , Hao Zhou3,5 , Mingxuan Wang1,5
jiangjiec@bytedance.com
zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn wangmingxuan.89@bytedance.com
1
ByteDance Seed
2
Fudan University
3
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
SIA-Lab of Tsinghua AIR and ByteDance Seed

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs), such as OpenAI’s o1 and DeepSeek’s R1, excel
at advanced reasoning tasks like math and coding via Reinforcement Learning with
Verifiable Rewards (RLVR), but still struggle with puzzles solvable by humans
without domain knowledge. We introduce E NIGMATA, the first comprehensive
suite tailored for improving LLMs with puzzle reasoning skills. It includes 36 tasks
across 7 categories, each with: 1) a generator that produces unlimited examples with
controllable difficulty, and 2) a rule-based verifier for automatic evaluation. This
generator-verifier design supports scalable, multi-task RL training, fine-grained
analysis, and seamless RLVR integration. We further propose E NIGMATA-Eval,
a rigorous benchmark, and develop optimized multi-task RLVR strategies. Our
trained model, Qwen2.5-32B-E NIGMATA, consistently surpasses o3-mini-high and
o1 on the puzzle reasoning benchmarks like E NIGMATA-Eval, ARC-AGI (32.8%),
and ARC-AGI 2 (0.6%). It also generalizes well to out-of-domain puzzle benchmarks and mathematical reasoning, with little multi-tasking trade-off. When trained
on larger models like Seed1.5-Thinking (20B activated parameters and 200B total
parameters), puzzle data from E NIGMATA further boosts SoTA performance on advanced math and STEM reasoning tasks such as AIME (2024-2025), BeyondAIME
and GPQA (Diamond), showing nice generalization benefits of E NIGMATA. This
work offers a unified, controllable framework for advancing logical reasoning in
LLMs. Project page: https://seed-enigmata.github.io.

1

Introduction

Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) such as o1 and R1, trained from Large Language Models (LLMs)
with Reinforcement Learning (RL), have demonstrated excellent performance in complex reasoning
tasks [1; 2; 3; 4; 5], such as mathematics, STEM, and coding. The success of LRMs highlights
the effectiveness of the Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) paradigm, which
stresses the great importance of obtaining high-quality verifiable prompts [6; 7; 8]. However, existing
LRMs still struggle to complete various puzzle tasks that require purely logical reasoning skills rather
than professional knowledge, which are easy and even obvious for human [9; 10; 11; 12]. Most
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Work done during internship at ByteDance Seed.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

