Projective Equivariant Networks via Second-order
Fundamental Differential Invariants

1

Yikang Li1 , Yeqing Qiu2,3 , Yuxuan Chen4 , Lingshen He1 , Lexiang Hu1 , Zhouchen Lin1,5∗
State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
4
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
liyk18@pku.edu.cn, yeqingqiu@link.cuhk.edu.cn, chen.yuxuan7@northeastern.edu
lingshenhe@pku.edu.cn, hulx@stu.pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Equivariant networks enhance model efficiency and generalization by embedding
symmetry priors into their architectures. However, most existing methods, primarily based on group convolutions and steerable convolutions, face significant
limitations when dealing with complex transformation groups, particularly the
projective group, which plays a crucial role in vision. In this work, we tackle the
challenge by constructing projective equivariant networks based on differential
invariants. Using the moving frame method with a carefully selected cross section
tailored for multi-dimensional functions, we derive a complete and concise set of
second-order fundamental differential invariants of the projective group. We provide a rigorous analysis of the properties and transformation relationships of their
underlying components, yielding a further simplified and unified set of fundamental
differential invariants, which facilitates both theoretical analysis and practical applications. Building on this foundation, we develop PDINet, the first framework for
deep projective equivariant networks, achieving full projective equivariance without
discretizing or sampling the group. Empirical results on the projectively transformed STL-10 and Imagenette datasets show that PDINet achieves improvements
of 11.39% and 5.66% in accuracy over the respective standard baselines under
out-of-distribution settings, demonstrating its strong generalization to complex
geometric transformations.

1

Introduction

Incorporating symmetry as an inductive bias into neural networks has emerged as a powerful approach
to enhance model efficiency and generalization. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [Krizhevsky
et al., 2012, Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015, He et al., 2016, Chen et al., 2017], which are among
the most widely used architectures in deep learning, owe much of their success to the inherent
translational equivariance. Building on this idea, Cohen and Welling [2016a] proposed Group
Equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs), which generalize equivariance to broader transformations like rotations
and reflections. Equivariant networks achieve symmetry incorporation by constructing network layers
whose outputs transform in a predictable pattern under group actions applied to the inputs.
The development of equivariant networks began with G-CNNs, whose feature map can be seen as a
function on a group. Although G-CNNs have proven effective in various tasks [Worrall and Brostow,
2018, Esteves et al., 2019, Lafarge et al., 2021, Shamsolmoali et al., 2021], they are less suited
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

