In-Context Fully Decentralized Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

1

Chao Li12 Bingkun Bao13∗ Yang Gao45
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
State Key Laboratory of Tibetan Intelligence 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
School of Intelligent Science and Technology, Nanjing University
5
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
chaoli@njupt.edu.cn, bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn, gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we consider fully decentralized cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning, where each agent has access only to the states, its local actions, and the
shared rewards. The absence of information about other agents’ actions typically
leads to the non-stationarity problem during per-agent value function updates, and
the relative overgeneralization issue during value function estimation. However,
existing works fail to address both issues simultaneously, as they lack the capability
to model the agents’ joint policy in a fully decentralized setting. To overcome this
limitation, we propose a simple yet effective method named Return-Aware Context
(RAC). RAC formalizes the dynamically changing task, as locally perceived by each
agent, as a contextual Markov Decision Process (MDP), and addresses both nonstationarity and relative overgeneralization through return-aware context modeling.
Specifically, the contextual MDP attributes the non-stationary local dynamics of
each agent to switches between contexts, each corresponding to a distinct joint
policy. Then, based on the assumption that the joint policy changes only between
episodes, RAC distinguishes different joint policies by the training episodic return
and constructs contexts using discretized episodic return values. Accordingly, RAC
learns a context-based value function for each agent to address the non-stationarity
issue during value function updates. For value function estimation, an individual
optimistic marginal value is constructed to encourage the selection of optimal joint
actions, thereby mitigating the relative overgeneralization problem. Experimentally,
we evaluate RAC on various cooperative tasks (including matrix game, predator
and prey, and SMAC), and its significant performance validates its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

In recent years, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has witnessed great advances
in both algorithms (e.g., value decomposition [1–4] and multi-agent policy gradient [5–8] methods)
and applications (e.g., autonomous vehicles [9], urban traffic management [10], and vaccine allocation [11]). Most of these advances heavily rely on the centralized training (often with decentralized
execution) paradigm, where global information, particularly the joint actions of all agents, is available
during training. However, direct access to other agents’ actions is often unattainable in real-world
settings, such as industrial scenarios where multiple robots from different companies may withhold
action information due to privacy concerns or limited communication capabilities. In such cases,
the fully decentralized learning becomes essential, where each agent learns solely from its local
experiences, without access to the actions of other agents, during both training and execution.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

