Confidence-Aware With Prototype Alignment for
Partial Multi-label Learning

Weijun Lv1 , Yu Chen1 , Xiaozhao Fang1∗ , Xuhuan Zhu1 , Jie Wen2∗,
Guoxu Zhou1 , Sixian Chan3
1
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition,
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen 518055, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology,
Hangzhou 310023, China
{lvweijun0201, chenyu9265324}@163.com, {xzhfang168, xuhuanz_zz}@126.com
jiewen_pr@126.com, gx.zhou@gdut.edu.cn, sxchan@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Label prototype learning has emerged as an effective paradigm in Partial MultiLabel Learning (PML), providing a distinctive framework for modeling structured
representations of label semantics while naturally filtering noise through prototypebased label confidence estimation. However, existing prototype-based methods
face a critical limitation: class prototypes are the biased estimates due to noisy
candidate labels, particularly when positive samples are scarce. To this end, we
first propose a mutually class prototype alignment strategy bypassing noise interference by introducing two different transformation matrices, which makes the
class prototypes learned by the fuzzy clustering and candidate label set mutually
alignment for correcting themselves. Such alignment is also passed on to the
fuzzy memberships label in turn. In addition, to eliminate noise interference in the
candidate label set during the classifier learning, we use the learned permutation
matrix to transform the fuzzy memberships label for learning a label reliability
indicator matrix accompanied by the candidate label set. This makes the label
reliability indicator matrix absolutely prevent the occurrence of numerical values
located in non-label and simultaneously eliminate the introduction of incorrect
label as much as possible. The resulting indicator matrix guides a robust multilabel classifier training process, jointly optimizing label confidence and classifier
parameters. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed model exhibits
significant performance advantages over state-of-the-art PML approaches.

1

Introduction

Multi-Label Learning (MLL) is an important branch of machine learning that allows an instance to
belong to multiple categories simultaneously, with widespread applications in image annotation[1, 2],
text categorization[3], and medical diagnosis [4]. However, in practical application scenarios,
obtaining precisely annotated data is often difficult due to high annotation costs and inherent
ambiguity[5, 6, 7, 8]. Annotators frequently provide a candidate label set when uncertain, containing both ground-truth labels and noisy labels (i.e., false positive labels mistakenly included).
For example, in image annotation tasks, objects with similar visual appearances may be incorrectly
labeled, which will introduce interference to the classification prediction. To address this issue, Partial
Multi-Label Learning (PML) [9] has emerged as a new weakly supervised learning framework. The
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

