A LIGN VLM: Bridging Vision and Language Latent
Spaces for Multimodal Document Understanding

Ahmed Masry1,2 , Juan A. Rodriguez1,3,4 , Tianyu Zhang1,3,5 , Suyuchen Wang1,3,5 ,
Chao Wang1 , Aarash Feizi1,3,6 , Akshay Kalkunte Suresh1 , Abhay Puri1 ,
Xiangru Jian1,7 , Pierre-André Noël1 , Sathwik Tejaswi Madhusudhan1 ,
Marco Pedersoli1,4 , Bang Liu1,5,8 , Nicolas Chapados1 , Yoshua Bengio3,5,8 ,
Enamul Hoque2 , Christopher Pal1,3,8,9 , Issam H. Laradji1,10 , David Vazquez1 ,
Perouz Taslakian1 , Spandana Gella1 , Sai Rajeswar1,3,5
1
ServiceNow 2 York University 3 Mila – Quebec AI Institute
4
École de Technologie Supérieure 5 Université de Montréal
6
McGill University 7 University of Waterloo 8 CIFAR AI Chair
9
Polytechnique Montréal 10 University of British Columbia

Abstract
Aligning visual features with language embeddings is a key challenge in visionlanguage models (VLMs). The performance of such models hinges on having a
good connector that maps visual features generated by a vision encoder to a shared
embedding space with the LLM while preserving semantic similarity. Existing
connectors, such as multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), lack inductive bias to constrain
visual features within the linguistic structure of the LLM’s embedding space,
making them data-hungry and prone to cross-modal misalignment. In this work,
we propose a novel vision-text alignment method, A LIGN VLM, that maps visual
features to a weighted average of LLM text embeddings. Our approach leverages
the linguistic priors encoded by the LLM to ensure that visual features are mapped
to regions of the space that the LLM can effectively interpret. A LIGN VLM is
particularly effective for document understanding tasks, where visual and textual
modalities are highly correlated. Our extensive experiments show that A LIGN VLM
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to prior alignment methods, with
larger gains on document understanding tasks and under low-resource setups. We
provide further analysis demonstrating its efficiency and robustness to noise.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have gained significant traction in recent years as a powerful
framework for multimodal document understanding tasks that involve interpreting both the visual
and textual contents of scanned documents [Kim et al., 2022, Lee et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2023a, 2024,
Hu et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2023a, Rodriguez et al., 2024b]. Such tasks are common in real-world
commercial applications, including invoice parsing [Park et al., 2019], form reading [Jaume et al.,
2019], and document question answering [Mathew et al., 2021b]. VLM architectures typically consist
of three components: (i) a vision encoder to process raw images, (ii) a Large Language Model (LLM)
pre-trained on text, and (iii) a connector module that maps the visual features from the vision encoder
into the LLM’s semantic space.
A central challenge in this pipeline is to effectively map the continuous feature embeddings of
the vision encoder into the latent space of the LLM while preserving the semantic properties of
visual concepts. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized into deep fusion and shallow fusion
methods. Deep fusion methods, such as NVLM [Dai et al., 2024], Flamingo [Alayrac et al., 2022],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

