Information-theoretic Generalization Analysis for
VQ-VAEs: A Role of Latent Variables
Futoshi Futami∗,1,2,3 , Masahiro Fujisawa∗,1,2 ,
1

The University of Osaka, 2 RIKEN AIP, 3 The University of Tokyo,
∗
Equal Contribution
futami.futoshi.es@osaka-u.ac.jp, fujisawa@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Latent variables (LVs) play a crucial role in encoder–decoder models by enabling
effective data compression, prediction, and generation. Although their theoretical
properties, such as generalization, have been extensively studied in supervised
learning, similar analyses for unsupervised models such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) remain insufficiently explored. In this work, we extend informationtheoretic generalization analysis to vector-quantized (VQ) VAEs with discrete
latent spaces, introducing a novel data-dependent prior to rigorously analyze the
relationship among LVs, generalization, and data generation. We derive a novel
generalization error bound of the reconstruction loss of VQ-VAEs, which depends
solely on the complexity of LVs and the encoder, independent of the decoder.
Additionally, we provide the upper bound of the 2-Wasserstein distance between
the distributions of the true data and the generated data, explaining how the regularization of the LVs contributes to the data generation performance.

1

Introduction

Encoder–decoder (ED) models have demonstrated remarkable performance [23] in (un)supervised
tasks such as classification [2, 4] and data generation [39, 70], compressing input data into latent
variables (LVs) via an encoder. The success of ED models hinges on how effectively the encoder can
represent essential features of the input in LVs, stimulating analyses of the relationship between LVs
and ED model performance, as well as developing algorithms designed to appropriately control LVs.
In supervised learning, the information bottleneck (IB) hypothesis [67, 60] has gained significant
attention for proposing that minimizing the mutual information (MI) between input data and LVs
enhances generalization by ensuring LVs retain the minimal information necessary for prediction.
This hypothesis has motivated numerous learning algorithms for deep neural networks and empirical
studies exploring their performance [66, 61, 56, 22, 1, 2]. Moreover, theoretical research about how
LVs contribute to generalization has been actively pursued [71, 28, 38, 72] within the IB hypothesis.
Recently, Sefidgaran et al. [57] has highlighted the limitations of these analyses, particularly in
terms of assumptions and the sample complexity represented by the MI. To address these limitations,
they proposed extending the supersample setting of information-theoretic (IT) analysis [63]. Their
approach induces a symmetric, data-dependent prior over LVs that facilitates rigorous analysis, which
successfully characterizes generalization performance using the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
between the posterior distribution of the LVs and this prior. These results suggest that, by carefully
constructing the data-dependent prior distribution, we can obtain a decoder-independent bound,
which illustrates clearly how LVs contribute to the generalization for ED models in classification.
Their analysis has recently been extended to multi-view learning settings [58, 59].
LVs play a key role in deep generative models for unsupervised learning tasks such as data compression and generation. For example, variational autoencoders (VAEs) [39] are trained by optimizing an
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

