Contextual Integrity in LLMs via Reasoning and
Reinforcement Learning

Guangchen Lan∗
Purdue University
lan44@purdue.edu

Huseyin A. Inan
Microsoft
Huseyin.Inan@microsoft.com

Janardhan Kulkarni
Microsoft
jakul@microsoft.com
Reza Shokri
Google, National Univ of Singapore
reza@nus.edu.sg

Sahar Abdelnabi
Microsoft
saabdelnabi@microsoft.com

Lukas Wutschitz
Microsoft
lukas.wutschitz@microsoft.com
Christopher G. Brinton
Purdue University
cgb@purdue.edu

Robert Sim
Microsoft
rsim@microsoft.com

Abstract
As the era of autonomous agents making decisions on behalf of users unfolds,
ensuring contextual integrity (CI) – what is the appropriate information to share
while carrying out a certain task – becomes a central question to the field. We
posit that CI demands a form of reasoning where the agent needs to reason about
the context in which it is operating. To test this, we first prompt LLMs to reason
explicitly about CI when deciding what information to disclose. We then extend
this approach by developing a reinforcement learning (RL) framework that further instills in models the reasoning necessary to achieve CI. Using a synthetic,
automatically created, dataset of only ∼ 700 examples but with diverse contexts
and information disclosure norms, we show that our method substantially reduces
inappropriate information disclosure while maintaining task performance across
multiple model sizes and families. Importantly, improvements transfer from this
synthetic dataset to established CI benchmarks such as PrivacyLens that has human
annotations and evaluates privacy leakage of AI assistants in actions and tool calls.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/EricGLan/CI-RL

1

Introduction

Agents powered by large language models (LLMs) offer significant capabilities across diverse
applications, from personalized virtual assistants to complex automated decision-making systems
[37]. However, as these agents gain autonomy and are deployed to complete tasks on behalf of
users that require interaction with the external world, ensuring that their actions are safe becomes
paramount. In this work, we focus on one crucial aspect of safety: the Contextual Integrity (CI) [26].
CI dictates that information being disclosed by the agent to complete a task should be appropriate to
the context in which it occurs.
Let us illustrate the concept of CI via the example in Figure 1. An agent performs a user’s task of
booking a treatment appointment. The agent has access to information that is appropriate and needed
to be shared in this context, such as name, treatment preference, or the doctor’s referral. But also it
∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

