Quartet: Native FP4 Training Can Be Optimal
for Large Language Models

Roberto L. Castro∗
ISTA & Red Hat AI
Jiale Chen
ISTA

Andrei Panferov∗
ISTA
Mahdi Nikdan
ISTA

Soroush Tabesh
ISTA

Saleh Ashkboos
ETH Zürich

Oliver Sieberling
ETH Zürich
Dan Alistarh
ISTA & Red Hat AI

Abstract
Training large language models (LLMs) models directly in low-precision offers
a way to address computational costs by improving both throughput and energy
efficiency. For those purposes, NVIDIA’s recent Blackwell architecture facilitates
very low-precision operations using FP4 variants. Yet, current algorithms for
training LLMs in FP4 precision face significant accuracy degradation and often
rely on mixed-precision fallbacks. In this paper, we investigate hardware-supported
FP4 training and introduce a new approach for accurate, end-to-end FP4 training
with all the major computations (i.e., linear layers) in low precision. Through
extensive evaluations on Llama-type models, we reveal a new low-precision scaling
law that quantifies performance trade-offs across bit-widths and training setups.
Guided by this investigation, we design an “optimal” technique in terms of accuracyvs-computation, called Quartet. We implement Quartet using optimized CUDA
kernels tailored for Blackwell, demonstrating that fully FP4-based training is a
competitive alternative to FP16 half-precision and to FP8 training. Our code is
available at https://github.com/IST-DASLab/Quartet.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have surged, unlocking
state-of-the-art performance in AI reasoning, coding, and multimodal understanding. These advances
have come at the cost of an unprecedented rise in compute costs, as the floating-point operations
(FLOPs) required to train a frontier model have been doubling every few months [16].
One key lever for reducing compute costs is lower-precision computation: executing the matrixmultiplication (MatMul) kernels that dominate training workloads at lower bit-widths yields
near-linear gains in throughput and energy efficiency. On the inference side, it is known that
4-bit quantization—or even lower—can preserve accuracy, via sophisticated calibration and rotation
schemes [24; 2; 9]. For training, recent work has pushed the precision frontier from FP16 [33] to 8-bit
pipelines, responsible in part for efficiency breakthroughs such as DeepSeek-V3 [31]. In this context,
NVIDIA’s Blackwell architecture introduces efficient hardware support for even lower-precision
microscaling formats [36] such as MXFP and NVFP, which natively support 4-bit floating-point
operations at higher teraFLOP-per-watt efficiency: for instance, moving from 8- to 4-bit multiplies
on the B200 GPU can almost double arithmetic throughput, while cutting energy roughly in half [35].
Yet, today’s algorithmic support for accurate end-to-end training in such low precision is missing.
State-of-the-art quantized training methods such as Switchback [54], Jetfire [57], HALO [3], and
∗

- Equal contribution. Correspondence to: dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

