Attention-based clustering

Rodrigo Maulen-Soto∗
Sorbonne Université, LPSM
Paris, France

Pierre Marion
EPFL, Institute of Mathematics
Lausanne, Switzerland

Claire Boyer∗
Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay
Université Paris Saclay
Institut Universitaire de France

Abstract
Transformers have emerged as a powerful neural network architecture capable of
tackling a wide range of learning tasks. In this work, we provide a theoretical analysis of their ability to automatically extract structure from data in an unsupervised
setting. In particular, we demonstrate their suitability for clustering when the input
data is generated from a Gaussian mixture model. To this end, we study a simplified
two-head attention layer and define a population risk whose minimization with
unlabeled data drives the head parameters to align with the true mixture centroids.
This phenomenon highlights the ability of attention-based layers to capture underlying distributional structure. We further examine an attention layer with key, query,
and value matrices fixed to the identity, and show that, even without any trainable
parameters, it can perform in-context quantization, revealing the surprising capacity
of transformer-based methods to adapt dynamically to input-specific distributions.

1

Introduction

Attention-based models (Bahdanau et al., 2015), in particular Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017),
have achieved state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of learning tasks. These include
applications in natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Bubeck et al., 2023; Luong et al.,
2015; Bahdanau et al., 2016) and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021;
Ramachandran et al., 2019). The success of the attention mechanism has been linked to its ability to
capture long-range relationships in input sequences (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017).
They do this by computing pairwise dependencies between tokens based on learned projections,
without regard to the tokens’ positions in the sequence.
On the theoretical side, a full understanding of attention-based mechanisms has not yet been developed.
This is due to the complexity of the architectures and the diversity of relevant tasks they manage to
achieve. A promising research direction to bridge this gap involves identifying essential features
from real-world problems and constructing minimal yet representative tasks that retain the essential
difficulty—paired with provable models that solve them using attention-based mechanisms. Notable
recent efforts in this vein include Ahn et al. (2023); von Oswald et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2025);
Zhang et al. (2024); Li et al. (2024, 2023). However, the existing literature mainly focuses on
supervised learning aspects, and in particular in-context learning (von Oswald et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024; Garg et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Furuya et al., 2024). The goal of in-context learning is
to predict the output corresponding to a new query, given a prompt consisting of input/output pairs.
∗

Correspondence: maulen@lpsm.paris and claire.boyer@universite-paris-saclay.fr.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

