From Average-Iterate to Last-Iterate Convergence in
Games: A Reduction and Its Applications∗

Yang Cai
Yale University
yang.cai@yale.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Chen-Yu Wei
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Weiqiang Zheng
Yale University
weiqiang.zheng@yale.edu

Abstract
The convergence of online learning algorithms in games under self-play is a fundamental question in game theory and machine learning. Among various notions
of convergence, last-iterate convergence is particularly desirable, as it reflects
the actual decisions made by the learners and captures the day-to-day behavior
of the learning dynamics. While many algorithms are known to converge in the
average-iterate, achieving last-iterate convergence typically requires considerably
more effort in both the design and the analysis of the algorithm. Somewhat surprisingly, we show in this paper that for a large family of games, there exists a
simple black-box reduction that transforms the average iterates of an uncoupled
learning dynamics into the last iterates of a new uncoupled learning dynamics,
thus also providing a reduction from last-iterate convergence to average-iterate
convergence. Our reduction applies to games where each player’s utility is linear in
both their own strategy and the joint strategy of all opponents. This family includes
two-player bimatrix games and generalizations such as multi-player polymatrix
games. By applying our reduction to the Optimistic Multiplicative Weights Update algorithm, we obtain new state-of-the-art last-iterate convergence rates for
uncoupled learning dynamics in multi-player zero-sum polymatrix games: (1) an
d
O( log
T ) last-iterate convergence rate under gradient feedback, representing an
exponential improvement in the dependence on the dimension d (i.e., the maximum
1
1
number of actions available to either player); and (2) an Õ(d 5 T − 5 ) last-iterate
convergence
rate under
feedback, improving upon the previous best rates of
√
√ bandit
1
1
Õ( dT − 8 ) and Õ( dT − 6 ).

1

Introduction

The convergence of online learning algorithms in games under self-play is a fundamental question
in both game theory and machine learning. Self-play methods for computing Nash equilibria have
enabled the development of superhuman AI agents in competitive games such as Go [Sil+17],
Poker [Bow+15; BS18; BS19], Stratego [Per+22], and Diplomacy [FAI+22]. More recently, self-play
learning algorithms have also been applied to large language model (LLM) alignment with human
feedback, which can be modeled as a two-player zero-sum game [Mun+23; Swa+24; Ye+24; Wu+24;
Liu+24; Liu+25]. From a game-theoretic perspective, understanding the convergence behavior of
self-play dynamics provides predictive insights into strategic multi-agent interactions and informs the
design of more effective mechanisms.
∗

Authors are ordered alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

