Compress & Cache: Vision token compression for
efficient generation and retrieval

Adrian Bulat∗ 1,2 Yassine Ouali∗1 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3
1
Samsung AI Cambridge 2 Technical University of Iasi 3 QMUL

Abstract
This work aims to compress the vision tokens of an LVLM into a representation
that is simultaneously suitable for (a) generative and (b) discriminative tasks, (c) is
nearly lossless, and (d) storage-efficient. To this end, we propose C&C, a novel
compression method that leverages the LVLM itself for task-agnostic visual token
compression. Unlike prior methods that perform token reduction on-the-fly, our
approach offloads computation to a dedicated, upfront indexing stage, effectively
decoupling compression from generation. This enables learning more powerful
representations for generation during inference. At the core of C&C is a “doubleforward pass” training strategy. During the first forward pass, the LLM (of the
LVLM) creates a bottleneck by compressing the dense visual tokens into a few
summary tokens. Subsequently, the second forward pass processes the language
instruction(s) alongside the summary tokens, used as a direct replacement for the
image ones. The training of C&C is guided by two key losses: an autoregressive
loss applied after the second pass that provides a direct optimization objective for
reconstructing the original information flow, and a contrastive loss applied after the
first pass to bolster the representational strength of the summary tokens, particularly
for discriminative tasks. Moreover, we propose stage-specific adapters for further
enhancing performance. C&C produces highly informative compressed representations. An in-depth ablation study confirms the efficacy of our approach. For
generative tasks, we achieve a 2× higher compression rate without compromising
capabilities, setting a new state-of-the-art. For discriminative tasks, we establish
new state-of-the-art results on image retrieval and compositionality benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) are LLMs [8, 19] that, in addition to text, are capable of
integrating and processing visual information as input context [24]. Being able to reason across both
vision and language, they are suitable for a wide range of use cases such as image captioning, VQA,
and multimodal chatbots. A key bottleneck for their efficient deployment is the large number of input
visual tokens, which often dominate the sequence length compared to the language instruction(s).
Recent efforts to improve their efficiency have primarily focused on on-the-fly token compression [27,
47, 3, 16]. These approaches aim to prune or dynamically condense visual tokens during the online
inference process for a given input image and query. While beneficial for single-pass efficiency, these
methods operate without a dedicated upfront compression or caching stage and thus limit the capacity
of the compressor. Moreover, in the context of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), they are not
aligned with a typical RAG setting, whereby the image and documents are available a priori.
In this work, we explore a different paradigm for LVLM visual token compression that leverages
offline processing and caching. Instead of performing token reduction during every inference step,
we propose to perform a computationally more intensive compression step once for a given image
∗

Denotes equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

