Quantum Visual Fields with Neural Amplitude
Encoding

Shuteng Wang
Christian Theobalt
Vladislav Golyanik∗
MPI for Informatics, SIC, Germany

Abstract
Quantum Implicit Neural Representations (QINRs) have emerged as a promising
paradigm that leverages parametrised quantum circuits to encode and process
classical information. However, significant challenges remain in areas such as
ansatz architecture design, the effective utility of quantum-mechanical properties,
training efficiency, and the integration with classical modules. This paper advances
the field by introducing a novel QINR architecture for 2D image and 3D geometric
field learning, which we collectively refer to as Quantum Visual Field (QVF).
QVF encodes classical data into quantum statevectors using neural amplitude
encoding grounded in a learnable energy manifold, ensuring meaningful Hilbert
space embeddings. Our ansatz follows a fully entangled design of learnable
parametrised quantum circuits, with quantum (unitary) operations performed in the
real Hilbert space, resulting in numerically stable training with fast convergence.
QVF does not rely on classical post-processing—in contrast to the previous QINR
learning approach—and directly employs measurements to extract learned signals
encoded in the ansatz. Experiments on a quantum hardware simulator demonstrate
that QVF outperforms existing quantum approach and competes widely used
classical foundational baselines in terms of visual representation accuracy across
various metrics and model characteristics. We also show applications of QVF in
2D and 3D field completion and 3D shape interpolation, highlighting its practical
potential. Project page: https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/QVF/.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representations (INRs) have emerged as a powerful framework for continuously modelling signals via neural networks. They are widely used in image and 3D shape synthesis, as well as
3D reconstruction, among other fields of visual computing [54]. INRs map spatial (and also temporal) coordinates to corresponding signal values, enabling resolution-independent, memory-efficient,
and differentiable representations; the signal encoding network fθ with parameters
θ is trained to
P
minimise the reconstruction loss L(θ) over sampled coordinates x: L(θ) = x∈X ∥fθ (x) − S(x)∥2 ,
where X denotes the sampled domain and S(x) is the signal value to be represented by fθ . As a
remedy to the growing computational, memory and energy demand required by INR, recent work
has explored the integration of quantum circuits into INR as a promising alternative to classical
methods, with potential advantages in model compactness and learning efficiency [57]. Quantum
algorithms operate within Hilbert spaces, enabling superposition and entanglement of states that
facilitate parallel processing beyond classical systems with comparable resource scales. Specifically,
quantum machine learning (QML) models involving parameterised quantum circuits (PQCs) or
ansatz parameterise the evolution of quantum states through unitary transformations (implemented as
quantum gate sequences), requiring a number of parameters that scale logarithmically with the Hilbert
∗

Corresponding author’s email: golyanik@mpi-inf.mpg.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

