Mechanism Design for LLM Fine-tuning with
Multiple Reward Models

Haoran Sun1 , Yurong Chen2∗, Siwei Wang3 , Xu Chu1 , Wei Chen3 , Xiaotie Deng1∗
1
CFCS, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Inria, École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
sunhaoran0301@stu.pku.edu.cn, yurong.chen@inria.fr,
{chu_xu, xiaotie}@pku.edu.cn, {siweiwang, weic}@microsoft.com,

Abstract
Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) to aggregate multiple preferences has
attracted considerable research attention. With aggregation algorithms advancing, a
potential economic scenario arises where fine-tuning services are provided to agents
with different preferences. In this context, agents may benefit from strategically
misreporting their preferences, but this could harm the aggregation performance.
This paper addresses such incentive issues by framing it as a mechanism design
problem: an LLM provider determines the fine-tuning objective (training rule)
and the pricing scheme (payment rule) for agents. We primarily focus on training
rules that maximize social welfare subject to certain regularizations, referred to as
SW-Max rules. First, we show that under most circumstances, truthful reporting
is sub-optimal with simply a SW-Max rule, thereby highlighting the necessity of
payments. Second, we extend the VCG payment to implement SW-Max rules
in dominant-strategy incentive compatibility (DSIC). We characterize sufficient
conditions for payment equivalence and derive the necessary conditions for a
payment rule to implement a SW-Max rule in DSIC and other principles. Third,
we demonstrate that our mechanism is approximately DSIC with perturbed input,
showcasing its robustness against the inevitable errors in real-world applications.
Experiments on real LLM training results further confirm the practical implications
of our results.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) [61, 74] become increasingly widespread, users are seeking models
that not only possess general capabilities but also align with their individual values. Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [14, 57] has emerged as a mainstream approach to achieve
this alignment, where a reward model guides the reinforcement learning process using feedback
signals that reflect human preferences.
However, standard RLHF becomes resource-intensive when catering to diverse preferences. Training
separate LLMs for every individual or group within a community, each with unique preferences,
is often impractical due to prohibitive computational costs and potential data privacy concerns. A
more feasible alternative is to train a unified model that reflects collective values while still accommodating distinct needs. Multiple-Objective RLHF (MORLHF) [5, 78], which aims to efficiently
integrate multiple preferences into a single model, offers a promising avenue for this. Further studies
aim to improve MORLHF algorithms from various perspectives, including efficiency [41, 62, 70],
accuracy [18, 26, 63, 82], and fairness [11].
∗

Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

