Geometry-Aware Edge Pooling
for Graph Neural Networks
Katharina Limbeck*,1,2
1

Lydia Mezrag*,3,4

Guy Wolf†,3,4

Bastian Rieck†,1,5

2
3
Helmholtz Munich
Technical University of Munich
Université de Montréal
4
5
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
Université de Fribourg

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown significant success for graph-based
tasks. Motivated by the prevalence of large datasets in real-world applications, pooling layers are crucial components of GNNs. By reducing the size of input graphs,
pooling enables faster training and potentially better generalisation. However,
existing pooling operations often optimise for the learning task at the expense of
discarding fundamental graph structures, thus reducing interpretability. This leads
to unreliable performance across dataset types, downstream tasks and pooling ratios.
Addressing these concerns, we propose novel graph pooling layers for structureaware pooling via edge collapses. Our methods leverage diffusion geometry and
iteratively reduce a graph’s size while preserving both its metric structure and
its structural diversity. We guide pooling using magnitude, an isometry-invariant
diversity measure, which permits us to control the fidelity of the pooling process.
Further, we use the spread of a metric space as a faster and more stable alternative
ensuring computational efficiency. Empirical results demonstrate that our methods
(i) achieve top performance compared to alternative pooling layers across a range
of diverse graph classification tasks, (ii) preserve key spectral properties of the
input graphs, and (iii) retain high accuracy across varying pooling ratios.

1

Introduction

Graph pooling layers are important components of GNN architectures. They are implemented
alongside convolutional layers to reduce the size of graph representations during training. Pooling
thus enables GNNs to scale to large and complex real-world graphs while regularising the resulting
representation. However, the choice of pooling method strongly influences downstream-applications
and task-performance. In fact, the question of which graph properties to preserve during pooling,
just as the question on the nature and quality of graph datasets in graph learning [15], remains an
ongoing debate [41, 44, 55]. It is thus crucial to design expressive, efficient, and interpretable pooling
layers that are capable of reliably encoding task-relevant information while reducing the size of input
graphs. Most graph pooling literature takes a node-centric view [41]. However, this focus on nodecentric rather than edge-centric pooling often leads to the loss of important structural information.
Common pooling methods either drop nodes or optimise for a node clustering while treating graph
connectivities as a secondary objective. As visualised in Figure 1 and further explored in our work,
this frequently leads to counter-intuitive pooling decisions that fail to retain key geometric structures
in a graph. Addressing these concerns, topological and geometric descriptors of graphs are uniquely
poised to interoperate structural information into graph pooling.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

These authors jointly supervised this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

