Making Classic GNNs Strong Baselines Across Varying
Homophily: A Smoothness–Generalization Perspective

Ming Gu⋆♠ , Zhuonan Zheng⋆♠ , Sheng Zhou⋆‡ , Meihan Liu† ,
Jiawei Chen♠ , Qiaoyu Tan§ , Liangcheng Li⋆♠∗, Jiajun Bu⋆♠
⋆
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems, Zhejiang University
♠
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
‡
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
†
China University of Mining and Technology
§
Department of Computer Science, New York University Shanghai

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved great success but are often considered to be challenged by varying levels of homophily in graphs. Recent empirical
studies have surprisingly shown that homophilic GNNs can perform well across
datasets of different homophily levels with proper hyperparameter tuning, but the
underlying theory and effective architectures remain unclear. To advance GNN universality across varying homophily, we theoretically revisit GNN message passing
and uncover a novel smoothness-generalization dilemma, where increasing hops
inevitably enhances smoothness at the cost of generalization. This dilemma hinders
learning in high-order homophilic neighborhoods and all heterophilic ones, where
generalization is critical due to complex neighborhood class distributions that are
sensitive to shifts induced by noise or sparsity. To address this, we introduce
the Inceptive Graph Neural Network (IGNN) built on three simple yet effective
design principles, which alleviate the dilemma by enabling distinct hop-wise generalization alongside improved overall generalization with adaptive smoothness.
Benchmarking against 30 baselines demonstrates IGNN’s superiority and reveals
notable universality in certain homophilic GNN variants. Our code and datasets
are available at https://github.com/galogm/IGNN.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [1–4] have attracted substantial attention, achieving notable success
across various domains [5–8]. Broadly, GNNs are classified into homophilic GNNs (homoGNNs) [9]
and heterophilic GNNs (heteroGNNs) [10]. HomoGNNs operate under the homophily assumption,
which posits that adjacent nodes tend to share similar labels. In contrast, heteroGNNs are tailored for
heterophilic graphs, where connected nodes are more likely to have differing labels.
However, real-world graphs do not exhibit a clear dichotomy between homophily and heterophily,
but instead present a continuous spectrum. As illustrated in Figure 1a and 1b, varying homophily
appears within a single graph across hops and nodes. Therefore, it is essential to develop GNNs that
generalize to different levels of homophily, rather than making separate designs for homophily and
heterophily as in existing methods. Recent studies [11] have empirically shown that homoGNNs, after
hyperparameter tuning with residual connections and dropout, can outperform advanced methods
designed for heterophily. This suggests that homoGNNs possess an inherent potential to adapt to
∗

Corresponding Author: liangcheng_li@zju.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

