Audits Under Resource, Data, and Access Constraints:
Scaling Laws For Less Discriminatory Alternatives

Sarah H. Cen
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94304
shcen@stanford.edu

Salil Goyal
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94304
salilg@stanford.edu

Ananya Karthik
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94304
ananya23@stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94304
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Zaynah Javed
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94304
zjaved@stanford.edu
Daniel E. Ho
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94304
deho@stanford.edu

Abstract
AI audits play a critical role in AI accountability and safety. They are particularly
salient in anti-discrimination law. Several areas of anti-discrimination law implicate
what is known as the “less discriminatory alternative” (LDA) requirement, under
which a protocol is defensible if no less discriminatory model that achieves
comparable performance can be found with reasonable effort. Notably, the burden
of proving an LDA exists typically falls on the claimant (the party alleging
discrimination). This creates a significant hurdle in AI cases, as the claimant would
seemingly need to train a less discriminatory yet high-performing model, a task
requiring resources and expertise beyond most litigants. Moreover, developers
often restrict access to their models and data as trade secrets, hindering replicability.
In this work, we present a procedure enabling claimants to determine if an LDA
exists, even when they have limited compute, data, and model access. To illustrate
our approach, we focus on the setting in which fairness is given by demographic
parity and performance by binary cross-entropy loss. As our main result, we
provide a novel closed-form upper bound for the loss-fairness Pareto frontier (PF).
This expression is powerful because the claimant can use it to fit the PF in the
“low-resource regime,” then extrapolate the PF that applies to the (large) model
being contested, all without training a single large model. The expression thus
serves as a scaling law for loss-fairness PFs. To use this scaling law, the claimant
would require a small subsample of the train/test data. Then, for a given compute
budget, the claimant can fit the context-specific PF by training as few as 7 (small)
models. We stress test our main result in simulations, finding that our scaling law
applies even when the exact conditions of our theory do not hold.

1

Introduction

Complex AI systems are increasingly used in decision-making contexts that are subject to legal
oversight. For example, HireVue has used AI to score video interviews [30]; various US agencies
apply facial recognition for fraud detection [3, 4, 5]; and insurance providers use elaborate behavioral
data to price policies [45, 46]. In the absence of methods that test whether such systems comply
with the law, decisions that rely heavily on AI are permitted to escape scrutiny. Accordingly, there is
growing need for AI audits. This need is particularly pronounced as models increase in complexity
and scale. In particular, auditing becomes more challenging as models process high-dimensional,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

