On Learning Verifiers and Implications to
Chain-of-Thought Reasoning

Maria-Florina Balcan
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Avrim Blum
TTIC
avrim@ttic.edu

Zhiyuan Li
TTIC
zhiyuanli@ttic.edu

Dravyansh Sharma
TTIC, Northwestern University
dravy@ttic.edu

Abstract
Chain-of-Thought reasoning has emerged as a powerful approach for solving
complex mathematical and logical problems. However, it can often veer off track
through incorrect or unsubstantiated inferences. Formal mathematical reasoning,
which can be checked with a formal verifier, is one approach to addressing this
issue. However, currently LLMs are simply not good enough to solve complex
problems in a formal way, and even just formalizing an informal problem statement
can be challenging. Motivated by this fact, in this work we consider the problem
of learning reliable verifiers for sequential reasoning, including natural language
Chain-of-Thought reasoning. That is, given a problem statement and step-bystep solution in natural language, the aim of the verifier is to output [Yes] if the
reasoning steps in the solution are all valid, and [No] otherwise. In this work we
give a formal PAC-learning framework for studying this problem. We propose
and analyze several natural verification goals, at different levels of strength, in this
framework. We provide sample complexity upper-bounds for learning verifiers
satisfying these goals, as well as lower-bound and impossibility results for learning
other natural verification objectives without additional assumptions.

1

Introduction

With increasing use of LLMs to solve complex mathematical and logical problems through chain-ofthought reasoning, it has become crucial to develop verifiers that can check the correctness of these
generated solutions. In particular, even with recent advances, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning is
still widely believed to suffer from catastrophic failures resulting from accumulated errors except for
highly limited scenarios [LFL+ 23, SVK24]. It can be particularly challenging to detect subtle errors
in long sequences of reasoning, especially when presented via informal natural expressions. This
motivates the need for designing effective verifiers for CoT reasoning in natural language.
To study this problem, in this work we introduce a PAC-learning framework for learning verifiers for
sequential reasoners. Our learning algorithms are given a sample of some problem statements and
labeled reasoning sequences for the problems, and are required to check the correctness of unseen
reasoning sequences for unseen problems. We consider several related but different verification goals
and analyze the sample complexity for learning verifiers satisfying these criteria, giving both upper
bounds and impossibility results.
For example, the simplest (weakest) verification goal we consider is that given a random reasoning
trace from some underlying distribution D, the verifier should output whether the reasoning is correct
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

