End-to-End Low-Light Enhancement for Object
Detection with Learned Metadata from RAWs
Xuelin Shen1∗ Haifeng Jiao1,3∗ Yitong Wang3

Yulin He 1 Wenhan Yang2 †

1

Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
shenxuelin@gml.ac.cn, jiaohaifeng@gml.ac.cn, wangyitong@gml.ac.cn
heyulin@gml.ac.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Although RAW images offer advantages over sRGB by avoiding ISP-induced distortion and preserving more information in low-light conditions, their widespread
use is limited due to high storage costs, transmission burdens, and the need for
significant architectural changes for downstream tasks. To address the issues, this
paper explores a new raw-based machine vision paradigm, termed Compact RAW
Metadata-guided Image Refinement (CRM-IR). In particular, we propose a Machine Vision-oriented Image Refinement (MV-IR) module that refines sRGB images
to better suit machine vision preferences, guided by learned raw metadata. In detail,
we propose a Cross-Modal Contextual Entropy (CMCE) network for raw metadata
extraction and compression. It builds upon the latent representation and entropy
modeling framework of learned image compression methods, and uniquely exploits
the contextual correspondence between raw images and their sRGB counterparts
to achieve more efficient and compact metadata representation. Additionally, we
integrate priors derived from the ISP pipeline to simplify the refinement process,
enabling a more efficient design. Such a design allows the CRM-IR to focus on
extracting the most essential metadata from raw images to support downstream
machine vision tasks, while remaining plug-and-play and fully compatible with
existing imaging pipelines, without any changes to model architectures or ISP modules. We implement our CRM-IR scheme on various object detection networks, and
extensive experiments under low-light conditions demonstrate that it can significantly improve performance with an additional bitrate cost of less than 10−3 bits per
pixel. Code is available at https://github.com/haifengjiao001/CRM-IR.

1

Introduction

Raw images refer to unprocessed and uncompressed data captured directly from a camera’s image
sensor. Their retained sensor readings preserve linear scene radiance and full bit-depth precision. Raw
images typically undergo in-camera Image Signal Processing (ISP) steps, including demosaicing,
white balancing, gamma correction and compression, to remove perceptual redundancy and enhance
visual appeal, ultimately producing the commonly seen sRGB images. However, as these ISP pipelines
are primarily designed to satisfy human perceptual preferences, they often perform suboptimally in
machine vision practice. Especially in low-light conditions, ISP pipelines apply nonlinear radiance
amplification to enhance details and textures, inevitably amplifying the inherent noise introduced
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Correspondence to: Wenhan Yang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

