Scaling Epidemic Inference on Contact Networks:
Theory and Algorithms

Guanghui Min Yinhan He Chen Chen
University of Virginia
{jjm8vr, nee7ne, zrh6du}@virginia.edu

Abstract
Computational epidemiology is crucial in understanding and controlling infectious
diseases, as highlighted by large-scale outbreaks such as COVID-19. Given the inherent uncertainty and variability of disease spread, Monte Carlo (MC) simulations
are widely used to predict infection peaks, estimate reproduction numbers, and
evaluate the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs). While effective,
MC-based methods require numerous runs to achieve statistically reliable estimates
and variance, which suffer from high computational costs. In this work, we present
a unified theoretical framework for analyzing disease spread dynamics on both
directed and undirected contact networks, and propose an algorithm, RAPID, that
significantly improves computational efficiency. Our contributions are threefold.
First, we derive an asymptotic variance lower bound for MC estimates and identify
the key factors influencing estimation variance. Second, we provide a theoretical
analysis of the probabilistic disease spread process using linear approximations and
derive the convergence conditions under non-reinfection epidemic models. Finally,
we conduct extensive experiments on six real-world datasets, demonstrating our
method’s effectiveness and robustness in estimating the nodes’ final state distribution. Specifically, our proposed method consistently produces accurate estimates
aligned with results from a large number of MC simulations, while maintaining a
runtime comparable to a single MC simulation. Our code and datasets are available
at https://github.com/GuanghuiMin/RAPID.

1

Introduction

In recent years, outbreaks of infectious diseases such as COVID-19 have highlighted the critical
need for accurate modeling and prediction of disease dynamics [15, 8, 5, 49]. Existing epidemic
studies tend to model the disease spread process using differential equations at the population
level, and often assume homogeneous populations with random mixing of initial infections within
contact networks [27]. Consequently, such work can only provide a rough estimate of the overall
dynamics of epidemics, while missing important details about individual- or local-level infection
dynamics in the networks. In practice, individual-level infection dynamic inference has important
practical implications. For example, individuals with a high probability of transmitting the disease
can be prioritized for vaccination, thus reducing the overall infected population [22]. In addition,
understanding the results of local infections can provide a more accurate projection of the global
trajectory of the epidemic. Although some recent studies have enabled advances in understanding
the interplay of network structure and epidemic spread process, they can only provide an insight
about the epidemic at a high level by determining whether an outbreak will escalate into a complete
pandemic [50, 16, 43], while neglecting the impact of distribution of initial cases and offering limited
information on the infection states and expected size of the infected population.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

