Confounding Robust Deep Reinforcement Learning:
A Causal Approach

Mingxuan Li1∗ Junzhe Zhang2∗ Elias Bareinboim1
1
Columbia University, 2 Syracuse University
1
{ml,eb}@cs.columbia.edu, 2 jzhan403@syr.edu

Abstract
A key task in Artificial Intelligence is learning effective policies for controlling
agents in unknown environments to optimize performance measures. Off-policy
learning methods, like Q-learning, allow learners to make optimal decisions based
on past experiences. This paper studies off-policy learning from biased data in
complex and high-dimensional domains where unobserved confounding cannot
be ruled out a priori. Building on the well-celebrated Deep Q-Network (DQN),
we propose a novel deep reinforcement learning algorithm robust to confounding
biases in observed data. Specifically, our algorithm attempts to find a safe policy
for the worst-case environment compatible with the observations. We apply our
method to twelve confounded Atari games, and find that it consistently dominates
the standard DQN in all games where the observed input to the behavioral and
target policies mismatch and unobserved confounders exist.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, reinforcement learning (RL) has gained significant popularity for solving
complex sequential decision-making problems, primarily due to its integration with deep learning
techniques [24, 52, 83]. This approach, known as deep reinforcement learning (deep RL), is particularly effective in high-dimensional state spaces [40, 61, 70, 84, 85, 88]. Deep RL addresses the
challenges faced by earlier RL methods by extracting various abstractions from data in complex
domains with minimal prior knowledge. For example, a classic algorithm known as Deep Q-Network
(DQN) algorithm can efficiently learn from visual inputs containing thousands of pixels [61], enabling
problem-solving capabilities comparable to humans in certain high-dimensional environments, such
as Atari games for the first time. These achievements were followed by notable advancements
in deep RL, including mastering the game of Go [89], defeating world-class professionals at the
game of poker [64]. Deep RL has also shown potentials in various real-world applications like
robotics [70, 88], autonomous driving [49] and protein design [40]. These advancements eventually
culminated in Sutton and Barto receiving the Turing Award in 2025 [22].
This paper attempts to leverage the capabilities and insights of DQN, while identifying an important
assumption embedded in this algorithm and its variants that does not necessarily hold in the real world.
Particularly, we notice that it is often implicitly assumed through the (PO)MDPs [93] framework
or explicitly enforced during the data-collection that no unmeasured confounder (NUC, [11, 78])
affects the observed action and the subsequent outcomes. When the NUC does not hold, the effect of
the target policy is generally not identifiable, i.e., the model assumptions are insufficient to uniquely
determine the value function from the offline data [72, 111]. On the other hand, partial identification
is a line of methodologies that enable the derivation of informative bounds on target effects from
confounded observations in non-identifiable settings [59]. It has been studied under the rubrics
of causal inference [7, 115], econometrics [18, 35, 62, 75, 79, 92, 99], and dynamical systems
[6, 15, 20, 63, 69]. More recently, researchers have been using partial identification methods to obtain
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

