Fairness-aware Anomaly Detection via Fair Projection

1

Feng Xiao1 Xiaoying Tang1 Jicong Fan2∗
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen),
Longgang, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R. China
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen),
Longgang, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R. China

Abstract
Unsupervised anomaly detection is a critical task in many high-social-impact
applications such as finance, healthcare, social media, and cybersecurity, where
demographics involving age, gender, race, disease, etc. are used frequently. In
these scenarios, possible bias from anomaly detection systems can lead to unfair
treatment for different groups and even exacerbate social bias. In this work, first,
we thoroughly analyze the feasibility and necessary assumptions for ensuring group
fairness in unsupervised anomaly detection. Second, we propose a novel fairnessaware anomaly detection method FairAD. From the normal training data, FairAD
learns a projection to map data of different demographic groups to a common
target distribution that is simple and compact, and hence provides a reliable base
to estimate the density of the data. The density can be directly used to identify
anomalies while the common target distribution ensures fairness between different
groups. Furthermore, we propose a threshold-free fairness metric that provides
a global view for model’s fairness, eliminating dependence on manual threshold
selection. Experiments on real-world benchmarks demonstrate that our method
achieves an improved trade-off between detection accuracy and fairness under both
balanced and skewed data across different groups.

1

Introduction

As machine learning techniques are increasingly being applied in high-social-impact fields such as
finance and justice, the fairness of machine learning systems receives a surge of attention. There are
growing studies [Larson et al., 2016, Hendricks et al., 2018, Dastin, 2022] that exhibit discrimination
in real-world machine learning systems. For instance, analysis [Larson et al., 2016] on the COMPAS
(Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions), a recidivism risk prediction
system, shows a strong correlation between recidivism prediction and race, where African-American
individuals have a much higher risk of recidivism than Caucasians. It is vital to eliminate or mitigate
the possible disparity of machine learning algorithms between different demographic groups to ensure
social fairness.
In response, many researchers [Dwork et al., 2012a, Zemel et al., 2013, Tzeng et al., 2014, Hardt
et al., 2016, Zafar et al., 2017a, Agarwal et al., 2019, Oh et al., 2022, Jovanović et al., 2023] have
begun to propose fairness-aware machine learning algorithms, where one of the most common
paradigms is to learn a fair representation depending on a formal fairness principle [Hajian et al.,
2016, Hardt et al., 2016, Zafar et al., 2017b, Gajane, 2017]. However, previous works on algorithm
fairness often focused on supervised machine learning tasks [Hardt et al., 2016, Agarwal et al., 2018,
2019] and the study on the fairness issue in unsupervised anomaly detection [Pang et al., 2021] is
scarce. Anomaly detection (AD), aiming at identifying anomalous samples in data, plays a crucial
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

