Preserving Task-Relevant Information Under Linear
Concept Removal

Floris Holstege ∗†‡ Shauli Ravfogel∗⋄ Bram Wouters†
University of Amsterdam, Department of Quantitative Economics†
New York University, Center for Data Science ⋄
Tinbergen Institute ‡

Abstract
Modern neural networks often encode unwanted concepts alongside task-relevant
information, leading to fairness and interpretability concerns. Existing post-hoc
approaches can remove undesired concepts but often degrade useful signals. We
introduce SPLINCE—Simultaneous Projection for LINear concept removal and
Covariance prEservation—which eliminates sensitive concepts from representations while exactly preserving their covariance with a target label. SPLINCE
achieves this via an oblique projection that “splices out” the unwanted direction
yet protects important label correlations. Theoretically, it is the unique solution
that removes linear concept predictability and maintains target covariance with
minimal embedding distortion. Empirically, SPLINCE outperforms baselines on
benchmarks such as Bias in Bios and Winobias, removing protected attributes
while minimally damaging main-task information.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs), including Language Models (LMs), have achieved great success
in natural language processing (NLP) by learning rich representations of text, often referred to as
embeddings [Cao, 2024, Wang et al., 2024a]. These embeddings were shown to also encode undesired
information, such as markers of gender, leading to biased predictions [Bolukbasi et al., 2016]. In
response, a variety of concept-removal methods has been developed to remove undesired information
from embeddings. Examples of such methods are iterative nullspace projection (INLP, Ravfogel
et al. [2020]), Linear adversarial concept erasure (RLACE, Ravfogel et al. [2022]), Spectral Attribute
Removal (SAL, Shao et al. [2023]), and Least-squares Concept Erasure (LEACE, Belrose et al.
[2023]). The shared objective of these methods is to make a concept—such as gender—-undetectable
by any linear classifier, while preserving the original embeddings as much as possible.
Previous work has noted that a drawback of post-hoc concept-removal methods is that in addition
to removing a particular concept, they tend to also eliminate other concepts and information from
embeddings [Feder et al., 2021, Belinkov, 2022, Kumar et al., 2022, Guerner et al., 2025, Ravfogel
et al., 2025]. Consider, for instance, a scenario where we wish to remove the effect of gender markers
on a classifier that screens CVs for job applications. Naively applying concept-erasure techniques
to removes gender markers from the input representations may inadvertently harm the model’s
performance on the primary task of profession prediction, since in real-world data, certain professions
are strongly associated with gender. As a result, the erasure may distort relevant information,
undermining both interpretability and utility.
In this paper, we seek to address a key drawback of post-hoc concept-removal methods. Our
contribution is to introduce SPLINCE, a projection that (similar to LEACE or SAL) prevents any
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to f.g.holstege@uva.nl.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

