TrajMamba: An Efficient and Semantic-rich Vehicle
Trajectory Pre-training Model

Yichen Liu1∗, Yan Lin2∗, Shengnan Guo1,3 , Zeyu Zhou1 , Youfang Lin1,4 , Huaiyu Wan1,4†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, China
{liuyichen, guoshn, zeyuzhou, yflin, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn,
lyan@cs.aau.dk

Abstract
Vehicle GPS trajectories record how vehicles move over time, storing valuable
travel semantics, including movement patterns and travel purposes. Learning travel
semantics effectively and efficiently is crucial for real-world applications of trajectory data, which is hindered by two major challenges. First, travel purposes are
tied to the functions of the roads and points-of-interest (POIs) involved in a trip.
Such information is encoded in textual addresses and descriptions and introduces
heavy computational burden to modeling. Second, real-world trajectories often
contain redundant points, which harm both computational efficiency and trajectory
embedding quality. To address these challenges, we propose TrajMamba, a novel
approach for efficient and semantically rich vehicle trajectory learning. TrajMamba
introduces a Traj-Mamba Encoder that captures movement patterns by jointly
modeling both GPS and road perspectives of trajectories, enabling robust representations of continuous travel behaviors. It also incorporates a Travel Purpose-aware
Pre-training procedure to integrate travel purposes into the learned embeddings
without introducing extra overhead to embedding calculation. To reduce redundancy in trajectories, TrajMamba features a Knowledge Distillation Pre-training
scheme to identify key trajectory points through a learnable mask generator and
obtain effective compressed trajectory embeddings. Extensive experiments on two
real-world datasets and three downstream tasks show that TrajMamba outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines in both efficiency and accuracy.

1

Introduction

A vehicle GPS trajectory is a sequence of (location, time) pairs recording the movement of the vehicle
during its trip from one location to another. Recent progress in intelligent traffic systems (ITS)
has highlighted the value of these trajectories in revealing travel semantics, including movement
patterns and travel purposes. These semantic insights support various spatio-temporal data mining
tasks, including trajectory prediction [38, 40, 3, 5], travel time estimation [45, 24, 34], anomaly
detection [26, 15], trajectory similarity measurement [43, 17], and trajectory clustering [44]. With
the increasing availability of vehicle GPS trajectories, a powerful trajectory learning model that can
extract travel semantics with high efficiency becomes more and more essential in building ITS.
For the vehicle trajectory hτ1 , τ2 , . . . , τ5 i in Fig. 1, where each point represents a GPS coordinate at a
specific time and lies on one of four road segments e1 , e2 , e3 , and e4 .Points τ2 and τ3 share the same
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

