Statistical Inference for Gradient Boosting Regression∗

Haimo Fang1 , Kevin Tan2†, Giles Hooker2
1
School of Economics, Fudan University
2
Department of Statistics and Data Science, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Gradient boosting is widely popular due to its flexibility and predictive accuracy.
However, statistical inference and uncertainty quantification for gradient boosting remain challenging and under-explored. We propose a unified framework for
statistical inference in gradient boosting regression. Our framework integrates
dropout or parallel training with a recently proposed regularization procedure
called Boulevard that allows for a central limit theorem (CLT) for boosting. With
these enhancements, we surprisingly find that increasing the dropout rate and the
number of trees grown in parallel at each iteration substantially enhances signal
recovery and overall performance. Our resulting algorithms enjoy similar CLTs,
which we use to construct built-in confidence intervals, prediction intervals, and
rigorous hypothesis tests for assessing variable importance in only O(nd2 ) time
with the Nyström method. Numerical experiments verify the asymptotic normality and demonstrate that our algorithms perform well, do not require early stopping, interpolate between regularized boosting and random forests, and confirm
the validity of their built-in statistical inference procedures.

1

Introduction

Gradient boosting Friedman (2000), particularly through widely used implementations such as XGBoost Chen and Guestrin (2016), LightGBM Ke et al. (2017), and CatBoost Prokhorenkova et al.
(2018), has become one of the most powerful and widely adopted methods for supervised learning,
especially on tabular data. However, this flexibility and predictive accuracy come at a cost. Unlike
their base learners – such as decision trees or linear models – boosting methods are typically far
less interpretable, and uncertainty quantification for their predictions is far from straightforward.
While point estimates may suffice for ad hoc prediction tasks, they overlook randomness inherent in
both the data and the algorithm itself. Uncertainty quantification therefore asks a central question:
if a new dataset were collected and models retrained, how different would the resulting predictions
be? This is a central ingredient in propagating uncertainty through forecast models, prioritizing data
collection and a host of other downstream tasks.
In this light, various methods have been proposed for uncertainty quantification in boosting. These
include Langevin boosting Tan et al. (2023); Ustimenko and Prokhorenkova (2022); Malinin et al.
(2021), k-nearest neighbors-based techniques Brophy and Lowd (2022), Gaussian graphical models
Chen and Wang (2023), quantile regression approaches Yin et al. (2023), and probabilistic prediction
via natural gradients Duan et al. (2020). However, most of these methods lack formal theoretical
guarantees, with many relying primarily on heuristic justifications.
A principled route to uncertainty quantification is through statistical inference, e.g. via prediction
intervals. However, this remains limited. In the Bayesian setting, Ustimenko et al. (2023) show
randomized boosting converges to a kernel ridge regression and approximate Gaussian process posterior. Yet, they re-run the entire boosting procedure to generate even a single posterior sample.
Malinin et al. (2021) suggest a virtual ensemble method, but do not provide formal guarantees.
∗

Code available at https://github.com/Fangbaixiangmomo/BRATs.git
This work was done prior to employment at Amazon.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
†

