Graph-based Symbolic Regression with Invariance
and Constraint Encoding

Ziyu Xiang1 Kenna Ashen1 Xiaofeng Qian1 Xiaoning Qian1,2
1
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77840, USA
2
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA
{zxiang,kashen13,feng,xqian}@tamu.edu; xqian1@bnl.gov

Abstract
Symbolic regression (SR) seeks interpretable analytical expressions that uncover
the governing relationships within data, providing mechanistic insight beyond
‘black-box’ models. However, existing SR methods often suffer from two key
limitations: (1) redundant representations that fail to capture mathematical equivalences and higher-order operand relations, breaking permutation invariance and
hindering efficient learning; and (2) sparse rewards caused by incomplete incorporation of constraints that can only be evaluated on full expressions, such as
constant fitting or physical-law verification. To address these challenges, we propose a unified framework, Graph-based Symbolic Regression (GSR), which
compresses the search space through the permutation-invariant representations,
expression graphs (EGs), that intrinsically encode expression equivalences via a
term-rewriting system (TRS) and a directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure. GSR
mitigates reward sparsity by employing a hybrid neural-guided Monte Carlo tree
search (hnMCTS) on EGs, where constraint-informed neural guidance enables the
direct incorporation of expression-level constraint priors, and an adaptive ϵ-UCB
policy balances exploration and exploitation. Theoretical analyses establish the
uniqueness of our proposed EG representation and the convergence of the hnMCTS
algorithm. Experiments on synthetic and real-world scientific datasets demonstrate
the efficiency and accuracy of GSR in discovering underlying expressions and
adhering to physical laws, offering practical solutions for scientific discovery.

1

Introduction

Symbolic regression (SR) [1, 2] is an approach to unveil the inherent dependencies governing the system under study in a symbolic form. SR explores the space of closed-form mathematical expressions
to find the most ideal analytical expressions that capture the underlying variable relationships from
observed data. Compared to black-box models (e.g., neural networks) that lack transparency or direct
mechanistic understanding, SR strikes a balance between prediction accuracy and interpretability,
highlighting its potential in advancing AI for scientific discovery [3].
However, solving SR problems is inherently NP-hard [4], due to the combinatorial nature of possible
mathematical expressions [5]. To improve search efficiency, recent SR methods have leveraged
modern supervised deep learning (DL) and reinforcement learning (RL) techniques [1, 6, 7, 8].
Despite these advancements, little attention has been given to capturing the inherent invariances of
expressions and effectively incorporating constraints in SR, leading to suboptimal learning strategies.
Prevailing works in SR [9, 8, 10] adopt semantic or expression tree (ET) representations, which fail to
account for the equivalence of mathematically identical expressions, breaking permutation invariance
with redundant states that hinder fast convergence. Additionally, the limited structural information
in ET may not fully leverage the effectiveness of DL-based encoding, limiting its expressive power.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

