On the Emergence of Linear Analogies in Word
Embeddings

Daniel J. Korchinski∗
Department of Physics
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Lausanne, VD Switzerland
daniel.korchinski@epfl.ch
Yasaman Bahri
Google DeepMind
Mountain View, CA, USA
yasamanbahri@gmail.com

Dhruva Karkada
Department of Physics
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
dkarkada@berkeley.edu

Matthieu Wyart
Johns Hopkins & EPFL
Baltimore, MD, USA & Lausanne, VD Switzerland
mwyart1@jh.edu

Abstract
Models such as Word2Vec and GloVe construct word embeddings based on the
co-occurrence probability P (i, j) of words i and j in text corpora. The resulting
vectors Wi not only group semantically similar words but also exhibit a striking linear analogy structure—for example, Wking − Wman + Wwoman ≈ Wqueen —
whose theoretical origin remains unclear. Previous observations indicate that
this analogy structure: (i) already emerges in the top eigenvectors of the matrix
M (i, j) = P (i, j)/P (i)P (j), (ii) strengthens and then saturates as more eigenvectors of M (i, j), which controls the dimension of the embeddings, are included,
(iii) is enhanced when using log M (i, j) rather than M (i, j), and (iv) persists
even when all word pairs involved in a specific analogy relation (e.g., king–queen,
man–woman) are removed from the corpus. To explain these phenomena, we
introduce a theoretical generative model in which words are defined by binary semantic attributes, and co-occurrence probabilities are derived from attribute-based
interactions. This model analytically reproduces the emergence of linear analogy
structure and naturally accounts for properties (i)–(iv). It can be viewed as giving
fine-grained resolution into the role of each additional embedding dimension. It
is robust to various forms of noise and agrees well with co-occurrence statistics
measured on Wikipedia and the analogy benchmark introduced by Mikolov et al.

1. Introduction and Motivation
Vector representations of words have become a cornerstone of modern natural language processing.
Models such as Word2Vec [1, 2] and GloVe [3] map any word i to some continuous vector space
Wi ∈ RK based on their co-occurrence statistics in large text corpora. These embeddings capture
rich semantic relationships, including a remarkable form of analogical structure: for instance, the
arithmetic expression
Wking − Wman + Wwoman ≈ Wqueen
(1)
often holds in embedding space [4, 2]. While widely observed, understanding the origin of this geometric regularity remains a challenge. Several works [5, 3] indicate that this property is already contained
in the co-occurrence matrix M (i, j) = P (i, j)/P (i)P (j), or in P M I(i, j) ≡ log(M (i, j)), called
∗

https://djkorchinski.github.io/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

