Efficient Utility-Preserving Machine Unlearning with
Implicit Gradient Surgery

Shiji Zhou1,2∗,† Tianbai Yu3 , Zhi Zhang4 , Heng Chang5 , Xiao Zhou5 , Dong Wu6 , Han Zhao3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing, Beihang University
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 4 University of Amsterdam
5
Tsinghua University 6 YanTron Technology Co.Ltd

Abstract
Machine unlearning (MU) aims to efficiently remove sensitive or harmful memory
from a pre-trained model. The key challenge is to balance the potential tradeoff
between unlearning efficacy and utility preservation, which involves forgetting
undesirable information as defined while maintaining the model’s original performance. One potential way to tackle this problem is to use multi-objective optimization to jointly optimize both the unlearning and utility preservation objectives.
However, existing multi-objective methods only guarantee finding a Pareto-optimal
solution without fine-grained control, which causes under-optimization of the unlearning objective. To this end, we first model MU as a constrained optimization
problem, that is, optimizing the unlearning objective under the constraint of a
bounded increase for utility loss. We then show that solving this optimization
problem is equivalent to unilateral gradient surgery on the unlearning objective.
To resolve the additional computational cost brought by gradient surgery, we propose an implicit gradient surgery method, which approximates the solution to the
aforementioned constrained optimization problem via only one backpropagation,
thereby achieving efficient utility-preserving MU. Theoretically, we provide a
tight convergence analysis of the algorithm. Empirically, our extensive experiments show that the proposed algorithm achieves better tradeoff results than
existing baselines. Codes are available at https://github.com/anseryuer/
EUPMU-Efficient-Utility-Preserving-Machine-Unlearning.

1

Introduction

The growing capacity of large generative models [39, 5, 74] has inevitably led to increasing concerns
about their potential security risks. In particular, massive pre-training data from large models may
contain privacy, copyright, and illegal information about individual users, which can be inadvertently
memorized through model parameters through training, posing a risk of content leakage under model
inversion attacks [21, 71]. Moreover, the high training costs of large models make addressing these
issues in pre-trained models particularly challenging [52], since naive retraining is computationally
infeasible. Consequently, both industry and academia are actively seeking efficient methods to enable
the erasing of sensitive information at a small cost.
Machine unlearning (MU) [4], which aims to enable models to efficiently remove memory of
sensitive data, is a potential approach to meet the above goals. The current landscape of MU
∗

Part of the work was done while Shiji Zhou was at Tsinghua University
Corresponding to Shiji Zhou: zhoushiji25@buaa.edu.cn
Shiji Zhou and Tianbai Yu have equal contributions
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

