AlphaDecay: Module-wise Weight Decay for
Heavy-Tailed Balancing in LLMs

Di He1,2,3 , Songjun Tu2,3 , Ajay Jaiswal4 , Li Shen5 , Ganzhao Yuan6 ,
Shiwei Liu7 , Lu Yin8 †
1
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Texas at Austin 5 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
6
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
7
University of Oxford 8 University of Surrey
l.yin@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Weight decay is a standard regularization technique for training large language models (LLMs). While it is common to assign a uniform decay rate to every layer, this
approach overlooks the structural diversity of LLMs and the varying spectral properties across modules. In this paper, we introduce AlphaDecay, a simple yet effective
method that adaptively assigns different weight decay strengths to each module of
an LLM. Our approach is guided by Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HT-SR)
theory, which analyzes the empirical spectral density (ESD) of weight correlation
matrices to quantify “heavy-tailedness.” Modules exhibiting more pronounced
heavy-tailed ESDs, reflecting stronger feature learning, are assigned weaker decay,
while modules with lighter-tailed spectra receive stronger decay. Our method leverages tailored weight decay assignments to balance the module-wise differences
in spectral properties, leading to improved performance. Extensive pre-training
tasks with various model sizes from 60M to 1B demonstrate that AlphaDecay
achieves better perplexity and generalization than conventional uniform decay and
other adaptive decay baselines. The code is available at https://github.com/heducas/AlphaDecay.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as a core technology in artificial intelligence, with
extensive applications in chatbots, content generation, code synthesis, and other domains, significantly
enhancing the efficiency and user experience of human-computer interaction [5; 28; 23; 11]. However,
the formidable capabilities of these models rely on massive pre-training datasets and substantial
computational resources, rendering the training process fraught with challenges [44; 2]. Persistent
research challenges include, but are not limited to, the efficient optimization of ultra-large-scale
parameters and the trade-off between training costs and model performance.
Weight decay, one of the most widely used regularization techniques for training well-generalized
deep neural networks [25; 42; 13], critically influences the convergence and performance of state-ofthe-art machine learning algorithms when properly configured. Extensive prior studies [21; 32; 35]
have demonstrated its pivotal role in enhancing model generalization from diverse theoretical and
empirical perspectives. Recent work [20; 8] further highlights its importance in improving optimizer
stability and efficacy during the training of LLMs.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

