HubGT: Fast Graph Transformer
with Decoupled Hierarchy Labeling

Ningyi Liao∗
Nanyang Technological University
liao0090@e.ntu.edu.sg

Zihao Yu∗
Nanyang Technological University
zihao.yu@ntu.edu.sg

Siqiang Luo†
Nanyang Technological University
siqiang.luo@ntu.edu.sg

Gao Cong
Nanyang Technological University
gaocong@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Graph Transformer (GT) leveraging the powerful Transformer architecture to learn
graph-structured data. However, effectively representing graph information while
ensuring efficiency remains challenging, as our analysis reveals that graph-scale
operations still constitute the computational bottleneck in current GT designs and
limit their applications to large graphs. In this work, we tackle the GT scalability
issue by proposing HubGT, which is boosted by decoupled graph computation and
hierarchical graph representations. HubGT represents graph information with a
novel hub labeling scheme, which encompasses enriched neighborhoods for node
token generation, and fast computation for distance-based positional encoding.
Notably, the precomputation and training of HubGT achieve complexities linear
to the number of graph edges and nodes, respectively, while the training stage
completely removes graph-related computations, leading to favorable mini-batch
capability and GPU utilization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HubGT
offers efficient computation and mini-batch capability over existing GT designs on
large-scale datasets while achieving top-tier effectiveness. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/gdmnl/HubGT.

1

Introduction

Graph Transformers (GTs) has recently emerged as a family of neural networks that introduce the
advantageous Transformer architecture [1] to the realm of graph data learning. These models have
garnered increasing research interest for tasks such as knowledge graph retrieval, molecule analysis,
and Large Language Model alignment [2, 3, 4, 5]. Despite their achievements, vanilla GTs are highly
limited to specific tasks because of the full-graph attention mechanism, which has computational
complexity at least quadratic to the graph size, rendering it impractical for a single graph with more
than thousands of nodes. Enhancing the scalability of GTs is thus a prominent task for enabling these
powerful models to handle a wider range of graph data at large scales.
To apply Graph Transformers to large graph data, existing studies explore various strategies to divide
and represent the graph structure into smaller batches and employ mini-batch training. One approach is
to simplify the Transformer architecture with a specialized attention module based on graph topology
[6, 7, 8], which learns on existing edge connections instead of all-pair interactions. Alternatively,
sophisticated representations are developed for inputting graph information to GT models as node
embeddings and positional encodings. These works feature graph processing techniques such
as adjacency-based spatial propagation [9, 10], polynomial spectral transformation [11, 12], and
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

