Increasing the Utility of Synthetic Images
through Chamfer Guidance

Nicola Dall’Asen1,2∗ Xiaofeng Zhang3,4,5†
Jakob Verbeek4
1

Reyhane Askari-Hemmat4†

Adriana Romero-Soriano3,4,6,7

Melissa Hall4

Michal Drozdzal4

University of Trento 2 University of Pisa 3 Mila - Québec AI Institute 4 FAIR at Meta
5
Université de Montréal 6 McGill University 7 Canada CIFAR AI chair

Abstract
Conditional image generative models hold considerable promise to produce infinite
amounts of synthetic training data. Yet, recent progress in generation quality has
come at the expense of generation diversity, limiting the utility of these models
as a source of synthetic training data. Although guidance-based approaches have
been introduced to improve the utility of generated data by focusing on quality
or diversity, the (implicit or explicit) utility functions oftentimes disregard the
potential distribution shift between synthetic and real data. In this work, we
introduce Chamfer Guidance: a training-free guidance approach which leverages
a handful of real exemplar images to characterize the quality and diversity of
synthetic data. We show that by leveraging the proposed Chamfer Guidance, we
can boost the diversity of the generations w.r.t. a dataset of real images while
maintaining or improving the generation quality on ImageNet-1k and standard
geo-diversity benchmarks. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art few-shot
performance with as little as 2 exemplar real images, obtaining 96.4% in terms of
precision, and 86.4% in terms of distributional coverage, which increase to 97.5%
and 92.7%, respectively, when using 32 real images. We showcase the benefits
of the Chamfer Guidance generation by training downstream image classifiers on
synthetic data, achieving accuracy boost of up to 15% for in-distribution over the
baselines, and up to 16% in out-of-distribution. Furthermore, our approach does
not require using the unconditional model, and thus obtains a 31% reduction in
FLOPs w.r.t. classifier-free-guidance-based approaches at sampling time.

1

Introduction

In the last few years, conditional image generative models [31, 47, 55] have demonstrated extraordinary capabilities, producing highly realistic images from both textual descriptions and class labels.
These models have rapidly evolved from experimental research tools to widely accessible applications,
enabling creative expression for users across various domains. With this acceleration, researchers have
also started exploring the use-cases of conditional image generative models as synthetic training data
for downstream machine learning models [6]. However, recent research has revealed that as models
grow in size and capability, they tend to produce images of higher quality, aligned with human preference, but with diminished diversity, hindering their utility as synthetic training data generators [5].
Learning-based approaches and guidance-based sampling techniques [4, 25, 26] have been introduced in the literature to mitigate the shortcomings of vanilla synthetic data. On the one hand,
∗

Work done during internship at FAIR, Meta. Currently at Fondazione Bruno Kessler. † equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

