ALINE: Joint Amortization for Bayesian Inference
and Active Data Acquisition

Xinyi Wen1,2,3 Ayush Bharti2 Samuel Kaski∗1,2,4 Luigi Acerbi∗3
1
ELLIS Institute Finland
2
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK
{daolang.huang, xinyi.wen, ayush.bharti, samuel.kaski}@aalto.fi
luigi.acerbi@helsinki.fi

Daolang Huang1,2

Abstract
Many critical applications, from autonomous scientific discovery to personalized
medicine, demand systems that can both strategically acquire the most informative data and instantaneously perform inference based upon it. While amortized
methods for Bayesian inference and experimental design offer part of the solution,
neither approach is optimal in the most general and challenging task, where new
data needs to be collected for instant inference. To tackle this issue, we introduce the Amortized Active Learning and Inference Engine (A LINE), a unified
framework for amortized Bayesian inference and active data acquisition. A LINE
leverages a transformer architecture trained via reinforcement learning with a
reward based on self-estimated information gain provided by its own integrated
inference component. This allows it to strategically query informative data points
while simultaneously refining its predictions. Moreover, A LINE can selectively
direct its querying strategy towards specific subsets of model parameters or designated predictive tasks, optimizing for posterior estimation, data prediction, or
a mixture thereof. Empirical results on regression-based active learning, classical Bayesian experimental design benchmarks, and a psychometric model with
selectively targeted parameters demonstrate that A LINE delivers both instant and
accurate inference along with efficient selection of informative points.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference [28] and Bayesian experimental design [61] offer principled mathematical means
for reasoning under uncertainty and for strategically gathering data, respectively. While both are
foundational, they introduce notorious computational challenges. For example, in scenarios with
continuous data streams, repeatedly applying gold-standard inference methods such as Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) [13] to update posterior distributions can be computationally demanding,
leading to various approximate sequential inference techniques [10, 18], yet challenges in achieving
both speed and accuracy persist. Similarly, in Bayesian experimental design (BED) or Bayesian
active learning (BAL), the iterative estimation and optimization of design objectives can become
costly, especially in sequential learning tasks requiring rapid design decisions [21, 30, 55], such as in
psychophysical experiments where the goal is to quickly infer the subject’s perceptual or cognitive
parameters [70, 57]. Moreover, a common approach in BED involves greedily optimizing for single∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

