Activity Pruning for Efficient Spiking Neural Networks

Tong Bu
Institution for Artificial Intelligence
School of Computer Science
Peking University
putong30@pku.edu.cn

Xinyu Shi
Institution for Artificial Intelligence
School of Computer Science
Peking University
xyshi@pku.edu.cn

Zhaofei Yu ∗
Institution for Artificial Intelligence
School of Computer Science
Peking University
yuzf12@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
While sparse coding plays an important role in promoting the efficiency of biological neural systems, it has not been fully utilized by artificial models as the activation
sparsity is not well suited to the current structure of deep networks. Spiking Neural
Networks (SNNs), with their event-driven characteristics, offer a more natural
platform for leveraging activation sparsity. In this work, we specifically target
the reduction of neuronal activity, which directly leads to lower computational
cost and facilitates efficient SNN deployment on Neuromorphic hardware. We
begin by analyzing the limitations of existing activity regularization methods and
identifying critical challenges in training sparse SNNs. To address these issues, we
propose a modified neuron model, AT-LIF, coupled with a threshold adaptation
technique that stabilizes training and effectively suppresses spike activity. Through
extensive experiments on multiple datasets, we demonstrate that our approach
achieves significant reductions in average firing rates and synaptic operations
without sacrificing much accuracy. Furthermore, we show that our method complements weight-based pruning techniques and successfully trains an SNN with
only 0.06 average firing rate and 2.22M parameters on ImageNet, highlighting its
potential for building highly efficient and scalable SNN models. Code is available
at https://github.com/putshua/Activity-Pruning-SNN.

1

Introduction

The human brain is remarkably energy-efficient, yet capable of performing a wide range of complex
tasks, such as reasoning and planning. One of the key factors behind this efficiency lies in the behavior
of the neurons. As a general strategy of the neural representation in the neural system [Yoshida and
Ohki, 2020], the flexibility of sparse coding enables neurons to operate in a highly energy-efficient
manner. For example, despite the large population of neurons in specific areas of the brain tasked
with particular functions, only a subset of the neuron populations will be engaged simultaneously.
Experimental evidence shows that sparse representation of visual sensory information in the primary
visual cortex enhances the selectivity and sparseness of individual neurons, thereby improving the
computational efficiency of the visual system [Vinje and Gallant, 2000].
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

