Venus-MAXWELL: Efficient Learning of
Protein-Mutation Stability Landscapes using Protein
Language Models

Yuanxi Yu1,2 † Fan Jiang1,2 † Xinzhu Ma3 Liang Zhang1,2 Bozitao Zhong1,2
Wanli Ouyang3 Guisheng Fan4 Huiqun Yu4 Liang Hong1,2 * Mingchen Li1,2,3,4∗
1
Institute of Natural Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Zhangjiang Institute for Advanced Study, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China
4
School of Information Science and Engineering,
East China University of Science and Technology, China

Abstract
In-silico prediction of protein mutant stability, measured by the difference in
Gibbs free energy change (∆∆G), is fundamental for protein engineering. Current
sequence-to-label methods typically employ the two-stage pipeline: (i) encoding mutant sequences using neural networks (e.g., transformers), followed by (ii)
the ∆∆G regression from the latent representations. Although these methods
have demonstrated promising performance, their dependence on specialized neural network encoders significantly increases the complexity. Additionally, the
requirement to individually compute latent representations for each mutant site
negatively impacts computational efficiency and poses the risk of overfitting. This
work proposes the Venus-M AXWELL framework, which reformulates mutation
∆∆G prediction as a sequence-to-landscape task. In Venus-M AXWELL, mutations
of a protein and their corresponding ∆∆G values are organized into a landscape
matrix, allowing our framework to learn the ∆∆G landscape of a protein with
a single forward and backward pass during training. Besides, to facilitate future works, we also curated a large-scale ∆∆G dataset with strict controls on
data leakage and redundancy to ensure robust evaluation. Venus-M AXWELL is
compatible with multiple protein language models and enables these models for
accurate and efficient ∆∆G prediction. For example, when integrated with the
ESM-IF, Venus-M AXWELL achieves higher accuracy than ThermoMPNN with
10× faster in inference speed (despite having 50× more parameters than ThermoMPNN). The training codes, model weights, and datasets are publicly available
at https://github.com/ai4protein/Venus-MAXWELL.

1

Introduction

Protein stability, determined by the change in Gibbs free energy (∆G) of protein sequences between
the native and unfolded states, plays a critical role in various applications, ranging from therapeutic
protein design to industrial enzyme engineering [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. In protein engineering, accurately
predicting mutation-induced stability changes (∆∆G) is critical, and current methods for assessing
stability across large mutant libraries remain prohibitively expensive and resource-intensive, creating
a pressing need for efficient computational solutions. Consequently, developing accurate and efficient
∗
Corresponding authors: Mingchen Li (limc@sjtu.edu.cn) and Liang Hong
(hongl3liang@sjtu.edu.cn); †These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

