O MNI G AZE: Reward-inspired Generalizable Gaze
Estimation in the Wild
Hongyu Qu1∗ , Jianan Wei2∗ , Xiangbo Shu1† , Yazhou Yao1 , Wenguan Wang2† , Jinhui Tang3
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology

2

Zhejiang University

3

Nanjing Forestry University

https://github.com/quhongyu/OmniGaze

Abstract
Current 3D gaze estimation methods struggle to generalize across diverse data domains, primarily due to i) the scarcity of annotated datasets, and ii) the insufficient
diversity of labeled data. In this work, we present O MNI G AZE, a semi-supervised
framework for 3D gaze estimation, which utilizes large-scale unlabeled data collected from diverse and unconstrained real-world environments to mitigate domain
bias and generalize gaze estimation in the wild. First, we build a diverse collection of unlabeled facial images, varying in facial appearances, background
environments, illumination conditions, head poses, and eye occlusions. In order to
leverage unlabeled data spanning a broader distribution, O MNI G AZE adopts a standard pseudo-labeling strategy and devises a reward model to assess the reliability of
pseudo labels. Beyond pseudo labels as 3D direction vectors, the reward model also
incorporates visual embeddings extracted by an off-the-shelf visual encoder and
semantic cues from gaze perspective generated by prompting a Multimodal Large
Language Model to compute confidence scores. Then, these scores are utilized to
select high-quality pseudo labels and weight them for loss computation. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that O MNI G AZE achieves state-of-the-art performance
on five datasets under both in-domain and cross-domain settings. Furthermore,
we also evaluate the efficacy of O MNI G AZE as a scalable data engine for gaze
estimation, which exhibits robust zero-shot generalization on four unseen datasets.

1

Introduction

Eye gaze provides human with a means for evaluating an individual’s interest in their internal and
external environments [1, 2], which is subtle but informative. 3D gaze estimation, as a crucial topic
in the field of gaze signal analysis, aims to directly predict gaze direction from face images, which
serves as the foundational representation in various applications, such as virtual reality [3, 4, 5],
human-computer interaction [6, 7, 8], medical diagnosis [9, 10], and driver monitor systems [11, 12].
Due to the variants of subject appearance, background environments, image quality, shooting angle
and illumination across existing datasets [13, 14, 15, 16], the performance of gaze estimation
methods [17, 18] trained on a single dataset suffer from performance degradation when testing on
new, unseen datasets. This limitation motivates recent research [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26] to focus
on cross-domain generalization for gaze estimation, seeking to bridge inter-dataset discrepancies.
Though effective, these methods are still constrained by the limited diversity of labeled training data,
restricting their applicability for real-world applications. In contrast, enormous face images can be
easily accessed by crawling from Internet [27] or synthetic generation using generative models [28].
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

