Improving Evolutionary Multi-View Classification via
Eliminating Individual Fitness Bias

Xinyan Liang1,2 , Shuai Li1 , Qian Guo3 , Yuhua Qian1∗, Bingbing Jiang4 ,
Tingjin Luo5 , Liang Du1
1
Institute of Big Data Science and Industry, Shanxi University
2
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Beijing, 100086
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Taiyuan University of Science and Technology
4
School of Information Science and Technology, Hangzhou Normal University
5
College of Science, National University of Defense Technology
{liangxinyan48,LiShuai_liuzhaona,czguoqian}@163.com, jinchengqyh@126.com
jiangbb@hznu.edu.cn, tingjinluo@hotmail.com, duliang@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract
Evolutionary multi-view classification (EMVC) methods have gained wide recognition due to their adaptive mechanisms. Fitness evaluation (FE), which aims to
calculate the classification performance of each individual in the population and
provide reliable performance ranking for subsequent operations, is a core step in
such methods. Its accuracy directly determines the correctness of the evolutionary
direction. That is, when FE fails to correctly reflect the superiority-inferiority
relationship among individuals, it will lead to confusion in individual performance
ranking, which in turn misleads the evolutionary direction and results in trapping
into local optima. This paper is the first to identify the aforementioned issue in the
field of EMVC and call it as fitness evaluation bias (FEB). FEB may be caused by a
variety of factors, and this paper approaches the issue from the perspective of view
information content: existing methods generally adopt joint training strategies,
which restrict the exploration of key information in views with low information
content. This makes it difficult for multi-view model (MVM) to achieve optimal
performance during convergence, which in turn leads to FE failing to accurately
reflect individual performance rankings and ultimately triggering FEB. To address
this issue, we propose an evolutionary multi-view classification via eliminating
individual fitness bias (EFB-EMVC) method, which alleviates the FEB issue by
introducing evolutionary navigators for each MVM, thereby providing more accurate individual ranking. Experimental results fully verify the effectiveness of the
proposed method in alleviating the FEB problem, and the EMVC method equipped
with this strategy exhibits more superior performance compared with the original
EMVC method. (The code is available at https://github.com/LiShuailzn/Neurips2025-EFB-EMVC)

1

Introduction

Multi-view classification (MVC) aims to integrate data from multiple views to improve classification
accuracy. A large number of methods have been proposed in this field [1–6]. Among them, evolutionary multi-view classification (EMVC) methods differs from traditional approaches where it
dynamically fuses different views through the adaptive mechanism of evolutionary algorithms (EA)
[7], rather than relying on static modeling. They have obtained important applications like protein
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

