Omnipresent Yet Overlooked: Heat Kernels
in Combinatorial Bayesian Optimization

Colin Doumont
ETH Zürich
University of Cambridge
Tübingen AI Center

Victor Picheny
Secondmind

Viacheslav Borovitskiy‡
ETH Zürich
University of Edinburgh

Henry Moss‡
University of Cambridge
Lancaster University

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) has the potential to solve various combinatorial tasks,
ranging from materials science to neural architecture search. However, BO requires
specialized kernels to effectively model combinatorial domains. Recent efforts
have introduced several combinatorial kernels, but the relationships among them
are not well understood. To bridge this gap, we develop a unifying framework
based on heat kernels, which we derive in a systematic way and express as simple
closed-form expressions. Using this framework, we prove that many successful
combinatorial kernels are either related or equivalent to heat kernels, and validate
this theoretical claim in our experiments. Moreover, our analysis confirms and
extends the results presented in Bounce: certain algorithms’ performance decreases
substantially when the unknown optima of the function do not have a certain
structure. In contrast, heat kernels are not sensitive to the location of the optima.
Lastly, we show that a fast and simple pipeline, relying on heat kernels, is able to
achieve state-of-the-art results, matching or even outperforming certain slow or
complex algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many real-world challenges can be framed as optimization problems, where the objective functions
are expensive-to-evaluate and black-box. For this type of problems, Bayesian Optimization (BO)
has emerged as a preferred approach, successfully solving problems from tuning machine-learning
algorithms (Snoek et al., 2012) to designing detectors for particle physics (Cisbani et al., 2020).
Although BO has mostly been concerned with continuous domains, in recent years, multiple methods
have been developed to extend BO to combinatorial domains, such as strings in genetic design (Moss
et al., 2020) or graphs in neural architecture search (Ru et al., 2020b). These new methods often consist
of a pipeline involving multiple components, making it hard to know how each individual component
affects the overall empirical performance. For example, the pipelines from CASMOPOLITAN (Wan
et al., 2021) and COMBO (Oh et al., 2019) are often chosen as baselines for other methods, but their
components are never evaluated individually.
In a first attempt to bridge this gap, Dreczkowski et al. (2024) introduced a modular benchmark, dividing combinatorial BO pipelines into three key components: (i) combinatorial kernel, (ii) acquisitionfunction optimizer, and (iii) presence of trust region. Using this distinction, the authors are able
‡

Equal supervision.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

