Marginal-Nonuniform PAC Learnability

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Shay Moran
Technion and Google Research
smoran@technion.ac.il

Maximilian Thiessen
TU Wien
maximilian.thiessen@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We revisit the classical model of nonuniform PAC learning, introduced by Benedek
and Itai [1994], where generalization guarantees may depend on the target concept
(but not on the marginal distribution). In this work, we study a complementary
variant, which we call marginal-nonuniform learning. In this setting, guarantees
may depend on the marginal distribution over the domain, but must hold uniformly
over all concepts. This captures the intuition that some data distributions are
inherently easier to learn from than others, allowing for a flexible, distributionsensitive view of learnability. Our main result is a complete characterization of the
achievable learning rates in this model, revealing a trichotomy: exponential rates
of the form e−n arise precisely when the hypothesis class is finite; linear rates of
the form d/n are achievable when a recently introduced combinatorial parameter,
the VC-eluder dimension d, is finite; and arbitrarily slow rates may occur when
d = ∞. Additionally, in the original (concept-)nonuniform model, we show that
for all learnable classes linear rates are achievable. We conclude by situating
marginal-nonuniform learning within the landscape of universal learning, and by
discussing its relationship to other distribution-dependent learning paradigms.

1

Introduction

We study the possible learning rates for binary classification in a variant of nonuniform learning
introduced by Benedek and Itai [1994]. In standard PAC learning, generalization guarantees take the
form of a uniform rate: the learning rate applies simultaneously to all target concepts and all marginal
distributions over the data domain. In contrast, the concept-nonuniform1 model of Benedek and Itai
[1994] allows the rate to depend on the target concept f ∗ , while still requiring it to hold uniformly
over all marginal distributions.
In this work, we study the complementary variant: marginal-nonuniform learning, in which the
learning rate may depend on the marginal distribution P over the domain, but must hold uniformly
over all target concepts once the marginal is fixed. This model captures the intuition that some
data distributions may be inherently easier to learn from than others, while still requiring a single
algorithm to generalize well for all possible labelings under a fixed marginal.
Together, these choices give rise to four basic notions of PAC learnability, depending on whether
the learning rate is uniform or nonuniform over concepts and distributions. This taxonomy was
introduced by Ben-David, Benedek, and Mansour [1995], who studied learnability in all four cases.
1
In the literature this is simply known as nonuniform learning. We use the term concept-nonuniform to
distinguish it from marginal-nonuniform learning studied here.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

