Fading to Grow: Growing Preference Ratios via
Preference Fading Discrete Diffusion for
Recommendation
Guoqing Hu‡ An Zhang‡∗ Shuchang Liu§ Wenyu Mao‡ Jiancan Wu‡
Xun Yang‡ Xiang Li§ Lantao Hu§ Han Li§ Kun Gai§ Xiang Wang‡
‡

University of Science and Technology of China
§
Independent Researcher
{HugoChinn}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{an_zhang,xyang21}@ustc.edu.cn
{wenyumao2, wujcan, xiangwang1223}@gmail.com
{xiangli.th11, hulantao, lee.han06}@gmail.com, gai.kun@qq.com

Abstract
Recommenders aim to rank items from a discrete item corpus in line with user
interests, yet suffer from extremely sparse user preference data. Recent advances in
diffusion models have inspired diffusion-based recommenders, which alleviate sparsity by injecting noise during a forward process to prevent the collapse of perturbed
preference distributions. However, current diffusion-based recommenders predominantly rely on continuous Gaussian noise, which is intrinsically mismatched
with the discrete nature of user preference data in recommendation. In this paper,
building upon recent advances in discrete diffusion, we propose PreferGrow, a
discrete diffusion-based recommender system that models preference ratios by
fading and growing user preferences over the discrete item corpus. PreferGrow
differs from existing diffusion-based recommenders in three core aspects: (1) Discrete modeling of preference ratios: PreferGrow models relative preference ratios
between item pairs, rather than operating in the item representation or raw score
simplex. This formulation aligns naturally with the discrete and ranking-oriented
nature of recommendation tasks. (2) Perturbing via preference fading: Instead of
injecting continuous noise, PreferGrow fades user preferences by replacing the
preferred item with alternatives—physically akin to negative sampling—thereby
eliminating the need for any prior noise assumption. (3) Preference reconstruction
via growing: PreferGrow reconstructs user preferences by iteratively growing the
preference signals from the estimated ratios. PreferGrow offers a well-defined
matrix-based formulation with theoretical guarantees on Markovianity and reversibility, and it demonstrates consistent performance gains over state-of-the-art
diffusion-based recommenders across five benchmark datasets, highlighting both
its theoretical soundness and empirical effectiveness. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/Hugo-Chinn/PreferGrow.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems aim to rank items from a discrete item set that align with user interests, where
ones in the user-item interaction matrix denote observed interactions, and zeros indicate unobserved
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

