This Time is Different: An Observability Perspective
on Time Series Foundation Models
Ben Cohen∗ ‡ Emaad Khwaja∗ ‡
Youssef Doubli Salahidine Lemaachi† ‡ Chris Lettieri† ‡ Charles Masson† ‡
Hugo Miccinilli† ‡ Elise Ramé† ‡ Qiqi Ren† ‡ Afshin Rostamizadeh† ‡ Jean Ogier du Terrail† ‡
Anna-Monica Toon† ‡ Kan Wang† ‡ Stephan Xie† ‡ § Zongzhe Xu† ‡ Viktoriya Zhukova † ‡
David Asker‡ Ameet Talwalkar‡ § Othmane Abou-Amal‡
{ben.cohen, emaad, ameet, othmane}@datadoghq.com
†‡

Abstract
We introduce T OTO, a time series forecasting foundation model with 151 million parameters. T OTO uses a modern decoder-only architecture coupled with
architectural innovations designed to account for specific challenges found in
multivariate observability time series data. T OTO’s pre-training corpus is a mixture of observability data, open datasets, and synthetic data, and is 4-10× larger
than those of leading time series foundation models. Additionally, we introduce
B OOM, a large-scale benchmark consisting of 350 million observations across
2,807 real-world time series. For both T OTO and B OOM, we source observability
data exclusively from Datadog’s own telemetry and internal observability metrics.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate that T OTO achieves state-of-the-art performance on both B OOM and on established general purpose time series forecasting
benchmarks. T OTO’s model weights ( https://huggingface.co/Datadog/
Toto-Open-Base-1.0), inference code , and evaluation scripts (https://www.
https://github.com/DataDog/toto), as well as B OOM’s data and evaluation
code (https://www.https://huggingface.co/datasets/Datadog/BOOM),
are all available as open source under the Apache 2.0 License.

1

Introduction

Observability is the practice of collecting and analyzing data generated by distributed computer
systems to detect, diagnose, and swiftly resolve performance and reliability issues [4]. A major
component of observability is monitoring time series metrics; observability tools generate massive
and diverse sets of metrics that reflect a system’s operational health over time. These metrics encompass a wide variety of indicators—such as memory usage, CPU load, disk I/O, network throughput,
hit counts, error rates, and latency—that each exhibit distinct behavioral patterns, and collectively
represent an important but under-studied subset of general time series data.
Accurately modeling observability metrics is essential for critical tasks like anomaly detection [5]
(e.g., identifying spikes in error rates) and predictive forecasting [6] (e.g., anticipating resource
exhaustion or scaling needs). Observability data present challenges for traditional forecasting methods due to diversity, high-dimensionality, and complex distributional characteristics (Section 4.3).
Moreover, real-world observability systems routinely generate millions to billions of distinct time
* Joint First Author, listed alphabetically
†

Core Contributor, listed alphabetically
Datadog AI Research
§
Carnegie Mellon University. AT and SX contributed to this work in their Datadog capacities.
‡

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

