MOSPA: Human Motion Generation Driven by
Spatial Audio

Shuyang Xu∗,1 , Zhiyang Dou∗,†,1 , Mingyi Shi1 , Liang Pan1 , Leo Ho1 , Jingbo Wang2 ,
Yuan Liu3 , Cheng Lin4 , Yuexin Ma5 , Wenping Wang†,6 , Taku Komura†,1
1

3

The University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Lab
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Macau University of Science and Technology
5
ShanghaiTech University 6 Texas A&M University

Figure 1: We introduce a novel human motion generation task centered on spatial audio-driven human
motion synthesis. Top row: We curate a novel Spatial Audio-Driven Human Motion (SAM) dataset,
including diverse spatial audio signals and high-quality 3D human motion pairs. Bottom row: We
develop a generative framework for human MOtion generation driven by SPatial Audio (MOSPA)
to produce high-quality, responsive human motion driven by spatial audio. We note that the motion
generation results are both realistic and responsive, effectively capturing both the spatial and semantic
features of spatial audio inputs.

Abstract
Enabling virtual humans to dynamically and realistically respond to diverse auditory stimuli remains a key challenge in character animation, demanding the
integration of perceptual modeling and motion synthesis. Despite its significance,
this task remains largely unexplored. Most previous works have primarily focused
on mapping modalities like speech, audio, and music to generate human motion.
As of yet, these models typically overlook the impact of spatial features encoded in
spatial audio signals on human motion. To bridge this gap and enable high-quality
modeling of human movements in response to spatial audio, we introduce the
first comprehensive Spatial Audio-Driven Human Motion (SAM) dataset, which
contains diverse and high-quality spatial audio and motion data. For benchmarking,
we develop a simple yet effective diffusion-based generative framework for human
MOtion generation driven by SPatial Audio, termed MOSPA, which faithfully captures the relationship between body motion and spatial audio through an effective
fusion mechanism. Once trained, MOSPA can generate diverse realistic human
∗, † denote equal contributions and corresponding authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

