First SFT, Second RL, Third UPT: Continual
Improving Multi-Modal LLM Reasoning via
Unsupervised Post-Training

Lai Wei1,2,∗
1

Yuting Li1 Chen Wang2 Yue Wang2
Weiran Huang1,3,† Lichao Sun4

Linghe Kong1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Zhongguancun Academy
3
Shanghai Innovation Institute 4 Lehigh University

Abstract
Improving Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) in the post-training
stage typically relies on supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or reinforcement learning
(RL), which require expensive and manually annotated multi-modal data–an ultimately unsustainable resource. This limitation has motivated a growing interest in
unsupervised paradigms as a third stage of post-training after SFT and RL. While
recent efforts have explored this direction, their methods are complex and difficult
to iterate. To address this, we propose MM-UPT, a simple yet effective framework
for unsupervised post-training of MLLMs, enabling continual self-improvement
without any external supervision. The training method of MM-UPT builds upon
GRPO, replacing traditional reward signals with a self-rewarding mechanism based
on majority voting over multiple sampled responses. Our experiments demonstrate
that such training method effectively improves the reasoning ability of Qwen2.5VL-7B (e.g., 66.3%→72.9% on MathVista, 62.9%→68.7% on We-Math), using
standard dataset without ground truth labels. To further explore scalability, we
extend our framework to a data self-generation setting, designing two strategies
that prompt the MLLM to synthesize new training samples on its own. Additional experiments show that combining these synthetic data with the unsupervised
training method can also boost performance, highlighting a promising approach
for scalable self-improvement. Overall, MM-UPT offers a new paradigm for autonomous enhancement of MLLMs, serving as a critical third step after initial
SFT and RL in the absence of external supervision. Our code is available at
https://github.com/waltonfuture/MM-UPT.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have achieved remarkable performance on a variety
of vision-language tasks, ranging from image captioning to visual reasoning [22, 51, 67, 73, 81, 83].
The dominant paradigm for improving MLLMs in the post-training stage typically involves supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning (RL) [2, 42, 47, 59, 65, 77]. However, both SFT and RL
rely on large volumes of high-quality and annotated multi-modal data, such as image captions, visual
reasoning traces, verifiable ground truth answers, and human preference signals. As real-world tasks
∗
†

Email: waltonfuture@sjtu.edu.cn
Correspondence to Weiran Huang (weiran.huang@outlook.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

