Neural Rule Lists:
Learning Discretizations, Rules, and Order in One Go

Sascha Xu∗, Nils Philipp Walter∗ and Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{sascha.xu, nils.walter, vreeken}@cispa.de

Abstract
Interpretable machine learning is essential in high-stakes domains like healthcare. Rule lists are a popular choice due to their transparency and accuracy, but
learning them effectively remains a challenge. Existing methods require feature
pre-discretization, constrain rule complexity or ordering, or struggle to scale. We
present N EU RULES, a novel end-to-end framework that overcomes these limitations. At its core, N EU RULES transforms the inherently combinatorial task of rule
list learning into a differentiable optimization problem, enabling gradient-based
learning. It simultaneously discovers feature conditions, assembles them into
conjunctive rules, and determines their order—without pre-processing or manual
constraints. A key contribution here is a gradient shaping technique that steers
learning toward sparse rules with strong predictive performance. To produce
ordered lists, we introduce a differentiable relaxation that, through simulated annealing, converges to a strict rule list. Extensive experiments show that N EU RULES
consistently outperforms combinatorial and neural baselines on binary as well as
multi-class classification tasks across a wide range of datasets.

1

Introduction

Rule lists [Cohen, 1995] are conceptually simple classifiers that are inherently interpretable and
surprisingly effective [Rudin, 2019]. As the name implies, rule lists are ordered lists of rules of the
kind “if Thalassemia = normal and Resting BP < 151 then predict yes”. Each rule consists of
a set of conditions, when met, trigger a specific prediction. The model evaluates the rules in order
and applies the first one whose conditions are satisfied, yielding a simple and interpretable decision
path. We give an example rule list in Fig. 1. Because of their transparency requirements, rule lists
are often used in high-stakes applications, e.g. stroke prediction [Letham et al., 2015], credit risk
evaluation [Bhatore et al., 2020], and criminal justice [Lakkaraju and Rudin, 2017].
Inferring rule lists is a challenging combinatorial problem in which we face a super-exponential search
space with little exploitable structure. First, there is the problem of which atomic rule conditions, or
predicates, to use. Existing strategies rely on pre-discretization, which incurs a loss of information.
Second, there is the problem of combining these predicates into rule-heads, i.e. the set of conditions
that specify when a rule triggers. Existing approaches are either combinatorial, and have to restrict
the search space in favor of runtime [Cohen, 1995, Yang et al., 2017, Proenca and van Leeuwen, 2020,
Angelino et al., 2018], or use differentiable relaxations that often lead to verbose rule-heads [Wang
et al., 2021, Qiao et al., 2021, Dierckx et al., 2023]. Third, there is the order of the list. Except for
Angelino et al. [2018], existing methods learn rules greedily or consider a fixed list order [Dierckx
et al., 2023], either of which can result in subpar accuracy.
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

