YEAST: Yet Another Sequential Test

Alexey Kurennoy
Meta
akurennoy@meta.com

Majed Dodin
Delivery Hero
majed.dodin@deliveryhero.com

Tural Gurbanov
SoundCloud
tural.gurbanov@soundcloud.com

Ana Peleteiro Ramallo
Preply
ana.peleteiro@preply.com

Abstract
The online evaluation of machine learning models is typically conducted through
A/B experiments. Sequential statistical tests are valuable tools for analysing
these experiments, as they enable researchers to stop data collection early without
increasing the risk of false discoveries. However, existing sequential tests either
limit the number of interim analyses or suffer from low statistical power. In this
paper, we introduce a novel sequential test designed for the continuous monitoring
of A/B experiments. We validate our method using semi-synthetic simulations
and demonstrate that it outperforms current state-of-the-art sequential testing
approaches. Our method is derived using a new technique that “inverts” a bound
on the probability of threshold crossing, based on a classical maximal inequality.

1

Introduction

Online A/B experiments have become a standard approach for evaluating the impact of machine
learning models on the systems and products where they are deployed. Although this approach offers
significant advantages, it also poses the risk of exposing users to harmful changes that could degrade
their experience. Unlike traditional techniques such as the Student’s t test, sequential testing supports
repeated significance checks without increasing the false positive rate. This makes it well-suited for
real-time monitoring of experiments, allowing early detection of harmful effects, which helps protect
user experience and reduce financial losses.
Sequential testing methods can be broadly divided into discrete and continuous. Discrete sequential
tests permit only a fixed number of interim checks while continuous methods impose no such limit
and allow checking for significance at the experimenter’s will - even after each new observation. In
this paper, we focus on continuous sequential tests. We find that the absence of a restriction on the
number of interim checks is useful in practice, as it avoids a situation where the experimenter and the
stakeholders observe a degradation in the metric of interest but have to wait until the next checkpoint
before assessing the statistical significance and making decisions.
In this paper, we propose a novel continuous sequential test that demonstrates a better control of
Type-I error and a greater power than current state-of-the-art methods for continuous experiment
monitoring. The theoretical technique we use to derive and (asymptotically) justify this novel test is,
to the best of our knowledge, also new.
We validate the proposed sequential test using a semi-synthetic simulation experiment based on a
public real-world data set. We share the associated code for greater reproducibility [16].
To summarise, our main contributions are as follows.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

