From Faults to Features: Pretraining to Learn Robust
Representations against Sensor Failures

Jens U. Brandt1∗ Noah C. Puetz1 Marcus Greiff2 Thomas Lew2
Marc Hilbert3 Thomas Bartz-Beielstein1
1
TH Köln 2 Toyota Research Institute
3
Toyota Gazoo Racing Europe

John Subosits2

Abstract
Machine learning models play a key role in safety-critical applications, such as autonomous vehicles and advanced driver assistance systems, where their robustness
during inference is essential to ensure reliable operation. Sensor faults, however,
can corrupt input signals, potentially leading to severe model failures that compromise reliability. In this context, pretraining emerges as a powerful approach
for learning expressive representations applicable to various downstream tasks.
Among existing techniques, masking represents a promising direction for learning
representations that are robust to corrupted input data. In this work, we extend this
concept by specifically targeting robustness to sensor outages during pretraining.
We propose a self-supervised masking scheme that simulates common sensor failures and explicitly trains the model to recover the original signal. We demonstrate
that the resulting representations significantly improve the robustness of predictions to seen and unseen sensor failures on a vehicle dynamics dataset, maintaining
strong downstream performance under both nominal and various fault conditions.
As a practical application, we deploy the method on a modified Lexus LC 500 and
show that the pretrained model successfully operates as a substitute for a physical
sensor in a closed-loop control system. In this autonomous racing application, a
supervised baseline trained without sensor failures may cause the vehicle to leave
the track. In contrast, a model trained using the proposed masking scheme enables
reliable racing performance in the presence of sensor failures.

Figure 1: Although traditional pretraining with masking produces representations suitable for downstream tasks, these representations can lack robustness to common sensor failures like signal offsets.
In contrast, our proposed pretraining scheme yields representations that are robust to sensor faults.
∗

Contact: jens_uwe.brandt@th-koeln.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

