Low-Precision Streaming PCA

Sanjoy Dasgupta
University of California San Diego
sadasgupta@ucsd.edu

Syamantak Kumar
University of Texas at Austin
syamantak@utexas.edu

Shourya Pandey
University of Texas at Austin
shouryap@utexas.edu

Purnamrita Sarkar
University of Texas at Austin
purna.sarkar@utexas.edu

Abstract
Low-precision Streaming PCA estimates the top principal component in a streaming setting under limited precision. We establish an information-theoretic lower
bound on the quantization resolution required to achieve a target accuracy for the
leading eigenvector. We study Oja’s algorithm for streaming PCA under linear and
nonlinear stochastic quantization. The quantized variants use unbiased stochastic quantization of the weight vector and the updates. Under mild moment and
spectral-gap assumptions on the data distribution, we show that a batched version
achieves the lower bound up to logarithmic factors under both schemes. This
leads to a nearly dimension-free quantization error in the nonlinear quantization
setting. Empirical evaluations on synthetic streams validate our theoretical findings
and demonstrate that our low-precision methods closely track the performance of
standard Oja’s algorithm.

1

Introduction

Quantization (or discretization) is the mapping of a continuous set of values to a small, finite set
of outputs close to the original values; standard methods for quantization include rounding and
truncation. The current popularity of training large-scale Machine Learning models has brought a
renewed focus on quantization, though its origins go back to the 1800s. Some early examples include
least-squares methods applied to large-scale data analysis in the early nineteenth century [Sti86].
In 1867, discretization was introduced for the approximate calculation of integrals [Rie67], and the
effects of rounding errors in integration were examined in 1897 [She97]. For an excellent survey and
history of quantization, see [GKD` 22].
In the context of efficient model training, it is natural to ask the following: does training a model
require the full precision of 32- or 64-bit representation, or is it possible to achieve comparable
performance using significantly fewer bits? Mixed-precision training (using 16-bit floats with 32-bit
accumulators) is now standard on GPUs and TPUs, yielding 1.5ˆ to 3ˆ speedups with negligible
accuracy loss on large transformers and CNNs [MNA` 18]. Binary Neural Networks (BNNs), which
constrain weights and activations to ˘1, can achieve up to 32ˆ memory compression and replace
multiplications with bitwise operations. This has been shown to approach nearly full-precision
ImageNet accuracy with careful training [HCS` 16].
Theoretical analysis of the effect of low-precision computation on optimization problems has received
significant attention [LD19, AGL` 17, SZOR15, SLZ` 18, LDX` 17, ZLK` 17]. Complementary
strategies leverage stochastic rounding to mitigate quantization bias during LLM training. Ozkara
et al. [OYP25] present theoretical analyses of implicit regularization and convergence properties of
Adam when using BF16 with stochastic rounding, demonstrating up to 1.5ˆ throughput gains and
30% memory reduction over standard mixed precision [OYP25].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

