Some Optimizers are More Equal: Understanding the
Role of Optimizers in Group Fairness

Mojtaba Kolahdouzi1 , Hatice Gunes2 , Ali Etemad1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Queen’s University, Canada
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
m.kolahdouzi@queensu.ca, hatice.gunes@cl.cam.ac.uk, ali.etemad@queensu.ca
1

Abstract
We study whether and how the choice of optimization algorithm can impact group
fairness in deep neural networks. Through stochastic differential equation analysis
of optimization dynamics in an analytically tractable setup, we demonstrate that
the choice of optimization algorithm indeed influences fairness outcomes, particularly under severe imbalance. Furthermore, we show that when comparing
two categories of optimizers, adaptive methods and stochastic methods, RMSProp
(from the adaptive category) has a higher likelihood of converging to fairer minima
than SGD (from the stochastic category). Building on this insight, we derive two
new theoretical guarantees showing that, under appropriate conditions, RMSProp
exhibits fairer parameter updates and improved fairness in a single optimization
step compared to SGD. We then validate these findings through extensive experiments on three publicly available datasets, namely CelebA, FairFace, and
MS-COCO, across different tasks as facial expression recognition, gender classification, and multi-label classification, using various backbones. Considering
multiple fairness definitions including equalized odds, equal opportunity, and
demographic parity, adaptive optimizers like RMSProp and Adam consistently
outperform SGD in terms of group fairness, while maintaining comparable predictive accuracy. Our results highlight the role of adaptive updates as a crucial yet
overlooked mechanism for promoting fair outcomes. We release the source code
at: https://github.com/Mkolahdoozi/Some-Optimizers-Are-More-Equal.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is increasingly applied to a wide variety of domains, many of which have significant
social implications [5, 43]. These include, but are not limited to, decision-making systems, risk
assessment models, recommendation engines, and personalized health interventions [12, 46]. These
systems influence people’s lives and can lead to unintended biases or disparities [38], for instance by
treating different groups of people differently. To address this, researchers have developed various
techniques to ensure group fairness in machine learning algorithms [20, 13].
Prior work has demonstrated that a variety of factors such as training data imbalance [45] and model
hyper-parameters [10] can impact the performance of deep neural networks in terms of group fairness
and bias. In this paper, we pose the following question for the first time:
Does the choice of optimization algorithm impact group fairness in deep
neural networks? and how?
The limited theoretical and empirical analysis in this area leaves a major gap in our understanding of
how optimizers impact the inherent performance of models in terms of bias. Consequently, we believe
that this question can have significant implications in developing models that perform consistently
across various groups, as optimization is a fundamental component of any deep learning model.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

