DIFFSSR: Stereo Image Super-resolution Using
Differential Transformer
Dafeng Zhang
Samsung R&D Institute China-Beijing (SRC-B)
dfeng.zhang@samsung.com

Abstract
In the field of computer vision, the task of stereo image super-resolution (StereoSR)
has garnered significant attention due to its potential applications in augmented
reality, virtual reality, and autonomous driving. Traditional Transformer-based
models, while powerful, often suffer from attention noise, leading to suboptimal
reconstruction issues in super-resolved images. This paper introduces DIFFSSR,
a novel neural network architecture designed to address these challenges. We
introduce the Diff Cross Attention Block (DCAB) and the Sliding Stereo CrossAttention Module (SSCAM) to enhance feature integration and mitigate the impact
of attention noise. The DCAB differentiates between relevant and irrelevant context, amplifying attention to important features and canceling out noise. The
SSCAM, with its sliding window mechanism and disparity-based attention, adapts
to local variations in stereo images, preserving details, and addressing the performance degradation due to misalignment of horizontal epipolar lines in stereo
images. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that DIFFSSR outperforms state-of-the-art methods, including NAFSSR and SwinFIRSSR,
in terms of both quantitative metrics and visual quality. Code is available at
https://github.com/Zdafeng/DIFFSSR.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancements in deep learning have led to significant progress in the field of single
image super-resolution (SISR) [1–4], where the goal is to reconstruct high-quality images from their
degraded low-resolution counterparts. The impressive results achieved by deep learning models in this
domain have naturally piqued the interest of researchers in leveraging the complementary information
present in stereo image pairs to further enhance resolution through deep learning methods [5, 6, 4].
This has directed the focus towards the exploration of new fundamental neural network architectures
and utilization of the complementary information present in the left and right views for stereo image
super-resolution (StereoSR).
Among the various neural network architectures that have emerged, SwinIR [3] stands out as a simple
yet effective baseline for image super-resolution task. It introduces the Swin Transformer [7] as a
powerful backbone to capture long-range dependencies and global interactions within images, and
achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in various restoration tasks, including image superresolution, denoising, and JPEG compression artifact reduction. SwinFIR [4], an extension of SwinIR,
incorporates Fast Fourier Convolution (FFC) [8] to further enhance the model’s ability to capture
global information and achieves a new SOTA results in image super-resolution benchmarks. In the
field of StereoSR, SwinFIRSSR [4] extends SwinFIR’s capabilities by fusing left/right viewpoint
features using a stereo cross-attention module (SCAM) [6]. This adaptation allows SwinFIRSSR to
effectively utilize the complementary information from stereo pairs, resulting in sharper and more
detailed stereo super-resolved images.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

