Transductive Conformal Inference for Full Ranking

Jean-Baptiste Fermanian
IMAG, IROKO, Univ. Montpellier, Inria, CNRS,
Montpellier, France
jean-baptiste.fermanian@inria.fr

Pierre Humbert
LPSM, Sorbonne Université,
Paris, France
humbert@lpsm.paris

Gilles Blanchard
Université Paris Saclay, Institut Mathématique d’Orsay,
Orsay, France
gilles.blanchard@universite-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract
We introduce a method based on Conformal Prediction (CP) to quantify the uncertainty of full ranking algorithms. We focus on a specific scenario where n + m
items are to be ranked by some “black box” algorithm. It is assumed that the
relative (ground truth) ranking of n of them is known. The objective is then to
quantify the error made by the algorithm on the ranks of the m new items among
the total (n + m). In such a setting, the true ranks of the n original items in the total
(n + m) depend on the (unknown) true ranks of the m new ones. Consequently,
we have no direct access to a calibration set to apply a classical CP method. To
address this challenge, we propose to construct distribution-free bounds of the
unknown conformity scores using recent results on the distribution of conformal
p-values. Using these scores upper bounds, we provide valid prediction sets for the
rank of any item. We also control the false coverage proportion, a crucial quantity
when dealing with multiple prediction sets. Finally, we empirically show on both
synthetic and real data the efficiency of our CP method for state-of-the-art ranking
algorithms such as RankNet or LambdaMart.

1

Introduction

Ranking is a fundamental problem in machine learning where the objective is to sort some items,
such as documents or products, by their relevance to a query or user profile. It has a wide range of
applications, ranging from document retrieval [Cao et al., 2006], collaborative filtering [Liu and Yang,
2008], sentiment analysis [Liu et al., 2017], and product rating. These applications are grouped under
the term preference learning [Fürnkranz et al., 2008]. While there exist a lot of ranking algorithms in
the literature (see e.g. Liu et al. [2009] for a review), the quantification of the uncertainty in their
rank predictions using conformal prediction is relatively new [Angelopoulos et al., 2023a, Xu et al.,
2024]. Indeed, so far, the design of ranking algorithms has mainly focused on the training phase
and their evaluations regarding the uncertainty of their predicted ranking, is not often studied. With
the increasing popularity of ranking methods (especially in the learning-to-rank literature Liu et al.,
2009), this evaluation is however a mandatory step to deploy them for real-world applications.
Our main objective is to quantify the uncertainty of ranking algorithms by constructing distribution
free prediction set for the ranks of each items. Formally, given n + m items with an underlying
unknown total order, we want to construct prediction sets that contain the true rank of each item
with high probability. We consider a particular scenario where the first n items have known relative
rankings, but their positions within the whole n + m items are unknown. Furthermore, the remaining
m items have no known ranking information.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

