A Reinforcement Learning-based Bidding Strategy for
Data Consumers in Auction-based Federated Learning

Xiaoli Tang1 , Han Yu1 , Xiaoxiao Li2,3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Canada
3
Vector Institute, Canada
1

Abstract
Auction-based Federated Learning (AFL) fosters collaboration among selfinterested data consumers (DCs) and data owners (DOs). A major challenge
in AFL pertains to how DCs select and bid for DOs. Existing methods are generally static, making them ill-suited for dynamic AFL markets. To address this
issue, we propose the Reinforcement Learning-based Bidding Strategy for DCs in
Auction-based Federated Learning (RLB-AFL). We incorporate historical states into
a Deep Q-Network to capture sequential information critical for bidding decisions.
To mitigate state space sparsity, where specific states rarely reoccur for each DC
during auctions, we incorporate the Gaussian Mixture Model into RLB-AFL. This
facilitates soft clustering on sequential states, reducing the state space dimensionality and easing exploration and action-value function approximation. In addition,
we enhance the ϵ-greedy policy to help the RLB-AFL agent balance exploitation and
exploration, enabling it to be more adaptable in the AFL decision-making process.
Extensive experiments under 6 widely used benchmark datasets demonstrate that
RLB-AFL achieves superior performance compared to 8 state-of-the-art approaches.
It outperforms the best baseline by 10.56% and 3.15% in terms of average total
utility.

1

Introduction

Driven by stringent user privacy and data confidentiality requirements, federated learning (FL) has
recently attracted substantial attention from both academic and industrial domains [1–7]. With
data owners (DOs), also known as FL clients, being self-interested entities that weigh a myriad of
factors (ranging from costs to potential utility gains) when deciding which FL data consumer (DC)
to collaborate with, the design of FL incentive mechanisms [8, 9] has taken center stage. These
mechanisms aim to incentivize DOs to participate in FL through various reward strategies.
Auction-based federated learning (AFL) is an important sub-field of FL incentive mechanism design,
due to its potential to achieve both efficiency and fairness [10, 11]. In AFL, the incentive mechanism
between DOs and DCs is organized in the form of an auction. This process is overseen by an
auctioneer, who acts as an intermediary to facilitate the exchange of data for FL training. AFL
methods can be roughly categorized into three main groups [12]: 1) DC-side methods, 2) auctioneerside methods, and 3) DO-side methods. The DC-side methods focus on how DCs select and place
bids on DOs, aiming to optimize key performance indicators (KPIs) while staying within budget
constraints. The auctioneer-side methods optimize DC-DO matching and pricing strategies, along
with the design of effective auction mechanisms. The goal is to achieve specific operational objectives,
such as maximizing social welfare or minimizing social costs, for the AFL ecosystem. DOs care
more about determining the allocation of local resources and setting their reserve prices for profit
maximization [13].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

