Adaptive Variance Inflation in Thompson Sampling:
Efficiency, Safety, Robustness, and Beyond

Feng Zhu
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
fengzhu@mit.edu

David Simchi-Levi
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
dslevi@mit.edu

Abstract
Thompson Sampling (TS) has emerged as a powerful algorithm for sequential
decision-making, with strong empirical success and theoretical guarantees. However, it has been shown that its behavior under stringent safety and robustness
criteria — such as safety of cumulative regret distribution and robustness to model
mis-specification — can sometimes perform poorly. In this work, we try to address
these aspects through the lens of adaptive variance inflation for Gaussian Thompson
Sampling. Our one-line change introduces a time- and arm-dependent inflation
factor into the sampling variance, and yields several compelling benefits. The
resulting policy achieves provably worst-case optimal expected regret and worstcase optimal fast-decaying regret tail bounds, even in the presence of heavy-tailed
(sub-exponential) noise or mis-specified environments. The policy is also robust to
mis-specified noise variances. Beyond cumulative regret, we further demonstrate
that our method ensures strong post-experiment guarantees: simple regret and
estimation error per arm exhibit fast-decaying tail probabilities, contributing to
more reliable and robust downstream decisions. Finally, we extend our policy to
incorporate settings with unknown arm-specific variances and empirically validate
the consistent performance of our approach across a range of environments.

1

Introduction

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a foundational framework for sequential
decision-making under uncertainty, with broad applications ranging from recommendation systems
[27] to clinical trials [33] and financial portfolio optimization [16]. A central challenge in MAB is
balancing exploration and exploitation. Among the many algorithms proposed to address this trade-off,
Thompson Sampling (TS), originally introduced in [32], has emerged as both a conceptually elegant
and practically effective approach. As a Bayesian method, TS selects actions based on samples drawn
from the posterior distributions over arm rewards. By naturally balancing exploration and exploitation
through probabilistic sampling, TS enjoys near-optimal theoretical guarantees [19, 1, 2, 24, 3, 25, 20]
and demonstrates excellent empirical performance [10, 25, 11]. Its simplicity of implementation and
strong empirical results have contributed to its widespread adoption in real-world systems.
Despite its success, recent work has revealed notable limitations of Thompson Sampling, particularly
regarding regret tail behavior [14, 30, 31] and statistical inference power [23, 29, 22]. Intuitively,
this is because TS — like many other bandit algorithms — is primarily designed to maximize the
expected cumulative reward within an experiment from an instance-dependent perspective. As a
result, it tends to adapt quickly to a perceived optimal arm and reduce exploration prematurely. This
limited exploration can lead to sub-optimal performance on other critical dimensions, such as safety
under heavy-tailed risks and robustness to model mis-specification.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

