GraphKeeper: Graph Domain-Incremental Learning
via Knowledge Disentanglement and Preservation

Zihao Guo1 , Qingyun Sun1∗, Ziwei Zhang1 , Haonan Yuan1 , Huiping Zhuang2 ,
Xingcheng Fu3 , Jianxin Li1
1
SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Shien-Ming Wu School of Intelligent Engineering, South China University of Technology
3
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Guangxi Normal University
{guozh,sunqy,zwzhang,yuanhn,lijx}@buaa.edu.cn
hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn, fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph incremental learning (GIL), which continuously updates graph models by
sequential knowledge acquisition, has garnered significant interest recently. However, existing GIL approaches focus on task-incremental and class-incremental
scenarios within a single domain. Graph domain-incremental learning (DomainIL), aiming at updating models across multiple graph domains, has become critical
with the development of graph foundation models (GFMs), but remains unexplored in the literature. In this paper, we propose Graph Domain-Incremental
Learning via Knowledge Disentanglement and Preservation (GraphKeeper), to
address catastrophic forgetting in Domain-IL scenario from the perspectives of
embedding shifts and decision boundary deviations. Specifically, to prevent embedding shifts and confusion across incremental graph domains, we first propose
the domain-specific parameter-efficient fine-tuning together with intra- and interdomain disentanglement objectives. Consequently, to maintain a stable decision
boundary, we introduce deviation-free knowledge preservation to continuously fit
incremental domains. Additionally, for graphs with unobservable domains, we
perform domain-aware distribution discrimination to obtain precise embeddings.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the proposed GraphKeeper achieves state-ofthe-art results with 6.5%∼16.6% improvement over the runner-up with negligible
forgetting. Moreover, we show GraphKeeper can be seamlessly integrated with
various representative GFMs, highlighting its broad applicative potential.

1

Introduction

Graph incremental learning (GIL)[40, 6, 47] aims to continuously update graph models as new graph
data arrives, and has attracted increasing attention. Most existing methods target task-incremental
(Task-IL) and class-incremental (Class-IL) settings (Figure 1), where new tasks or classes emerge
within a single domain. However, as newly added graphs often come from different domains, the
domain-incremental (Domain-IL) setting becomes essential. This is especially relevant with the
rise of graph foundation models (GFMs), which require integrating diverse graphs from multiple
domains to build a comprehensive and evolving knowledge base. Unfortunately, current GIL methods
are designed for single-domain scenarios and struggle with Domain-IL. As illustrated in Figure 2,
a representative method SSM [45] performs well under Class-IL but fails in the more challenging
Domain-IL case. Despite its importance, effective GIL under Domain-IL remains an open problem.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

