FRN: Fractal-Based Recursive Spectral
Reconstruction Network
Ge Meng1 , Zhongnan Cai1 , Ruizhe Chen1 , Jingyan Tu1 , Yingying Wang1 ,
Yue Huang1 , Xinghao Ding1,∗
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China
mengge0001@gmail.com

Abstract
Generating hyperspectral images (HSIs) from RGB images through spectral reconstruction can significantly reduce the cost of HSI acquisition. In this paper, we
propose a Fractal-Based Recursive Spectral Reconstruction Network (FRN), which
differs from existing paradigms that attempt to directly integrate the full-spectrum
information from the R, G, and B channels in a one-shot manner. Instead, it treats
spectral reconstruction as a progressive process, predicting from broad to narrow
bands or employing a coarse-to-fine approach for predicting the next wavelength.
Inspired by fractals in mathematics, FRN establishes a novel spectral reconstruction paradigm by recursively invoking an atomic reconstruction module. In each
invocation, only the spectral information from neighboring bands is used to provide
clues for the generation of the image at the next wavelength, which follows the
low-rank property of spectral data. Moreover, we design a band-aware state space
model that employs a pixel-differentiated scanning strategy at different stages of
the generation process, further suppressing interference from low-correlation regions caused by reflectance differences. Through extensive experimentation across
different datasets, FRN achieves superior reconstruction performance compared to
state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https://github.com/mongko007/frn.

1

Introduction

Hyperspectral images (HSIs) contain more spectral
bands (channels) than RGB images, enabling them
to capture richer emission information that more
accurately reflects the properties of objects. As a
result, HSIs are commonly used in applications such
as medical imaging [33, 35, 3], remote sensing [55,
46, 34, 19], material classification [25, 26], and
object tracking [48, 31], etc.
Conventional hyperspectral imaging systems typically employ a single 1D or 2D sensor to scan the
scene along the spatial or spectral dimension, capturing hyperspectral information through prolonged,
repeated exposures. However, this approach is not
well-suited for dynamic scenes. The coded aperture
snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) system takes
advantage of the sparsity of spectral data, acquiring
∗

Figure 1: PSNR-Parameters comparisons of
FRN and SOTA methods. FRN achieves outstanding HSI reconstruction performance with
only a minimal number of parameters.

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

