Dataset Distillation for Pre-Trained
Self-Supervised Vision Models

George Cazenavette

Antonio Torralba

Vincent Sitzmann

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
georgecazenavette.github.io/linear-gm

Abstract
The task of dataset distillation aims to find a small set of synthetic images such
that training a model on them reproduces the performance of the same model
trained on a much larger dataset of real samples. Existing distillation methods
focus on synthesizing datasets that enable training randomly initialized models.
In contrast, state-of-the-art vision approaches are increasingly building on large,
pre-trained self-supervised models rather than training from scratch. In this paper,
we investigate the problem of distilling datasets that enable us to optimally train
linear probes on top of such large, pre-trained vision models. We introduce a
method of dataset distillation for this task called Linear Gradient Matching that
optimizes the synthetic images such that, when passed through a pre-trained feature
extractor, they induce gradients in the linear classifier similar to those produced
by the real data. Our method yields synthetic data that outperform all real-image
baselines and, remarkably, generalize across pre-trained vision models, enabling
us, for instance, to train a linear CLIP probe that performs competitively using a
dataset distilled via a DINO backbone. Further, we show that our distilled datasets
are exceptionally effective for fine-grained classification and provide a valuable
tool for model interpretability, predicting, among other things, how similar two
models’ embedding spaces are under the platonic representation hypothesis or
whether a model is sensitive to spurious correlations in adversarial datasets.

1

Introduction

The task of Dataset Distillation involves the synthesis of a small set of synthetic samples such that a
model trained from scratch on this synthetic set will achieve test-time performance comparable to
that of a model trained on the full real dataset. Since this problem’s first introduction and proposed
solution in the self-titled paper [47], many new methods [6, 27, 51, 54–56] and extensions thereof [7,
11, 16, 25, 28, 40, 46, 53] have made strides towards the lofty goal of learning a high-quality model
from just a handful of synthetic images.
Meanwhile, computer vision has increasingly adopted a paradigm of using the representations of large,
pre-trained self-supervised vision models for downstream tasks, either via fine-tuning or by using these
models as feature extraction backbones. Given this trend, in this work, we explore dataset distillation
in the regime of training models on top of features extracted by pre-trained vision foundation models.
Specifically, we study linear classification on top of a pre-trained feature representation.
In our new method, Linear Gradient Matching, we distill synthetic datasets by optimizing such
that their representations extracted by pre-trained feature extractors induce gradients in a linear
classifier similar to those obtained from real images. We find that a single synthetic image per class
suffices to train linear classifiers to competitive performance across a wide variety of large vision
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

