Diversity as a Reward: Fine-Tuning LLMs on a
Mixture of Domain-Undetermined Data
Zhenqing Ling1∗ , Daoyuan Chen2∗ , Liuyi Yao2 , Qianli Shen2 , Yaliang Li2 , Ying Shen1,3†
1

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 FSIETP

lingzhq@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, sheny76@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{daoyuanchen.cdy, yly287738, shenqianli.sql, yaliang.li}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) using diverse datasets is crucial for
enhancing their overall performance across various domains. In practical scenarios,
existing methods based on modeling the mixture proportions of data composition
often struggle with data whose domain labels are missing, imprecise or nonnormalized, while methods based on data selection usually encounter difficulties
in balancing multi-domain performance. To address these challenges, in this
work, we investigate the role of data diversity in enhancing the overall abilities of
LLMs by empirically constructing contrastive data pools and theoretically deriving
explanations. Building upon the insights gained, we propose a new method that
gives the LLM a dual identity: an output model to cognitively probe and select
data based on diversity reward, as well as an input model to be tuned with the
selected data. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method notably
boosts performance across domain-undetermined data and a series of foundational
downstream tasks when applied to various advanced LLMs. We release our code
and hope this study can shed light on the understanding of data diversity and
advance feedback-driven data-model co-design for LLMs.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) — exemplified by open-source series such
as LLaMA [18], Qwen [53], and DeepSeek [31], as well as closed-source models like GPT [2] — has
transformed artificial intelligence by significantly enhancing capabilities in core areas such as common
sense reasoning, mathematics, and code generation. Fine-tuning these models further improves their
usability by aligning their behaviors with specific instructions and human preferences [43, 39].
To cultivate comprehensive capabilities in LLMs, prior studies have explored preferable trade-offs
between quality, quantity, and diversity of their training data [30, 7, 38, 59]. For example, methods
focusing on data selection [29, 48, 44] and mixture [21] demonstrate promising capabilities to
enhance model performance, particularly through semantic diversity [34, 33].
However, real-world applications frequently encounter unlabeled data and difficulties in domain
labeling [22], posing challenges for data mixture methodologies that take the domain tags as a prior,
as well as the data selection approaches, which often prioritize quality over diversity, especially with
data sourced from quite different domains.
* Equal contribution.
†
3

Corresponding author.
FSIETP: Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fire Science and Intelligent Emergency Technology.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

