Language Models can Self-Improve at State-Value
Estimation for Better Search
Ethan Mendes, Alan Ritter
Georgia Institute of Technology
emendes3@gatech.edu, alan.ritter@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Collecting ground-truth rewards or human demonstrations for multi-step reasoning
tasks is often prohibitively expensive, particularly in interactive domains such as
web tasks. We introduce Self-Taught Lookahead (STL), a reward-free framework
that improves language model–based value functions by reasoning explicitly about
state transitions. STL can be viewed as a chain-of-thought analogue of the value
iteration algorithm: instead of regressing directly on numeric values, a value LLM
is trained to simulate a step of lookahead in natural language—predicting the next
action, resulting state, and rationale for its value, thereby refining value estimates
without any labeled data. This self-supervised procedure yields more accurate statevalue predictions, which in turn enable lightweight search algorithms to expand
fewer states while maintaining strong performance. Empirically, STL-trained
value models built on moderately sized (8B parameter) open-weight LLMs boost
web agent success rates by over 39%, achieving comparable performance with
proprietary models. STL also generalizes to multi-hop QA and math puzzles. We
find that STL enables small open-source models to guide efficient search, reducing
inference costs by integrating explicit reasoning with value learning.

1

Introduction

While large language models (LLMs) demonstrate strong reasoning capabilities by generating
extended token sequences before answering [56, 22, 40], guiding inference with explicit tree search
has the potential to further improve performance on tasks with a structured state space [64, 60].
In this setting, a policy LLM proposes candidate actions, and a value LLM evaluates resulting
states to steer the search toward promising trajectories. Figure 1 summarizes the assumptions
different LLM-driven search methods make about information available during training and inference.
Reward and Demo Learning methods [63, 70, 27, 52] assume access to ground-truth reward
signals or human demonstrations and optimize the model with reinforcement learning (RL) or
imitation learning (IL). In contrast, Reward-Guided Inference strategies [74, 49] forego explicit
reward during training; they only consult a reward signal at inference time, using it to guide procedures
such as LLM-based Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). However, collecting ground-truth rewards
or human demonstrations may not be possible in every environment, and can oftentimes be costly.
For example, for web agent tasks, even small-scale data collection can cost thousands of dollars [63].
Reward and Demo Free methods [65, 64] relax this assumption as they can operate without access
to reward. However, these methods often rely on prompting an off-the-shelf LLM to serve as both
the policy and value models during the search process, which constrains performance compared to
models specifically tuned for agentic tasks [55].
In this paper, we introduce Self-Taught Lookahead (STL), a Reward and Demo Free , selfsupervised framework for interactive, multi-step reasoning tasks. Building on evidence that search
quality is strongly influenced by the accuracy of the state-value estimator [10, 37], STL improves an
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

