UniTraj: Learning a Universal Trajectory Foundation
Model from Billion-Scale Worldwide Traces
∗

†

†

Yuanshao Zhu1,2,3, , James Jianqiao Yu4, , Xiangyu Zhao2, , Xun Zhou4 ,
†
Liang Han4 , Xuetao Wei1 , Yuxuan Liang3,
1
2
Southern University of Science and Technology, City University of Hong Kong
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
yuanshao@ieee.org, jqyu@ieee.org, xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk
zhouxun2023@hit.edu.cn, han.liang@hit.edu.cn
weixt@sustech.edu.cn, yuxliang@outlook.com

Abstract
Building a universal trajectory foundation model is a promising solution to address
the limitations of existing trajectory modeling approaches, such as task specificity,
regional dependency, and data sensitivity. Despite its potential, data preparation,
pre-training strategy development, and architectural design present significant challenges in constructing this model. Therefore, we introduce UniTraj, a Universal
Trajectory foundation model that aims to address these limitations through three
key innovations. First, we construct WorldTrace, an unprecedented dataset of 2.45
million trajectories with billions of GPS points spanning 70 countries, providing
the diverse geographic coverage essential for region-independent modeling. Second, we develop novel pre-training strategies—Adaptive Trajectory Resampling
and Self-supervised Trajectory Masking—that enable robust learning from heterogeneous trajectory data with varying sampling rates and quality. Finally, we
tailor a flexible model architecture to accommodate a variety of trajectory tasks,
effectively capturing complex movement patterns to support broad applicability.
Extensive experiments across multiple tasks and real-world datasets demonstrate
that UniTraj consistently outperforms existing methods, exhibiting superior scalability, adaptability, and generalization, with WorldTrace serving as an ideal yet
non-exclusive training resource. The implementation codes and full dataset are
available at https://github.com/Yasoz/UniTraj.

1

Introduction

Trajectory data, as the digital footprints of human movement, is becoming a fundamental data
source for understanding mobility patterns and transforming urban intelligence [3]. These spatiotemporal sequences unlock critical insights across diverse applications: from optimizing transportation
networks that alleviate congestion in megacities, enhancing location-based services that personalize
user experiences [18, 2], to powering logistics systems that determine the efficiency of global supply
chains [12, 24, 36]. Despite their significance, extracting meaningful patterns (from statistical
methods to deep learning [25]) of trajectory data presents profound challenges due to their inherent
complexity, varying lengths, irregular sampling rates, and region-specific characteristics.
As trajectory data continues to expand exponentially, three critical limitations in current approaches
have become increasingly apparent: (1) Task Specificity: Current approaches are typically designed
∗
†

Work done during the internship at HKUST(GZ)
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

