Fira: Can We Achieve Full-rank Training of LLMs
under Low-rank Constraint?
Xi Chen1 , Kaituo Feng1 , Changsheng Li1∗, Xunhao Lai2 ,
Xiangyu Yue3 , Ye Yuan1 , Guoren Wang1,4
1
Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Science and Intelligent Technology
xichen.fy@gmail.com, kaituofeng@gmail.com,
lcs@bit.edu.cn, laixunhao@pku.edu.cn,
xyyue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, yuan-ye@bit.edu.cn, wanggrbit@126.com
https://github.com/xichen-fy/Fira

Abstract
Low-rank training has emerged as a promising approach for reducing memory
usage in training Large Language Models (LLMs). Previous methods either rely on
decomposing weight matrices (e.g., LoRA), or seek to decompose gradient matrices
(e.g., GaLore) to ensure reduced memory consumption. However, both of them
constrain the training in a low-rank subspace, thus inevitably leading to sub-optimal
performance. To resolve this, we propose a new plug-and-play training framework
for LLMs called Fira, as the first attempt to consistently preserve the low-rank
constraint for memory efficiency, while achieving full-rank training (i.e., training
with full-rank gradients of full-rank weights) to avoid inferior outcomes. First,
we observe an interesting phenomenon during LLM training: the scaling impact
of adaptive optimizers (e.g., Adam) on the gradient norm remains similar from
low-rank to full-rank training. In light of this, we propose a norm-based scaling
method, which utilizes the scaling impact of low-rank optimizers as substitutes
for that of original full-rank optimizers to achieve this goal. Moreover, we find
that low-rank optimizers may lead to potential loss spikes during training. To
address this, we further put forward a norm-growth limiter to smooth the gradient.
Extensive experiments on the pre-training and fine-tuning of LLMs show that Fira
outperforms both LoRA and GaLore. Notably, for pre-training LLaMA 7B, our
Fira uses 8× smaller memory of optimizer states than Galore, yet outperforms it
by a large margin.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable advancements in various
domains [2, 30, 10]. While the substantial increase in model size contributes significantly to these
advancements, it also introduces considerable memory bottlenecks, especially for optimizer states
[43]. For instance, pre-training a LLaMA-7B model from scratch 2 requires at least 58 GB memory,
allocated as follows: 14GB for loading parameters, 14GB for weight gradients, 28GB for Adam
[16] optimizer states, and 2GB for activations [43]. Notably, the optimizer states consume even
more memory than the parameters themselves. To address this, low-rank training has demonstrated
∗
2

Corresponding author
Training the model with a single batch size and maximum sequence length of 2048 under BF16 precision.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

