Fully Autonomous Neuromorphic Navigation and
Dynamic Obstacle Avoidance

Xiaochen Shang1 , Pengwei Luo1 , Xinning Wang1 , Jiayue Zhao1 ,
Huilin Ge2 , Bo Dong3 , Xin Yang1,∗
1
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence
(Dalian University of Technology), Minstry of Education,
2
Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, 3 Cephia AI
xcshang0614@gmail.com
xinyang@dult.edu.cn

Abstract
Unmanned aerial vehicles could accurately accomplish complex navigation and obstacle avoidance tasks under external control. However, enabling unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) to rely solely on onboard computation and sensing for real-time
navigation and dynamic obstacle avoidance remains a significant challenge due to
stringent latency and energy constraints. Inspired by the efficiency of biological
systems, we propose a fully neuromorphic framework achieving end-to-end obstacle avoidance during navigation with an overall latency of just 2.3 milliseconds.
Specifically, our bio-inspired approach enables accurate moving object detection
and avoidance without requiring target recognition or trajectory computation. Additionally, we introduce the first monocular event-based pose correction dataset
with over 50,000 paired and labeled event streams. We validate our system on
an autonomous quadrotor using only onboard resources, demonstrating reliable
navigation and avoidance of diverse obstacles moving at speeds up to 10 m/s under
different light conditions, with energy consumption reduced to 21% compared to
traditional architecture.

1

Introduction

The utilization of UAVs across various applications expanded rapidly over the past decade [1].
Currently, most UAVs rely heavily on external aids such as positioning systems like Global Positioning
System (GPS) [2] for localization and ground stations [3] for navigation and dynamic obstacle
avoidance. However, such external aid is not feasible in all circumstances as it could be easily
jammed [4] or interfered in multiple scenarios, including dense urban areas [5], caves, or even war
zones [6]. Therefore, it is vital for UAVs to fully perform navigation and dynamic obstacle avoidance
tasks using only sensors and computing resources onboard, without any dependence on external
signals or infrastructure. Although applicable options are well researched, most solutions are designed
for larger platforms but not for tiny UAV systems [7]. Ranging sensors like the Li-DAR system
could provide accurate positioning information, but are too heavy and power-hungry to be deployed
on tiny autonomous systems [8]. Vision-based approach may be an appropriate way for tiny UAVs
since, firstly, visual sensors can be both lightweight and power-efficient [9, 10, 11]. Secondly, visual
algorithms achieve state-of-the-art performance in multiple tasks. However, such high performance
comes at excessive computational and memory costs. Mainstream approaches like simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithms [12] and object recognition-based trajectory estimation
methods [13, 14, 15] consume hundreds of megabytes to several gigabytes of memory and hundreds
of gigaflops [16]. Such high consumption makes tiny UAV autonomy challenging.
Neuromorphic hardwares provide a solution to this problem since the asynchronous and sparse nature
of their biomimetic data format could exceed the current standard of energy efficiency, computational
consumption, and task accuracy, and thus represents a paradigm shift compared to the traditional
∗

Correspongding Author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

