Mitigating Instability in High Residual Adaptive
Sampling for PINNs via Langevin Dynamics

Minseok Jeong∗†, Giup Seo∗, Euiseok Hwang‡
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST)
dsa950115@kaist.ac.kr, guseo1120@gm.gist.ac.kr, euiseokh@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have gained attention in
the scientific community for their potential to solve partial differential equations
(PDEs). However, they face challenges related to resource efficiency and slow
convergence. Adaptive sampling methods, which prioritize collocation points with
high residuals, improve both efficiency and accuracy. However, these methods
often neglect points with medium or low residuals, which can affect stability as the
complexity of the model increases. In this paper, we investigate this limitation and
show that high residual-based approaches require stricter learning rate bounds to
ensure stability. To address this, we propose a Langevin dynamics-based Adaptive
Sampling (LAS) framework that is robust to various learning rates and model
complexities. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
existing approaches in terms of relative L2 error, and stability across a range of environments, including high-dimensional PDEs where Monte Carlo integration-based
methods typically suffer from instability. The implementation code is publicly
available at https://github.com/neurips2025-las/LAS-implementation.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) describe a wide range of physical phenomena, including heat
transfer [17, 8], fluid flow [37, 18, 33], wave propagation [34, 5], optics, and epidemiology [26, 36].
Accurate and efficient PDE solutions are vital across many industries. With recent advances in deep
learning, physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have emerged as a promising approach for
solving PDEs. PINNs train by minimizing errors from initial conditions (IC), boundary conditions
(BC), and PDE residuals at collocation points [31, 49, 12, 41, 23]. These error terms are treated as
soft constraints, guiding the model to satisfy essential physical requirements.
This collocation-based learning method enhances the capability of PINNs by reducing the need
for extensive experimental data collection across spatio-temporal ranges, demonstrating success
in various industries as a promising alternative to traditional numerical methods such as the finite
difference method and the finite element method [50, 2, 25]. However, collocation-based PINN
(hereafter referred to as PINNs) encounter challenges in efficiently setting collocation points within
the constraints of a limited sampling budget and in achieving fast convergence to accurate solutions.
A key challenge arises from the presence of small regions with abrupt changes, in contrast to larger,
smoother regions. This issue is particularly evident in stiff PDEs, which are often characterized by
discontinuities, such as sudden transitions or jumps across the spatio-temporal domain.
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done while at GIST. Now at KAIST, ACSS.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

