Conservative classiﬁers do consistently well with
improving agents: characterizing statistical and
online learning

Dravyansh Sharma
Northwestern University
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Alec Sun
University of Chicago

Abstract
Machine learning is now ubiquitous in societal decision-making, for example in
evaluating job candidates or loan applications, and it is increasingly important
to take into account how classiﬁed agents will react to the learning algorithms.
The majority of recent literature on strategic classiﬁcation has focused on reducing and countering deceptive behaviors by the classiﬁed agents, but recent work
of Attias et al. [5] identiﬁes surprising properties of learnability when the agents
genuinely improve in order to attain the desirable classiﬁcation, such as smaller
generalization error than standard PAC-learning. In this paper we characterize
so-called learnability with improvements across multiple new axes. We introduce
an asymmetric variant of minimally consistent concept classes and use it to provide an exact characterization of proper learning with improvements in the realizable setting. While prior work studies learnability only under general, arbitrary
agent improvement regions, we give positive results for more natural Euclidean
ball improvement sets. In particular, we characterize improper learning under a
generative assumption on the data distribution. We further show how to learn in
more challenging settings, achieving lower generalization error under well-studied
bounded noise models and obtaining mistake bounds in realizable and agnostic online learning. We resolve open questions posed by Attias et al. [5] for both proper
and improper learning.

1

Introduction

Suppose that a school is trying to create a machine learning classiﬁer to admit students based on
their test score. The school uses a cutoff θ̂ to determine whether a student should be admitted. If the
school publishes this cutoff, then students immediately below the cutoff will want to boost their test
scores in order to be admitted, for example by studying harder or by registering for booster courses.
This is an example of where deploying a classiﬁer can inﬂuence the behavior of the agents it is
aiming to classify. We assume binary classiﬁcation and that agents want to be positively classiﬁed.
There are two views one can take on this phenomenon. The ﬁrst is that the actions that agents take
in response to the deployed classiﬁer do not truly improve the agent’s quality. This setting is known
as strategic classiﬁcation [36] or measure management [16]. A second view, however, which is
the focus of this work, is that agents’ actions lead to real improvements. For example, studying or
taking classes in order to get a higher exam score can genuinely make a student more qualiﬁed, so
the school would want to admit any student that achieves their desired cutoff θ̂. This setting, when
agents respond to the classiﬁer to potentially improve their classiﬁcation while changing their true
features in the process, is known as strategic improvements [40, 45].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

