Instance-Optimality for
Private KL Distribution Estimation
Jiayuan Ye∗
National University of Singapore

Vitaly Feldman
Apple

Kunal Talwar
Apple

Abstract
We study the fundamental problem of estimating an unknown discrete distribution
p over d symbols, given n i.i.d. samples from the distribution. We are interested in
minimizing the KL divergence between the true distribution and the algorithm’s
estimate. We first construct minimax optimal private estimators. Minimax optimality however fails to shed light on an algorithm’s performance on individual
(non-worst-case) instances p and simple minimax-optimal DP estimators can have
poor empirical performance on real distributions. We then study this problem from
an instance-optimality viewpoint, where the algorithm’s error on p is compared
to the minimum achievable estimation error over a small local neighborhood of p.
Under natural notions of local neighborhood, we propose algorithms that achieve
instance-optimality up to constant factors, with and without a differential privacy
constraint. Our upper bounds rely on (private) variants of the Good-Turing estimator. Our lower bounds use additive local neighborhoods that more precisely
captures the hardness of distribution estimation in KL divergence, compared to
ones considered in prior works.

1

Introduction

Accurately estimating a discrete distribution (over d symbols) from the empirical samples is a
fundamental task in statistical machine learning. An especially important distribution estimation
objective is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence error, as it is crucial in promoting diversity and
smoothness by penalizing zero-mass assignment to unseen symbols. Noticeably in speech-recognition
and language modeling communities, negative log likelihood on a test set (which up to translation
is the KL divergence) is the measure that has been found to best correlate with the performance of
the model [13, 14], and is therefore the standard loss being optimized for. Additionally, KL error is
well-established in the coding community [18, 42] in the context of data compression (i.e., identifying
encoding that represents the information with fewer bits). Due to this reason, KL distribution
estimation has been extensively studied [62, 11, 10, 51, 52, 39, 49].
However, overly fine-grained release of statistics make it possible to infer the memberships [37,
55, 28, 56] or even reconstruct the values [20, 12] of input data records. To this end, differential
privacy [26] offers a powerful mathematical definition to provably control the associated privacy risk.
Definition 1.1 (Differential Privacy (DP) [26]). A (randomized) algorithm A is (ε, δ)-differentially
private ((ε, δ)-DP) if for all neighboring datasets x, x′ that differ in at most one sample, and any
measurable output set T , Pr[A(x) ∈ T ] ≤ eε · Pr[A(x′ ) ∈ T ] + δ.
Our work aims to provide an understanding of the KL error of private distribution estimation. Below
we present the problem setting and summarize known results and our contributions.
*

Research done while at Apple

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

