The Power of Iterative Filtering for Supervised
Learning with (Heavy) Contamination

Adam R. Klivans∗
UT Austin

Konstantinos Stavropoulos†
UT Austin

Kevin Tian‡
UT Austin

Arsen Vasilyan§
UT Austin

Abstract
Inspired by recent work on learning with distribution shift, we give a general
outlier removal algorithm called iterative polynomial filtering and show a number
of striking applications for supervised learning with contamination: (1) We show
that any function class that can be approximated by low-degree polynomials with
respect to a hypercontractive distribution can be efficiently learned under bounded
contamination (also known as nasty noise). This is a surprising resolution to
a longstanding gap between the complexity of agnostic learning and learning
with contamination, as it was widely believed that low-degree approximators only
implied tolerance to label noise. (2) For any function class that admits the (stronger)
notion of sandwiching approximators, we obtain near-optimal learning guarantees
even with respect to heavy additive contamination, where far more than 1/2 of the
training set may be added adversarially. Prior related work held only for regression
and in a list-decodable setting. (3) We obtain the first efficient algorithms for
tolerant testable learning of functions of halfspaces with respect to any fixed logconcave distribution. Even the non-tolerant case for a single halfspace in this
setting had remained open. These results significantly advance our understanding
of efficient supervised learning under contamination, a setting that has been much
less studied than its unsupervised counterpart.

1

Introduction

Dataset curation is a fundamental part of the training pipeline of modern machine learning models and
often appears to be the bottleneck in obtaining models with improved performance [SKL17, LRB+ 21,
BGMMS21, GIF+ 23]. One way to theoretically model this problem is to assume that the learner has
access to a—potentially heavily—contaminated dataset and the goal is to learn a model that performs
well on some clean underlying target distribution. While there has been tremendous recent progress
for unsupervised learning with contamination [HM13, CSV17, KS17a, KS17b, BDLS17, DKS18b,
HL18, CDG19, RY20, BDH+ 20, CMY20, BK21, IK22, ZS22, DKK+ 22a, DHPT24], relatively
little is known for supervised learning with contamination, especially for binary classification.
Many efficient algorithms with strong error guarantees have been developed for agnostic learning, a
special case of contamination where only the labels are adversarially corrupted [KKMS08, KOS08,
BOW10, ABL17, DKS18a, DKTZ20b, DKK+ 22b]. Most of these guarantees, however, had seemed
difficult to extend to the more challenging setting of contamination, where both labels and covariates
can be adversarially corrupted. In this paper—building on recent work on robust learning and learning
with distribution shift [DKS18a, GSSV24, KSV24c]—we give a general iterative polynomial filtering
procedure that greatly expands the set of known positive results for learning binary classifiers from
∗

klivans@cs.utexas.edu.
kstavrop@utexas.edu.
‡
kjtian@cs.utexas.edu.
§
arsenvasilyan@gmail.com.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

