Fortifying Time Series: DTW-Certified
Robust Anomaly Detection

Shijie Liu1⋆ , Tansu Alpcan1 , Christopher Leckie2 , Sarah Erfani2
1
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
2
School of Computing and Information Systems
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
⋆
shijie3@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Time-series anomaly detection is critical for ensuring safety in high-stakes applications, where robustness is a fundamental requirement rather than a mere
performance metric. Addressing the vulnerability of these systems to adversarial
manipulation is therefore essential. Existing defenses are largely heuristic or provide certified robustness only under ℓp -norm constraints, which are incompatible
with time-series data. In particular, ℓp -norm fails to capture the intrinsic temporal
structure in time series, causing small temporal distortions to significantly alter the
ℓp -norm measures. Instead, the similarity metric Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is
more suitable and widely adopted in the time-series domain, as DTW accounts for
temporal alignment and remains robust to temporal variations. To date, however,
there has been no certifiable robustness result in this metric that provides guarantees.
In this work, we introduce the first DTW-certified robust defense in time-series
anomaly detection by adapting the randomized smoothing paradigm. We develop
this certificate by bridging the ℓp -norm to DTW distance through a lower-bound
transformation. Extensive experiments across various datasets and models validate
the effectiveness and practicality of our theoretical approach. Results demonstrate significantly improved performance, e.g., up to 18.7% in F1-score under
DTW-based adversarial attacks compared to traditional certified models.

1

Introduction

In recent years, significant research has advanced the study of adversarial attacks and certified
defenses for machine learning systems. Despite the considerable progress in adversarial robustness
across various domains [42, 2, 45, 9, 12, 3], robustness in time-series anomaly detection remains
comparatively underexplored. As a core component of many safety-critical systems—including
healthcare [25, 46, 21], finance [41, 22, 64], and mobile networks [56, 70, 35]— anomaly detectors
are essential for identifying abnormal behavior in preventing failures or hazards. Robustness in this
context is not merely a model performance concern but a core requirement for operational reliability.
Recent work has revealed that time-series anomaly detectors are susceptible to adversarial attacks
tailored to the characteristics of time-series data [6, 5], underscoring the urgent need for ensuring
robustness in this domain.
Adversaries can manipulate detection outcomes by introducing subtle yet strategically crafted perturbations into anomaly time-series data to evade detection [61, 29, 74, 69]. Traditional adversarial
threat models typically restrict perturbations to bounded ℓp -norms, widely effective in image [1, 31]
and text domains [63, 76, 57] due to the alignment with semantic preservation in such data types.
However, time-series data exhibit an inherent temporal structure that challenges the assumption of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

