Interactive and Hybrid Imitation Learning: Provably
Beating Behavior Cloning

Yichen Li
University of Arizona
yichenl@arizona.edu

Chicheng Zhang
University of Arizona
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) is a paradigm for learning sequential decision-making policies from experts, leveraging offline demonstrations, interactive annotations, or
both. Recent advances show that when annotation cost is tallied per trajectory,
Behavior Cloning (BC)—which relies solely on offline demonstrations—cannot
be improved in general, leaving limited conditions for interactive methods such
as DAgger to help. We revisit this conclusion and prove that when the annotation
cost is measured per state, algorithms using interactive annotations can provably
outperform BC. Specifically: (1) we show that S TAGGER, a one-sample-per-round
variant of DAgger, provably beats BC under low-recovery-cost settings; (2) we initiate the study of hybrid IL where the agent learns from offline demonstrations and
interactive annotations. We propose WARM -S TAGGER whose learning guarantee
is not much worse than using either data source alone. Furthermore, motivated
by compounding error and cold-start problem in imitation learning practice, we
give an MDP example in which WARM -S TAGGER has significant better annotation
cost; (3) experiments on MuJoCo continuous-control tasks confirm that, with modest cost ratio between interactive and offline annotations, interactive and hybrid
approaches consistently outperform BC. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the first to highlight the benefit of state-wise interactive annotation and hybrid
feedback in imitation learning.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning, also known as learning from demonstrations, is a widely-used approach for
learning policies to make sequential decisions [45, 6, 5]. In many applications, it offers a preferable
alternative to reinforcement learning, as it bypasses the need for carefully designed reward functions
and avoids costly exploration [43, 67].
Two prominent data collection regimes exist in imitation learning: offline and interactive. In offline
imitation learning, expert demonstration data in the format of trajectories is collected ahead of time,
which is a non-adaptive process that is easy to maintain. In contrast, in interactive imitation learning,
the learner is allowed to query the expert for annotations in an adaptive manner [51, 50, 67]. The
most basic and well-known approach for offline imitation learning is Behavior Cloning [49, 17],
which casts the policy learning problem as a supervised learning problem that learns to predict
expert actions from states. Although simple and easy to implement, offline imitation learning has
the drawback that the quality of the data can be limited [45]. As a result, the trained model can
well suffer from compounding error, where imperfect imitation leads the learned policy to enter
unseen states, resulting in a compounding sequence of mistakes. In contrast, in interactive imitation
learning, the learner maintains a learned policy over time, with the demonstrating experts providing
corrective feedback on-policy, which enables targeted collection of demonstrations and improves
sample efficiency.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

