Causal Climate Emulation with Bayesian Filtering

Sebastian Hickman1,4,∗

Ilija Trajkovic2

Julia Kaltenborn3,4

Francis Pelletier4

Alex Archibald1 Yaniv Gurwicz5 Peer Nowack2 David Rolnick3,4 Julien Boussard3,4

2

1
Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, UK
Institute of Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
3
School of Computer Science, McGill University, Canada
4
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Canada
5
Intel Labs, Israel
∗
now at the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, UK

Abstract
Traditional models of climate change use complex systems of coupled equations to
simulate physical processes across the Earth system. These simulations are highly
computationally expensive, limiting our predictions of climate change and analyses
of its causes and effects. Machine learning has the potential to quickly emulate data
from climate models, but current approaches are not able to incorporate physicallybased causal relationships. Here, we develop an interpretable climate model
emulator based on causal representation learning. We derive a novel approach
including a Bayesian filter for stable long-term autoregressive emulation. We
demonstrate that our emulator learns accurate climate dynamics, and we show the
importance of each one of its components on a realistic synthetic dataset and data
from two widely deployed climate models.

1

Introduction

In order to respond to climate change, it is necessary to understand future climates as precisely as
possible, under different scenarios of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Earth system models
(ESMs), which couple together complex numerical models simulating different components of the
Earth system, are the primary tool for making these projections, but require solving vast numbers of
equations representing physical processes and are thus computationally expensive [Balaji et al., 2017,
Mansfield et al., 2020]. This severely limits the number of future scenarios that can be simulated and
attribution studies investigating the influence of climate change on extreme events. Reduced physical
models, such as Simple Climate Models [Leach et al., 2021], are commonly used to speed up the
process, but at the expense of oversimplifying necessary complex processes.
In contrast, data-driven models are flexible and efficient but often lack the physical grounding of
Simple Climate Models [Watson-Parris et al., 2022], as they rely on correlations in data. Deep
learning (DL) models have shown considerable success in medium-range weather forecasting up
to a few weeks ahead [Bi et al., 2023, Lam et al., 2023, Lang et al., 2024, Bodnar et al., 2024], but
many such models become physically unrealistic or unstable when performing long-term climate
projections [Chattopadhyay et al., 2024, Karlbauer et al., 2024]. Recent approaches for climate
emulation [Watt-Meyer et al., 2024, Cachay et al., 2024, Guan et al., 2024, Cresswell-Clay et al.,
2024] have achieved stable long-term simulations suitable for climate modeling, with small biases in
climate statistics. However, it is unclear whether these models learn physical climate processes, and
they may not always respect known causal relationships [Clark et al., 2024].
A potential reconciliation of the respective advantages of physics-based and data-driven models lies
in causal discovery, the automatic discovery of causal dependencies from available data [Runge et al.,
2023, Rohekar et al., 2021], which has emerged as a valuable tool to improve our understanding
of physical systems across various fields, including Earth sciences [Runge et al., 2019a,b]. Many
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

