MLEP: Multi-granularity Local Entropy Patterns for
Generalized AI-generated Image Detection

Lin Yuan, Xiaowan Li, Yan Zhang∗, Jiawei Zhang, Hongbo Li, Xinbo Gao∗
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China
yuanlin@cqupt.edu.cn, s230201063@stu.cqupt.edu.cn,
{yanzhang1991, zhangjw, lihongbo, gaoxb}@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Advances in image generation technologies have raised growing concerns about
their potential misuse, particularly in producing misinformation and deepfakes.
This creates an urgent demand for effective methods to detect AI-generated images
(AIGIs). While progress has been made, achieving reliable performance across
diverse generative models and scenarios remains challenging due to the absence
of source-invariant features and the limited generalization of existing approaches.
In this study, we investigate the potential of using image entropy as a discriminative cue for AIGI detection and propose Multi-granularity Local Entropy Patterns
(MLEP), a set of feature maps computed based on Shannon entropy from shuffled
small patches at multiple image scales. MLEP effectively captures pixel dependencies across scales and dimensions while disrupting semantic content, thereby
reducing potential content bias. Based on MLEP, we can easily build a robust CNNbased classifier capable of detecting AIGIs with enhanced reliability. Extensive
experiments in an open-world setting, involving images synthesized by 32 distinct
generative models, demonstrate that our approach achieves substantial improvements over state-of-the-art methods in both accuracy and generalization. Our code
and models are available at https://www.github.com/fkeufss/MLEP/.

1

Introduction

The rapid development of generative technologies has transformed image synthesis, with models
like GAN [1], diffusion model [2], and their variants achieving impressive realism. While enabling
new applications in creative industries, these advancements have also raised concerns over misuse
in misinformation and deepfakes [3, 4], prompting an urgent need for reliable AI-generated image
(AIGI) detection methods. Researchers have leveraged spatial [5, 6, 7, 8] and frequency-domain
cues [9, 10, 11, 12], as well as high-level knowledge from pretrained diffusion models [13, 14] and
LLMs [15, 16, 17] for AIGI detection. Yet, the lack of source-invariant representations still limits the
cross-domain detection robustness, especially when across different models and content types.
To address this challenge, we aim to identify a generalized, content-agnostic pattern that can reliably
distinguish AIGIs from real photographs. Inspired by recent studies [7, 8], our work builds on two
key observations. Tan et al.[7] found that generative models typically involve internal upsampling
operations and propose Neighboring Pixel Relationships (NPR) to capture resulting structural artifacts.
However, NPR operates on small local patches and retains visible semantic structures, introducing
bias that may hinder generalization. Zheng et al.[8] emphasized the impact of “semantic artifacts” on
detection and propose disrupting image semantics by shuffling 32 × 32 patches. While this improves
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

