Atomic Diffusion Models for Small Molecule
Structure Elucidation from NMR Spectra

Ziyu Xiong
Princeton University
ziyux@princeton.edu
Yichi Zhang
Princeton University
zycddd@princeton.edu

Foyez Alauddin
Princeton University
fa1073@alumni.princeton.edu

Chu Xin Cheng
California Institute of Technology
ccheng2@alumni.caltech.edu

Joon Soo An
Princeton University
ahnjunsoo@princeton.edu

Mohammad R. Seyedsayamdost
Princeton University
mrseyed@princeton.edu

Ellen D. Zhong
Princeton University
zhonge@princeton.edu

Abstract
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a cornerstone technique for
determining the structures of small molecules and is especially critical in the discovery of novel natural products and clinical therapeutics. Yet, interpreting NMR
spectra remains a time-consuming, manual process requiring extensive domain
expertise. We introduce C HEF NMR (CHemical Elucidation From NMR), an endto-end framework that directly predicts an unknown molecule’s structure solely
from its 1D NMR spectra and chemical formula. We frame structure elucidation as
conditional generation from an atomic diffusion model built on a non-equivariant
transformer architecture. To model the complex chemical groups found in natural
products, we generated a dataset of simulated 1D NMR spectra for over 111,000
natural products. C HEF NMR predicts the structures of challenging natural product compounds with an unsurpassed accuracy of over 65%. This work takes a
significant step toward solving the grand challenge of automating small-molecule
structure elucidation and highlights the potential of deep learning in accelerating
molecular discovery.

1

Introduction

The molecules that sustain life come in several forms: large biopolymers such as DNA, RNA,
and proteins described by our genetic code, and small molecules, which form complex metabolic
pathways and influence all aspects of biology. A category of small molecules, known as secondary
metabolites or natural products, describes those that are secreted into the environment where they
serve myriad functions, such as signaling and chemical warfare. Because of these roles, natural
products have delivered more than half of the FDA-approved small-molecule agents, including the
majority of antibiotics and antitumor drugs in current clinical use, such as penicillin, taxol, and other
blockbuster drugs such as lovastatin and semaglutide [48, 14, 68, 58].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

