HALO: Hadamard-Assisted Lower-Precision
Optimization for LLMs

Saleh Ashkboos∗†
ETH Zurich

Mahdi Nikdan∗
ISTAustria

Torsten Hoefler
ETH Zurich

Soroush Tabesh∗
ISTAustria

Roberto L. Castro
ISTAustria

Dan Alistarh
ISTAustria & Neural Magic

Abstract
Quantized training of Large Language Models (LLMs) remains an open challenge,
as maintaining accuracy while performing all matrix multiplications in low precision has proven difficult. This is particularly the case when fine-tuning pre-trained
models, which can have large weight, activation, and error (output gradient) outlier values that make lower-precision optimization difficult. To address this, we
present HALO, a new quantization-aware training approach for Transformers that
enables accurate and efficient low-precision training by combining 1) strategic
placement of Hadamard rotations in both forward and backward passes, which
mitigate outliers, 2) high-performance kernel support, and 3) FSDP integration for
low-precision communication. Our approach ensures that all large matrix multiplications during the forward and backward passes are executed in lower precision.
Applied to L LAMA-family models, HALO achieves near-full-precision-equivalent
results during fine-tuning on various tasks, while delivering up to 1.41× end-to-end
speedup for full fine-tuning on RTX 4090 GPUs. HALO efficiently supports both
standard and parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT). Our results demonstrate the
first practical approach to fully quantized LLM fine-tuning that maintains accuracy
in INT8 and FP6 precision, while delivering performance benefits.

1

Introduction

The high performance of large language models (LLMs) across a wide series of tasks comes with
considerable computational costs; reducing them is one of the key directions in Machine Learning
Systems research [9; 16; 21]. For LLM inference, a standard acceleration approach has been the
quantization of weights and activations, which reduces the precision at which they are stored and
potentially also computed over, e.g. [17; 42; 1; 35; 3].
By contrast, much less is known about quantization in the context of LLM training. While the
recent DeepSeek breakthrough [11] has showed that 8-bit floating-point (FP8) pre-training of large
models can be done both accurately and efficiently, it is not known how to extend this result using
the more widely-supported 8-bit integer (INT8) format, or lower-precision 6-bit formats such as
MXFP6 [38; 41]. Intuitively, accurate and efficient quantized training is much more challenging
than quantized inference: while in inference a single large matrix multiplication occurs in lower
precision, for training, all three matrix multiplications (one during the forward pass and two during
back-propagation) must be executed in lower precision. This creates critical issues both in terms of
accuracy—as quantizing weights, activations, and errors can induce significant training instability—
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to: saleh.ashkboos@inf.ethz.ch

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

