QSVD: Efficient Low-rank Approximation for Unified
Query-Key-Value Weight Compression in
Low-Precision Vision-Language Models

Yutong Wang1∗ Haiyu Wang1∗ Sai Qian Zhang1,2
1
Tandon School of Engineering, New York University
2
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
{yw6594, hw3689, sai.zhang}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are integral to tasks such as image captioning
and visual question answering, but their high computational cost, driven by large
memory footprints and processing time, limits their scalability and real-time applicability. In this work, we propose leveraging Singular-Value Decomposition
(SVD) over the joint query (Q), key (K), and value (V) weight matrices to reduce
KV cache size and computational overhead. We in addition introduce an efficient
rank allocation strategy that dynamically adjusts the SVD rank based on its impact
on VLM accuracy, achieving a significant reduction in both memory usage and
computational cost. Finally, we extend this approach by applying quantization
to both VLM weights and activations, resulting in a highly efficient VLM. Our
method outperforms previous approaches that rely solely on quantization or SVD
by achieving more than 10% accuracy improvement while consuming less hardware
cost, making it better for real-time deployment on resource-constrained devices.We
open source our code at https://github.com/SAI-Lab-NYU/QSVD.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are crucial for advancing artificial intelligence by bridging the gap
between visual perception and natural language understanding. By enabling machines to interpret and
generate both visual and textual information, VLMs open up a wide range of applications, such as
image captioning [63, 17, 8, 11], visual question answering [7, 3, 47], and content-based search [22,
43]. These models are vital for tasks where visual context is needed to fully understand textual queries
or vice versa, such as healthcare [34, 3, 18], education [61], and interactive entertainment [44, 26].
Despite their strong performance, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) incur substantial computational
costs due to the intensive processing required to integrate high-dimensional visual and textual data.
Additionally, their autoregressive token generation places significant pressure on memory bandwidth,
becoming a major bottleneck for inference speed. To enable practical deployment in latency-sensitive
and resource-constrained environments, it is essential to reduce both the computational overhead and
the size of the Key-Value (KV) cache, without compromising model accuracy.
To address this issue, particularly the high memory usage introduced by Multi-Head Attention
(MHA), several variants have been proposed, such as Grouped-Query Attention [1] and Multi-Query
Attention [42, 1], which aim to reduce the number of KV projections while maintaining performance.
A recent proposal, Multi-Head Latent Attention (MLA) in the DeepSeek-v3 model [31], offers a novel
approach to improving VLM efficiency. It significantly reduces the KV cache size by compressing
the KV cache into a latent vector, thereby enhancing inference efficiency.
∗

Authors contributed equally; the order of authorship was assigned randomly.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

