Learning to Add, Multiply, and Execute Algorithmic
Instructions Exactly with Neural Networks
Artur Back de Luca∗
University of Waterloo
abackdel@uwaterloo.ca

George Giapitzakis∗
University of Waterloo
ggiapitz@uwaterloo.ca

Kimon Fountoulakis
University of Waterloo
kfountou@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Neural networks are known for their ability to approximate smooth functions,
yet they fail to generalize perfectly to unseen inputs when trained on discrete
operations. Such operations lie at the heart of algorithmic tasks such as arithmetic,
which is often used as a test bed for algorithmic execution in neural networks. In
this work, we ask: can neural networks learn to execute binary-encoded algorithmic
instructions exactly? We use the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) framework to study
the training dynamics of two-layer fully connected networks in the infinite-width
limit and show how a sufficiently large ensemble of such models can be trained to
execute exactly, with high probability, four fundamental tasks: binary permutations,
binary addition, binary multiplication, and Subtract and Branch if Negative (SBN)
instructions. Since SBN is Turing-complete, our framework extends to computable
functions. We show how this can be efficiently achieved using only logarithmically
many training data. Our approach relies on two techniques: structuring the training
data to isolate bit-level rules, and controlling correlations in the NTK regime to
align model predictions with the target algorithmic executions.

1

Introduction

There has been growing interest in the computational capabilities and efficiency of neural networks
both from a theoretical and empirical perspective [7, 16, 21, 28, 31, 34]. Most works have either
demonstrated the expressive power of different architectures through simulation results or learnability
from a probably approximately correct (PAC) viewpoint. While important, the mere existence of
parameter configurations that realize a specific computation or a generalization bound does not offer
insight into the ability to learn to execute an algorithm through gradient-based training. In fact,
simulating algorithmic instructions with neural networks often involves approximating discontinuous
functions that gradient descent is difficult to converge to with standard training datasets [1].
By modeling training with the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), we prove that two-layer fully connected
networks in the infinite-width limit can learn to iteratively execute binary permutations, binary
addition, binary multiplication, and SBN instructions with a logarithmic number of examples, or
equivalently, a number of examples polynomial in the input bit size. Rather than training on traditional
input-output pairs, we exploit the locality of these algorithms by casting each step as a set of templates.
We show that training with these local templates is sufficient for full algorithmic execution when
composed across iterations of a loop. To our knowledge, this is the first NTK-based proof of exact
learnability for these tasks. A high-level overview of our approach is shown in Figure 1.
Contributions. Our approach is built on two key innovations that overcome the interference and
ambiguity in training data that can usually create problems for neural learning for discrete tasks:
1. Algorithmic template representation: We demonstrate how to design training data that
represent local computations (i.e., operating only on a subset of bits) that can be composed
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
∗

Equal contribution

