Learning long range dependencies through
time reversal symmetry breaking

Guillaume Pourcel
University of Groningen ∗ , INRIA †
g.a.pourcel@rug.nl

Maxence Ernoult
Google DeepMind
mernoult@google.com

Abstract
Deep State Space Models (SSMs) reignite physics-grounded compute paradigms, as
RNNs could natively be embodied into dynamical systems. This calls for dedicated
learning algorithms obeying to core physical principles, with efficient techniques to
simulate these systems and guide their design. We propose Recurrent Hamiltonian
Echo Learning (RHEL), an algorithm which provably computes loss gradients as
finite differences of physical trajectories of non-dissipative, Hamiltonian systems.
In ML terms, RHEL only requires three “forward passes” irrespective of model size,
without explicit Jacobian computation, nor incurring any variance in the gradient
estimation. Motivated by the potential to implement our algorithm in non-digital
physical systems, we first introduce RHEL in continuous time and demonstrate
its formal equivalence with the continuous adjoint state method. To facilitate the
simulation of Hamiltonian systems trained by RHEL, we propose a discrete-time
version of RHEL which is equivalent to Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT)
when applied to a class of recurrent modules which we call Hamiltonian Recurrent
Units (HRUs). This setting allows us to demonstrate the scalability of RHEL by
generalizing these results to hierarchies of HRUs, which we call Hamiltonian SSMs
(HSSMs). We apply RHEL to train HSSMs with linear and nonlinear dynamics on a
variety of time-series tasks ranging from mid-range to long-range classification and
regression with sequence length reaching ∼ 50k. We show that RHEL consistently
matches the performance of BPTT across all models and tasks 3 . This work opens
new doors for the design of scalable, energy-efficient physical systems endowed
with self-learning capabilities for sequence modelling.

1

Introduction

The resurgence of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) for sequence modeling [1], particularly when
integrated with State Space Models (SSMs) [1–6], reopens the debate about the “hardware lottery”.
This raises a critical question with high stakes [7]: should future hardware development continue to
optimize for the long-dominant GPU/TPU-Transformer-backprop paradigm [8], or should it explore
alternative computational approaches alongside novel training algorithms?
This paper embraces a distinctive standpoint in the realm of AI hardware by not distinguishing
algorithms from hardware [9] and posits that some SSMs could be physically realized in dynamical
physical systems and, when endowed with bespoke credit assignment mechanisms, be turned into
“self-learning” machines [10, 11] – see Section 5 for a detailed discussion. To this end, such
algorithms should fulfill at least two requirements: i) use “forward passes” only (i.e. no backward
∗

Bernoulli Institute & CogniGron
University of Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL
3
Our code is available on: https://github.com/guillaumepourcel/rhel

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

