UGG-ReID: Uncertainty-Guided Graph Model for
Multi-Modal Object Re-Identification

Xixi Wan1 Aihua Zheng1∗ Bo Jiang2∗ Beibei Wang2 Chenglong Li1 Jin Tang2
1
Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
1
ahzheng214@foxmail.com, 2 jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-modal object Re-IDentification (ReID) has gained considerable attention
with the goal of retrieving specific targets across cameras using heterogeneous
visual data sources. At present, multi-modal object ReID faces two core challenges:
(1) learning robust features under fine-grained local noise caused by occlusion,
frame loss, and other disruptions; and (2) effectively integrating heterogeneous
modalities to enhance multi-modal representation. To address the above challenges, we propose a robust approach named Uncertainty-Guided Graph model for
multi-modal object ReID (UGG-ReID). UGG-ReID is designed to mitigate noise
interference and facilitate effective multi-modal fusion by estimating both local
and sample-level aleatoric uncertainty and explicitly modeling their dependencies. Specifically, we first propose the Gaussian patch-graph representation model
that leverages uncertainty to quantify fine-grained local cues and capture their
structural relationships. This process boosts the expressiveness of modal-specific
information, ensuring that the generated embeddings are both more informative
and robust. Subsequently, we design an uncertainty-guided mixture of experts
strategy that dynamically routes samples to experts exhibiting low uncertainty.
This strategy effectively suppresses noise-induced instability, leading to enhanced
robustness. Meanwhile, we design an uncertainty-guided routing to strengthen
the multi-modal interaction, improving the performance. UGG-ReID is comprehensively evaluated on five representative multi-modal object ReID datasets,
encompassing diverse spectral modalities. Experimental results show that the
proposed method achieves excellent performance on all datasets and is significantly
better than current methods in terms of noise immunity. Our code is available at
https://github.com/wanxixi11/UGG-ReID.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal data has emerged as a significant trend in artificial intelligence [1–4]. Especially driven
by large model technology, more and more applications have begun to utilize multi-modal information
for comprehensive analysis [5–7]. Multi-modal object Re-IDentification (ReID) [8–11], as a cuttingedge direction of this research, not only broadens the application boundaries of traditional object
ReID [12–14], but also effectively makes up for some limitations in cross-modal object ReID [15–17].
Recently, researchers have extensively explored multi-modal feature fusion and matching strategies to
bridge the representation gap between different modalities for object ReID [9, 18–20]. For example,
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

