S PATIAL LM: Training Large Language Models for
Structured Indoor Modeling

Yongsen Mao1∗ Junhao Zhong1∗ Chuan Fang2 Jia Zheng1
Rui Tang1 Hao Zhu1 Ping Tan2 Zihan Zhou1
1
Manycore Tech Inc. 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
https://manycore-research.github.io/SpatialLM

Abstract
S PATIAL LM is a large language model designed to process 3D point cloud data
and generate structured 3D scene understanding outputs. These outputs include
architectural elements like walls, doors, windows, and oriented object boxes with
their semantic categories. Unlike previous methods which exploit task-specific
network designs, our model adheres to the standard multimodal LLM architecture
and is fine-tuned directly from open-source LLMs.
To train S PATIAL LM, we collect a large-scale, high-quality synthetic dataset
consisting of the point clouds of 12,328 indoor scenes (54,778 rooms) with groundtruth 3D annotations, and conduct a careful study on various modeling and training
decisions. On public benchmarks, our model gives state-of-the-art performance
in layout estimation and competitive results in 3D object detection. With that, we
show a feasible path for enhancing the spatial understanding capabilities of modern
LLMs for applications in augmented reality, embodied robotics, and more.

1

Introduction

3D indoor environments are ubiquitous in our daily lives. We spend a lot of time and perform various
activities in such environments every day. Therefore, a long-standing goal of artificial intelligence is
to teach machines to perceive, reason about, and interact with 3D indoor scenes as humans do. In this
work, we focus on the task of structured indoor modeling, which aims to extract structured indoor
scene descriptions from raw sensorial inputs (i.e., RGBD scans). Specifically, the scene description
includes both the architectural layout (i.e., walls, doors, and windows) and 3D object bounding boxes
in the indoor environment. Such 3D structure information has been shown to benefit a wide range of
real-world applications such as scene editing [40], augmented reality [4, 2], and robot navigation [17].
Compared to 3D formats such as meshes, voxels, or implicit functions, the structured scene description
provides a highly compact yet flexible scene representation. In this paper, our first contribution
is to regard the structured descriptions as scripts of a general-purpose language (i.e., Python) and
propose to predict the language in text form, as illustrated in Figure 1. This design choice has several
advantages: (i) it is human interpretable and editable; (ii) it can be easily extended to incorporate
any new classes without affecting existing content in the scripts; and (iii) it allows us to leverage the
strong built-in coding capability of pre-trained large language models.
Therefore, our goal is to implement our method by directly fine-tuning open-source LLMs. While
modern (multimodal) LLMs have revolutionized fields like natural language processing, 2D image
understanding and generation, few work has attempted to use LLMs for 3D structured scene modeling.
This is partly due to the lack of large-scale, high-quality datasets for the task. In this paper, as our
second contribution, we collect a new synthetic dataset, which consists of the point clouds of 12,328
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

