Gated Attention for Large Language Models:
Non-linearity, Sparsity, and Attention-Sink-Free

Zihan Qiu∗1 , Zekun Wang∗1 , Bo Zheng∗1 , Zeyu Huang∗2 ,
Kaiyue Wen3 , Songlin Yang4 , Rui Men1 , Le Yu1 , Fei Huang1 , Suozhi Huang5 ,
Dayiheng LiuB1 , Jingren Zhou1 , Junyang LinB1
1
Qwen Team, Alibaba Group 2 University of Edinburgh 3 Stanford University
4
MIT 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Gating mechanisms have been widely utilized, from early models like LSTMs [1]
and Highway Networks [2] to recent state space models [3], linear attention [4], and
also softmax attention [5, 6]. Yet, existing literature rarely examines the specific
effects of gating. In this work, we conduct comprehensive experiments to systematically investigate gating-augmented softmax attention variants. Specifically, we
perform a comprehensive comparison over 30 variants of 15B Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) models and 1.7B dense models trained on a 3.5 trillion token dataset. Our
central finding is that a simple modification—applying an head-specific sigmoid
gate after the Scaled Dot-Product Attention (SDPA)—consistently improves performance. This modification also enhances training stability, tolerates larger learning
rates, and improves scaling properties. By comparing various gating positions
and computational variants, we attribute this effectiveness to two key factors: (1)
introducing non-linearity upon the low-rank mapping in the softmax attention, and
(2) applying query-dependent sparse gating scores to modulate the SDPA output.
Notably, we find this sparse gating mechanism mitigates ‘massive activation’ [7],
‘attention sink’ [8], and enhances long-context extrapolation performance, and we
also release related codes and models to facilitate future research. Furthermore, the
most effective SDPA output gating is used in the Qwen3-Next models.

1

Introduction

Gating mechanism is well-established in neural networks. Early architectures, such as LSTMs [1],
Highway Networks [2] and GRUs [9], pioneer the use of gating to control information flow across
time steps or layers and improve gradient propagation. This principle persists in modern architectures.
Recent sequence modeling works, including state-space models [3, 10] and attention mechanisms [11,
12, 13, 4, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 5, 6] commonly apply gating, often to modulate the outputs of tokenmixer components. Despite its widespread adoption and empirical success, most recent works do not
look into the gating mechanisms like the gating scores and their effect on the model’s hidden states.
Insufficient understanding hinders assessing gating’s true contribution, especially when confounded
with other architectural factors. For instance, while Switch Heads [19, 20] introduces a sigmoid gating
to select top-K attention head experts, our experiments reveal an interesting finding (Appendix A.1):
substantial performance gains persist even when reduced to a single expert, where the gate simply
modulates the value output. This strongly suggests the gating itself provides significant intrinsic value,
separate from the routing mechanism. Similarly, in Native Sparse Attention (NSA) [21], while overall
performance improvements are demonstrated, they do not disentangle the contributions of its gating
mechanism from the effects of the sparse attention design itself. These considerations underscore the
need to rigorously disentangle the effects of gating from other architectural components.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

