Beyond Scalars: Concept-Based Alignment Analysis in
Vision Transformers
Johanna Vielhaben∗
Fraunhofer HHI
Jim Berend
Fraunhofer HHI

Dilyara Bareeva
Fraunhofer HHI

Wojciech Samek†
Fraunhofer HHI &
Technical University of Berlin

Nils Strodthoff‡
Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg

Abstract
Measuring the alignment between representations lets us understand similarities
between the feature spaces of different models, such as Vision Transformers trained
under diverse paradigms. However, traditional measures for representational alignment yield only scalar values that obscure how these spaces agree in terms of
learned features. To address this, we combine alignment analysis with concept
discovery, allowing a fine-grained breakdown of alignment into individual concepts.
This approach reveals both universal concepts across models and each representation’s internal concept structure. We introduce a new definition of concepts as
non-linear manifolds, hypothesizing they better capture the geometry of the feature
space. A sanity check demonstrates the advantage of this manifold-based definition
over linear baselines for concept-based alignment. Finally, our alignment analysis
of four different ViTs shows that increased supervision tends to reduce semantic
organization in learned representations.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) [11] are gaining increased popularity as backbones for various computer
vision tasks. There is a large zoo of pre-trained models covering different learning paradigms and
supervision levels, with different capabilities [19] and thereby different internal representations.
Consequently, understanding and comparing these representations is essential for practitioners when
selecting pre-trained models, assessing robustness and generalization properties, and designing finetuning protocols. This opens up questions like: Where does the model representation change the most
and how? Which concepts (i.e. dominant structures in representation space) are encoded in lower
layers vs. upper layers? Does the model encode semantically similar concepts in spatial proximity
to each other? How are the representations of model A aligned to that of model B across layers?
One way to address these questions is by examining patterns in hidden activations and measuring
representational alignment[35, 44], yet existing methods often provide only a single scalar to indicate
similarity[41], leaving finer details unexamined.
In this paper, we propose a fine-grained alignment analysis based on concepts that structure the
latent representation. This gives insights into universal concepts between representations of different
layers or models, as well as how a single representation is structured. To achieve concept-based
alignment we need solutions for concept discovery, and measuring the alignment between concept
∗

Now at Graphcore
Corresponding author wojciech.samek@hhi.fraunhofer.de
‡
Corresponding author nils.strodthoff@uol.de
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

