MTL-KD: Multi-Task Learning Via Knowledge
Distillation for Generalizable Neural Vehicle Routing
Solver
Yuepeng Zheng1∗ , Fu Luo2,3∗ , Zhenkun Wang2,3 , Yaoxin Wu4 , Yu Zhou1†
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fully Actuated System Control Theory and Technology,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences,
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
2019271024@email.szu.edu.cn,luof2023@mail.sustech.edu.cn
wangzhenkun90@gmail.com,y.wu2@tue.nl, zhouyu_1022@126.com

Abstract
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) in Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) is a
promising approach for training a unified model capable of solving multiple Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) variants. However, existing Reinforcement Learning
(RL)-based multi-task methods can only train light decoder models on small-scale
problems, exhibiting limited generalization ability when solving large-scale problems. To overcome this limitation, this work introduces a novel multi-task learning
method driven by knowledge distillation (MTL-KD), which enables efficient training of heavy decoder models with strong generalization ability. The proposed
MTL-KD method transfers policy knowledge from multiple distinct RL-based
single-task models to a single heavy decoder model, facilitating label-free training
and effectively improving the model’s generalization ability across diverse tasks.
In addition, we introduce a flexible inference strategy termed Random Reordering
Re-Construction (R3C), which is specifically adapted for diverse VRP tasks and
further boosts the performance of the multi-task model. Experimental results on 6
seen and 10 unseen VRP variants with up to 1,000 nodes indicate that our proposed
method consistently achieves superior performance on both uniform and real-world
benchmarks, demonstrating robust generalization abilities. The code is available at
https://github.com/CIAM-Group/MTLKD.

1

Introduction

The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is a classical combinatorial optimization problem (COP) with
widespread application across numerous real-world scenarios, including logistics distribution, traffic
scheduling, and emergency response [1–5]. Obtaining exact VRP solutions is computationally difficult
due to its NP-hard nature [6]. Traditional heuristic algorithms [7–9] exhibit superior performance on
many classic VRP tasks. However, they typically necessitate substantial domain-specific knowledge
for design. In recent years, neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) [10–20] has emerged as a
∗
†

Equal contributors
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

