MEGADance: Mixture-of-Experts Architecture for
Genre-Aware 3D Dance Generation
Kaixing Yang1∗ Xulong Tang3∗ Ziqiao Peng1∗ Yuxuan Hu1
1
Renmin University of China 2 Tsinghua University

3

Jun He1† Hongyan Liu2†
Malou Tech Inc

Abstract
Music-driven 3D dance generation has attracted increasing attention in recent
years, with promising applications in choreography, virtual reality, and creative
content creation. Previous research has generated promising realistic dance movement from audio signals. However, traditional methods underutilize genre conditioning, often treating it as auxiliary modiﬁers rather than core semantic drivers.
This oversight compromises music-motion synchronization and disrupts dance
genre continuity, particularly during complex rhythmic transitions, thereby leading to visually unsatisfactory effects. To address the challenge, we propose
MEGADance, a novel architecture for music-driven 3D dance generation. By
decoupling choreographic consistency into dance generality and genre speciﬁcity,
MEGADance demonstrates signiﬁcant dance quality and strong genre controllability. It consists of two stages: (1) High-Fidelity Dance Quantization Stage
(HFDQ), which encodes dance motions into a latent representation by Finite
Scalar Quantization (FSQ) and reconstructs them with kinematic-dynamic constraints, and (2) Genre-Aware Dance Generation Stage (GADG), which maps music into the latent representation by synergistic utilization of Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) mechanism with Mamba-Transformer hybrid backbone. Extensive experiments on the FineDance and AIST++ dataset demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of MEGADance both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code is available
at https://github.com/XulongT/MEGADance.

1

Introduction

Music-to-dance generation is a crucial task that translates auditory input into dynamic motion, with
signiﬁcant applications in virtual reality, choreography, and digital entertainment[1, 2]. By automating this process, it enables deeper exploration of the intrinsic relationship between music and
movement[3], while expanding possibilities for creative content generation. Due to its broad impact,
music-to-dance generation has attracted increasing attention[4, 5, 6].
Current music-to-dance generation approaches have witnessed rapid progress and can be broadly
categorized into two paradigms[4, 7]: (1) One-stage methods directly map musical features to human
motion[8, 6, 9]. (2) Two-stage methods ﬁrst construct choreographic units and then learn their
probability distributions conditioned on music [4, 5, 10]. However, previous methods only treat
genre as a weak auxiliary bias rather than the core semantic driver[11, 2, 8], facing several essential
problems such as misaligned music-motion synchronization and disrupted dance genre continuity.
For example, A Uyghur movements clip is inappropriately mixed into the Popping routine, when a
typical Popping music exhibits complex transitions in rhythm and intensity, as shown in Fig. 1. This
oversight leads to unsatisfactory visual effects, and fails to meet genre-speciﬁc user demands.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

