Reverse Diffusion Sequential Monte Carlo Samplers

Luhuan Wu∗
Columbia University

Yi Han
Columbia University

Christian A. Naesseth
University of Amsterdam

John P. Cunningham
Columbia University

Abstract
We propose a novel sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) method for sampling from
unnormalized target distributions based on a reverse denoising diffusion process.
While recent diffusion-based samplers simulate the reverse diffusion using approximate score functions, they can suffer from accumulating errors due to time
discretization and imperfect score estimation. In this work, we introduce a principled SMC framework that formalizes diffusion-based samplers as proposals while
systematically correcting for their biases. The core idea is to construct informative
intermediate target distributions that progressively steer the sampling trajectory toward the final target distribution. Although ideal intermediate targets are intractable,
we develop exact approximations using quantities from the score estimation-based
proposal, without requiring additional model training or inference overhead. The
resulting sampler, termed Reverse Diffusion Sequential Monte Carlo, enables consistent sampling and unbiased estimation of the target’s normalization constant
under mild conditions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a range
of synthetic targets and real-world Bayesian inference problems. 2

1

Introduction

Sampling from unnormalized target distributions is a fundamental problem in many applications,
ranging from Bayesian inference [1, 2] to simulating molecular systems [3]. Classical methods
like Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulate a Markov chain with the target as its stationary
distribution, but they can suffer from slow mixing and difficulty traversing between modes for complex
distributions. Particle methods such as importance sampling generate exact samples in a large compute
limit; yet they struggle with the curse of dimensionality [4]. Alternatively, variational inference (VI)
[5] casts inference as an optimization task, though its success depends on the expressiveness of the
variational family and the complexity of the optimization landscape.
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a powerful approach for sampling from complex distributions [6, 7]. They define a forward noising process that gradually transforms a complex target
distribution into a simple base distribution. A reverse denoising process then reconstructs target
samples by simulating the dynamics backward in time, starting from the base distribution and guided
by a time-dependent score function. In the generative modeling setting, this score function is approximated by a neural network trained on samples from the target distribution. However, in the sampling
context, such training data are unavailable and only an unnormalized target density is accessible.
Recent works on diffusion-based samplers explore alternative ways to approximate the score function
directly from the target density, enabling sampling without access to training data. One line of works,
∗
2

Correspondence email: lw2827@columbia.edu
Our code is available at https://github.com/LuhuanWu/RDSMC.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

