S TRATUS: A Multi-agent System for Autonomous
Reliability Engineering of Modern Clouds
Yinfang Chen⋄∗
Noah Zheutlin†

Jiaqi Pan⋄¶∗
Jackson Clark⋄∗
Yiming Su⋄∗
†
†
Bhavya Bhavya
Rohan Arora
Yu Deng†
†
⋄
Saurabh Jha
Tianyin Xu
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign⋄ IBM Research† IIIS, Tsinghua University¶

Abstract
In cloud-scale systems, failures are the norm. A distributed computing cluster
exhibits hundreds of machine failures and thousands of disk failures; software
bugs and misconfigurations are reported to be more frequent. The demand for
autonomous, AI-driven reliability engineering continues to grow, as existing humanin-the-loop practices can hardly keep up with the scale of modern clouds. This paper
presents S TRATUS, an LLM-based multi-agent system for realizing autonomous
Site Reliability Engineering (SRE) of cloud services. S TRATUS consists of multiple
specialized agents (e.g., for failure detection, diagnosis, mitigation), organized
in a state machine to assist system-level safety reasoning and enforcement. We
formalize a key safety specification of agentic SRE systems like S TRATUS, termed
Transactional No-Regression (TNR), which enables safe exploration and iteration.
We show that TNR can effectively improve autonomous failure mitigation. S TRA TUS significantly outperforms state-of-the-art SRE agents in terms of success rate
of failure mitigation problems in AIOpsLab and ITBench (two SRE benchmark
suites), by at least 1.5 times across various models. S TRATUS shows a promising
path toward practical deployment of agentic systems for cloud reliability.

1

Introduction

Cloud systems are the backbone of today’s large-scale computing and end-user applications. Their
reliability is crucial, with a few minutes of outages leading to significant user impacts and financial
losses [9, 11]. Given the ever-growing scale, complexity, and dynamics of cloud systems, cloud
reliability continues to be a grand challenge. Despite extensive efforts [32, 39, 58, 82], modern clouds
still struggle to detect, localize, and mitigate system failures effectively and timely. One essential
reason is the existing human-centric reliability engineering practice [12, 13]—human engineers are
in the loop, responsible for decision making, e.g., which alerts to act upon, which tools to use, and

Localization
RCA
Mitigation

SRE Tasks

Stratus
Detection
Agent
Diagnosis
Agent
Mitigation
Agent
Undo
Agent

Toolset
Control Plane

Detection

Observability

TelemetryCollection
NL2Kubectl

Traces

Linting; Notification

Logs

Oracles

Metrics

• Alert clearance
• System health
• Workloads

Cloud

System states

Services
Failure

Figure 1: Overview of S TRATUS, an LLM-based multi-agent system for autonomous Site Reliability
Engineering (SRE) of modern cloud services.
∗

Co-primary authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

