Kernel Learning with Adversarial Features:
Numerical Efficiency and Adaptive Regularization

Antônio H. Ribeiro
Uppsala University
antonio.horta.ribeiro@it.uu.se
Thomas B. Schön
Uppsala University
thomas.schon@uu.se

David Vävinggren
Uppsala University
david.vavinggren@it.uu.se

Dave Zachariah
Uppsala University
dave.zachariah@it.uu.se

Francis Bach
PSL Research University / INRIA
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
Adversarial training has emerged as a key technique to enhance model robustness against adversarial input perturbations. Many of the existing methods rely on
computationally expensive min-max problems that limit their application in practice. We propose a novel formulation of adversarial training in reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces, shifting from input to feature-space perturbations. This reformulation enables the exact solution of inner maximization and efficient optimization.
It also provides a regularized estimator that naturally adapts to the noise level and
the smoothness of the underlying function. We establish conditions under which
the feature-perturbed formulation is a relaxation of the original problem and propose an efficient optimization algorithm based on iterative kernel ridge regression.
We provide generalization bounds that help to understand the properties of the
method. We also extend the formulation to multiple kernel learning. Empirical
evaluation shows good performance in both clean and adversarial settings.

1

Introduction

Adversarial training can be used to learn models that are robust against input perturbations (Madry
et al., 2018). It considers training samples that have been modified by an adversary, with the goal of
obtaining a model that will be more robust when faced with newly perturbed samples. Consider a
training dataset {(xi , yi )}ni=1 consisting of n samples of dimension X × R. The training procedure
is formulated as the following min-max optimization problem:
n
1X
max ℓ(yi , f (xi + ∆xi )),
(1)
min
∆xi ∈ΩX
f ∈H n
i=1
finding the best function f ∈ H subject to the worst disturbances in a predefined set of admissible
input perturbations ΩX , for instance, ΩX = {∆x : ∥∆x∥ ≤ δ}. For nonlinear functions, solving
this problem directly is often challenging; simple optimization typically requires two stages. First
we differentiate through the inner maximization, which is often approximated via projected gradient descent (Madry et al., 2018), and then we differentiate again through the solver steps in the
computation of gradients through the outer minimization.
We consider H to be a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) and represent the function f as a
linear model applied to a (potentially infinite-dimensional) feature transformation of the input. Let
ϕ(x) denote the corresponding feature map, so that any f ∈ H evaluated at x can be expressed as
f (x) = ⟨f , ϕ(x)⟩, where ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the inner product in H, see Schölkopf and Smola (2002).
In this paper, we introduce perturbations directly in the feature space rather than in the input space.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

