Defending Multimodal Backdoored Models by
Repulsive Visual Prompt Tuning

1

Zhifang Zhang1,2 Shuo He3∗ Haobo Wang4 Bingquan Shen5 Lei Feng1∗
Southeast University 2 University of Queensland 3 Nanyang Technological University
4
Zhejiang University 5 National University of Singapore

Abstract
Multimodal contrastive learning models (e.g., CLIP) can learn high-quality representations from large-scale image-text datasets, while they exhibit significant
vulnerabilities to backdoor attacks, raising serious safety concerns. In this paper,
we reveal that CLIP’s vulnerabilities primarily stem from its tendency to encode
features beyond in-dataset predictive patterns, compromising its visual feature
resistivity to input perturbations. This makes its encoded features highly susceptible to being reshaped by backdoor triggers. To address this challenge, we
propose Repulsive Visual Prompt Tuning (RVPT), a novel defense approach that
employs deep visual prompt tuning with a specially designed feature-repelling
loss. Specifically, RVPT adversarially repels the encoded features from deeper
layers while optimizing the standard cross-entropy loss, ensuring that only predictive features in downstream tasks are encoded, thereby enhancing CLIP’s visual
feature resistivity against input perturbations and mitigating its susceptibility to
backdoor attacks. Unlike existing multimodal backdoor defense methods that
typically require the availability of poisoned data or involve fine-tuning the entire
model, RVPT leverages few-shot downstream clean samples and only tunes a small
number of parameters. Empirical results demonstrate that RVPT tunes only 0.27%
of the parameters in CLIP, yet it significantly outperforms state-of-the-art defense
methods, reducing the attack success rate from 89.70% to 2.76% against the most
advanced multimodal attacks on ImageNet and effectively generalizes its defensive
capabilities across multiple datasets. The code is publicly available in our GitHub
repository: https://github.com/zhangzf01/RVPT.

1

Introduction

Recently, Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [52] has emerged as a powerful base model
across multiple domains. Unlike traditional models that rely on uni-modal supervision, CLIP aligns
visual and textual signals to learn rich representations from numerous image-text pairs in the pretraining stage. This unique training paradigm enables its impressive performance in open-vocabulary
visual recognition [64] and robustness to distribution shift [13].
However, despite CLIP’s success in visual recognition, recent research [5, 4] has revealed its vulnerabilities against backdoor attacks in downstream tasks. The vulnerabilities can be roughly categorized
into two aspects. First, concerns arise from its training data collection process: the data is noisy,
uncurated, and sourced from the web, which facilitates adversarial poisoning of the image-text
pairs. Second, CLIP demonstrates heightened susceptibility to a smaller number of poisoned training
samples: recent studies [5] have empirically shown that poisoning CLIP may require injecting orders
of magnitude fewer poisoned data into the training dataset than poisoning conventional supervised
* Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

