Controlling the Spread of Epidemics on Networks with
Differential Privacy

Dung Nguyen
Department of Computer Science
Haverford College
Haverford, PA 19041
dnguyen1@haverford.edu
Renata Valieva
Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
rvalieva@umd.edu

Aravind Srinivasan
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
srin01umd@gmail.com
Anil Vullikanti
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
vsakumar@virginia.edu

Jiayi Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
jwu12328@terpmail.umd.edu

Abstract
Designing effective strategies for controlling epidemic spread by vaccination is an
important question in epidemiology, especially in the early stages when vaccines
are limited. This is a challenging question when the contact network is very
heterogeneous, and strategies based on controlling network properties, such as the
degree and spectral radius, have been shown to be effective. Implementation of such
strategies requires detailed information on the contact structure, which might be
sensitive in many applications. Our focus here is on choosing effective vaccination
strategies when the edges are sensitive and differential privacy guarantees are
needed. Our main contributions are (ε, δ)-differentially private algorithms for
designing vaccination strategies by reducing the maximum degree and spectral
radius. Our key technique is a private algorithm for the multi-set multi-cover
problem, which we use for controlling network properties. We evaluate privacyutility tradeoffs of our algorithms on multiple synthetic and real-world networks,
and show their effectiveness.

1

Introduction

A fundamental public health problem is to implement interventions such as vaccination to control the
spread of an outbreak, e.g., [37, 8]. This is especially important in the early stages of an outbreak,
when resources are limited. Here, we focus on network based models for epidemic spread, such
as SI/SIS/SIR models, in which the disease spreads on a contact network G = (V, E) from an
infected node u ∈ V to each susceptible neighbor v of u independently with some probability,
e.g., [32, 1, 16, 36]; such models (which are simplifications of agent based models) have been used
extensively in public health analyses in recent years. Interventions such as vaccination and isolation,
can be modeled as node removal in such models [32]. The Vaccination Problem (VP), introduced
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

