Availability-aware Sensor Fusion
via Unified Canonical Space

Dong-Hee Paek
Seung-Hyun Kong∗
CCS Graduate School of Mobility
KAIST
{donghee.paek, skong}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Sensor fusion of camera, LiDAR, and 4-dimensional (4D) Radar has brought a
significant performance improvement in autonomous driving. However, there still
exist fundamental challenges: deeply coupled fusion methods assume continuous
sensor availability, making them vulnerable to sensor degradation and failure,
whereas sensor-wise cross-attention fusion methods struggle with computational
cost and unified feature representation. This paper presents availability-aware
sensor fusion (ASF), a novel method that employs unified canonical projection
(UCP) to enable consistency in all sensor features for fusion and cross-attention
across sensors along patches (CASAP) to enhance robustness of sensor fusion
against sensor degradation and failure. As a result, the proposed ASF shows a
superior object detection performance to the existing state-of-the-art fusion methods
under various weather and sensor degradation (or failure) conditions. Extensive
experiments on the K-Radar dataset demonstrate that ASF achieves improvements
of 9.7% in APBEV (87.2%) and 20.1% in AP3D (73.6%) in object detection at
IoU=0.5, while requiring a low computational cost. All codes are available at
https://github.com/kaist-avelab/k-radar.

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving technology has advanced rapidly, with multiple companies adopting multi-sensor
fusion approaches that combine two or more sensors, such as cameras, LiDAR, and 4-dimensional
(4D) Radar, to achieve more robust and reliable perception (Badue et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020).
Cameras uniquely provide color information but struggle with depth estimation; LiDAR delivers
high-resolution 3-dimensional (3D) point cloud data but is less reliable in adverse weather conditions
(Zheng et al., 2023a); and 4D Radar, despite its relatively low angular resolution, offers robustness
in adverse weather and directly measures relative velocity (Paek et al., 2022; Palffy et al., 2022;
Kong et al., 2024; Sun and Zhang, 2021). This complementary nature initiated sensor fusion between
camera, LiDAR, and 4D Radar to improve perception performance and reliability compared to a
single-sensor (Yan et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023a; Zheng et al., 2023b).
Most multi-modal sensor fusion methods can be categorized into two methods. The first is deeply
coupled fusion (DCF), which directly combines feature maps (FMs) extracted by sensor-specific
encoder, as illustrated in Fig. 1-(a). While it is simple to implement and computationally efficient with
excellent performance in various benchmarks (Chae et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023a; Liang et al., 2024;
Zhao et al., 2024a; Caesar et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2013), it assumes all sensors are functioning
properly and consistently. This makes DCF vulnerable to sensor degradation due to adverse weathers,
surface-damages, and sensor failure. Moreover, DCF requires retraining the entire neural network
when the number of sensors changes, as the size of the fused FM (i.e., the input to the detection
∗

corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

