Advanced Sign Language Video Generation with
Compressed and Quantized Multi-Condition
Tokenization
Cong Wang1∗
Zexuan Deng1∗
Zhiwei Jiang1†
Yafeng Yin1†
Fei Shen2
1
1
1
Zifeng Cheng
Shiping Ge
Shiwei Gan
Qing Gu1
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
National University of Singapore
{cw,dengzx}@smail.nju.edu.cn {jzw,yafeng}@nju.edu.cn
shenfei29@nus.edu.sg {chengzf,shipingge,sw}@smail.nju.edu.cn
guq@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Sign Language Video Generation (SLVG) seeks to generate identity-preserving
sign language videos from spoken language texts. Existing methods primarily
rely on the single coarse condition (e.g., skeleton sequences) as the intermediary
to bridge the translation model and the video generation model, which limits
both the naturalness and expressiveness of the generated videos. To overcome
these limitations, we propose SignViP, a novel SLVG framework that incorporates
multiple fine-grained conditions for improved generation fidelity. Rather than
directly translating error-prone high-dimensional conditions, SignViP adopts a
discrete tokenization paradigm to integrate and represent fine-grained conditions
(i.e., fine-grained poses and 3D hands). SignViP contains three core components.
(1) Sign Video Diffusion Model is jointly trained with a multi-condition encoder to
learn continuous embeddings that encapsulate fine-grained motion and appearance.
(2) Finite Scalar Quantization (FSQ) Autoencoder is further trained to compress
and quantize these embeddings into discrete tokens for compact representation
of the conditions. (3) Multi-Condition Token Translator is trained to translate
spoken language text to discrete multi-condition tokens. During inference, MultiCondition Token Translator first translates the spoken language text into discrete
multi-condition tokens. These tokens are then decoded to continuous embeddings
by FSQ Autoencoder, which are subsequently injected into Sign Video Diffusion
Model to guide video generation. Experimental results show that SignViP achieves
state-of-the-art performance across metrics, including video quality, temporal
coherence, and semantic fidelity. The code is available at https://github.com/
umnooob/signvip/.

1

Introduction

Sign language, as a visual language, serves as the primary communication medium for deaf individuals.
Early research focused on Sign Language Recognition (SLR) [32, 45, 90], Translation (SLT) [5, 20, 42,
14], or Production (SLP) [58, 56, 60, 86, 83]. More recently, Sign Language Video Generation (SLVG)
[57, 61, 47, 69] has gained increasing attention, which aims to generate realistic and expressive sign
language videos from spoken language texts, preserving the unique identity of a target signer, as
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

