Graph Few-Shot Learning via Adaptive Spectrum
Experts and Cross-Set Distribution Calibration

Yonghao Liu1∗ , Yajun Wang1∗ , Chunli Guo2∗ , Wei Pang3 , Ximing Li1,4 ,
Fausto Giunchiglia5 , Xiaoyue Feng1† , Renchu Guan1†
1
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of the Ministry
of Education, College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
2
College of Software, Jilin University
3
School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University
4
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
5
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento
{yonghao20, yajun24, guocl24}@mails.jlu.edu.cn,
w.pang@hw.ac.uk, liximing86@gmail.com, fausto.giunchiglia@unitn.it,
{fengxy, guanrenchu}@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph few-shot learning has attracted increasing attention due to its ability to
rapidly adapt models to new tasks with only limited labeled nodes. Despite the
remarkable progress made by existing graph few-shot learning methods, several
key limitations remain. First, most current approaches rely on predefined and
unified graph filters (e.g., low-pass or high-pass filters) to globally enhance or
suppress node frequency signals. Such fixed spectral operations fail to account
for the heterogeneity of local topological structures inherent in real-world graphs.
Moreover, these methods often assume that the support and query sets are drawn
from the same distribution. However, under few-shot conditions, the limited labeled
data in the support set may not sufficiently capture the complex distribution of
the query set, leading to suboptimal generalization. To address these challenges,
we propose GRACE, a novel Graph few-shot leaRning framework that integrates
Adaptive spectrum experts with Cross-sEt distribution calibration techniques. Theoretically, the proposed approach enhances model generalization by adapting to
both local structural variations and cross-set distribution calibration. Empirically,
GRACE consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines across a wide range of
experimental settings. Our code can be found here.

1

Introduction

Graphs, as a fundamental and expressive data structure, are widely employed to model a variety of
complex systems in the real world [1, 2], including social networks [3, 4], transportation networks
[5, 6], and protein–protein interaction networks [7, 8]. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs)
have emerged as the de facto standard for learning on graph-structured data due to their powerful
representation capabilities. However, the effectiveness of GNN-based models heavily relies on the
availability of a large number of labeled nodes. A major challenge lies in the fact that annotating
large-scale datasets is often impractical in real-world scenarios [9]. This process is not only timeand resource-intensive, but also demands extensive domain-specific expertise in certain specialized
fields [10, 11]. For example, in the biomedical domain, accurately annotating unknown genes
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

