HoT-VI: Reparameterizable Variational Inference for
Capturing Instance-Level High-Order Correlations

1

Junxi Xiao1
Qinliang Su1,2∗ Zexin Yuan1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
{xiaojx7,yuanzx7}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn suqliang@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Mean-field variational inference (VI), despite its scalability, is limited by the
independence assumption, making it unsuitable for scenarios with correlated data
instances. Existing structured VI methods either focus on correlations among latent
dimensions which lack scalability for modeling instance-level correlations, or are
restricted to simple first-order dependencies, limiting their expressiveness. In this
paper, we propose High-order Tree-structured Variational Inference (HoT-VI)2 ,
that explicitly models k-order instance-level correlations among latent variables. By
expressing the global posterior through overlapping k-dimensional local marginals,
our method enables efficient parameterized sampling via a sequential procedure.
To ensure the validity of these marginals, we introduce a conditional correlation
parameterization method that guarantees positive definiteness of their correlation
matrices. We further extend our method with a tree-structured backbone to capture
more flexible dependency patterns. Extensive experiments on time-series and graphstructured datasets demonstrate that modeling higher-order correlations leads to
significantly improved posterior approximations and better performance across
various downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) is a widely used framework for approximating the posterior distribution in latent-variable models pθ (X, Z) = pθ (X|Z)p(Z), where X = [x1 , x2 , · · · , xN ] and
Z = [z1 , z2 , · · · , zN ] are observed data and the corresponding latent variables, respectively.
VI seeks to approximate the intractable posterior p(Z|X) with a tractable surrogate distribution qϕ (Z|X) from a parametrized distribution family Qϕ , by maximizing the evidence lower
bound L(θ, ϕ) = EZ∼qϕ [log pθ (X, Z) − log qϕ (Z|X)]. In typical settings where data instances
are assumedQto be independent, the joint distribution naturally factorizes across instances as
pθ (X, Z) = i pθ (xi , zi ) where xi and zi denote the i-th data instance andQlatent variable. Under
these scenarios, we can reasonably use the mean-field posterior qϕ (Z|X) = i qϕ (zi |xi ) for model
inference and training. However, many real-world datasets exhibit complex relationships among
instances, making the independence assumption across data instances untenable. For instance, in multivariate time series [59, 21], the latent states zi at a timestamp may depend on those preceding and
succeeding timestamps. Similarly in graph-structured data such as social networks [19] and citation
graphs [29], the latent representations zi and zj of connected nodes are typically correlated due to
underlying relational structure. In these scenarios, the mean-field posterior is clearly inadequate, as it
ignores crucial dependencies among data points.
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Code is available at: https://github.com/Mephestopheles/HoT-VI.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

