Prompt-Guided Alignment with Information
Bottleneck Makes Image Compression Also a Restorer

Xuelin Shen2∗ Quan Liu2,3∗ Jiayin Xu2,3

Wenhan Yang1 †

1

Peng Cheng Laboratory
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
shenxuelin@gml.ac.cn, quanliu@gml.ac.cn
jiayinxu@gml.ac.cn, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Learned Image Compression (LIC) models face critical challenges in real-world
scenarios due to various environmental degradations, such as fog and rain. Due to
the distribution mismatch between degraded inputs and clean training data, welltrained LIC models suffer from reduced compression efficiency, while retraining
dedicated models for diverse degradation types is costly and impractical. Our
method addresses the above issue by leveraging prompt learning under the information bottleneck principle, enabling compact extraction of shared components
between degraded and clean images for improved latent alignment and compression
efficiency. In detail, we propose an Information Bottleneck-constrained Latent Representation Unifying (IB-LRU) scheme, in which a Probabilistic Prompt Generator
(PPG) is deployed to simultaneously capture the distribution of different degradations. Such a design dynamically guides the latent-representation process at the
encoder through a gated modulation process. Moreover, to promote the degradation
distribution capture process, the probabilistic prompt learning is guided by the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle. That is, IB constrains the information encoded
in the prompt to focus solely on degradation characteristics while avoiding the inclusion of redundant image contextual information. We apply our IB-LRU method to a
variety of state-of-the-art LIC backbones, and extensive experiments under various
degradation scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness of our design. Code is available
at https://github.com/liuquan0521-sys/IB-LRU-compression.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, Learned Image Compression (LIC) has emerged as a competitive alternative
to conventional image coding standards [1, 2, 3] by leveraging deep neural networks to optimize
the rate-distortion trade-off in an end-to-end manner. Existing LIC models typically adopt an
autoencoder structure, where the encoder extracts a latent representation and the decoder reconstructs
the image, characterized by an integrated entropy model that captures spatial dependencies in the latent
representation and plays a critical role in compression efficiency. A milestone in entropy modeling is
the introduction of the hyperprior [4], which adopts the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework
and introduces a Gaussian-based prior to model the distribution of latent representations. This
approach enables the compression model to adaptively learn compact latent representations tailored
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Correspondence to: Wenhan Yang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

