Continual Optimization with Symmetry Teleportation
for Multi-Task Learning

Zhipeng Zhou1 ,

Ziqiao Meng2 , Pengcheng Wu1 , Peilin Zhao3 , Chunyan Miao1∗
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
National University of Singapore
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

zzpustcml@gmail.com, zq-meng@nus.edu.sg, peilinzhao@sjtu.edu.cn,
{pengchengwu, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a widely explored paradigm that enables the simultaneous learning of multiple tasks using a single model. Despite numerous solutions,
the key issues of optimization conflict and task imbalance remain under-addressed,
limiting performance. Unlike existing optimization-based approaches that typically reweight task losses or gradients to mitigate conflicts or promote progress,
we propose a novel approach based on Continual Optimization with Symmetry
Teleportation (COST). During MTL optimization, when an optimization conflict
arises, we seek an alternative loss-equivalent point on the loss landscape to reduce conflict. Specifically, we utilize a low-rank adapter (LoRA) to facilitate this
practical teleportation by designing convergent, loss-invariant objectives. Additionally, we introduce a historical trajectory reuse strategy to continually leverage the
benefits of advanced optimizers. Extensive experiments on multiple mainstream
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. COST is a plug-and-play solution that enhances a wide range of existing MTL methods. When integrated with
state-of-the-art methods, COST achieves superior performance. Code is avaliable at
https://github.com/zzpustc/COST.

1

Introduction

Traditional machine learning typically requires separate models for each task, leading to higher computational and storage demands as the number of
tasks increases[Zhou et al., 2023, Pan et al., 2024,
(a)
(b)
Feng et al., 2024]. To overcome this issue, multitask learning (MTL) offers an efficient approach, Figure 1: The illustration of symmetry teleporenabling the simultaneous learning of multiple tasks tation. (a) is the original gradient descent. (b) is
using a single model [Qiu et al., 2017, Hai et al., the gradient descent with a faster convergence
2016, Yao et al., 2021]. Recent developments in rate after teleporting the start point from (a).
MTL methods can be broadly divided into two categories: structure-based [Heuer et al., 2021, Ye and
Xu, 2023, Chen et al., 2023] and optimization-based [Sener and Koltun, 2018, Yu et al., 2020, Liu
et al., 2024a]. Structure-based methods focus on designing architectures that enhance task learning by
utilizing task relationships and promoting individual progress. On the other hand, optimization-based
methods prioritize the learning process by addressing challenges such as gradient conflicts and
task imbalances. Since this paper concentrates on optimization-based methods, our analysis and
comparisons will primarily focus on these approaches.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

