Rethinking Gradient Step Denoiser: Towards Truly
Pseudo-Contractive Operator

Shuchang Zhang
College of Science
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, 410073
zhangshuchang19@nudt.edu.cn

Yaoyun Zeng∗
College of Science
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, 410073
yaoyun_zeng@nudt.edu.cn

Kangkang Deng
College of Science
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, 410073
freedeng1208@gmail.com

Hongxia Wang †
College of Science
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, 410073
wanghongxia@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning pseudo-contractive denoisers is a fundamental challenge in the theoretical
analysis of Plug-and-Play (PnP) methods and the Regularization by Denoising
(RED) framework. While spectral methods attempt to address this challenge using
the power iteration method, they fail to guarantee the truly pseudo-contractive
property and suffer from high computational complexity. In this work, we rethink
gradient step (GS) denoisers and establish a theoretical connection between GS
denoisers and pseudo-contractive operators. We show that GS denoisers, with
the gradients of convex potential functions parameterized by input convex neural
networks (ICNNs), can achieve truly pseudo-contractive properties. Furthermore,
we integrate the learned truly pseudo-contractive denoiser into the RED-PRO (RED
via fixed-point projection) model, definitely ensuring convergence in terms of both
iterative sequences and objective functions. Extensive numerical experiments
confirm that the learned GS denoiser satisfies the truly pseudo-contractive property and, when integrated into RED-PRO, provides a favorable trade-off between
interpretability and empirical performance on inverse problems.

1

Introduction

The pseudo-contractive operators constitute a wide class of operators that arise in iterative methods
for solving fixed point problems [17]. Here, we recall that an operator T : H → H is d-pseudocontractive (d-PC) if there exists a constant d ∈ (−∞, 1] such that for any x, y ∈ H, it holds
that [12, 31]
kT (x) − T (y)k2 ≤ kx − yk2 + dk(x − T (x)) − (y − T (y))k2 ,

(1)

where H is a Hilbert space. When d < 1, the operator T is called d-strictly PC (d-SPC) operator [17]. The operator T is nonexpansive and firmly nonexpansive (FNE) when d = 0 and
d = −1 [6]. The pseudo-contractive assumption has played an important role in the convergence
analysis of PnP methods [60, 53, 14, 51, 56, 59, 40, 47, 57, 48, 30, 4, 11, 61, 46, 52, 10] and RED
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

