PermLLM: Learnable Channel Permutation for
N:M Sparse Large Language Models
Lancheng Zou1 , Shuo Yin1 , Zehua Pei1 , Tsung-Yi Ho1 , Farzan Farnia1 , and Bei Yu1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Channel permutation is a powerful technique for enhancing the accuracy of N:M
sparse models by reordering the channels of weight matrices to prioritize the retention of important weights. However, traditional channel permutation methods
rely on handcrafted quality metrics, which often fail to accurately capture the true
impact of pruning on model performance. To address this limitation, we propose
PermLLM, a novel post-training pruning framework that introduces learnable channel permutation (LCP) for N:M sparsity. LCP leverages Sinkhorn normalization to
transform discrete permutation matrices into differentiable soft permutation matrices, enabling end-to-end optimization. Additionally, PermLLM incorporates an
efficient block-wise channel permutation strategy, which significantly reduces the
number of learnable parameters and computational complexity. PermLLM seamlessly integrates with existing one-shot pruning methods to adaptively optimize
channel permutations, effectively mitigating pruning-induced errors. Extensive
experiments on the LLaMA series, Qwen, and OPT models demonstrate that
PermLLM achieves superior performance in optimizing N:M sparse models. The
code is available at https://github.com/lanchengzou/PermLLM.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancements in large language models (LLMs) [6, 61, 52, 1] have led to a notable
enhancement in their capabilities across a broad range of domains. However, the growing scale of
LLMs presents substantial challenges for efficient deployment. To address these challenges, model
compression techniques, such as quantization [57, 16, 10, 31, 65] and pruning [15, 50, 62], offer
promising solutions to reduce memory usage and computational overhead.
In this paper, we focus on network pruning [28, 22, 21], particularly semi-structured pruning [46, 42].
The core idea of network pruning is to eliminate redundancies within the model by preserving only
the essential weights while setting the less important ones to zero. Semi-structured pruning takes this
a step further by enforcing N:M sparsity, where N out of every M consecutive elements are set to
zero. The N:M sparsity pattern is natively supported by Sparse Tensor Core in NVIDIA GPUs [45]
to achieve speed-up, which makes semi-structured pruning a practical approach for efficient model
inference.
Recent studies on LLM pruning primarily focus on designing a better pruning metric to obtain
higher-quality masks to improve the accuracy of the sparse models [15, 50, 62]. RIA [62] introduces
a novel pruning metric that avoids channel corruption while accounting for the effect of activations.
Additionally, it proposes a two-stage channel permutation strategy to maximize the sum of retained
weight importance, which serves as the quality metric to evaluate channel permutation solution.
However, it is important to note that a discrepancy may exist between the handcrafted quality metric
and the actual impact on output loss, as illustrated in Figure 1. Moreover, it fails to fully capture the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

