Hierarchical Demonstration Order Optimization for
Many-shot In-Context Learning

Yinhan He∗
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
nee7ne@virginia.edu

Wendy Zheng∗
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
ncd9cf@virginia.edu

Song Wang
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL
song.wang@ucf.edu

Zaiyi Zheng
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
sjc4fq@virginia.edu

Yushun Dong
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL
yd24f@fsu.edu

Yaochen Zhu
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
uqp4qh@virginia.edu

Jundong Li
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA
jl6qk@virginia.edu

Abstract
In-Context Learning (ICL) is a technique where large language models (LLMs)
leverage multiple demonstrations (i.e., examples) to perform tasks. With the
recent expansion of LLM context windows, many-shot ICL (generally with more
than 50 demonstrations) can lead to significant performance improvements on
a variety of language tasks such as text classification and question answering.
Nevertheless, ICL faces the issue of demonstration order instability (ICL-DOI),
which means that performance varies significantly depending on the order of
demonstrations. Moreover, ICL-DOI persists in many-shot ICL, validated by our
thorough experimental investigation. Current strategies for handling ICL-DOI
are not applicable to many-shot ICL due to two critical challenges: (1) Most
existing methods assess demonstration order quality by first prompting the LLM,
then using heuristic metrics based on the LLM’s predictions. In the many-shot
scenarios, these metrics without theoretical grounding become unreliable, where
the LLMs struggle to effectively utilize information from long input contexts,
making order distinctions less clear. (2) The requirement to examine all orders
for the large number of demonstrations is computationally infeasible due to the
super-exponential complexity of the order space in many-shot ICL. To tackle
the first challenge, we design a demonstration order evaluation metric based on
information theory for measuring order quality, which effectively quantifies the
usable information gain of a given demonstration order. To address the second
challenge, we propose a hierarchical demonstration order optimization method
named HIDO that enables a more refined exploration of the order space, achieving
high ICL performance without the need to evaluate all possible orders. Extensive
experiments on multiple LLMs and real-world datasets demonstrate that our HIDO
method consistently and efficiently outperforms other baselines. Our code project
can be found at https://github.com/YinhanHe123/HIDO/.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

