First Attentions Last: Better Exploiting First
Attentions for Efficient Transformer Training

Gyudong Kim1 Hyukju Na1 Jin Hyeon Kim1 Hyunsung Jang2 Jaemin Park2
Jaegi Hwang2 Namkoo Ha2 Seungryong Kim3† Young Geun Kim1†
1
2
3
Korea University
LIG Nex1 Co., Ltd.
KAIST AI

Abstract
As training billion-scale transformers becomes increasingly common, employing multiple
distributed GPUs along with parallel training methods has become a standard practice. However,
existing transformer designs suffer from significant communication overhead, especially in
Tensor Parallelism (TP), where each block’s MHA–MLP connection requires an all-reduce
communication. Through our investigation, we show that the MHA-MLP connections can be
bypassed for efficiency, while the attention output of the first layer can serve as an alternative
signal for the bypassed connection. Motivated by the observations, we propose FAL (First
Attentions Last), an efficient transformer architecture that redirects the first MHA output to the
MLP inputs of the following layers, eliminating the per-block MHA-MLP connections. This
removes the all-reduce communication and enables parallel execution of MHA and MLP on a
single GPU. We also introduce FAL+, which adds the normalized first attention output to the
MHA outputs of the following layers to augment the MLP input for the model quality. Our
evaluation shows that FAL reduces multi-GPU training time by up to 44%, improves single-GPU
throughput by up to 1.18×, and achieves better perplexity compared to the baseline GPT. FAL+
achieves even lower perplexity without increasing the training time than the baseline. Codes
are available at: https://casl-ku.github.io/FAL/

1

Introduction

As transformers continue to grow following scaling law trends [1], Large Language Models (LLMs)
such as GPT [2] and LLaMA [3] demonstrate superior performance across a wide range of NLP tasks.
Given that the large transformers usually have billions of parameters which is far exceeding a single
GPU’s memory and computation limit, distributed training over multiple GPUs is necessary.
Among distributed training methods, Tensor Parallelism (TP) [4] has been considered as a standard
practice for multi-GPU training in each single-node, given its decent computation throughput and
memory efficiency [5, 6, 7]. However, the overall efficiency of TP can still be limited by the
communication overhead across the GPUs. For example, if the number of GPUs increases (and/or
the interconnect speed slows down), the efficiency of TP can be significantly degraded due to the
increased communication overhead. Hence, to further scale up transformers with more GPUs and
diverse interconnect configurations, it is essential to mitigate the communication overhead in TP.
One of the major sources of communication overhead in TP is the per-block communication (i.e.,
all-reduce) required across GPUs to transfer data between two main modules in each transformer
block: Multi Head Attention (MHA) and Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP). In TP, each GPU computes
a part of the MHA output, but the results must be aggregated via all-reduce to form a complete
activation before being passed to the MLP.
†

Corresponding authors (seungryong.kim@kaist.ac.kr, younggeun_kim@korea.ac.kr)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

