FedFACT: A Provable Framework for Controllable
Group-Fairness Calibration in Federated Learning

Li Zhang1 , Zhongxuan Han1 , Xiaohua Feng1 , Jiaming Zhang1 , Yuyuan Li2 , Chaochao Chen1∗
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Hangzhou Dianzi University
zhanglizl80@gmail.com, {zxhan, fengxiaohua, 22321350}@zju.edu.cn
y2li@hdu.edu.cn, zjuccc@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
With the emerging application of Federated Learning (FL) in decision-making
scenarios, it is imperative to regulate model fairness to prevent disparities across
sensitive groups (e.g., female, male). Current research predominantly focuses on
two concepts of group fairness within FL: Global Fairness (overall model disparity
across all clients) and Local Fairness (the disparity within each client). However, the non-decomposable, non-differentiable nature of fairness criteria poses
two fundamental, unresolved challenges for fair FL: (i) Harmonizing global and
local fairness, especially in multi-class setting; (ii) Enabling a controllable, optimal accuracy-fairness trade-off. To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel
controllable federated group-fairness calibration framework, named FedFACT. FedFACT identifies the Bayes-optimal classifiers under both global and local fairness
constraints, yielding models with minimal performance decline while guaranteeing
fairness. Building on the characterization of the optimal fair classifiers, we reformulate fair federated learning as a personalized cost-sensitive learning problem
for in-processing and a bi-level optimization for post-processing. Theoretically,
we provide convergence and generalization guarantees for FedFACT to approach
the near-optimal accuracy under given fairness levels. Extensive experiments on
multiple datasets across various data heterogeneity demonstrate that FedFACT consistently outperforms baselines in balancing accuracy and global-local fairness.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a collaborative distributed machine learning paradigm that allows multiple
clients to jointly train a shared model while preserving the privacy of their local data [55]. As
FL is increasingly adopted in high-stakes domains—healthcare [80, 65, 62], finance [15, 11, 72],
pattern recognition [52, 63, 94, 86, 19], and recommender systems [10, 82, 35, 73]—ensuring
fairness is imperative to prevent discrimination against demographic groups based on sensitive
attributes [32, 90, 88, 64], such as race, gender, age, etc. Although a rich literature addresses group
fairness in centralized settings [2, 3, 41, 13], these methods depend on full access to the entire dataset
and centralized processing, imposing excessive communication overhead and elevating privacy
concerns when directly applied in the FL context.
To provide fairness guarantees for federated algorithms, recent works have concentrated on two
group-fairness concepts in FL: Global Fairness and Local Fairness [33, 25, 95, 18, 31]. Global
fairness aims to identify a model that provides similar treatment to protected groups across the
entire data distribution. Local fairness concerns models that mitigate disparities and deliver unbiased
predictions for sensitive groups within each client’s local data. Previous work [33] theoretically
demonstrated that, under statistical heterogeneity across clients, global and local fairness can differ,
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

