Emergence and Evolution of
Interpretable Concepts in Diffusion Models

Berk Tinaz∗ Zalan Fabian∗ Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
tinaz@usc.edu fabian.zalan@gmail.com soltanol@usc.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have become the go-to method for text-to-image generation,
producing high-quality images from pure noise. However, the inner workings of
diffusion models is still largely a mystery due to their black-box nature and complex, multi-step generation process. Mechanistic interpretability techniques, such
as Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs), have been successful in understanding and steering the behavior of large language models at scale. However, the great potential of
SAEs has not yet been applied toward gaining insight into the intricate generative
process of diffusion models. In this work, we leverage the SAE framework to
probe the inner workings of a popular text-to-image diffusion model, and uncover
a variety of human-interpretable concepts in its activations. Interestingly, we find
that even before the first reverse diffusion step is completed, the final composition
of the scene can be predicted surprisingly well by looking at the spatial distribution
of activated concepts. Moreover, going beyond correlational analysis, we design
intervention techniques aimed at manipulating image composition and style, and
demonstrate that (1) in early stages of diffusion image composition can be effectively controlled, (2) in the middle stages image composition is finalized, however
stylistic interventions are effective, and (3) in the final stages only minor textural
details are subject to change.2

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) [17, 47] have revolutionized the field of generative modeling. These models
iteratively refine images through a denoising process, progressively transforming Gaussian noise into
coherent visual outputs. DMs have established state-of-the-art in image [8, 33, 42, 40, 18], audio [24],
and video generation [19]. The introduction of text-conditioning in diffusion models [40, 41], i.e.
guiding the generation process via text prompts, enables careful customization of generated samples
while simultaneously maintaining exceptional sample quality.
While DMs excel at producing images of exceptional quality, the internal mechanisms by which
they ground textual concepts in visual features that govern generation remain opaque. The timeevolution of internal representations through the generative process, from pure noise to high-quality
images, renders the understanding of DMs even more challenging compared to other deep learning
models. A particular blind spot is the early, ’chaotic’ stage [53] of diffusion, where noise dominates
the generative process. Recently, a flurry of research has emerged towards demystifying the inner
workings of DMs. In particular, a line of work attempts to interpret the internal representations by
constructing saliency maps from cross-attention layers [50]. Another direction is to find interpretable
∗

Equal contribution.
Code is available at https://github.com/berktinaz/stable-concepts.

2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

1

