SPAZER: Spatial-Semantic Progressive Reasoning
Agent for Zero-shot 3D Visual Grounding

Zhao Jin1 Rong-Cheng Tu1,§ Jingyi Liao1 Wenhao Sun1
Xiao Luo2 Shunyu Liu1 Dacheng Tao1,§
1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
University of California, Los Angeles
{zhao.jin, rongcheng.tu, jingyi012, wenhao006}@ntu.edu.sg
xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu, {shunyu.liu, dacheng.tao}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
3D Visual Grounding (3DVG) aims to localize target objects within a 3D scene
based on natural language queries. To alleviate the reliance on costly 3D training
data, recent studies have explored zero-shot 3DVG by leveraging the extensive
knowledge and powerful reasoning capabilities of pre-trained LLMs and VLMs.
However, existing paradigms tend to emphasize either spatial (3D-based) or semantic (2D-based) understanding, limiting their effectiveness in complex real-world
applications. In this work, we introduce SPAZER — a VLM-driven agent that
combines both modalities in a progressive reasoning framework. It first holistically
analyzes the scene and produces a 3D rendering from the optimal viewpoint. Based
on this, anchor-guided candidate screening is conducted to perform a coarse-level
localization of potential objects. Furthermore, leveraging retrieved relevant 2D camera images, 3D-2D joint decision-making is efficiently performed to determine the
best-matching object. By bridging spatial and semantic reasoning neural streams,
SPAZER achieves robust zero-shot grounding without training on 3D-labeled
data. Extensive experiments on ScanRefer and Nr3D benchmarks demonstrate that
SPAZER significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art zero-shot methods,
achieving notable gains of 9.0% and 10.9% in accuracy. Our codes are available
at https://github.com/JZ-9962/SPAZER.

1

Introduction

3D Visual Grounding (3DVG) focuses on accurately localizing the referred object in the 3D scene
based on a user-provided query text. This task demands a comprehensive understanding of both
natural language and spatial structure of the 3D scene, serving a pivotal role in various real-world
applications, such as embodied robotics [23, 24] and augmented reality [6, 22]. In the early phase,
3DVG approaches [6, 57, 53, 25, 16, 1] typically follow a fully supervised learning paradigm,
training models using manually annotated textual descriptions and 3D bounding boxes. Despite their
effectiveness, the reliance on large-scale labeled 3D data, which is expensive and labor-intensive to
obtain, significantly limits their scalability and practical adoption.
To reduce the dependence on costly 3D training data, zero-shot 3D visual grounding has been
actively explored, largely facilitated by recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) and
Vision-Language Models (VLMs). By leveraging the general world knowledge and reasoning
§

Co-corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

