Near-Optimal Experiment Design in Linear
non-Gaussian Cyclic Models

Ehsan Sharifian
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
ehsan.sharifian@epfl.ch

Saber Salehkaleybar
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
s.salehkaleybar@liacs.leidenuniv.nl

Negar Kiyavash
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the problem of causal structure learning from a combination of observational and interventional data generated by a linear non-Gaussian structural
equation model that might contain cycles. Recent results show that using mere
observational data identifies the causal graph only up to a permutation-equivalence
class. We obtain a combinatorial characterization of this class by showing that
each graph in an equivalence class corresponds to a perfect matching in a bipartite
graph. This bipartite representation allows us to analyze how interventions modify
or constrain the matchings. Specifically, we show that each atomic intervention
reveals one edge of the true matching and eliminates all incompatible causal graphs.
Consequently, we formalize the optimal experiment design task as an adaptive
stochastic optimization problem over the set of equivalence classes with a natural
reward function that quantifies how many graphs are eliminated from the equivalence class by an intervention. We show that this reward function is adaptive
submodular and provide a greedy policy with a provable near-optimal performance
guarantee. A key technical challenge is to efficiently estimate the reward function
without having to explicitly enumerate all the graphs in the equivalence class. We
propose a sampling-based estimator using random matchings and analyze its bias
and concentration behavior. Our simulation results show that performing a small
number of interventions guided by our stochastic optimization framework recovers
the true underlying causal structure.

1

Introduction

Learning causal relationships among variables of interest in a complex system is a central goal
in empirical sciences, forming the foundation for prediction, intervention, and explanation [25].
These relationships are typically represented by causal graphs in which an edge from variable X to
variable Y indicates that X is a direct cause of Y . Much of the existing literature on causal structure
learning assumes that the underlying causal graph is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). However,
many natural and engineered systems include feedback mechanisms that give rise to cycles in their
causal representations. Such cyclic structures emerge in equilibrium models, low-frequency temporal
sampling of dynamical systems, and various biological networks [3].
In acyclic settings, a variety of methods (such as those based on conditional independence tests)
allow us to recover the skeleton and orientations of the causal graph from observational data. These
methods often fail when applied to graphs with cycles. More specifically, observational data alone
does not even suffice for learning the skeleton, let alone orienting the edges of the graph [23].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

