NormFit: A Lightweight Solution for Few-Shot
Federated Learning with Non-IID Data

Azadeh Motamedi∗
Queen’s University
Kingston, Canada
A.Motamedi@queensu.ca

Jae–Mo Kang
Kyungpook National University
Daegu, South Korea
jmkang@knu.ac.kr

Il–Min Kim
Queen’s University
Kingston, Canada
ilmin.kim@queensu.ca

Abstract
Vision–Language Models (VLMs) have recently attracted considerable attention in
Federated Learning (FL) due to their strong and robust performance. In particular,
few-shot adaptation with pre-trained VLMs like CLIP enhances the performance
of downstream tasks. However, existing methods still suffer from substantial
communication overhead, high local computational demands, and suboptimal performance under non-IID user data. To simultaneously address all those limitations,
we propose NormFit, a lightweight solution that selectively fine-tunes only a very
small portion of the model parameters, specifically only the Pre-LayerNorm parameters of the vision encoder within a VLM. Overcoming the existing tradeoff
between performance and communication/computation efficiency in few-shot FL,
NormFit sets a new benchmark by simultaneously achieving superior accuracy
and substantially reduced communication and computational demands. Theoretically, we show that NormFit yields a considerably smaller generalization gap
compared to tuning all LayerNorm parameters. Importantly, NormFit can function
effectively as a standalone solution or integrate seamlessly with existing few-shot
fine-tuning methods to further enhance their performance. Notably, NormFit offers
implementation simplicity, achieving these improvements without any algorithmic
modifications, changes to the underlying model architecture, or the addition of
external parameters.2

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising paradigm for decentralized machine learning,
allowing multiple users to collaboratively train a shared model without sharing raw data. This
approach preserves user data privacy, making it suitable in sensitive domains such as healthcare and
finance. However, FL faces several challenges that limit its scalability and effectiveness. As the model
size expands, the communication overhead between the central server and users increases significantly.
Additionally, the computational demands on the user side substantially grow with larger models and
more sophisticated training algorithms. Furthermore, the inherent nature of non-independent and
identically distributed (non-IID) users data continues to adversely impact model performance.
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as Contrastive Language–Image Pretraining (CLIP) [Radford
et al., 2021], pre-trained on large-scale image–text pairs, have recently attracted significant attention
in the FL community for their strong zero-shot performance. Pre-trained VLMs are advantageous
∗
2

Corresponding author
The code is available at https://github.com/AziMtmd/NormFit.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

