Concept-Guided Interpretability via Neural Chunking

Shuchen Wu1,2 , Stephan Alaniz3 , Shyamgopal Karthik4 ,
Peter Dayan5 , Eric Schulz6 , Zeynep Akata4
1
2
Allen Institute, University of Washington, 3 Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
4
Institute of Explainable Machine Learning, Helmholtz Munich
5
Department of Computational Neuroscience,
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
6
Institute for Human-Centered AI, Helmholtz Munich
shuchen.wu@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Neural networks are often described as black boxes, reflecting the significant
challenge of understanding their internal workings and interactions. We propose
a different perspective that challenges the prevailing view: rather than being inscrutable, neural networks exhibit patterns in their raw population activity that
mirror regularities in the training data. We refer to this as the Reflection Hypothesis and provide evidence for this phenomenon in both simple recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) and complex large language models (LLMs). Building on this
insight, we propose to leverage our cognitive tendency of chunking to segment
high-dimensional neural population dynamics into interpretable units that reflect
underlying concepts. We propose three methods to extract recurring chunks on
a neural population level, complementing each other based on label availability and neural data dimensionality. Discrete sequence chunking (DSC) learns a
dictionary of entities in a lower-dimensional neural space; population averaging
(PA) extracts recurring entities that correspond to known labels; and unsupervised
chunk discovery (UCD) can be used when labels are absent. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of these methods in extracting concept-encoding entities agnostic
to model architectures. These concepts can be both concrete (words), abstract
(POS tags), or structural (narrative schema). Additionally, we show that extracted
chunks play a causal role in network behavior, as grafting them leads to controlled and predictable changes in the model’s behavior. Our work points to a
new direction for interpretability, one that harnesses both cognitive principles and
the structure of naturalistic data to reveal the hidden computations of complex
learning systems, gradually transforming them from black boxes into systems
we can begin to understand. Implementation and code are publicly available at
https://github.com/swu32/Chunk-Interpretability.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are known as “black boxes” [80, 71, 73, 93, 56, 25], highlighting the inherent
challenge to make sense of a vast number of computing units. Their computations are performed
by up to billions of interacting components, in stark contrast to the traditional scientific practice of
modeling phenomena through a number of well-defined symbolic entities in physics or mathematics.
A substantial portion of the interpretability challenge is cognitive [1, 60] and demands asking the
question: what makes high-dimensional data meaningful for cognition? And what constitutes the
basic units and entities for perception that underlie the constitution of the symbols that we are adept
at studying in physics or math?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

