Tight Bounds for Answering Adaptively Chosen
Concentrated Queries
Emma Rapoport
Tel Aviv University
emmarapoport@gmail.com

Edith Cohen
Google Research
and Tel Aviv University
edith@cohenwang.com

Uri Stemmer
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research
u@uri.co.il

Abstract
Most work on adaptive data analysis assumes that samples in the dataset are
independent. When correlations are allowed, even the non-adaptive setting can
become intractable, unless some structural constraints are imposed. To address
this, Bassily and Freund [2016] introduced the elegant framework of concentrated
queries, which requires the analyst to restrict itself to queries that are concentrated
around their expected value. While this assumption makes the problem trivial in
the non-adaptive setting, in the adaptive setting it remains quite challenging. In fact,
all known algorithms in this framework support significantly fewer queries than in
the independent case: At most O(n) queries for a sample of size n, compared to
O(n2 ) in the independent setting.
In this work, we prove that this utility gap is inherent under the current formulation
of the concentrated queries framework, assuming some natural conditions on
the algorithm. Additionally, we present a simplified version of the best-known
algorithms that match our impossibility result.

1

Introduction

Adaptive interaction with data is a central feature of modern analysis pipelines, from scientific
exploration to model selection and parameter tuning. However, adaptivity introduces fundamental
statistical difficulties, as it creates dependencies between the data and the analysis procedures applied
to it, which could quickly lead to overfitting and false discoveries. Motivated by this, following the
seminal work of Dwork et al. [2015b], a substantial body of work has established rigorous frameworks
for addressing this problem. These works demonstrated that various notions of algorithmic stability,
and in particular differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006], allow for methods which maintain
statistical validity under the adaptive setting. Most of the current work, however, focuses on the case
where the underlying data distribution is a product distribution, i.e., the samples in the dataset are
independent of each other. Much less is understood about the feasibility of accurate adaptive analysis
when the data exhibits correlations. In this work, we examine the extent to which accurate adaptive
analysis remains possible under minimal structural conditions on the data distribution.
Before presenting our new results, we describe our setting more precisely. Let X be a data domain.
We consider the following game between a data analyst A and a mechanism M.
1. The analyst A chooses a distribution D over tuples in X → (under some restrictions).
2. The mechanism M obtains a sample S → D. % We denote |S| = n.
3. For k rounds j = 1, 2, . . . , k:
(a) The analyst A chooses a query qj : X ↑ [0, 1], possibly as a function of all previous
answers given by M (under some restrictions).
(b) The mechanism M obtains qj and responds with an answer aj ↓ R, which is given to A.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

