Non-equilibrium Annealed Adjoint Sampler

Jaemoo Choi1,∗ , Yongxin Chen1 , Molei Tao1 , Guan-Horng Liu2,∗
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 FAIR at Meta, ∗ Core contributors
{jchoi843, yongchen, mtao}@gatech.edu, ghliu@meta.com

Abstract
Recently, there has been significant progress in learning-based diffusion samplers,
which aim to sample from a given unnormalized density. Many of these approaches
formulate the sampling task as a stochastic optimal control (SOC) problem using a
canonical uninformative reference process, which limits their ability to efficiently
guide trajectories toward the target distribution. In this work, we propose the NonEquilibrium Annealed Adjoint Sampler (NAAS), a novel SOC-based diffusion
framework that employs annealed reference dynamics as a non-stationary base
SDE. This annealing structure provides a natural progression toward the target
distribution and generates informative reference trajectories, thereby enhancing
the stability and efficiency of learning the control. Owing to our SOC formulation,
our framework can incorporate a variety of SOC solvers, thereby offering high
flexibility in algorithmic design. As one instantiation, we employ a lean adjoint
system inspired by adjoint matching, enabling efficient and scalable training. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of NAAS across a range of tasks, including sampling
from classical energy landscapes and molecular Boltzmann distributions.

1

Introduction

A fundamental task in probabilistic inference is to draw samples from a target distribution ν(x)
given only its unnormalized density function, where the normalizing constant is intractable. This
challenge arises across a wide range of scientific domains, including Bayesian inference (Box and
Tiao, 2011), statistical physics (Binder et al., 1992), proteins (Jumper et al., 2021; Bose et al., 2024),
and molecular chemistry (Weininger, 1988; Tuckerman, 2023; Midgley et al., 2023). Traditional
approaches predominantly leverage Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, which construct
a Markov chain whose stationary distribution is the target distribution ν (Metropolis et al., 1953;
Neal, 2001; Del Moral et al., 2006). However, these methods often suffer from slow mixing times,
leading to high computational cost and limited scalability.
To overcome this limitation, recent research has focused on Diffusion Neural Samplers—a family of learned stochastic differential equation (SDE)–based samplers in which the dynamics are
parameterized by neural networks (Zhang and Chen, 2022; Vargas et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024;
Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden, 2024; Phillips et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). Among diffusion neural
samplers, many of the prior SOC-based approaches (Zhang and Chen, 2022; Vargas et al., 2023;
Domingo-Enrich et al., 2025; Behjoo and Chertkov, 2025) aim to solve the stochastic optimal control
(SOC) problem to construct unbiased diffusion samplers. However, these methods typically learn the
controlled dynamics starting from a stationary or uninformative base reference, and therefore do not
fully leverage annealed reference dynamics that progressively guide trajectories toward the target
distribution.
Motivated by this limitation, we propose Non-Equilibrium Annealed Adjoint Sampler (NAAS), a
new SOC-based diffusion framework that employs annealed reference dynamics as the base SDE.
The annealing structure provides a natural progression toward the target distribution and generates
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

