Tighter CMI-Based Generalization Bounds via
Stochastic Projection and Quantization

Milad Sefidgaran 1 , Kimia Nadjahi 2 , Abdellatif Zaidi 1,3
1
Paris Research Center, Huawei Technologies France
2
CNRS, ENS Paris, France 3 Université Gustave Eiffel, France
milad.sefidgaran2@huawei.com, kimia.nadjahi@ens.fr, abdellatif.zaidi@univ-eiffel.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we leverage stochastic projection and lossy compression to establish new
conditional mutual information (CMI) bounds on the generalization error of statistical
learning algorithms. It is shown that these bounds are generally tighter than the existing
ones. In particular, we prove that for certain problem instances for which existing MI
and CMI bounds were recently shown in Attias et al. [2024] and Livni [2023] to become
vacuous or fail to describe the right generalization
√ behavior, our bounds yield suitable
generalization guarantees of the order of O(1/ n), where n is the size of the training
dataset. Furthermore, we use our bounds to investigate the problem of data “memorization” raised in those works, and which asserts that there are learning problem instances
for which any learning algorithm that has good prediction there exist distributions under which the algorithm must “memorize” a big fraction of the training dataset. We
show that for every learning algorithm, there exists an auxiliary algorithm that does not
memorize and which yields comparable generalization error for any data distribution.
In part, this shows that memorization is not necessary for good generalization.

1

Introduction

One of the major problems in statistical learning theory consists in understanding what really drives
the generalization error of learning algorithms. That is, what makes an algorithm trained on a given
dataset continue to perform well on unseen data samples. Historically, this fundamental question has
been studied independently in various lines of work, using seemingly unconnected tools. This includes
VC-dimension theory [1], Rademacher complexity approaches [2], stability-based analysis [3] and, more
recently, intrinsic-dimension [4–8] and information-theoretic approaches [9–21]. It is only until recently
that the above various approaches were shown to be possibly unified [22, 23] using a variable-length
compressibility technique, which is rate-distortion-theoretic in nature.
In the context of statistical learning theory perhaps one can date back information-theoretic approaches
to the PAC-Bayes bounds of McAllester [24, 25], which were then followed by various extensions and
ramifications [26–39]. The mutual information (MI) bounds of [9] and [10] have the advantages to be
relatively simpler comparatively and of offering somewhat clearer insights into the question of generalization. Roughly, such bounds suggest that a learning algorithm generalizes better as its output model reveals
less information about the training data samples, where the amount of revealed information is measured in
terms of the Shannon mutual information.
However, MI-based bounds are also known to sometimes take large (infinite) values and become vacuous,
such as for continuous data and deterministic models. This shortcoming has been identified in a number of
works, including [40, 41]. The issue was believed to be resolved by the introduction in [12] of the important framework of conditional mutual information (CMI). The CMI setting introduces a “super-sample”
construction in which an auxiliary “ghost sample” is used in conjunction with the training sample; and
a sequence of Bernoulli random variables determines which data samples among the super-sample were
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

