Locality in Image Diffusion Models
Emerges from Data Statistics

Artem Lukoianov
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
arteml@mit.edu
Justin Solomon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jsolomon@mit.edu

Chenyang Yuan
Toyota Research Institute
chenyang.yuan@tri.global
Vincent Sitzmann
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
sitzmann@mit.edu

https://locality.lukoianov.com

Abstract
Recent work has shown that the generalization ability of image diffusion models
arises from the locality properties of the trained neural network. In particular, when
denoising a particular pixel, the model relies on a limited neighborhood of the
input image around that pixel, which, according to the previous work, is tightly
related to the ability of these models to produce novel images. Since locality is
central to generalization, it is crucial to understand why diffusion models learn
local behavior in the first place, as well as the factors that govern the properties
of locality patterns. In this work, we present evidence that the locality in deep
diffusion models emerges as a statistical property of the image dataset and is
not due to the inductive bias of convolutional neural networks, as suggested in
previous work. Specifically, we demonstrate that an optimal parametric linear
denoiser exhibits similar locality properties to deep neural denoisers. We show,
both theoretically and experimentally, that this locality arises directly from pixel
correlations present in the image datasets. Moreover, locality patterns are drastically
different on specialized datasets, approximating principal components of the data’s
covariance. We use these insights to craft an analytical denoiser that better matches
scores predicted by a deep diffusion model than prior expert-crafted alternatives.
Our key takeaway is that while neural network architectures influence generation
quality, their primary role is to capture locality patterns inherent in the data.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models [8, 27] have achieved state-of-the-art results for generative modeling,
especially for domains involving continuous data distributions such as images, videos, and audio.
They are trained to predict a clean image from one corrupted by varying levels of Gaussian noise.
Analysis of the diffusion model training objective leads to an apparent paradox: The objective
admits a unique, analytical, non-parametric, and closed-form solution that is only a function of the
training dataset. However, this so-called optimal denoiser does not empirically match the outputs
of deep diffusion models and in fact can only produce images in the training set, exhibiting perfect
“memorization” and failing to generate novel images.
Recent work investigates this paradox and proposes changes to the optimal denoiser to close the gap
between theory and practice [12, 19, 25, 26]. Kamb and Ganguli [12] hypothesize that inductive
biases of the neural network architecture—particularly shift equivariance and locality biases of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

