Video World Models with Long-term Spatial Memory

Tong Wu*1 , Shuai Yang*2,4 , Ryan Po1 , Yinghao Xu1 ,
Ziwei Liu5 , Dahua Lin3,4 , Gordon Wetzstein1
1

Stanford University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
https://spmem.github.io/

Global Static Point Cloud

Episodic-mem

“A hooded figure walks through a sunlit courtyard. Autumn trees cast golden light across the
stone path, while a statue and old architecture evoke a sense of history and mystery.”

Working-mem

Dynamic Video Generation
Spatial-mem

Global Static Point Cloud

Episodic-mem

Working-mem

“A rider moves forward on horseback along an empty city street. Old buildings, trees, and utility
poles line the path, while soft shadows and distant light add depth to the cinematic scene.”

Dynamic Video Generation
Spatial-mem

Figure 1: We augment video world models with memory. In this context, we consider the conventional approach of conditioning autoregressively generated frames with a few recent context frames
as a short-term working memory. We explore two additional mechanisms modeling different types
of long-term memory: spatial and episodic memory. The former is represented as a point map that
is autoregressively generated along with the video frames and fused into the spatial memory by
extracting only its static scene parts. To remember visual detail and identities for long time horizons,
we also store a sparse set of historical reference frames as an episodic memory. Together, our memory
mechanisms significantly improve the long-term consistency of emerging video world models.

Abstract
Emerging world models autoregressively generate video frames in response to
actions, such as camera movements and text prompts, among other control signals.
Due to limited temporal context window sizes, these models often struggle to
maintain scene consistency during revisits, leading to severe forgetting of previously
generated environments. Inspired by the mechanisms of human memory, we
introduce a novel framework to enhancing long-term consistency of video world
models through a geometry-grounded long-term spatial memory. Our framework
includes mechanisms to store and retrieve information from the long-term spatial
memory and we curate custom datasets to train and evaluate world models with
explicitly stored 3D memory mechanisms. Our evaluations show improved quality,
consistency, and context length compared to relevant baselines, paving the way
towards long-term consistent world generation.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

