Private Evolution Converges

Tomas Gonzalez
Carnegie Mellon University
tcgonzal@andrew.cmu.edu

Giulia Fanti
Carnegie Mellon University
gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Carnegie Mellon University
aramdas@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Private Evolution (PE) is a promising training-free method for differentially private
(DP) synthetic data generation. While it achieves strong performance in some
domains (e.g., images and text), its behavior in others (e.g., tabular data) is less
consistent. To date, the only theoretical analysis of the convergence of PE depends
on unrealistic assumptions about both the algorithm’s behavior and the structure
of the sensitive dataset. In this work, we develop a new theoretical framework
to understand PE’s practical behavior and identify sufficient conditions for its
convergence. For d-dimensional sensitive datasets with n data points from a
convex and compact domain, we prove that under the right hyperparameter settings
and given access to the Gaussian variation API proposed in [33], PE produces an
(ε, δ)-DP synthetic dataset with expected 1-Wasserstein distance Õ(d(nε)−1/d )
from the original; this establishes worst-case convergence of the algorithm as
n → ∞. Our analysis extends to general Banach spaces as well. We also connect
PE to the Private Signed Measure Mechanism, a method for DP synthetic data
generation that has thus far not seen much practical adoption. We demonstrate the
practical relevance of our theoretical findings in experiments.

1

Introduction

Many modern machine learning applications rely on user data, making data privacy protection a
central concern. In this regard, differential privacy (DP) [17, 19] has become a de facto standard for
safeguarding sensitive information of individuals. Given a private dataset, many problems—including
regression [40, 12], deep learning [1], and stochastic optimization [6, 2]—can be performed in a DP
manner. While it is possible to design a different DP algorithm for each specific task, a reasonable
alternative is to generate a DP synthetic dataset that preserves many of the statistical properties of
the sensitive dataset. By the post-processing property of DP [19], the DP synthetic data can then be
fed into existing non-DP algorithms without incurring additional privacy loss; this avoids modifying
existing ML pipelines and enables data sharing with third parties (e.g. for reproducibility).
Recently, [33] introduced Private Evolution (PE), a promising new framework for DP synthetic data
generation that relies on public, pretrained data generators [48, 32, 27, 41, 50, 28]. PE is currently
competitive with—and sometimes improves on—state-of-the-art models in terms of Fréchet inception
distance (FID) and downstream task performance in settings such as images and text [33, 48, 32, 27].
In addition, PE is training-free, whereas current state-of-the-art approaches typically train (or finetune)
a generative model on the sensitive dataset using DP-SGD [49, 35, 14, 11]. However, in some settings,
including tabular data [41], and image data with mismatched distributions [21], PE has achieved
limited success. To better understand when PE works, it is crucial to improve our theoretical
understanding of the algorithm.
At a high level, PE works as follows (Figure 1). First, it creates a synthetic data set S0 with an
API that is independent of the sensitive dataset S (e.g a foundation model trained on public data).
Then, iteratively it refines the synthetic data, creating S1 , S2 , ..., where St is obtained from St−1 by
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

