TP-MDDN: Task-Preferenced Multi-Demand-Driven
Navigation with Autonomous Decision-Making

Shanshan Li1 , Da Huang23 , Yu He13 , Yanwei Fu13† , Yu-Gang Jiang1 , Xiangyang Xue1†
1
Fudan University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Shanghai Innovation Institution

Abstract
In daily life, people often move through spaces to find objects that meet their needs,
posing a key challenge in embodied AI. Traditional Demand-Driven Navigation
(DDN) handles one need at a time but does not reflect the complexity of realworld tasks involving multiple needs and personal choices. To bridge this gap, we
introduce Task-Preferenced Multi-Demand-Driven Navigation (TP-MDDN),
a new benchmark for long-horizon navigation involving multiple sub-demands
with explicit task preferences. To solve TP-MDDN, we propose AWMSystem,
an autonomous decision-making system composed of three key modules: BreakLLM (instruction decomposition), LocateLLM (goal selection), and StatusMLLM
(task monitoring). For spatial memory, we design MASMap, which combines 3D
point cloud accumulation with 2D semantic mapping for accurate and efficient
environmental understanding. Our Dual-Tempo action generation framework integrates zero-shot planning with policy-based fine control, and is further supported
by an Adaptive Error Corrector that handles failure cases in real time. Experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in both
perception accuracy and navigation robustness.

1

Introduction

In daily life, people often identify a need and look for something in their environment to meet it [3, 4].
Demand-Driven Navigation (DDN) [1] is a task where an agent receives a natural language instruction
(e.g., “I am tired”) and must find an object that fulfills that need (e.g., a bed or chair). This is a
variation of the ObjectNav task. However, a single need can often be met in different ways, depending
on personal preferences. For example, “organize the living space” could mean finding cleaning tools,
decorative items, or storage boxes. To guide the agent effectively, it is important to clarify the user’s
specific preference, like focusing on decoration, so the instruction becomes actionable. People also
tend to have a series of needs, such as cleaning, then resting, then eating. Efficiently handling multiple
needs and evaluating the success of these actions is still a major challenge. This paper explores how
to enhance long-horizon DDN tasks by making user preferences more explicit.
Recent work like MO-DDN [5] addresses navigation instructions through Multi-object Demanddriven Navigation with human preferences. For example, given an instruction like “I need to
display my photography collection, preferably with good lighting”, the demand may involve multiple
objects such as picture frames, bookshelves, and ceiling lamps. However, it still focuses on singledemand navigation. Some works have explored long-range instruction navigation by constructing
Landmark Semantic Memory for decision-making planning [6] or adopting Autonomous Evolution
mechanisms [7, 8], but they primarily target object-driven navigation.
†

Corresponding Authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

