ROSE: Remove Objects with Side Effects in Videos

Chenxuan Miao1,4 , Yutong Feng2∗, Jianshu Zeng3 , Zixiang Gao3 , Hantang Liu2 ,
Yunfeng Yan1 , Donglian Qi1 , Xi Chen4 , Bin Wang2 , Hengshuang Zhao4†
1
Zhejiang University, 2 KunByte AI, 3 Peking University, 4 The University of Hong Kong
{weiyuchoumou526, fengyutong.fyt, zengjianshu.AI, gzx2401210062 }@gmail.com
{liuhantang77, chauncey0620, binwang393}@gmail.com
{yyff, qidl}@zju.edu.cn hszhao@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Video object removal has achieved advanced performance due to the recent success
of video generative models. However, when addressing the side effects of objects,
e.g., their shadows and reflections, existing works struggle to eliminate these
effects for the scarcity of paired video data as supervision. This paper presents
ROSE, termed Remove Objects with Side Effects, a framework that systematically
studies the object’s effects on environment, which can be categorized into five
common cases: shadows, reflections, light, translucency and mirror. Given
the challenges of curating paired videos exhibiting the aforementioned effects,
we leverage a 3D rendering engine for synthetic data generation. We carefully
construct a fully-automatic pipeline for data preparation, which simulates a largescale paired dataset with diverse scenes, objects, shooting angles, and camera
trajectories. ROSE is implemented as an video inpainting model built on diffusion
transformer. To localize all object-correlated areas, the entire video is fed into the
model for reference-based erasing. Moreover, additional supervision is introduced
to explicitly predict the areas affected by side effects, which can be revealed
through the differential mask between the paired videos. To fully investigate the
model performance on various side effect removal, we presents a new benchmark,
dubbed ROSE-Bench, incorporating both common scenarios and the five special
side effects for comprehensive evaluation. Experimental results demonstrate that
ROSE achieves superior performance compared to existing video object erasing
models and generalizes well to real-world video scenarios. The project page is
https://rose2025-inpaint.github.io.

1

Introduction

Removing objects in visual contents represents a valuable technique with widespread applications
in both daily and industrial scenarios. This task targets to re-fill the masked region of objects
via reasonable and consistent content, regarding the context in surrounding environment. Prior
works [15, 38, 14, 3] towards either image or video object removal have explored to leverage flowbased pixel propagation to restore the masked region with neighboring information [44], or adopt
the inpainting paradigm to directly generate the masked content [33, 23]. Powered by the significant
capability of large-scale models [27, 8, 19, 23] on generalized visual creation, the inpainting-based
methods exhibit satisfying erasing performance in diverse scenarios of image and video.
Despite the advanced performance, however, existing works are still restricted due to the lack of
paired training samples that follows real-world physical rules. The paired samples represents data
∗
†

Project Leader
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

