ComPO: Preference Alignment via Comparison
Oracles
Peter Chen⋄

Xi Chen† Wotao Yin‡ Tianyi Lin⋄
Columbia University⋄
Stern School of Business, New York University†
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group US‡
{lc3826, tl3335}@columbia.edu, xc13@stern.nyu.edu
wotao.yin@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Direct alignment methods are increasingly used for aligning large language models
(LLMs) with human preferences. However, these methods suffer from the issues of
likelihood displacement, which can be driven by noisy preference pairs that induce
similar likelihood for preferred and dispreferred responses. The contributions of
this paper are two-fold. First, we propose a preference alignment method based on
zeroth-order, comparison-based optimization via comparison oracles and provide
convergence guarantees for its basic mechanism. Second, we improve our method
using some heuristics and conduct the experiments to demonstrate the flexibility
and compatibility of practical mechanisms in improving the performance of LLMs
using noisy preference pairs. Evaluations are conducted across multiple base
and instruction-tuned models (Mistral-7B, Llama-3-8B and Gemma-2-9B) with
benchmarks (AlpacaEval 2, MT-Bench and Arena-Hard)1 . Experimental results
show the effectiveness of our method as an alternative to addressing the limitations
of existing methods, not only likelihood displacement but verbosity. A highlight
of our work is that we evidence the importance of designing specialized methods
for preference pairs with distinct likelihood margin, which complements the recent
findings in Razin et al. [73].

1

Introduction

Generative AI is breaking down barriers to intelligence, empowering domain experts across academia,
industrial sectors, and governments to develop and manage AI systems more effectively. At the
heart of this revolution are large language models (LLMs), which are transforming data organization,
retrieval, and analysis [9, 20, 85, 1, 10]. These models are trained on vast, diverse data and must be
carefully aligned with human preferences to ensure they generate helpful and harmless content [7].
A prominent alignment method is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [21, 81],
which first fits a reward model based on human preference pairs and then uses RL to train a policy
to maximize this trained reward. Despite RLHF’s success [108, 63, 85, 1], it involves a complex
and computationally expensive multi-stage procedure. This motivates the development of direct
alignment methods, such as direct preference optimization (DPO) [70] and its variants [6, 30, 66, 93,
83, 60, 16, 103], which directly optimize the LLM using the human preference pairs, avoiding the
need for separately training a reward model.
The applications of direct alignment methods have gained momentum due to their simplicity and training stability. However, these methods suffer from one critical issue: likelihood displacement. Likelihood displacement refers the counterintuitive situation where the training process, designed to increase
1

Models and code: huggingface.co/ComparisonPO

github.com/PeterLauLukChen/ComparisonPO

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

