Balancing Multimodal Training Through
Game-Theoretic Regularization

Konstantinos Kontras1∗

Thomas Strypsteen1

Christos Chatzichristos1

Paul Pu Liang3

Matthew Blaschko1

Maarten De Vos1,2

2

1
Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
3
MIT Media Lab and EECS, Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract
Multimodal learning holds promise for richer information extraction by capturing
dependencies across data sources. Yet, current training methods often underperform
due to modality competition, a phenomenon where modalities contend for training
resources leaving some underoptimized. This raises a pivotal question: how can
we address training imbalances, ensure adequate optimization across all modalities,
and achieve consistent performance improvements as we transition from unimodal
to multimodal data? This paper proposes the Multimodal Competition Regularizer
(MCR), inspired by a mutual information (MI) decomposition designed to prevent
the adverse effects of competition in multimodal training. Our key contributions are:
1) A game-theoretic framework that adaptively balances modality contributions by
encouraging each to maximize its informative role in the final prediction 2) Refining
lower and upper bounds for each MI term to enhance the extraction of both taskrelevant unique and shared information across modalities. 3) Proposing latent space
permutations for conditional MI estimation, significantly improving computational
efficiency. MCR outperforms all previously suggested training strategies and
simple baseline, clearly demonstrating that training modalities jointly leads to
important performance gains on both synthetic and large real-world datasets. We
release our code and models at https://github.com/kkontras/MCR.

1

Introduction

Exploiting multimodal data has made significant progress, with advances in generalizable representations and larger datasets enabling solutions to previously unattainable tasks [28, 33, 30, 39, 45, 44,
46, 52, 55, 66]. However, studies indicate that jointly trained multimodal data is often utilized suboptimally, underperforming compared to ensembles of unimodal models, jointly trained modalities, or
even the best single modality [56, 64]. The expectation that adding a new modality should improve
performance, assuming independent errors and above-chance predictive power [16], is frequently
contradicted in practice.
Huang et al. [20] attribute this issue to modality competition, where one modality quickly minimizes
training error, misdirecting and suppressing the learning of others. To counteract this effect, monitoring each modality’s contribution during training and applying corrective measures is crucial. To this
∗

Correspondence to: konstantinos.kontras@kuleuven.be

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

