Global Minimizers of ℓp-Regularized Objectives
Yield the Sparsest ReLU Neural Networks

Julia Nakhleh
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
jnakhleh@wisc.edu

Robert D. Nowak
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
Overparameterized neural networks can interpolate a given dataset in many different ways, prompting the fundamental question: which among these solutions
should we prefer, and what explicit regularization strategies will provably yield
these solutions? This paper addresses the challenge of finding the sparsest interpolating ReLU network—i.e., the network with the fewest nonzero parameters
or neurons—a goal with wide-ranging implications for efficiency, generalization,
interpretability, theory, and model compression. Unlike post hoc pruning approaches, we propose a continuous, almost-everywhere differentiable training
objective whose global minima are guaranteed to correspond to the sparsest singlehidden-layer ReLU networks that fit the data. This result marks a conceptual
advance: it recasts the combinatorial problem of sparse interpolation as a smooth
optimization task, potentially enabling the use of gradient-based training methods.
Our objective is based on minimizing ℓp quasinorms of the weights for 0 < p < 1,
a classical sparsity-promoting strategy in finite-dimensional settings. However,
applying these ideas to neural networks presents new challenges: the function
class is infinite-dimensional, and the weights are learned using a highly nonconvex
objective. We prove that, under our formulation, global minimizers correspond
exactly to sparsest solutions. Our work lays a foundation for understanding when
and how continuous sparsity-inducing objectives can be leveraged to recover sparse
networks through training.

1

Introduction

Highly overparameterized neural networks have become the workhorse of modern machine learning.
Because these networks can interpolate a given dataset in many different ways (see e.g. Figs. 1b
and 1c), explicit regularization is frequently incorporated into the training procedure to favor solutions
that are, in some sense, more regular or desirable. In this work, we focus on explicit regularizers
which yield sparse single-hidden-layer ReLU interpolating networks, which for our purposes are
those with the fewest nonzero input weight/bias parameters among the active neurons.1 Sparse
models are particularly desirable for computational efficiency purposes, as they have lower storage
requirements and computational overhead when deployed at inference time, and may have other
attractive properties in terms of generalization, interpretability, and robustness (Mozer and Smolensky
(1988); Guo et al. (2018); Liao et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2022), among many others).
Although a myriad of sparsity-inducing training schemes have been proposed in the neural network
literature, almost none of them have actually been proven to yield true sparsest solutions, and the
1

In the univariate-input case, this is equivalent to the count of active neurons.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

