Beyond Accuracy: Dissecting Mathematical Reasoning
for LLMs Under Reinforcement Learning

Jiayu Wang†∗, Yifei Ming‡∗ , Zixuan Ke‡ , Caiming Xiong‡ , Shafiq Joty‡ ,
Aws Albarghouthi† , Frederic Sala†
†
‡
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Salesforce AI Research

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become the dominant paradigm for improving
the performance of language models on complex reasoning tasks. Despite the
substantial empirical gains demonstrated by RL-based training methods like GRPO,
a granular understanding of why and how RL enhances performance is still lacking.
To bridge this gap, we introduce SPARKLE, a fine-grained analytic framework
to dissect the effects of RL across three key dimensions: (1) plan following and
execution, (2) knowledge integration, and (3) chain of subproblems. Using this
framework, we gain insights beyond mere accuracy. For instance, providing
models with explicit human-crafted, step-by-step plans can surprisingly degrade
performance on the most challenging benchmarks, yet RL-tuned models exhibit
greater robustness, experiencing markedly smaller performance drops than base
or SFT models. This suggests that RL may not primarily enhance the execution
of external plans but rather empower models to formulate and follow internal
strategies better suited to their reasoning processes. Conversely, we observe that
RL enhances models’ ability to integrate provided knowledge into their reasoning
process, yielding consistent gains across diverse tasks. Finally, we study whether
difficult problems—those yielding no RL signals and mixed-quality reasoning
traces—can still be effectively used for training. We introduce SparkleRL-PSS,
a multi-stage RL pipeline that reuses hard problems with partial step scaffolding,
guiding exploration effectively without additional data generation. Together, our
findings provide a principled foundation for understanding how RL shapes model
behavior, offering practical insights for building more adaptive, data-efficient, and
interpretable RL pipelines for reasoning tasks. Our code, data, and checkpoints are
available at: https://sparkle-reasoning.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Reasoning models are among the most exciting recent developments in the large language model
space. These models are able to perform mathematical and other forms of reasoning and achieve
excellent performance on a number of benchmarks [2, 15, 37, 47]. Reinforcement learning-based
training appears to be crucial to achieving these reasoning capabilities, leading to a proliferation of
papers proposing new RL-based training techniques, reasoning models, and evaluation benchmarks.
Despite this explosion of interest, precisely what capabilities are gained during RL training is not
clear. Most works studying RL for reasoning use a set of standardized benchmarks. While convenient,
tracking the gain in accuracy for a method on, for example, the AIME 2024 contest [32], ultimately
provides limited signal into what behaviors are enabled by RL. To make further progress, we argue
that it is necessary to develop a fine-grained understanding of the benefits of RL.
∗

Co-lead. Correspondence to: milawang@cs.wisc.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

