Few-Shot Learning from Gigapixel Images via
Hierarchical Vision-Language Alignment and
Modeling

Bryan Wong1∗ Jong Woo Kim1∗ Huazhu Fu2 Mun Yong Yi1†
1
KAIST 2 IHPC, A*STAR
{bryan.wong, gsds4885, munyi}@kaist.ac.kr
hzfu@ieee.org

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) have recently been integrated into multiple instance learning (MIL) frameworks to address the challenge of few-shot, weakly
supervised classification of whole slide images (WSIs). A key trend involves
leveraging multi-scale information to better represent hierarchical tissue structures.
However, existing methods often face two key limitations: (1) insufficient modeling
of interactions within the same modalities across scales (e.g., 5× and 20×) and
(2) inadequate alignment between visual and textual modalities on the same scale.
To address these gaps, we propose HiVE-MIL, a hierarchical vision-language
framework that constructs a unified graph consisting of (1) parent–child links
between coarse (5×) and fine (20×) visual/textual nodes to capture hierarchical
relationships, and (2) heterogeneous intra-scale edges linking visual and textual
nodes on the same scale. To further enhance semantic consistency, HiVE-MIL
incorporates a two-stage, text-guided dynamic filtering mechanism that removes
weakly correlated patch–text pairs, and introduces a hierarchical contrastive loss
to align textual semantics across scales. Extensive experiments on TCGA breast,
lung, and kidney cancer datasets demonstrate that HiVE-MIL consistently outperforms both traditional MIL and recent VLM-based MIL approaches, achieving
gains of up to 4.1% in macro F1 under 16-shot settings. Our results demonstrate
the value of jointly modeling hierarchical structure and multimodal alignment for
efficient and scalable learning from limited pathology data. The code is available
at https://github.com/bryanwong17/HiVE-MIL.

1

Introduction

Whole slide image (WSI) classification is a central task in computational pathology (CPath), enabling
cancer diagnosis, subtyping, and prognosis prediction [50, 51, 10]. With gigapixel resolution, WSIs
contain detailed spatial information ranging from coarse tissue structures to fine-grained cellular
morphology [20], which is crucial for accurate interpretation in these diagnostic tasks. To handle their
large size and the absence of fine-grained annotations, multiple instance learning (MIL) is widely
adopted [8, 28]. In MIL, each WSI is treated as a bag of instances (patches), and a slide-level label is
predicted through a feature aggregator with supervision only at the slide level (Figure 1(A)). However,
traditional MIL models [27, 33, 38, 47, 54, 34] face key challenges in real-world clinical settings
[23]: (1) they rely on large labeled datasets, which are difficult to obtain due to privacy concerns [40]
and the rarity of certain diseases [32], making them ineffective in few-shot scenarios where labeled
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

