REDOUBT: Duo Safety Validation for Autonomous
Vehicle Motion Planning

Shuguang Wang1

Qian Zhou1 Kui Wu2 Dapeng Wu1 Wei-Bin Lee3 Jianping Wang1
1
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
University of Victoria, B.C., Canada
3
Information Security Center, Hon Hai Research Institute, Taipei, Taiwan
sgwang6-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
{qiazhou, jianwang}@cityu.edu.hk wkui@uvic.ca
dpwu@ieee.org wei-bin.lee@foxconn.com

Abstract
Safety validation, which assesses the safety of an autonomous system’s motion
planning decisions, is critical for the safe deployment of autonomous vehicles.
Existing input validation techniques from other machine learning domains, such as
image classification, face unique challenges in motion planning due to its contextual properties, including complex inputs and one-to-many mapping. Furthermore,
current output validation methods in autonomous driving primarily focus on openloop trajectory prediction, which is ill-suited for the closed-loop nature of motion
planning. We introduce REDOUBT, the first systematic safety validation framework for autonomous vehicle motion planning that employs a duo mechanism,
simultaneously inspecting input distributions and output uncertainty. REDOUBT
identifies previously overlooked unsafe modes arising from the interplay of InDistribution/Out-of-Distribution (OOD) scenarios and certain/uncertain planning
decisions. We develop specialized solutions for both OOD detection via latent
flow matching and decision uncertainty estimation via an energy-based approach.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that both modules outperform existing
approaches, under both open-loop and closed-loop evaluation settings. Our codes
are available at: https://github.com/sgNicola/Redoubt.

1

Introduction

Motion planning—the process of generating a trajectory for the ego-vehicle based on sensed traffic
scenario data—is a cornerstone of autonomous driving. Learning-based motion planning methods [48,
54, 47, 45, 7], which leverage datasets of human driving behavior to train autonomous systems, have
gained increasing attention due to their potential for greater adaptability compared to traditional
rule-based approaches. Despite significant advances, autonomous vehicles continue to struggle with
the full complexity of real-world driving scenarios [11, 29, 28, 42].
Safety validation for motion planning, which assesses whether a vehicle’s decisions are safe in a
given scenario, is thus critical. When an unsafe decision is detected, the validation module can: (1)
immediately override the decision and initiate fallback measures (e.g., manual takeover [1]) to ensure
short-term safety, and (2) flag the scenario as “challenging” to prioritize improvement in subsequent
continual learning iterations [37, 41]. Safety validation could reduce or prevent tragedies like the
March 29, 2025, Xiaomi SU7 incident, which resulted in three fatalities [12]. Nevertheless, such a
systematic safety validation framework is currently lacking—a gap our this work seeks to address.
Safety validation can potentially be approached via two main angles: input inspection and output
inspection. In the first category, input inspection, we draw inspiration from Out-of-Distribution
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

