High-Dimensional Calibration from Swap Regret

Maxwell Fishelson∗

Noah Golowich†

Mehryar Mohri‡

Jon Schneider§

maxfish@mit.edu

nzg@mit.edu

mohri@google.com

jschnei@google.com

Abstract
We study the online calibration of multi-dimensional forecasts over an arbitrary
convex set P ⊂ Rd relative to an arbitrary norm k·k. We connect this with the
problem of external regret minimization
for online linear optimization, showing that
√
if it is possible to guarantee O( ρT ) worst-case regret after T rounds when actions
are drawn from P and losses are drawn from the dual k·k∗ unit norm ball, then it
is also possible to obtain -calibrated forecasts after T = exp(O(ρ/2 )) rounds.
When
√ P is the d-dimensional simplex and k·k is the `1 -norm, the existence of
O( T log d)-regret algorithms for learning with experts implies that it is possible
2
to obtain -calibrated forecasts after T = exp(O(log d/2 )) = dO(1/ ) rounds,
recovering a recent result of [Pen25].
Interestingly, our algorithm obtains this guarantee without requiring access to any
online linear optimization subroutine or knowledge of the optimal rate ρ – in fact,
our algorithm is identical for every setting of P and k·k. Instead, we show that
the optimal regularizer for the above OLO problem can be used to upper bound
the above calibration error by a swap regret, which we then minimize by running
the recent TreeSwap algorithm ([DDFG24, PR24]) with Follow-The-Leader as a
subroutine. The resulting algorithm is highly efficient and plays a distribution over
simple averages of past observations in each round.
Finally, we prove that any online calibration algorithm that guarantees T `1 calibration error over the d-dimensional simplex requires T ≥ exp(poly(1/))
(assuming d ≥ poly(1/)). This strengthens the corresponding dΩ(log 1/) lower
bound of [Pen25], and shows that an exponential dependence on 1/ is necessary.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem faced by a forecaster who must report probabilistic predictions for a sequence
of events (e.g. whether it will rain or not tomorrow). One of the most common methods to evaluate
the quality of such a forecaster is to verify whether they are calibrated: for example, does it indeed
rain with probability 40% on days where the forecaster makes this prediction? In addition to
calibration being a natural property to expect from predictions, several applications across machine
learning, fairness, and game theory require the ability to produce online calibrated predictions
[ZME20, GPSW17, HJKRR18, FV97].
When events have binary outcomes, calibration can be quantified by the notion of expected calibration
error, which measures the expected distance between a prediction made by a forecaster and the actual
empirical probability of the outcome on the days where they made that prediction. In a seminal result
by Foster and Vohra [FV98], it was proved that it is possible for an online forecaster to efficiently
∗

MIT.
MIT. Supported by a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship and a Fannie & Hertz Foundation Graduate
Fellowship.
‡
Google Research and Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York.
§
Google Research.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

