Universal Sequence Preconditioning
Annie Marsden →

Elad Hazan→ †

Abstract
We study the problem of preconditioning in sequential prediction. From the theoretical lens of linear dynamical systems, we show that convolving the target sequence
corresponds to applying a polynomial to the hidden transition matrix. Building
on this insight, we propose a universal preconditioning method that convolves
the target with coefficients from orthogonal polynomials such as Chebyshev or
Legendre. We prove that this approach reduces regret for two distinct prediction
algorithms and yields the first ever sublinear and hidden-dimension–independent
regret bounds (up to logarithmic factors) that hold for systems with marginally
stable and asymmetric transition matrices. Finally, extensive synthetic and realworld experiments show that this simple preconditioning strategy improves the
performance of a diverse range of algorithms, including recurrent neural networks,
and generalizes to signals beyond linear dynamical systems.

1

Introduction

In sequence prediction the goal of the learner is to predict the next token accurately according to a
specified loss function, such as the mean square error or cross-entropy. This fundamental problem
in machine learning has gained increased importance with the rise of large language models, which
perform sequence prediction on tokens using cross entropy. The focus of this paper is preconditioning,
i.e. modifying the target sequence to make it easier to learn. A classic example is differencing,
introduced by Box and Jenkins in the 1970s [13], which transforms observations y1 , y2 , . . . into
successive differences,
y1 → y0 , y2 → y1 , ..., yt → yt↑1 , ...
It is widely acknowledged that learning this sequence can be “easier" than learning the original
sequence for a large number of modalities. In this work we seek a more general framework for
sequence preconditioning that captures the same intuition behind differencing and extends it to a
broader class of transformations. The question we ask is
What is the general form of sequence preconditioning that enables provably accurate learning?
We address this question by introducing a preconditioning method which takes in n fixed coefficients
c0 , . . . , cn and converts the sequence of observations y1 , . . . , yt , . . . to the sequence of convolved
observations1
n
!
c0 y0 , c 0 y1 + c1 y0 , . . . ,
ci yt↑i , . . .
i=0

From
" an information-theoretic perspective, approaches of this kind seem futile—predicting yt or
i ci yt↑i seems equally hard in an adversarial setting. Yet we show that when the data arises from
a linear dynamical system (LDS), there exists a universal form of preconditioning that provably
* Google Deepmind
†
1

Princeton University
This recovers differencing when n = 2, c0 = 1, and c1 = →1.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

