Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader Nearly Achieves
Best-of-Both-Worlds for the m-Set Semi-Bandit
Problems
Jingxin Zhan
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
bjdxzjx@pku.edu.cn

Yuchen Xin
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
2301110087@pku.edu.cn

Chenjie Sun
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
scj233@stu.pku.edu.cn

Zhihua Zhang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Center for Intelligent Computing
Great Bay University, China
zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider a common case of the combinatorial semi-bandit problem, the m-set
semi-bandit, where the learner exactly selects m arms from the√total d arms. In
the adversarial setting, the best regret bound, known to be O( nmd) for time
horizon n, is achieved by the well-known Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL)
policy. However, this requires to explicitly compute the arm-selection probabilities
via optimizing problems at each time step and sample according to them. This
problem can be avoided by the Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader (FTPL) policy, which
simply pulls the m arms that rank among the m smallest (estimated) loss with
random perturbation. In this paper, we show that FTPLp
with a Fréchet perturbation
√
also enjoys the near optimal regret bound O( nm( d log(d) + m5/6 )) in the
adversarial setting and approaches best-of-both-world regret bounds, i.e., achieves
a logarithmic regret for the stochastic setting. Moreover, our lower bounds show
that the extra factors are unavoidable with our approach; any improvement would
require a fundamentally different and more challenging method.

1

Introduction

The combinatorial semi-bandit problem [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2012] is an important online
decision-making problem with partial information feedback, and has many practical applications
such as in shortest-path problems [Gai et al., 2012], ranking [Kveton et al., 2015a], multi-task bandits
[Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2012] and recommender systems [Zou et al., 2019]. The semi-bandit
problem is a sequential game that involves a learner and an environment, both interacting over time.
In particular, the problem setup consists of d fixed arms, and at each round t = 1, 2, . . ., the learner
selects a combinatorial action—a subset of arms—from a predefined set A ⊂ {0, 1}d . Simultaneously,
the environment generates a loss vector ℓt ∈ [0, 1]d . The learner then incurs a loss of ⟨At , ℓt ⟩, where
At ∈ A is the selected action, and receives semi-bandit feedback ot = At ⊙ ℓt , representing the
losses associated with the selected arms only (here, ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

