CPO: Condition Preference Optimization for
Controllable Image Generation

Zonglin Lyu Ming Li Xinxin Liu Chen Chen
Institute of Artificial Intelligence
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816
{zonglin.lyu, ming.li, xinxin.liu, chen.chen}@ucf.edu

Abstract
To enhance controllability in text-to-image generation, ControlNet introduces
image-based control signals, while ControlNet++ improves pixel-level cycle consistency between generated images and the input control signal. To avoid the
prohibitive cost of back-propagating through the sampling process, ControlNet++
optimizes only low-noise timesteps (e.g., t < 200) using a single-step approximation, which not only ignores the contribution of high-noise timesteps but also
introduces additional approximation errors. A straightforward alternative for optimizing controllability across all timesteps is Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO), a fine-tuning method that increases model preference for more controllable images (I w ) over less controllable ones (I l ). However, due to uncertainty in
generative models, it is difficult to ensure that win–lose image pairs differ only
in controllability while keeping other factors, such as image quality, fixed. To
address this, we propose performing preference learning over control conditions
rather than generated images. Specifically, we construct winning and losing control
signals, cw and cl , and train the model to prefer cw . This method, which we term
Condition Preference Optimization (CPO), eliminates confounding factors and
yields a low-variance training objective. Our approach theoretically exhibits lower
contrastive loss variance than DPO and empirically achieves superior results. Moreover, CPO requires less computation and storage for dataset curation. Extensive
experiments show that CPO significantly improves controllability over the state-ofthe-art ControlNet++ across multiple control types: over 10% error rate reduction
in segmentation, 70–80% in human pose, and consistent 2–5% reductions in edge
and depth maps. The error rate is defined as the difference between the evaluated
controllability and the oracle results. Our project is available here.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in diffusion models [1–3] have achieved state-of-the-art performance in text-toimage (T2I) generation. Text prompts serve as sparse conditioning signals, typically conveying only
global attributes such as background, foreground, and salient objects. However, when multiple objects
are present or when fine-grained details, such as edges or 2D/3D spatial structure, are involved, text
prompts struggle to capture such information precisely. These details are more effectively conveyed
through dense visual conditions, such as segmentation maps [4], depth maps [5], and Canny edges [6].
To incorporate such dense control, several works [7–10] introduce additional modules that extract
control signals on top of base T2I models, such as Stable Diffusion [2]. However, these methods do
not define an explicit training objective to ensure precise controllability.
ControlNet++ [11] introduces a pixel-level cycle consistency loss between the generated image x̂
and the input control condition c to explicitly model controllability during training, as shown in
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

