Wavy Transformer

Satoshi Noguchi
Research Institute for Value-Added Information Generation, JAMSTEC
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
satoshin@jamstec.go.jp
Yoshinobu Kawahara
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Osaka
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
kawahara@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Transformers have achieved remarkable success across natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV). However, deep transformer models often
suffer from an over-smoothing issue, in which token representations converge
to similar values as they pass through successive transformer blocks. In this paper, we establish an equivalence between the hidden-state dynamics induced by
stacked attention layers and graph neural diffusion on a complete graph. From
this perspective, over-smoothing can be interpreted as a consequence of the dissipative nature of the underlying diffusion dynamics. Motivated by this physical
interpretation, we propose Wavy Transformer, which consists of a novel attention layer based on second-order wavy dynamics. We also introduce a feedforward network and a normalization layer designed to preserve the physical
state-velocity relationship under the chain rule, thereby extending the transformer
architecture. We further validate our proposed techniques on various transformer
models for NLP, CV, and sparse-graph tasks. The results consistently demonstrate
that Wavy Transformer improves performance with minimal additional parameters
and no extra hyperparameter tuning. Source code and models are available at
https://github.com/noguchisatoshi/Wavy-Transformer.

1

Introduction

Transformers [41] have achieved outstanding success in a wide range of machine learning fields such
as natural language processing (NLP) [41, 11, 7, 3] and computer vision (CV) [39, 13, 26, 1, 4, 24].
These successes clearly demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of the transformer. Despite
this remarkable progress, deep transformer models often suffer from an over-smoothing issue, in
which all token representations become identical as more layers are added [12, 29, 43, 37]. This
phenomenon is also known as the token uniformity problem [12] and is recognized as a crucial
obstacle preventing transformers from going deeper. Accordingly, several techniques to mitigate
the over-smoothing behavior of transformers have been proposed [37, 43, 29]. However, compared
to graph neural networks (GNNs), where over-smoothing was first identified and widely studied
[34, 31, 28, 14, 35, 38, 20, 30, 2, 8, 17], over-smoothing in transformers has not been adequately
discussed.
Based on the above discussion, in this paper, we examine over-smoothing in transformers from the
perspective of physical dynamical systems. In addition, we propose a new type of attention layer
inspired by physical dynamical systems. Our approach originates from interpreting the dynamics
of hidden states induced by stacked attention layers as graph neural diffusion [5] on a complete
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

