Geometry Meets Incentives: Sample-Efficient
Incentivized Exploration with Linear Contexts

Benjamin Schiffer
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
1 Oxford St
bschiffer1@g.harvard.edu

Mark Sellke
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
1 Oxford St
msellke@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In the incentivized exploration model, a principal aims to explore and learn over
time by interacting with a sequence of self-interested agents. It has been recently
understood that the main challenge in designing incentive-compatible algorithms
for this problem is to gather a moderate amount of initial data, after which one
can obtain near-optimal regret via posterior sampling. With high-dimensional
contexts, however, this initial exploration phase requires exponential sample complexity in some cases, which prevents efficient learning unless initial data can
be acquired exogenously. We show that these barriers to exploration disappear
under mild geometric conditions on the set of available actions, in which case
incentive-compatibility does not preclude regret-optimality. Namely, we consider
the linear bandit model with actions in the Euclidean unit ball, and give an incentivecompatible exploration algorithm with sample complexity that scales polynomially
with the dimension and other parameters.

1

Introduction

The exploration/exploitation trade-off is fundamental to online decision making. This trade-off is
classically exemplified by the multi-armed bandit problem, where a single agent chooses actions
sequentially and learns to improve over time. In this setting, the agent has clear justification for early
exploration because they can reap future rewards by exploiting the knowledge gained by exploration.
But what if agents are unable to reap these future rewards, and so each decision must be justifiable
on its own terms without taking into account future rewards? This may occur when actions are
recommendations made to different agents by a central platform based on user feedback, as in
e-commerce, traffic routing, movies, restaurants, etc. In these settings, the agents may have a prior for
the rewards of the actions in addition to the recommendation made by the platform. Therefore, while
the platform makes recommendations with the goal of learning over time, individual myopic agents
will decline to follow any recommendations which seem suboptimal based on their individual priors.
The incentivized exploration problem was introduced in Kremer et al. [2014], Che and Hörner [2018]
to understand this fundamental tension, and extends the well-studied problem of Bayesian Persuasion
in information design Bergemann and Morris [2019], Kamenica [2019]. The model adopted in these
early works consists of a finite set of actions, each with a (publicly shared) Bayesian prior distribution
for rewards. A sequence of agents arrives one by one, and each agent is recommended an action
by a central planner. The central planner’s recommendations are made using a (publicly known)
randomized algorithm, and the agents are assumed to be selfish and rational, aiming only to maximize
their own expected reward. Given the planner’s recommendation, each agent computes and chooses
the posterior-optimal action (using Bayes’ rule). As observed in the original works, thanks to the
revelation principle of Myerson [1986], the latter step is equivalent to assuming that the planner’s
recommendations are Bayesian incentive-compatible (BIC) so that rational agents will always follow
the recommendations (at least under the assumption of agent homogeneity).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

