Automated Model Discovery via
Multi-modal & Multi-step Pipeline

Lee Jung-Mok1

Nam Hyeon-Woo1

Moon Ye-Bin 1

Junhyun Nam2

Tae-Hyun Oh3∗

1

Dept. of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH
2
Samsung Electronics
3
School of Computing, KAIST
{jungmok,hyeonw.nam,ybmoon}@postech.ac.kr,
junh.nam@samsung.com, taehyun.oh@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Automated model discovery is the process of automatically searching and identifying the most appropriate model for a given dataset over a large combinatorial
search space. Existing approaches, however, often face challenges in balancing
the capture of fine-grained details with ensuring generalizability beyond training
data regimes with a reasonable model complexity. In this paper, we present a
multi-modal & multi-step pipeline for effective automated model discovery. Our
approach leverages two vision-language-based modules (VLM), AnalyzerVLM
and EvaluatorVLM, for effective model proposal and evaluation in an agentic way.
AnalyzerVLM autonomously plans and executes multi-step analyses to propose
effective candidate models. EvaluatorVLM assesses the candidate models both
quantitatively and perceptually, regarding the fitness for local details and the generalibility for overall trends. Our results demonstrate that our pipeline effectively
discovers models that capture fine details and ensure strong generalizability. Additionally, extensive ablation studies show that both multi-modality and multi-step
reasoning play crucial roles in discovering favorable models.

1

Introduction

Model discovery aims to identify the optimal model structure and parameters that best represent
given data. Historically, model discovery has been conducted manually by scientists [40, 41] and has
established groundbreaking advances in science and technology that have shaped our understanding
of the world. However, as the complexity and scale of modern datasets continue to grow, the
feasibility of manual model discovery has become increasingly limited [11, 46, 58]. Automating this
process [7, 14, 23, 33, 38, 46] offers the potential to accelerate the scientific progress by reducing
reliance on human experts and efficient exploring of complex model spaces.
Nevertheless, automatically finding the appropriate model structure is inherently challenging as it
requires: 1) exploring over a vast combinatorial search space of candidate models, and 2) balancing between interpretability and model fit, ensuring the model captures the data accurately while remaining
sufficiently simple and understandable to domain experts. Most existing systems [8, 14, 29, 33, 43]
were carefully designed to address these challenges. For instance, [14] and [33] proposed a predefined
grammar for kernel composition within Gaussian processes, which structured the search process and
reduced the manual effort required to determine kernel composition. Also, the objective function
relied on predefined quantifiable metrics for the model selection, rather than dynamically adapting
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

