Preference Optimization on Pareto Sets:
On a Theory of Multi-Objective Optimization
Abhishek Roy∗
Texas A&M University
abhishekroy@tamu.edu

Geelon So∗
UC San Diego
geelon@ucsd.edu

Yi-An Ma
UC San Diego
yianma@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In multi-objective optimization, a single decision vector must balance the trade-offs
across many objectives. Pareto-optimal solutions are those achieving optimal tradeoffs, where improving any objective comes at a cost to another. As many different
decisions can be Pareto optimal, this raises the question of which solution to pick
and how. We formulate this problem as one of optimizing a preference function over
the set of Pareto-optimal solutions, or Pareto-constrained optimization for short.
It poses significant challenges: not only is the constraint set defined implicitly,
but it is also generally non-convex and non-smooth, even when the objectives are
strongly convex. We propose an equivalent formulation of the problem where the
constraint set is the simplex, leading to clearer notions of optimality and stationarity
that improve upon existing definitions in literature. We give an algorithm with
a last-iterate convergence rate of O(K −1/2 ) to stationarity when the preference
function is Lipschitz smooth and when the objective functions are strongly convex
and Lipschitz smooth. Motivated by applications like Reinforcement Learning
with Human Feedback (RLHF), we also extend this algorithm to the case where
access to the preference function is only available through dueling feedback.

1

Introduction

Modern, large-scale machine learning often draws data from diverse sources, are simultaneously
deployed across many settings to perform many tasks, or need to perform well across many different
metrics. These learning settings can naturally be formulated as multi-objective optimization (MOO)
problems, including multi-task, multi-distribution, meta-learning; multi-calibration, multi-group
learning; learning from crowds, or from heterogeneous/multi-fidelity sources; personalization, preference learning; hyperparameter optimization, model fine-tuning and model fusion (Jin, 2007; Sener
and Koltun, 2018; Huang et al., 2015; Haghtalab et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022;
Martinez et al., 2020; La Cava, 2023; Kamani et al., 2021; Globus-Harris et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022;
Tosh and Hsu, 2022; Raykar et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2025a). As a result, MOO has increasingly
attracted the interest of the learning community. But, in contrast to the single-objective case, far less
has been established theoretically and algorithmically for the multi-objective setting—even very basic
questions may not have rigorous definitions or solutions. We formalize and tackle such a problem.
To give an intuitive problem description, consider the concrete example of large language model
(LLM) alignment (Houlsby et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2023). In this problem, we aim
to finetune LLM outputs to achieve a number of desiderata: positivity of the tone, succinctness of the
answer, consistency with lexical conventions, and so on. While no model is generally optimal under
all criteria, it is Pareto optimal if it makes an optimal trade-off between the objectives. We would
like our decision to at least be Pareto optimal, as this means no other decision was strictly better by
all metrics. Many different trade-offs can usually be made; we call the set of all such decisions the
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

