Accelerated Evolving Set Processes for Local
PageRank Computation

Binbin Huang 1

Luo Luo 1,2 Yanghua Xiao 3 Deqing Yang 1,3 Baojian Zhou 1,3∗
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University,
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics,
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
bbhuang24@m.fudan.edu.cn
luoluo,shawyh,yangdeqing,bjzhou@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
This work proposes a novel framework based on nested evolving set processes to
accelerate Personalized PageRank (PPR) computation. At each stage of the process, we employ a localized inexact proximal point iteration to solve a simpliﬁed
linear system. We show that the time complexity of such localized methods is upper bounded by min{Õ(R2 /ϵ2 ), Õ(m)} to obtain an ϵ-approximation of the PPR
vector, where m denotes the number of edges in the graph and R is a constant
deﬁned via nested evolving set processes. Furthermore, the algorithms induced
√
by our framework require solving only Õ(1/ α) such linear systems, where α
2
is the damping factor. When 1/ϵ ≪ m, this implies the existence of an algorithm that computes an ϵ-approximation of the PPR vector with an overall time
√
complexity of Õ(R2 /( αϵ2 )), independent of the underlying graph size. Our result resolves an open conjecture from existing literature [19, 52]. Experimental
results on real-world graphs validate the efﬁciency of our methods, demonstrating
signiﬁcant convergence in the early stages.

1

Introduction

We study efﬁcient local methods for computing the PPR vector π ∈ Rn , deﬁned by

I − (1 − α)(I + AD −1 )/2) π = αes ,

(1)

where es ∈ Rn is the standard basis vector corresponding to the source node s ∈ V, and α ∈ (0, 1)
is the damping factor. Here, A ∈ Rn×n and D ∈ Rn×n are the adjacency and degree matrices
of an undirected graph G(V, E) with n = |V| nodes and m = |E| edges, respectively. The vector
π measures the importance of nodes in V from the perspective of the source node s, which is the
steady-state distribution of a lazy random walk on G. Speciﬁcally, given a precision parameter ϵ,
our goal is to design local algorithms that compute an ϵ-approximation π̂, i.e., one that satisﬁes
∥D −1 (π̂ − π)∥∞ ≤ ϵ, while avoiding access to the entire graph.
Andersen et al. [4] proposed the ﬁrst local method, called the Approximate Personalized PageRank
(APPR) algorithm, to approximate π, achieving a time complexity of O(1/(αϵ)). To further characterize the locality of π, Fountoulakis et al. [20] introduced a variational formulation of Eq. (1) and
applied a proximal gradient method to compute local estimates with a comparable time complexity
to APPR. Both methods critically rely on the monotonically decreasing ℓ1 -norm of the residual (or
gradient) to ensure the time complexity remains locally bounded.
Note that Eq. (1) can be reformulated as a strongly-convex minimization problem with condition
number 1/α. It is natural to ask whether accelerated local methods can be designed with a time
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

