Less is More: Local Intrinsic Dimensions of
Contextual Language Models

Benjamin Matthias Ruppik1 Julius von Rohrscheidt2,3 Carel van Niekerk1 Michael Heck1
Renato Vukovic1 Shutong Feng1 Hsien-chin Lin1 Nurul Lubis1
Bastian Rieck2,4 Marcus Zibrowius1 Milica Gašić1
1
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany
2
Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Munich, Germany
3
Technical University of Munich, Germany
4
University of Fribourg, Switzerland
{ruppik,niekerk,heckmi,revuk100,fengs,
linh,lubis,marcus.zibrowius,gasic}@hhu.de
julius.rohrscheidt@helmholtz-munich.de
bastian.grossenbacher@unifr.ch

Abstract
Understanding the internal mechanisms of large language models (LLMs) remains
a challenging and complex endeavor. Even fundamental questions, such as how
fine-tuning affects model behavior, often require extensive empirical evaluation. In
this paper, we introduce a novel perspective based on the geometric properties of
contextual latent embeddings to study the effects of training and fine-tuning. To that
end, we measure the local dimensions of a contextual language model’s latent space
and analyze their shifts during training and fine-tuning. We show that the local
dimensions provide insights into the model’s training dynamics and generalization
ability. Specifically, the mean of the local dimensions predicts when the model’s
training capabilities are exhausted, as exemplified in a dialogue state tracking
task, overfitting, as demonstrated in an emotion recognition task, and grokking,
as illustrated with an arithmetic task. Furthermore, our experiments suggest a
practical heuristic: reductions in the mean local dimension tend to accompany
and predict subsequent performance gains. Through this exploration, we aim to
provide practitioners with a deeper understanding of the implications of fine-tuning
on embedding spaces, facilitating informed decisions when configuring models for
specific applications. The results of this work contribute to the ongoing discourse
on the interpretability, adaptability, and generalizability of LLMs by bridging the
gap between intrinsic model mechanisms and geometric properties in embeddings.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have transformed natural language processing in recent years,
achieving impressive performance across a variety of tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2019;
Jiang et al., 2023; Radford et al., 2018; Touvron et al., 2023). These models learn contextual
token embeddings in high-dimensional latent spaces, whose structure governs how information is
represented and processed. However, most performance diagnostics in LLMs rely on supervised
validation or task-specific probes, with few attempting to understand the geometry of the LLM
embedding spaces. Our paper is motivated by a central question: Can structural changes in the
embedding space yield unsupervised insights into model behavior across language modeling tasks?
We address this question by applying a localized version of the TwoNN estimator (Facco et al.,
2017) to quantify the local intrinsic dimension of contextual token embeddings. While the ambient
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

