G RAVER: Generative Graph Vocabularies for
Robust Graph Foundation Models Fine-tuning

Haonan Yuan1 , Qingyun Sun1∗, Junhua Shi1 , Xingcheng Fu2 , Bryan Hooi3 ,
Jianxin Li1 , Philip S. Yu4
1
SKLCCSE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Guangxi Normal University
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Chicago
{yuanhn,sunqy,shijunhua,lijx}@buaa.edu.cn
fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn, bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg, psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
Inspired by the remarkable success of foundation models in language and vision,
Graph Foundation Models (GFMs) hold significant promise for broad applicability
across diverse graph tasks and domains. However, existing GFMs struggle with
unstable few-shot fine-tuning, where both performance and adaptation efficiency
exhibit significant fluctuations caused by the randomness in the support sample
selection and structural discrepancies between the pre-trained and target graphs.
How to fine-tune GFMs robustly and efficiently to enable trustworthy knowledge
transfer across domains and tasks is the major challenge. In this paper, we propose
G RAVER, a novel Generative gRAph VocabulariEs for Robust GFM fine-tuning
framework that tackles the aforementioned instability via generative augmentations.
Specifically, to identify transferable units, we analyze and extract key class-specific
subgraph patterns by ego-graph disentanglement and validate their transferability
both theoretically and empirically. To enable effective pre-training across diverse
domains, we leverage a universal task template based on ego-graph similarity and
construct graph vocabularies via graphon-based generative experts. To facilitate robust and efficient prompt fine-tuning, we grave the support samples with in-context
vocabularies, where the lightweight MoE-CoE network attentively routes knowledge from source domains. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
G RAVER over effectiveness, robustness, and efficiency on downstream few-shot
node and graph classification tasks compared with 15 state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is pervasive across a wide range of domains, including social networks [13,
127], recommendation systems [114, 100], and bioinformatics [50, 17]. Graphs are capable of
modeling complex relationships and attributed interactions between entities, making them a powerful
abstraction for solving real-world problems, such as fraud detection [60, 128], molecular property
prediction [70, 135], and protein-protein interaction modeling [34, 15]. While foundation models
such as GPTs [1] and Vision Transformers [38] have achieved impressive generalization capabilities
in language and vision through large-scale pre-training, they struggle when applied directly to graphs
due to their non-Euclidean nature, structural heterogeneity, and task diversity inherent in graph
data [52, 46, 63, 37]. To address this gap, Graph Foundation Models (GFMs) [64, 75, 149] have
emerged with the goal of enabling general-purpose learning on graph-structured data. Instead of
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

