Evaluating and Learning Optimal Dynamic
Treatment Regimes under Truncation by Death
Sihyung Park
Department of Statistics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
spark52@ncsu.edu

Wenbin Lu
Department of Statistics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
wlu4@ncsu.edu

Shu Yang
Department of Statistics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
syang24@ncsu.edu

Abstract
Truncation by death, a prevalent challenge in critical care, renders traditional dynamic treatment regime (DTR) evaluation inapplicable due to ill-defined potential
outcomes. We introduce a principal stratification-based method, focusing on the
always-survivor value function. We derive a semiparametrically efficient, multiply robust estimator for multi-stage DTRs, demonstrating its robustness and efficiency. Empirical validation and an application to electronic health records showcase its utility for personalized treatment optimization.

1

Introduction

The implementation of evidence-based treatment strategies has grown in importance in healthcare,
with dynamic treatment regimes (DTRs; Robins, 1997) being a key component. DTRs can identify
optimal treatment strategies even when data is collected from suboptimal policies. Extending beyond
traditional static decision rules, DTRs offer personalized, multi-stage treatment sequences that adapt
to evolving patient characteristics and treatment histories. Crucially, they facilitate individualized
care by determining the right interventions at the right time, tailored to each patient’s needs. This
personalized approach is essential, particularly in chronic conditions, e.g., alcohol and drug abuse
(Murphy et al., 2007), AIDS (Robins et al., 1989), cancer (Zhao et al., 2009), diabetes (Chakraborty
and Murphy, 2014), that are characterized by their prolonged duration, often involving repeated
cycles of remission and exacerbation and necessitating ongoing medical intervention. Early works
proposed g-computation (Robins, 1997), inverse probability weighting (IPW; Robins et al., 2000),
Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan, 1992) and A-learning (Murphy, 2003) to evaluate average clinical
benefits – value functions – of treatment policies, while more recent literature employs doubly robust
forms of value search methods (Zhang et al., 2013) and outcome weighted learning (Liu et al., 2018)
to mitigate error due to potential model misspecification.
While statistical methods for estimating optimal DTRs have proliferated, their applicability is often
limited by the requirement of well-defined potential outcomes. In studies, truncation by death is a
common challenge, which arises when death precludes subsequent data collection thereby leaving
outcomes of interest undefined. For example, 15% of sepsis patients in the Medical Information
Mart for Intensive Care III (MIMIC-III) database experience death, causing the outcomes at the final
48-hour time point undefined (Rhodes et al., 2024). For individuals underwent truncation by death,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

