Robust Estimation Under Heterogeneous Corruption
Rates
Syomantak Chaudhuri
University of California, Berkeley

Jerry Li
University of Washington

Thomas A. Courtade
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
We study the problem of robust estimation under heterogeneous corruption rates,
where each sample may be independently corrupted with a known but non-identical
probability. This setting arises naturally in distributed and federated learning,
crowdsourcing, and sensor networks, yet existing robust estimators typically assume uniform or worst-case corruption, ignoring structural heterogeneity. For
mean estimation for multivariate bounded distributions and univariate gaussian
distributions, we give tight minimax rates for all heterogeneous corruption patterns.
For multivariate gaussian mean estimation and linear
√ regression, we establish the
minimax rate for squared error up to a factor of d, where d is the dimension.
Roughly, our findings suggest that samples beyond a certain corruption threshold
may be discarded by the optimal estimators – this threshold is determined by the
empirical distribution of the corruption rates given.

1

Introduction

In traditional statistics, we typically rely on the assumption that our data is generated in a “nice”,
i.i.d. manner from some population distribution. Robust statistics can be seen as a relaxation of these
assumptions, aiming to ensure meaningful performance even when the data that has been corrupted by
a small fraction of arbitrary, but potentially adversarially chosen, outliers. First proposed in seminal
work by statisticians such as Huber, Tukey, and Anscombe more than fifty years ago [1–4], this
problem remains highly relevant to this day, and has received considerable recent attention from the
statistics, machine learning, and theoretical computer science community, see e.g. [5–20]. A full
survey of this line of work is beyond the scope of this paper, see e.g. [21] for a more comprehensive
overview.
There are a number of related ways in the literature to model such outliers. For instance, one classical
setting is known as the Huber contamination model [22]. Here, there is a “nice” distribution D,
typically assumed to be from some well-behaved class of distributions, and we receive n samples
Z1 , . . . , Zn from a distribution D0 = (1 − )D + N for some arbitrary noise distribution N , and
some error parameter  > 0. In other words, to generate a sample point Zi , we generate a clean
sample from D with probability (1 − ), and we sample an outlier from a noise distribution with
probability . There are also a number of other, more powerful, adversaries considered in the literature,
for instance, which allow the adversary to choose the corrupted points adaptively based on the clean
samples; see e.g. [23–25] for a more detailed discussion. However, by now, at least for many basic
estimation tasks such as mean estimation, tight (or nearly tight) rates are known for many parametric
families of distributions under all of these corruption models.
But, all of these models share an unfortunate drawback: namely, they all essentially assume a
homogeneous prior on the error rates across the dataset. In the Huber contamination model, for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

