TreeGen: A Bayesian Generative Model for
Hierarchies
Marcel Kollovieh1,2,3

Nils Fleischmann4

Bertrand Charpentier4
1
2

Filippo Guerranti1,2,3

Stephan Günnemann1,2,3,4

School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
Munich Data Science Institute 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning 4 Pruna AI
Correspondence to: m.kollovieh@tum.de

Abstract
In this work, we introduce TreeGen, a novel generative framework modeling
distributions over hierarchies. We extend Bayesian Flow Networks (BFNs) to
enable transitions between probabilistic and discrete hierarchies parametrized via
categorical distributions. Our proposed scheduler provides smooth and consistent
entropy decay across varying numbers of categories. We empirically evaluate
TreeGen on the jet-clustering task in high-energy physics, demonstrating that it
consistently generates valid trees that adhere to physical constraints and closely
align with ground-truth log-likelihoods. Finally, by comparing TreeGen’s samples
to the exact posterior distribution and performing likelihood maximization via
rejection sampling, we demonstrate that TreeGen outperforms various baselines.

1

Introduction

Hierarchies are central to representing complex relationships across diverse domains. Consequently,
hierarchical clustering algorithms are core components in well-established machine libraries such
as scikit-learn [36], and find applications in a wide range of fields, spanning from phylogenetics
and particle physics to web and citation network analysis. In phylogenetics, for example, clustering
algorithms group organisms or genetic sequences based on similarity, helping to infer evolutionary
relationships [18]. Further, real-world systems, from neural representation [22] to citation networks
and web graphs [37] often exhibit hierarchical organization. Importantly, in high-energy physics,
agglomerative linkage algorithms are indispensable for jet clustering and provide insights into the
substructure of particle collisions [7].
Traditional hierarchical clustering algorithms operate primarily in an unsupervised setting. Agglomerative methods greedily merge clusters with the shortest distance until only a single root remains [21].
Divisive algorithms work in a top-down approach and start with all points in a single cluster and
iteratively split them into smaller groups [43, 14]. More recent methods optimize global cost functions
via continuous relaxations, yet the setting remains unsupervised [11, 34, 9, 48, 30]. This is sensible
in many applications, as ground truth hierarchies are often unavailable for supervised training.
Jet clustering in high-energy physics is a prime example where supervised simulations are available,
yet traditional algorithms remain unsupervised. In particle accelerators, high-energy collisions
produce unstable particles that successively decay and split into more particles. This resulting spray
of particles, also known as a jet, is detected by particle detectors. The task in jet clustering is to
reconstruct the latent hierarchy that describes the splitting process from the observed constituents, i.e.,
leaves of the hierarchy [33]. Simulators are extensively used in this field to generate collision events
based on a physical model, enabling the creation of realistic hierarchy datasets for jet clustering [3, 4,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

