Pragmatic Heterogeneous Collaborative Perception
via Generative Communication Mechanism
Junfei Zhou1, 2

Penglin Dai1, 2∗ Quanmin Wei1, 2 Bingyi Liu3
Xiao Wu1, 2 Jianping Wang4
1
Southwest Jiaotong University 2 Engineering Research Center of Sustainable
Urban Intelligent Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
3
Wuhan University of Technology 4 City University of Hong Kong
{jeffreychou, wqm}@my.swjtu.edu.cn penglindai@swjtu.edu.cn
byliu@whut.edu.cn wuxiaohk@gmail.com jianwang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Multi-agent collaboration enhances the perception capabilities of individual agents
through information sharing. However, in real-world applications, differences in
sensors and models across heterogeneous agents inevitably lead to domain gaps
during collaboration. Existing approaches based on adaptation and reconstruction
fail to support pragmatic heterogeneous collaboration due to two key limitations:
(1) Intrusive retraining of the encoder or core modules disrupts the established
semantic consistency among agents; and (2) accommodating new agents incurs
high computational costs, limiting scalability. To address these challenges, we
present a novel Generative Communication mechanism (GenComm) that facilitates
seamless perception across heterogeneous multi-agent systems through feature generation, without altering the original network, and employs lightweight numerical
alignment of spatial information to efficiently integrate new agents at minimal cost.
Specifically, a tailored Deformable Message Extractor is designed to extract spatial
message for each collaborator, which is then transmitted in place of intermediate
features. The Spatial-Aware Feature Generator, utilizing a conditional diffusion
model, generates features aligned with the ego agent’s semantic space while preserving the spatial information of the collaborators. These generated features are
further refined by a Channel Enhancer before fusion. Experiments conducted on
the OPV2V-H, DAIR-V2X and V2X-Real datasets demonstrate that GenComm
outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods, achieving an 81% reduction in both
computational cost and parameter count when incorporating new agents. Our code
is available at https://github.com/jeffreychou777/GenComm.

1

Introduction

In autonomous driving field, multi-agent collaborative perception has emerged as a promising
paradigm for enhancing environmental understanding by enabling information sharing among agents,
thereby effectively extending perception range and mitigating challenges such as occlusions and
long-range sensing limitations [1, 2, 3]. Recently, numerous studies have been conducted to advance
this field [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Most of these works are based on the assumption of homogeneous collaboration, which limits their applicability in real-world scenarios, where collaboration typically involves
heterogeneous agents with diverse sensor modalities and model architectures.
Existing approaches for heterogeneous multi-agent perception are predominantly non-generative
and can be broadly categorized into two types: adaptation-based and reconstruction-based methods, illustrated in Figure 1 (a) and (b). Adaptation-based methods include using a single adapter
for one-stage transformation such as MPDA[9], employing two-stage adaptation with a predefined
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

