Rethinking Losses for Diffusion Bridge Samplers

Sebastian Sanokowski1,2

Lukas Gruber 2

Sepp Hochreiter2,3
1

Christoph Bartmann 2

Sebastian Lehner2

Technical University Munich, Chair of Robotics, Artificial Intelligence and Embedded Systems
2
ELLIS Unit Linz, LIT AI Lab, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
3
NXAI Lab & NXAI GmbH, Linz, Austria
sebastian.sanokowski[at]tum.de

Abstract
Diffusion bridges are a promising class of deep-learning methods for sampling
from unnormalized distributions. Recent works show that the Log Variance (LV)
loss consistently outperforms the reverse Kullback-Leibler (rKL) loss when using
the reparametrization trick to compute rKL-gradients. While the on-policy LV loss
yields identical gradients to the rKL loss when combined with the log-derivative
trick for diffusion samplers with non-learnable forward processes, this equivalence
does not hold for diffusion bridges or when diffusion coefficients are learned.
Based on this insight we argue that for diffusion bridges the LV loss does not
represent an optimization objective that can be motivated like the rKL loss via the
data processing inequality. Our analysis shows that employing the rKL loss with
the log-derivative trick (rKL-LD) does not only avoid these conceptual problems
but also consistently outperforms the LV loss. Experimental results with different
types of diffusion bridges on challenging benchmarks show that samplers trained
with the rKL-LD loss achieve better performance. From a practical perspective
we find that rKL-LD requires significantly less hyperparameter optimization and
yields more stable training behavior.1

1

Introduction

We consider the task of learning to generate samples X ∈ RN from an unnormalized target distribution:
exp (−E(X))
(1)
π0 (X) =
with Z = ∫ exp (−E(X)) dX,
Z
RN
where Z denotes the partition function and E ∶ RN → R is the energy function. In this setting, it is
assumed that the energy function E of the target distribution can be evaluated and Z is unknown and
computationally intractable. Importantly, there are no available samples from π0 . Sampling problems of this kind represent fundamental challenges in computational physics and chemistry and in
Bayesian inference [Noé and Wu, 2018, Wu et al., 2019, Shih and Ermon, 2020]. Recent approaches
have focused on training probability distributions parameterized by neural networks to approximate
target distributions. Early deep learning-based methods explored exact likelihood models such as
normalizing flows [Noé and Wu, 2018] and autoregressive models [Wu et al., 2019, Nicoli et al.,
2020], while more recent work has turned to approximate likelihood models like diffusion models
in continuous [Zhang and Chen, 2022, Berner et al., 2022] and discrete domains [Sanokowski et al.,
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/sanokows/RethinkingLossesforDiffusionBridgeSamplers.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

