3D-GSRD: 3D Molecular Graph Auto-Encoder
with Selective Re-mask Decoding

Chang Wu1* , Zhiyuan Liu2* , Wen Shu3 , Liang Wang4 , Yanchen Luo1 ,
Wenqiang Lei3 , Yatao Bian2 , Junfeng Fang2† , Xiang Wang1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 National University of Singapore
3
Sichuan University 4 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
wuchang0124@mail.ustc.edu.cn, acharkq@gmail.com, shuwen@stu.scu.edu.cn,

liang.wang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, luoyanchen@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wenqianglei@scu.edu.cn,
ybian@nus.edu.sg, fangjf1997@gmail.com, xiangwang1223@gmail.com
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

Abstract
Masked graph modeling (MGM) is a promising approach for molecular representation learning (MRL). However, extending the success of re-mask decoding from 2D
to 3D MGM is non-trivial, primarily due to two conflicting challenges: avoiding 2D
structure leakage to the decoder, while still providing sufficient 2D context for reconstructing re-masked atoms. To address these challenges, we propose 3D-GSRD:
a 3D Molecular Graph Auto-Encoder with Selective Re-mask Decoding. The core
innovation of 3D-GSRD lies in its Selective Re-mask Decoding (SRD), which
re-masks only 3D-relevant information from encoder representations while preserving the 2D graph structures. This SRD is synergistically integrated with a 3D
Relational-Transformer (3D-ReTrans) encoder alongside a structure-independent
decoder. We analyze that SRD, combined with the structure-independent decoder,
enhances the encoder’s role in MRL. Extensive experiments show that 3D-GSRD
achieves strong downstream performance, setting a new state-of-the-art on 7 out of
8 targets in the widely used MD17 molecular property prediction benchmark. The
code is released at https://github.com/WuChang0124/3D-GSRD.

1

Introduction

Molecular representation learning (MRL) [1–3] is fundamental to a wide range of downstream tasks,
including de novo drug design [4], molecular dynamics simulation [5], and molecular property
prediction [6, 7]. Given the abundance of unlabeled molecular data in this field, self-supervised
pretraining has emerged as a key strategy for learning effective molecular representations. Previous
works have primarily focused on 1D molecular strings [8, 9] and 2D molecular graphs [10–12],
achieving promising results. However, they often neglect critical 3D structural information, which is
crucial for capturing molecular properties such as the highest occupied molecular orbital, molecular
dynamics, and energy functions [13]. This limitation has led to a growing interest in incorporating
3D molecular coordinates into pretraining frameworks.
Masked graph modeling (MGM) has emerged as a leading paradigm for 3D molecular pretraining,
aiming to learn data distributions by reconstructing randomly masked graph features [14, 15]. As
illustrated in Figure 1, its 3D variant typically consists of three key components: (1) 3D graph
masking, which perturbs the original 3D molecular graph by randomly masking features such as 3D
coordinates, atom types, and chemical bonds [14, 16]; (2) a 3D graph encoder, which processes the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

