Obliviator Reveals the Cost of Nonlinear
Guardedness in Concept Erasure

Ramin Akbari∗

Milad Afshari∗

Vishnu Naresh Boddeti

Michigan State University
{akbarigh, afsharim, vishnu}@msu.edu

Abstract
Concept erasure aims to remove unwanted attributes, such as social or demographic
factors, from learned representations, while preserving their task-relevant utility.
While the goal of concept erasure is protection against all adversaries, existing
methods remain vulnerable to nonlinear ones. This vulnerability arises from their
failure to fully capture the complex, nonlinear statistical dependencies between
learned representations and unwanted attributes. Moreover, although the existence
of a trade-off between utility and erasure is expected, its progression during the
erasure process, i.e., the cost of erasure, remains unstudied. In this work, we
introduce Obliviator, a post-hoc erasure method designed to fully capture nonlinear
statistical dependencies. We formulate erasure from a functional perspective,
leading to an optimization problem involving a composition of kernels that lacks a
closed-form solution. Instead of solving this problem in a single shot, we adopt
an iterative approach that gradually morphs the feature space to achieve a more
utility-preserving erasure. Unlike prior methods, Obliviator guards unwanted
attribute against nonlinear adversaries. Our gradual approach quantifies the cost
of nonlinear guardedness and reveals the dynamics between attribute protection
and utility-preservation over the course of erasure. The utility-erasure trade-off
curves obtained by Obliviator outperform the baselines and demonstrate its strong
generalizability: its erasure becomes more utility-preserving when applied to the
better-disentangled representations learned by more capable models.

1

Introduction

Pretrained Language Models (PLMs) have become central in Natural Language Processing (NLP),
achieving remarkable performance across various tasks. However, they often encode unwanted
concepts, such as demographic or social attributes, leading to biases and potentially unfair predictions
[31, 5, 26]. Concept erasure aims to remove such undesirable concepts from the learned representations [27], either supervised, leveraging both task and sensitive labels or unsupervised, using only
sensitive labels.
Current concept erasure methods fall short of fully removing undesired attributes. The task
involves balancing two often competing objectives: (1) removing unwanted concepts, and (2)
preserving as much information as possible. Early methods relied on linear projection techniques
[5, 15, 26, 27] applied in a post-hoc manner, i.e., modify learned representations without needing
direct access to the PLMs, offering simplicity and efficiency. Later methods shifted to addressing
concept erasure in a nonlinear manner [28, 30, 1, 6, 2]; however, they remain limited in capturing
*

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

