Robustly Learning Monotone Single-Index Models

Puqian Wang *
UW Madison
pwang333@wisc.edu

Nikos Zarifis *
UW Madison
zarifis@wisc.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas
UW Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Jelena Diakonikolas
UW Madison
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider the basic problem of learning Single-Index Models with respect to
the square loss under the Gaussian distribution in the presence of adversarial label
noise. Our main contribution is the first computationally efficient algorithm for
this learning task, achieving a constant factor approximation, that succeeds for
the class of all monotone activations with bounded moment of order 2 + ζ, for
ζ > 0. This class in particular includes all monotone Lipschitz functions and
even discontinuous functions like (possibly biased) halfspaces. Prior work for the
case of unknown activation either does not attain constant factor approximation
or succeeds for a substantially smaller family of activations. The main conceptual
novelty of our approach lies in developing an optimization framework that steps
outside the boundaries of usual gradient methods and instead identifies a useful
vector field to guide the algorithm updates by directly leveraging the problem
structure, properties of Gaussian spaces, and regularity of monotone functions.

1

Introduction

Single-index models (SIMs) [Ich93, HJS01, HMS+ 04, DJS08, KS09, KKSK11, DH18] represent
a fundamental class of supervised learning models, widely used and studied in machine learning
and statistics. The SIM framework captures scenarios where the output value depends solely on
a one-dimensional projection of the input, i.e., it contains functions of the form f (x) = σ(w · x),
where σ : R → R is an unknown activation (or link) function, and w ∈ Rd is an unknown parameter
vector. While the activation function is generally unknown, it is often assumed to lie in a “wellbehaved” family, e.g., it is monotone and/or Lipschitz. In addition to being well-motivated from
the aspect of applications, such regularity assumptions are also necessary for ensuring statistical
and computational tractability of the underlying learning task. Indeed, without such assumptions,
learning SIMs can be information-theoretically impossible (see, e.g., [ZWDD25]) or computationally
intractable [SZB21]—even for Gaussian data. Classical works [KS09, KKSK11] demonstrated that
SIMs with monotone and Lipschitz activations can be learned efficiently in the realizable case (i.e.,
with clean labels) or zero-mean label noise, under any distribution on the unit ball.
In this paper, we consider the task of learning SIMs in the (more challenging) agnostic model [Hau92,
KSS94], in which the labels may be arbitrarily corrupted and no structural assumptions are made
on the noise. The goal of an agnostic learner for a target class C is to find a predictor that is
competitive with the best function in C. More concretely, let D denote a distribution over labeled
pairs (x, y) ∈ Rd × R, and let the squared loss of a predictor f : Rd → R be given by L2 (f ) =
*

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

