FuncGenFoil: Airfoil Generation and Editing Model
in Function Space

Jinouwen Zhang1∗ Junjie Ren1,2 Qianhong Ma1,8 Jianyu Wu1 Aobo Yang3
Yan Lu1,4 Lu Chen1,5 Hairun Xie6,7 Jing Wang6,8
Miao Zhang6 Wanli Ouyang1,4 Shixiang Tang1,4⋆
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Fudan University
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
6
Shanghai Aircraft Design and Research Institute
7
Innovation Academy for Microsatellites of CAS 8 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
∗
zhangjinouwen@pjlab.org.cn ⋆ tangshixiang@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Aircraft manufacturing is the jewel in the crown of industry, in which generating high-fidelity airfoil geometries with controllable and editable representations
remains a fundamental challenge. Existing deep learning methods, which typically rely on predefined parametric representations (e.g., Bézier curves) or discrete
point sets, face an inherent trade-off between expressive power and resolution
adaptability. To tackle this challenge, we introduce FuncGenFoil, a novel functionspace generative model that directly reconstructs airfoil geometries as function
curves. Our method inherits the advantages of arbitrary-resolution sampling and
smoothness from parametric functions, as well as the strong expressiveness of
discrete point-based representations. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that FuncGenFoil improves upon state-of-the-art methods in airfoil generation, achieving a
relative 74.4% reduction in label error and a 23.2% increase in diversity on the
AF-200K dataset. Our results highlight the advantages of function-space modeling
for aerodynamic shape optimization, offering a powerful and flexible framework
for high-fidelity airfoil design.

1

Introduction

The airfoil inverse design problem serves as a central aspect of aircraft manufacturing. Traditionally,
given geometric requirements, engineers first select the most similar airfoils from well-known airfoil
datasets (e.g., NACA [8]) and rely on a trial-and-error strategy [51]. Considering the mission of the
aircraft, an initial airfoil design that meets these conditions is preliminarily created. Then, through
iterative rounds of physical analyses, such as aerodynamic and mechanical evaluations, the airfoil
is optimized to achieve improved performance until the specified requirements are met. In practice,
such direct design procedures are highly inefficient and time-consuming, often taking months. To
minimize development and design time, as well as associated costs, automated design methods have
been introduced as efficient alternatives in aircraft manufacturing engineering. In particular, machine
learning-based design and optimization techniques have gained significant attention. However,
before applying these algorithms to airfoil design, it is crucial to determine appropriate methods for
representing airfoils within these algorithms.
Existing methods for airfoil representation can generally be divided into two categories: parametricmodel-based approaches [61] and discrete-point-based methods [37, 49]. First, parametric-modelbased methods predefine function families, e.g., Bézier curves [7], Hicks-Henne curves, and NURBS,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

