BoltzNCE: Learning Likelihoods for Boltzmann
Generation with Stochastic Interpolants and Noise
Contrastive Estimation
Rishal Aggarwal
CMU-Pitt Computational Biology
Dept. of Computational & Systems Biology
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
rishal.aggarwal@pitt.edu
Nicholas M. Boffi
Machine Learning Dept.
Dept. of Mathematical Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
nboffi@andrew.cmu.edu

Jacky Chen
CMU-Pitt Computational Biology
Dept. of Computational & Systems Biology
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
jackychen@pitt.edu
David Ryan Koes
Dept. of Computational & Systems Biology
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
dkoes@pitt.edu

Abstract
Efficient sampling from the Boltzmann distribution given its energy function is a
key challenge for modeling complex physical systems such as molecules. Boltzmann Generators address this problem by leveraging continuous normalizing flows
to transform a simple prior into a distribution that can be reweighted to match the
target using sample likelihoods. Despite the elegance of this approach, obtaining
these likelihoods requires computing costly Jacobians during integration, which
is impractical for large molecular systems. To overcome this difficulty, we train
an energy-based model (EBM) to approximate likelihoods using both noise contrastive estimation (NCE) and score matching, which we show outperforms the
use of either objective in isolation. On 2D synthetic systems where failure can
be easily visualized, NCE improves mode weighting relative to score matching
alone. On alanine dipeptide, our method yields free energy profiles and energy
distributions that closely match those obtained using exact likelihoods while achieving 100× faster inference. By training on multiple dipeptide systems, we show
that our approach also exhibits effective transfer learning, generalizing to new
systems at inference time and achieving at least a 6× speedup over standard MD
with only a bit of fine-tuning. While many recent efforts in generative modeling
have prioritized models with fast sampling, our work demonstrates the design
of models with accelerated likelihoods, enabling the application of reweighting
schemes that ensure unbiased Boltzmann statistics at scale. Our code is available
at https://github.com/RishalAggarwal/BoltzNCE.

1

Introduction

Obtaining the equilibrium distribution of molecular conformations defined by an energy function
is a fundamental problem in the physical sciences [1–3]. The Boltzmann distribution describes the
equilibrium probability density and is given by p(x) ∝ exp(−E(x)/KB T ) where E(x) is the energy
of molecular conformer x, KB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is temperature. Sampling from this
distribution is particularly difficult for molecular systems due to the non-convex nature of the energy
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

