MonarchAttention: Zero-Shot Conversion to Fast,
Hardware-Aware Structured Attention
Can Yaras
University of Michigan
cjyaras@umich.edu

Alec S. Xu
University of Michigan
alecx@umich.edu

Changwoo Lee
University of Michigan
cwoolee@umich.edu

Pierre Abillama
University of Michigan
pabillam@umich.edu

Laura Balzano
University of Michigan
girasole@umich.edu

Abstract
Transformers have achieved state-of-the-art performance across various tasks, but
suffer from a notable quadratic complexity in sequence length due to the attention
mechanism. In this work, we propose MonarchAttention – a novel approach to
sub-quadratic attention approximation via Monarch matrices, an expressive class
of structured matrices. Based on the variational form of softmax, we describe an
efficient optimization-based algorithm to compute an approximate
√ projection of
softmax attention onto the class of Monarch matrices with Θ(N N d) computational complexity and Θ(N d) memory/IO complexity. Unlike previous approaches,
MonarchAttention is both (1) transferable, yielding minimal performance loss
with no additional training, even when replacing every attention layer of the Transformer, and (2) hardware-efficient, utilizing the highest-throughput tensor core units
on modern GPUs. With optimized kernels, MonarchAttention achieves substantial speed-ups in wall-time over FlashAttention-2: 1.4× for shorter sequences
(N = 256), 4.5× for medium-length sequences (N = 4K), and 8.2× for longer
sequences (N = 16K). We demonstrate the quality of MonarchAttention on
diverse tasks and architectures in vision and language problems, showing that it
flexibly and accurately approximates softmax attention in a variety of contexts. Our
code is available at https://github.com/cjyaras/monarch-attention.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the dominant architecture
for generating and processing various data modalities, such as text (Brown et al., 2020), images
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), and speech (Radford et al., 2023). Central to the Transformer’s success is
attention, the mechanism through which complex interactions within sequential data are captured
through weighted combinations of embeddings at every position in the sequence. Famously, the
attention mechanism has a quadratic-time complexity Θ(N 2 d) in the length of the sequence N ,
where d is the head dimension, which is a key bottleneck for both training and inference, particularly
in long sequence problems. To address this, numerous works have proposed sub-quadratic
substitutes for attention. Yet, such approaches are either (1) not transferable, requiring training
from scratch or fine-tuning of existing models, or (2) do not yield speed-ups in practice (except on
extremely long sequences) due to a gap between theoretical complexity and practical considerations for modern GPUs, especially compared to highly optimized implementations (Dao et al., 2022b).
In this work, we propose MonarchAttention: a novel sub-quadratic attention substitute
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

