Provable Scaling Laws for the Test-Time Compute
of Large Language Models

Yanxi Chen∗
Alibaba Group
chenyanxi.cyx@alibaba-inc.com

Xuchen Pan∗
Alibaba Group
panxuchen.pxc@alibaba-inc.com

Yaliang Li
Alibaba Group
yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com

Bolin Ding
Alibaba Group
bolin.ding@alibaba-inc.com

Jingren Zhou
Alibaba Group
jingren.zhou@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
We propose two simple, principled and practical algorithms that enjoy provable
scaling laws for the test-time compute of large language models (LLMs). The
first one is a two-stage knockout-style algorithm: given an input problem, it first
generates multiple candidate solutions, and then aggregate them via a knockout
tournament for the final output. Assuming that the LLM can generate a correct
solution with non-zero probability and do better than a random guess in comparing
a pair of correct and incorrect solutions, we prove theoretically that the failure
probability of this algorithm decays to zero exponentially or by a power law
(depending on the specific way of scaling) as its test-time compute grows. The
second one is a two-stage league-style algorithm, where each candidate is evaluated
by its average win rate against multiple opponents, rather than eliminated upon
loss to a single opponent. Under analogous but more robust assumptions, we prove
that its failure probability also decays to zero exponentially with more test-time
compute. Both algorithms require a black-box LLM and nothing else (e.g., no
verifier or reward model) for a minimalistic implementation, which makes them
appealing for practical applications and easy to adapt for different tasks. Through
extensive experiments with diverse models and datasets, we validate the proposed
theories and demonstrate the outstanding scaling properties of both algorithms.

1

Introduction

Despite the astonishing advancements of large language models (LLMs) in the past few years, they
still face challenges with reliability and stability. This hinders their applications in high-stakes
scenarios where a problem need to be solved with success probability 99.9% rather than 90%.
Similarly, in an LLM-based agentic workflow that involves solving many sub-problems, each of
them need to be solved with near-perfect success rate, since a single error in the process can lead
to an incorrect final output. In these and many other similar scenarios, one is willing to boost
the success probability by spending more test-time compute on LLM inference. One category of
methods for this purpose include iterative approaches like generating a sequential chain of thoughts
∗

Equal contributions.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

