Exploring the Design Space of Diffusion Bridge Models

Shaorong Zhang, Yuanbin Cheng, Greg Ver Steeg
Unversity of California Riverside
{szhan311, ychen871, gregoryv}@ucr.edu

Abstract
Diffusion bridge models and stochastic interpolants enable high-quality imageto-image (I2I) translation by creating paths between distributions in pixel space.
However, recent diffusion bridge models excel in image translation but suffer
from restricted design flexibility and complicated hyperparameter tuning, whereas
Stochastic Interpolants offer greater flexibility but lack essential refinements. We
show that these complementary strengths can be unified by interpreting all existing methods within a single SI-based framework. In this work, we unify and
expand the space of bridge models by extending Stochastic Interpolants (SIs)
with preconditioning, endpoint conditioning, and an optimized sampling algorithm. These enhancements expand the design space of diffusion bridge models, leading to state-of-the-art performance in both image quality and sampling
efficiency across diverse I2I tasks. Furthermore, we identify and address a previously overlooked issue of low sample diversity under fixed conditions. We
introduce a quantitative analysis for output diversity and demonstrate how we
can modify the base distribution for further improvements. Code is available at
https://github.com/szhan311/ECSI.

1

Introduction

Denoising Diffusion Models (DDMs) and flow matching create a stochastic process to transition
Gaussian noise into a target distribution [33, 14, 34, 19]. Building upon this, diffusion bridge-based
models (DBMs) have been developed to transport between two arbitrary distributions, πT and π0 ,
including I2SB [21], DSBM [39], DDBM [18], DBIM [42], Bridge Matching [28]. DBMs achieve
superior image quality in I2I translation compared to DDMs [18, 21, 2], primarily because the distance
between source and target image distributions is typically smaller than that between Gaussian and
target distributions.
While DBMs like DDBM [39], DBIM [42], and I2SB [21] achieve state-of-the-art FID scores
in image-to-image translation, they suffer from limited design flexibility, constrained bridge path
formulations, and complex parameter tuning. In contrast, Stochastic Interpolants (SIs) [1, 2] offer a
simpler and more flexible framework, but they have yet to integrate practical advances from recent
diffusion bridge models, such as preconditioning. Besides, SIs require training two separate models,
unlike the more efficient single-model setup in DDBM. Table 1 summarizes the key characteristics of
these methods, highlighting that their complementary strengths had not yet been unified.
Another overlooked issue stemming from restrictive design choices in previous bridge models is
the lack of diversity in outputs. While some image translation tasks are one-to-one, we find that in
one-to-many translation tasks, like black and white edges to color images, previous methods produce
limited variation in colors and textures. We refer to this as the conditional diversity problem and
show that our approach leads to significant improvements.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

