S PACE: Noise Contrastive Estimation Stabilizes
Self-Play Fine-Tuning for Large Language Models

Yibo Wang1,2,∗, Guangda Huzhang, Qing-Guo Chen3 ,
Zhao Xu3 , Weihua Luo3 , Kaifu Zhang3 , Lijun Zhang1,4,2,†
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
Alibaba International Digital Commerce 4 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
{wangyb, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
{qingguo.cqg, changgong.xz, weihua.luowh, kaifu.zkf}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Self-play fine-tuning has demonstrated promising abilities in adapting large language models (LLMs) to downstream tasks with limited real-world data. The
basic principle is to iteratively refine the model with real samples and synthetic
ones generated from itself. However, the existing methods primarily focus on the
relative gaps between the rewards for two types of data, neglecting their absolute
values. Through theoretical analysis, we identify that the gap-based methods suffer
from unstable evolution, due to the potentially degenerated objectives. To address
this limitation, we introduce a novel self-play fine-tuning method, namely SelfPlAy via Noise Contrastive Estimation (S PACE), which leverages noise contrastive
estimation to capture the real-world data distribution. Specifically, S PACE treats
synthetic samples as auxiliary components, and discriminates them from the real
ones in a binary classification manner. As a result, S PACE independently optimizes
the absolute reward values for each type of data, ensuring a consistently meaningful
objective and thereby avoiding the instability issue. Theoretically, we show that the
optimal solution of the objective in S PACE aligns with the underlying distribution
of real-world data, and S PACE guarantees a provably stable convergence to the
optimal distribution. Empirically, we show that S PACE significantly improves the
performance of LLMs over various tasks, and outperforms supervised fine-tuning
that employs much more real-world samples. Compared to gap-based self-play
fine-tuning methods, S PACE exhibits remarkable superiority and stable evolution.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the success of large language models (LLMs) has drawn a surge of attention from the
industry [2, 14, 22, 24, 47, 55, 56], and also sparked extensive investigations across various fields in
academia, such as recommendation system [19, 42, 96], multimodality [4, 36, 44, 45, 48], reasoning
[9, 32, 61, 89], code programming [34, 37, 39, 74], and beyond. One notable advantage of LLMs lies
in their strong generalization capability, which allows them to perform well on downstream tasks via
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on real-world data annotated by human experts [38, 58].
It has been shown that effective handling of downstream tasks via SFT typically requires a large
amount of annotated data, which is often impractical in real-world applications due to the expensive
costs of data curation and annotation [16, 46, 82]. For this reason, self-play fine-tuning is proposed,
∗
†

Work done during the internship at Alibaba International Digital Commerce.
Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

