Soft Thinking: Unlocking the Reasoning Potential of
LLMs in Continuous Concept Space

Zhen Zhang1∗ Xuehai He2∗ Weixiang Yan1
Ao Shen4 Chenyang Zhao3,5 Xin Eric Wang1
1
University of California, Santa Barbara, 2 University of California, Santa Cruz
3
University of California, Los Angeles, 4 Purdue University, 5 LMSYS Org
zhen_zhang@ucsb.edu, ericxwang@ucsb.edu

11.6%

16.1%

22.4%
17.9%

19.1%

16.3%

Figure 1: Soft Thinking vs. Chain-of-Thought thinking on mathematical and coding datasets. Soft
Thinking consistently improves both accuracy (with improvements of up to 2.48% on pass@1
accuracy) and generation efficiency (achieving up to 22.4% reduction in generation length) across
both tasks, without any training.

Abstract
Human cognition typically involves thinking through abstract, fluid concepts rather
than strictly using discrete linguistic tokens. Current reasoning models, however,
are constrained to reasoning within the boundaries of human language, processing discrete token embeddings that represent fixed points in the semantic space.
This discrete constraint restricts the expressive power and upper potential of such
reasoning models, often causing incomplete exploration of reasoning paths, as
standard Chain-of-Thought (CoT) methods rely on sampling one token per step.
In this work, we introduce Soft Thinking, a training-free method that emulates
human-like “soft” reasoning by generating soft, abstract concept tokens in a continuous concept space. These concept tokens are created by the probability-weighted
mixture of token embeddings, which form the continuous concept space, enabling
smooth transitions and richer representations that transcend traditional discrete
boundaries. In essence, each generated concept token encapsulates multiple meanings from related discrete tokens, implicitly exploring various reasoning paths to
converge effectively toward the correct answer. Empirical evaluations on diverse
mathematical and coding benchmarks consistently demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of Soft Thinking, improving pass@1 accuracy by up to 2.48 points
while simultaneously reducing token usage by up to 22.4% compared to standard
CoT. Qualitative analysis further reveals that Soft Thinking outputs remain highly
interpretable and readable, highlighting the potential of Soft Thinking to break the
inherent bottleneck of discrete language-based reasoning. Code is available here.
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

