Momentum Multi-Marginal Schrödinger Bridge
Matching

Panagiotis Theodoropoulos1 , Augustinos D. Saravanos1 ,
Evangelos A. Theodorou1,∗ , Guan-Horng Liu2,∗
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 FAIR at Meta, ∗ Equal advising

Abstract
Understanding complex systems by inferring trajectories from sparse sample snapshots is a fundamental challenge in a wide range of domains, e.g., single-cell
biology, meteorology, and economics. Despite advancements in Bridge and Flow
matching frameworks, current methodologies rely on pairwise interpolation between adjacent snapshots. This hinders their ability to capture long-range temporal
dependencies and potentially affects the coherence of the inferred trajectories. To
address these issues, we introduce Momentum Multi-Marginal Schrödinger
Bridge Matching (3MSBM), a novel matching framework that learns smooth
measure-valued splines for stochastic systems that satisfy multiple positional constraints. This is achieved by lifting the dynamics to phase space and generalizing
stochastic bridges to be conditioned on several points, forming a multi-marginal
conditional stochastic optimal control problem. The underlying dynamics are then
learned by minimizing a variational objective, having fixed the path induced by the
multi-marginal conditional bridge. As a matching approach, 3MSBM learns transport maps that preserve intermediate marginals throughout training, significantly
improving convergence and scalability. Extensive experimentation in a series of
real-world applications validates the superior performance of 3MSBM compared
to existing methods in capturing complex dynamics with temporal dependencies,
opening new avenues for training matching frameworks in multi-marginal settings.

1

Introduction

Transporting samples between probability distributions is a fundamental problem in machine learning.
Diffusion Models (DMs;[Ho et al., 2020, Song et al., 2020]) constitute a prominent technique in
generative modeling, which employ stochastic mappings through Stochastic Differential Equations
(SDEs) to transport data samples to a tractable prior distribution, and then learn to reverse this
process [Anderson, 1982, Vincent, 2011]. However, diffusion models present several limitations,
e.g., the lack of optimality guarantees concerning the kinetic energy for their generated trajectories
[Shi et al., 2023]. To address these shortcomings, principled approaches that stem from Optimal
Transport [Villani et al., 2009] have emerged that aim to minimize the transportation energy of
mapping samples between two marginals, π0 and π1 . In this vein, the Schrödinger Bridge (SB;
[Schrödinger, 1931])—equivalent to Entropic Optimal Transport (EOT;[Cuturi, 2013, Peyré et al.,
2019])—has been one of the most prominent approaches used in generative modeling [Vargas et al.,
2021]. This popularity has been enabled by recent remarkable advancements of matching methods
[Lipman et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2022a]. Crucially, these matching-based frameworks circumvent the
need to cache the full trajectories of forward and backward SDEs, mitigate the time-discretization
and "forgetting" issues encountered in earlier SB techniques, and maintain a feasible transport map
throughout training. This renders them highly scalable and stable methods for training the SB [Shi
et al., 2023, Gushchin et al., 2024a, Peluchetti, 2023, Liu et al., 2024, Rapakoulias et al., 2024].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

