Connecting Jensen–Shannon and Kullback-Leibler
Divergences: A New Bound for Representation
Learning

Reuben Dorent
Inria
reuben.dorent@inria.fr

Polina Golland
MIT
polina@csail.mit.edu

William Wells III
Harvard, MIT
sw@bwh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Mutual Information (MI) is a fundamental measure of statistical dependence widely
used in representation learning. While direct optimization of MI via its definition
as a Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) is often intractable, many recent methods
have instead maximized alternative dependence measures, most notably, the JensenShannon divergence (JSD) between joint and product of marginal distributions via
discriminative losses. However, the connection between these surrogate objectives
and MI remains poorly understood. In this work, we bridge this gap by deriving a
new, tight, and tractable lower bound on KLD as a function of JSD in the general
case. By specializing this bound to joint and marginal distributions, we demonstrate
that maximizing the JSD-based information increases a guaranteed lower bound
on mutual information. Furthermore, we revisit the practical implementation of
JSD-based objectives and observe that minimizing the cross-entropy loss of a
binary classifier trained to distinguish joint from marginal pairs recovers a known
variational lower bound on the JSD. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
lower bound is tight when applied to MI estimation. We compared our lower bound
to state-of-the-art neural estimators of variational lower bound across a range of
established reference scenarios. Our lower bound estimator consistently provides a
stable, low-variance estimate of a tight lower bound on MI. We also demonstrate its
practical usefulness in the context of the Information Bottleneck framework. Taken
together, our results provide new theoretical justifications and strong empirical
evidence for using discriminative learning in MI-based representation learning.

1

Introduction

Estimating and optimizing Mutual Information (MI) is central to many representation learning
frameworks [4, 18, 8]. The MI between two random variables U and V is defined as the KullbackLeibler Divergence (KLD) between their joint distribution and the product of their marginals,
.
I [U ; V ] = DKL [pU V || pU ⊗ pV ] .
(1)
Mutual information serves as a natural measure of dependence between U and V . In representation
learning, a common goal is to learn compact yet informative representations by maximizing the MI
between encoded variables.
A popular class of methods for estimating MI involves learning a discriminator that distinguishes
between samples from the joint distribution and those from the product of marginals. However,
because the MI objective depends on a discriminator trained through a separate optimization problem,
maximizing MI leads to a bilevel optimization problem, which is intractable in practice. To bypass
this challenge, tractable Variational Lower Bounds (VLBs) [3, 16, 20, 24] could be used, such as the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

