When majority rules, minority loses: bias
amplification of gradient descent

François Bachoc
University of Lille
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF)
francois.bachoc@univ-lille.fr
Ryan Boustany
Toulouse School of Economics
ryan.boustany@tse-fr.eu

Jérôme Bolte
Toulouse School of Economics
ANITI
jerome.bolte@tse-fr.eu
Jean-Michel Loubes
Université de Toulouse
ANITI & Regalia INRIA
jean-michel.a.loubes@inria.fr

Abstract
Despite growing empirical evidence of bias amplification in machine learning, its
theoretical foundations remain poorly understood. We develop a formal framework
for majority-minority learning tasks, showing how standard training can favor
majority groups and produce stereotypical predictors that neglect minority-specific
features. Assuming population and variance imbalance, our analysis reveals three
key findings: (i) the close proximity between "full-data" and stereotypical predictors, (ii) the dominance of a region where training the entire model tends to merely
learn the majority traits, and (iii) a lower bound on the additional training required.
Our results are illustrated through experiments in deep learning for tabular and
image classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Imbalanced data are pervasive in machine learning, spanning rare-event detection, fraud, faults,
medical anomalies, security, finance, and modern LLM pipelines with unequally represented subpopulations, see e.g., [26, 29] for some references. A sensitive case arises in fairness-related applications,
where decisions apply to human beings [3, 10, 12, 33]. Addressing this issue is increasingly important notably under regulatory frameworks such as the European Union’s AI Act, which emphasizes
non-discrimination and risk mitigation.
In all these settings, the goal is to learn predictors that genuinely capture minority structure.
Our focus is on scenarios with two distinctive characteristics. First, the imbalance is typically
significative, as we work directly with raw data without resampling or augmentation. Second, the
imbalance is not corrected at the data level but addressed only through the training dynamics of
gradient descent. An empirical fact, well known to practitioners, is that imbalance is not only
preserved but often amplified by training: models initially align with the majority component and
only later start to capture minority features. In the fairness literature, this is sometimes referred to
as bias amplification [7, 18, 45, 46, 47]. Related simplicity-driven behaviors have been observed in
representation learning [6, 16, 22, 39, 44].
This phenomenon has been documented since the 1990s in the class imbalance literature, see [1],
which motivated numerous work and heuristics: data-level remedies (oversampling, under-sampling,
synthetic examples [9, 43]), algorithm-level adjustments [15], cost-sensitive learning [14], focal and
reshaped losses [30, 35]. With the advent of deep learning, the issue became even more acute, as
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

