Twilight: Adaptive Attention Sparsity with
Hierarchical Top-p Pruning

Chaofan Lin Jiaming Tang Shuo Yang Hanshuo Wang
Tian Tang Boyu Tian Ion Stoica Song Han Mingyu Gao
Tsinghua University Massachusetts Institute of Technology
University of California, Berkeley
lcf24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn gaomy@tsinghua.edu.cn
https://github.com/tsinghua-ideal/Twilight

Abstract
Leveraging attention sparsity to accelerate long-context large language models
(LLMs) has been of great importance recently. However, most existing sparse attention algorithms use a fixed budget of how many tokens to use in their computations.
This simple static decision raises critical issues in real-world deployment because
it fails to account for the dynamic nature of real-world scenarios, where the optimal
balance between accuracy and efficiency can vary greatly. In this paper, we reveal
a key insight that leveraging the idea of top-p sampling (a.k.a., nucleus sampling)
in sparse attention could enable efficient and adaptive budget decisions. Based on
this, we propose Twilight, a framework that enhances any existing sparse attention
algorithm with adaptive budget decision capabilities without sacrificing accuracy.
Empirical results show that Twilight can adaptively prune up to 98% tokens with
nearly no accuracy loss in both long- and medium-context scenarios, leading to a
1.4× speedup over state-of-the-art sparse attention mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) with long-context capabilities have revolutionized a wide array of
natural language processing applications, such as retrieval-based tasks, document summarization [1],
and code generation [16]. The increasing availability of models supporting context windows up to
1M to 10M tokens [47, 37] highlights the growing potential of these advancements. For instance,
video language models (VLMs) [41] often require tens of thousands of tokens for video processing.
Similarly, large reasoning models [8, 38], which are rapidly growing in popularity, frequently demand
substantial token lengths to enable chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. Consequently, the importance
of long-context LLMs is increasing rapidly to meet the needs of these sophisticated applications.
Despite the substantial potential of long-context LLMs, they come with excessive computational
and memory costs [58, 36, 45], primarily from the attention mechanism. Particularly, in the decoding stage of LLMs, the key-value (KV) cache size grows rapidly as the token sequence becomes
longer. These data need to be repeatedly loaded from the memory, leading to significant latency
overheads. Furthermore, the substantial size of the KV cache significantly increases the GPU memory
consumption, compounding the challenges of continuously scaling long-context LLMs.
Previous research has extensively investigated the use of attention sparsity (a.k.a., KV cache sparsity)
to accelerate long-context inference, both during the prefilling and decoding stages. The core idea
is to compute an approximate attention on a subset of tokens, often referred to as “critical tokens”
or “heavy hitters” [58]. The number of selected tokens, denoted as B, is commonly referred to as
the KV cache budget. A top-k operation is required to identify the indices of the critical tokens that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

