Efficient Knowledge Transfer in Federated
Recommendation for Joint Venture Ecosystem

Yichen Li1 , Yijing Shan1 , Yi Liu2 Haozhao Wang1 , Cheng Wang1 ,
Wei Wang2 , Yi Wang2 , Ruixuan Li1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China 2 Chongqing Ant Consumer Finance Co., Ltd, Ant Group, Chongqing, China
{ycli0204,M202474082,hz_wang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The current Federated Recommendation System (FedRS) focuses on personalized
recommendation services and assumes clients are personalized IoT devices (e.g.,
mobile phones). In this paper, we deeply dive into new but practical FedRS
applications within the joint venture ecosystem. Subsidiaries engage as participants
with their users and items. However, in such a situation, merely exchanging
item embedding is insufficient, as user bases always exhibit both overlaps and
exclusive segments, demonstrating the complexity of user information. Meanwhile,
directly uploading user information is a violation of privacy and unacceptable.
To tackle the above challenges, we propose an efficient and privacy-enhanced
Federated Recommendation for the Joint Venture Ecosystem (FR-JVE) that each
client transfers more common knowledge from other clients with a distilled user’s
rating preference from the local dataset. More specifically, we first transform
the local data into a new format and apply model inversion techniques to distill
the rating preference with frozen user gradients before the federated training.
Then, a bridge function is employed on each client side to align the local rating
preference and aggregated global preference in a privacy-friendly manner. Finally,
each client matches similar users to make a better prediction for overlapped users.
From a theoretical perspective, we analyze how effectively FR-JVE can guarantee
user privacy. Empirically, we show that FR-JVE achieves superior performance
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems have emerged as crucial tools and products, significantly impacting
daily lives by offering tailored suggestions of new items that may interest users. These systems
fundamentally rely on centralized servers to consolidate user data, digital behaviors, and preferences,
thereby training models for precise recommendation generation [9, 39, 8]. However, transmitting
local user information to central servers poses considerable privacy and security concerns. Moreover,
recent stringent government regulations on privacy protection underscore the necessity of storing
user data locally on devices rather than uploading it to a global server. As a potential remedy to this
dilemma, federated learning (FL) emerges as a promising approach, enforcing data localization and
enabling the distributed training of a globally shared model [18, 12, 37, 13]. This framework has
achieved remarkable success and has been applied to various fields, such as recommendation systems
[38, 27, 14] and smart healthcare [6, 34].
In recent years, researchers have studied federated recommendation systems (FedRS), which enable
different clients to yield optimal recommendations without breaching user privacy. FCF proposed
∗

Ruixuan Li is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

