You Can Trust Your Clustering Model: A
Parameter-free Self-Boosting Plug-in for Deep
Clustering

1

Hanyang Li1 , Yuheng Jia1,2,3∗, Hui Liu3 , Junhui Hou4∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Computing Information Sciences, Saint Francis University, Hong Kong, China
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{lihanyang, yhjia}@seu.edu.cn, h2liu@sfu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent deep clustering models have produced impressive clustering performance.
However, a common issue with existing methods is the disparity between global and
local feature structures. While local structures typically show strong consistency
and compactness within class samples, global features often present intertwined
boundaries and poorly separated clusters. Motivated by this observation, we propose DCBoost, a parameter-free plug-in designed to enhance the global feature
structures of current deep clustering models. By harnessing reliable local structural
cues, our method aims to elevate clustering performance effectively. Specifically,
we first identify high-confidence samples through adaptive k-nearest neighborsbased consistency filtering, aiming to select a sufficient number of samples with
high label reliability to serve as trustworthy anchors for self-supervision. Subsequently, these samples are utilized to compute a discriminative loss, which
promotes both intra-class compactness and inter-class separability, to guide network optimization. Extensive experiments across various benchmark datasets
showcase that our DCBoost significantly improves the clustering performance
of diverse existing deep clustering models. Notably, our method improves the
performance of current state-of-the-art baselines (e.g., ProPos) by more than 3%
on average and amplifies the silhouette coefficient by over 7×. Code is available at
https://github.com/l-h-y168/DCBoost.

1

Introduction

Deep clustering aims to use deep neural networks to uncover the intrinsic structure of data by
partitioning samples into groups based on their similarity, without relying on any class labels. Early
methods employed autoencoders [12, 37] to extract data representations, which significantly enhanced
clustering performance and helped establish deep clustering as a prominent research field. More
recently, the integration of self-supervised learning techniques [11, 4, 9] has further advanced deep
clustering, leading to impressive clustering performance [36, 20, 13].
Despite the impressive performance, we observe that existing methods do not construct a reliable
global structure, but all build a reliable local pattern. For example, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the
intra-class similarity is relatively low, and the inter-class similarity remains noticeable, suggesting
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

