The Price of Opportunity Fairness in Matroid
Allocation Problems
Rémi Castera∗
Moroccan Center for Game Theory
University Mohammed VI Polytechnic
Rabat, Morocco

Felipe Garrido-Lucero
IRIT, Université Toulouse Capitole
Toulouse, France

Patrick Loiseau
Inria, Fairplay joint team
Palaiseau, France

Simon Mauras
Inria, Fairplay joint team
Palaiseau, France

Mathieu Molina
Inria, Fairplay joint team
Crest, ENSAE
Palaiseau, France

Vianney Perchet
ENSAE, Fairplay joint team
Criteo AI Lab
Palaiseau, France

Abstract
We consider matroid allocation problems under opportunity fairness constraints:
resources need to be allocated to a set of agents under matroid constraints (which
include classical problems such as bipartite matching). Agents are divided into C
groups according to a sensitive attribute, and an allocation is opportunity-fair if
each group receives the same share proportional to the maximum feasible allocation
it could achieve in isolation. We study the Price of Fairness (PoF), i.e., the ratio
between maximum size allocations and maximum size opportunity-fair allocations.
We first provide a characterization of the PoF leveraging the underlying polymatroid
structure of the allocation problem. Based on this characterization, we prove bounds
on the PoF in various settings from fully adversarial (worst-case) to fully random.
Notably, one of our main results considers an arbitrary matroid structure with agents
randomly divided into groups. In this setting, we prove a PoF bound as a function
of the (relative) size of the largest group. Our result implies that, as long as there is
no dominant group (i.e., the largest group is not too large), opportunity fairness
constraints do not induce any loss of social welfare (defined as the allocation size).
Overall, our results give insights into which aspects of the problem’s structure
affect the trade-off between opportunity fairness and social welfare.

1

Introduction

Allocating scarce resources among agents is a fundamental task in diverse fields such as online
markets [20], online advertising [54], the labor market [22], university admissions [3, 38], refugee
programs [1, 26, 36], or organ transplants [2]. Traditionally, central planners aim to efficiently
compute allocations that maximize some metric of social welfare such as the total number of
allocated resources. Unfortunately, optimal allocations that neglect equity considerations often result
in disparate treatment and unfair outcomes for legally protected groups of individuals, as documented
in domains such as job offerings [50, 63] and online advertising [5, 14], among others.
Matching markets, a prominent instance of resource allocation problems, are especially sensitive
to these discrimination concerns. For example, initiatives such as the European Union’s proposed
∗

This research was partly conducted while at Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

