RAG4GFM: Bridging Knowledge Gaps in Graph
Foundation Models through Graph Retrieval
Augmented Generation

Xingliang Wang1
Zemin Liu1,∗
Junxiao Han2,∗
Shuiguang Deng1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Computer and Computing Science, Hangzhou City University, Hangzhou, China
{wangxingliang, liu.zemin, dengsg}@zju.edu.cn, hanjx@hzcu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Graph Foundation Models (GFMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential across
graph learning tasks but face significant challenges in knowledge updating and reasoning faithfulness. To address these issues, we introduce the Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) paradigm for GFMs, which leverages graph knowledge retrieval.
We propose RAG4GFM , an end-to-end framework that seamlessly integrates
multi-level graph indexing, task-aware retrieval, and graph fusion enhancement.
RAG4GFM implements a hierarchical graph indexing architecture, enabling multigranular graph indexing while achieving efficient logarithmic-time retrieval. The
task-aware retriever implements adaptive retrieval strategies for node, edge, and
graph-level tasks to surface structurally and semantically relevant evidence. The
graph fusion enhancement module fuses retrieved graph features with query features and augments the topology with sparse adjacency links that preserve structural
and semantic proximity, yielding a fused graph for GFM inference. Extensive experiments conducted across diverse GFM applications demonstrate that RAG4GFM
significantly enhances both the efficiency of knowledge updating and reasoning
faithfulness2 .

1

Introduction

Graph representation learning [1, 2, 3] has achieved remarkable progress across diverse graph
tasks, such as node classification and link prediction. Concurrently, the substantial success of
Large Language Models (LLMs) [4, 5] has revolutionized natural language processing (NLP) and
motivated the development of Graph Foundation Models (GFMs) [3, 6, 7]. GFMs adapt large-scale
pre-training techniques to graph data, enabling powerful cross-domain generalization and multitask adaptability for diverse graph-based applications. However, two practical challenges remain
prominent: knowledge updating [8, 9, 10]i.e., keeping models current as graphs evolveand faithful
reasoning [11, 12, 13]i.e., generating accurate and factually consistent outputs.
On the one hand, as graph data evolves rapidly, GFMs usually require knowledge updates within
hours or a day [14, 15], massive parameter scales impose substantial computational demands [16, 17].
On the other hand, handling complex graph structures [18] and coupling GFMs with LLMs may
induce hallucinations [19, 20, 21], e.g., generating fictitious features or nodes, leading to unfaithful
or factually inconsistent outputs.
Some recent studies have attempted to address these challenges. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods on GFMs, such as GraphLoRA [22, 23] and G-Adapter [24], aim to reduce the cost
∗
2

Corresponding authors.
Code: https://github.com/Matrixmax/RAG4GFM.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

