Robust LLM Alignment via Distributionally Robust
Direct Preference Optimization
Zaiyan Xu1 , Sushil Vemuri1 , Kishan Panaganti2,† , Dileep Kalathil1 ,
Rahul Jain3 , Deepak Ramachandran3
1

Texas A&M University, 2 Tencent AI Lab, 3 Google DeepMind.
Emails: {zxu43, sushil22, dileep.kalathil}@tamu.edu, kpb.research@gmail.com,
{rahulajain, ramachandrand}@google.com

Abstract
A major challenge in aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences is the issue of distribution shift. LLM alignment algorithms rely on static
preference datasets, assuming that they accurately represent real-world user preferences. However, user preferences vary significantly across geographical regions,
demographics, linguistic patterns, and evolving cultural trends. This preference
distribution shift leads to catastrophic alignment failures in many real-world applications. We address this problem using the principled framework of distributionally
robust optimization, and develop two novel distributionally robust direct preference
optimization (DPO) algorithms, namely, Wasserstein DPO (WDPO) and Kullback–Leibler DPO (KLDPO). We characterize the sample complexity of learning
the optimal policy parameters for WDPO and KLDPO. Moreover, we propose
scalable gradient descent-style learning algorithms by developing suitable approximations for the challenging minimax loss functions of WDPO and KLDPO. Our
empirical experiments using benchmark data sets and LLMs demonstrate the superior performance of WDPO and KLDPO in substantially improving the alignment
when there is a preference distribution shift.

1

Introduction

The alignment of large language models (LLMs) with human values and preferences is a central
objective in machine learning, enabling these models to produce outputs that are useful, safe, and
aligned with human intent. Since LLMs are trained on vast, diverse datasets using self-supervised
learning, an additional alignment phase is often required to refine their behavior based on human
feedback. A widely adopted approach for this is Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022), which involves training a reward model using human preference data and optimizing the LLM using reinforcement
learning (RL) approaches, such as proximal policy optimization. More recently, Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO) has emerged as an alternative that simplifies the alignment process by directly
optimizing model parameters based on human preferences without requiring an explicit reward model.
These alignment techniques have played a crucial role in improving the ability of LLMs to generate
responses that adhere to human expectations and societal norms, leading to today’s powerful chat
models (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023).
Despite the importance of the LLM alignment problem, RLHF and DPO remain fundamentally
challenging and fragile, mainly due to three reasons. (i) Diversity of human preferences: Standard
RLHF/DPO approaches implicitly assume that human preferences can be accurately captured by
a single reward function. In reality, human preferences are highly diverse, context-dependent, and
distributional, making it infeasible to represent them with a one-size-fits-all optimization framework
†

Work done as postdoctoral researcher at the California Institute of Technology.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

