Agentic Plan Caching: Test-Time Memory for
Fast and Cost-Efficient LLM Agents

Qizheng Zhang

Michael Wornow

Kunle Olukotun

Stanford University

Abstract
LLM-based agent applications have shown increasingly remarkable capabilities
in complex workflows but incur substantial costs and latency due to extensive
planning and reasoning requirements. Existing LLM caching techniques (like
context caching and semantic caching), primarily designed for serving chatbots,
are insufficient for agent applications where outputs depend on external data and
environmental contexts. We propose Agentic Plan Caching (APC), a novel testtime memory that extracts, stores, adapts, and reuses structured plan templates
from planning stages of agent applications across semantically similar tasks to
reduce the cost and latency of serving. Unlike traditional semantic caching, our
system extracts plan templates from completed agent executions at test-time, employs keyword extraction to match new requests against cached plans, and utilizes
lightweight models to adapt these templates to task-specific plans with contexts.
Evaluation across multiple real-world agent applications shows that our system
can reduce costs by 50.31% and latency by 27.28% on average while maintaining
performance, offering a more efficient solution for serving LLM-based agents that
complements existing LLM serving infrastructures.

1

Introduction

Agent applications based on Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown early promise in replicating
human performance on a broad range of workflows, from coding [26, 28, 61] to web navigation [23,
70] to open-ended research [3, 8] to social interactions [42, 57]. Many of these LLM-based agents
follow a two-stage pipeline, often referred to as the ReAct-agent loop [63, 45], that alternates
between: (1) Plan – reasoning about what to do next, and (2) Act – executing those plans. While
effective, these agents incur significant costs due to the complexity of executed workflows [67, 31]
and need to interact with external tools and environments [43]. Specifically, the Plan stage is often
implemented via test-time compute techniques [13, 47] like chain-of-thought reasoning [53], which
can require numerous LLM queries and access to expensive LLMs (e.g., reasoning models). This
results in substantial costs for executing agentic workflows via APIs [15, 39] or locally [35].
To reduce LLM costs, methods have been developed to optimize responses to individual queries [32,
69]. In particular, caching has emerged as a popular approach, with two primary implementations:
Context caching (e.g., KV cache reuse and prompt caching [20, 60, 62]) stores internal model states
to speed up subsequent generations, while semantic caching [10, 46, 2] stores and reuses (input,
output) pairs to accelerate the serving of queries that are similar to historical queries.
These caching techniques, however, have significant limitations when applied to Plan-Act agents.
These agents often require making data-dependent decisions, i.e., LLM outputs depend on external
data or contextual information that varies between runs. For example, in data analysis applications,
the same high-level query ("summarize key statistics of this dataset") will result in similar high-level
plans, but different specific details depending on the characteristics of the dataset provided. Similarly,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

