VCM: Vision Concept Modeling with Adaptive Vision
Token Compression via Instruction Fine-Tuning

Run Luo1,2,3

Renke Shan4
Longze Chen1,2
Ziqiang Liu1,2
Lu Wang4
1,3∗
4,5∗
Min Yang
Xiaobo Xia
1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
4
National University of Singapore
5
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China

{R . LUO @ SIAT. AC . CN

MIN . YANG @ SIAT. AC . CN

XIAOBOXIA . UNI @ GMAIL . COM }

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have emerged as foundational tools for
real-world AI applications. Despite their remarkable capabilities, current LVLMs
process entire images at the token level, leading to significant inefficiencies compared to human cognition, which selectively focuses on high-level vision concepts.
This token-level redundancy becomes increasingly problematic for high-resolution
images and long video sequences, resulting in large computational costs and limited scalability in practical applications. To address this limitation, we introduce
the concept of a vision concept model, a novel paradigm that enables LVLMs to
dynamically extract the most relevant vision concepts from complex inputs, based
on task-specific instructions. To optimize this vision concept modeling process,
we propose VCM, a self-supervised framework that leverages vision-language
correlations across diverse instances. VCM is designed to learn meaningful vision concepts without the need for expensive concept-level annotations. At its
core, it employs a forward-backward optimization algorithm that supports LVLMs
to adjust concept granularity and spatial alignment dynamically. Experiments
demonstrate that VCM remarkably reduces computational costs (e.g., achieving
up to 85% fewer FLOPs for LLaVA-1.5-7B), while maintaining strong performance across a series of vision-language tasks. The codebase is available at
https://github.com/RainBowLuoCS/VCM.

1

Introduction

Large vision-language models (LVLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] play a critical role in addressing a
wide range of vision-language tasks and have become a cornerstone for enabling general artificial
intelligence to interact with the real world, such as in embodied intelligence [9, 10] and autonomous
driving [11, 12, 13]. However, current LVLMs process entire images at the token level, which is
inefficient compared to humans, who analyze information and generate content at the conceptual
level, extracting relevant vision concepts with minimal effort. This inefficiency becomes particularly
pronounced when dealing with higher-resolution images or longer video inputs, which humans can
easily handle, but LVLMs struggle with it due to the rapidly increasing computational cost. This
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

