ROGR: Relightable 3D Objects using
Generative Relighting

Jiapeng Tang1,3∗ Matthew Levine1∗ Dor Verbin2 Stephan J. Garbin1
Matthias Nießner3 Ricardo Martin-Brualla1 Pratul P. Srinivasan2 Philipp Henzler1
1
Google Research 2 Google Deepmind 3 Technical University of Munich

Input: posed images + target illumination

Output: 3D relit object under novel illumination

Figure 1: Given a set of posed images under unknown illumination (top), our method reconstructs a
relightable neural radiance field (bottom), that can be rendered under any novel environment map
without further optimization, on-the-fly relighting and novel view synthesis.

Abstract
We introduce ROGR, a novel approach that reconstructs a relightable 3D model of
an object captured from multiple views, driven by a generative relighting model
that simulates the effects of placing the object under novel environment illuminations. Our method samples the appearance of the object under multiple lighting
environments, creating a dataset that is used to train a lighting-conditioned Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) that outputs the object’s appearance under any input
environmental lighting. The lighting-conditioned NeRF uses a novel dual-branch
architecture to encode the general lighting effects and specularities separately. The
optimized lighting-conditioned NeRF enables efficient feed-forward relighting
under arbitrary environment maps without requiring per-illumination optimization
or light transport simulation. We evaluate our approach on the established TensoIR
and Stanford-ORB datasets, where it improves upon the state-of-the-art on most
metrics, and showcase our approach on real-world object captures. Project Page

1

Introduction

Inserting real-world objects into new environments is a long-standing problem in computer graphics [1,
2], with numerous applications in the movie and gaming industries. While recent years have seen
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

