Scaling Image Geo-Localization to Continent Level

Philipp Lindenberger 1∗
plindenbe@ethz.ch

Paul-Edouard Sarlin 2
psarlin.com

Marc Pollefeys 1
mapo@ethz.ch

Simon Lynen 2
slynen@google.com
1

2

ETH Zurich

Jan Hosang 2
hosang@google.com
Eduard Trulls 2
trulls@google.com

Google

scaling-geoloc.github.io
cell
prototypes

query image

aerial
imagery
cross-view
classification

…

classification

cross-view
retrieval

╳ too coarse

╳ domain gap

…

our approach
all localized within 100m

✓ scalable & robust

Figure 1: Large-scale fine-grained geolocalization. We introduce an approach that can localize a
ground-level image within 100 m at the scale of a continent (here Western Europe) by combining the
scalability and robustness of classification with the precision of cross-view ground-aerial retrieval.
All images shown here are misregistered by either paradigm, but correctly localized by ours.

Abstract
Determining the precise geographic location of an image at a global scale remains
an unsolved challenge. Standard image retrieval techniques are inefficient due to the
sheer volume of images (>100M) and fail when coverage is insufficient. Scalable
solutions, however, involve a trade-off: global classification typically yields coarse
results (10+ kilometers), while cross-view retrieval between ground and aerial
imagery suffers from a domain gap and has been primarily studied on smaller
regions. This paper introduces a hybrid approach that achieves fine-grained geolocalization across a large geographic expanse the size of a continent. We leverage
a proxy classification task during training to learn rich feature representations
that implicitly encode precise location information. We combine these learned
prototypes with embeddings of aerial imagery to increase robustness to the sparsity
of ground-level data. This enables direct, fine-grained retrieval over areas spanning
multiple countries. Our extensive evaluation demonstrates that our approach can
localize within 200m more than 68% of queries of a dataset covering a large part
of Europe. The code is publicly available at scaling-geoloc.github.io.

1

Introduction

Pinpointing where in the world an image was taken, down to a scale of meters, remains a challenge
in computer vision, especially when scaling beyond city limits [1, 2]. Achieving such fine-grained
∗
Work done during an internship at Google.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

