Quantile Reward Policy Optimization: Alignment with
Pointwise Regression and Exact Partition Functions
Simon Matrenok∗
CLAIRE, EPFL

Skander Moalla∗
CLAIRE, EPFL

Caglar Gulcehre
CLAIRE, EPFL

Abstract
Aligning large language models with pointwise absolute rewards has so far required
online, on-policy algorithms such as PPO and GRPO. In contrast, simpler methods
that can leverage offline or off-policy data, such as DPO and REBEL, are limited to
learning from preference pairs or relative signals. To bridge this gap, we introduce
Quantile Reward Policy Optimization (QRPO), which learns from pointwise absolute rewards while preserving the simplicity and offline applicability of DPO-like
methods. QRPO uses quantile rewards to enable regression to the closed-form
solution of the KL-regularized RL objective. This reward yields an analytically
tractable partition function, removing the need for relative signals to cancel this
term. Moreover, QRPO scales with increased compute to estimate quantile rewards,
opening a new dimension for pre-computation scaling. Empirically, QRPO consistently achieves top performance on chat and coding evaluations—reward model
scores, AlpacaEval 2, and LeetCode—compared to DPO, REBEL, and SimPO
across diverse datasets and 8B-scale models. Finally, we find that training with
robust rewards instead of converting them to preferences induces less length bias.
Table 1: Policy fitting methods are popular for their simplicity and ability to work offline, but cannot
fully use the signal from pointwise absolute rewards (e.g., strong reward models, verifiable rewards);
they learn from relative rewards (preferences or reward differences). QRPO fills this important gap.

Offline (& Online)

Pointwise Rewards

Policy Improvement: PPO, GRPO, RLOO, etc.
Policy Fitting: DPO, REBEL, SimPO, etc.
Policy Fitting: QRPO (Ours)
Table 2: QRPO is more suitable for code
generation tasks such as LeetCode, where
the reward is canonically pointwise, expressing the test-case pass rate.
Method

Figure 1: QRPO outperforms policy fitting methods that
learn from relative signals in downstream general chat tasks.
∗

Avg. Pass (%)↑

Llama 8B Tülu 3 SFT

20.9 ± 0.5

+ SFT on Correct

18.8 ± 1.1

+ REBEL

26.1 ± 1.8

+ DPO

30.2 ± 1.4

+ SimPO

22.3 ± 1.4

+ QRPO (Ours)

32.7 ± 1.0

Shared first authorship and equal contributions. Correspondence to skander.moalla@epfl.ch.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

