UniSite: The First Cross-Structure Dataset and
Learning Framework for End-to-End Ligand Binding
Site Detection
Jigang Fan1,∗
2

Quanlin Wu1,∗

Shengjie Luo2

Liwei Wang1,2,3,†

1
Center for Data Science, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University

{jigangfan,luosj}@stu.pku.edu.cn,

{quanlin,wanglw}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The detection of ligand binding sites for proteins is a fundamental step in StructureBased Drug Design. Despite notable advances in recent years, existing methods,
datasets, and evaluation metrics are confronted with several key challenges: (1)
current datasets and methods are centered on individual protein–ligand complexes
and neglect that diverse binding sites may exist across multiple complexes of
the same protein, introducing significant statistical bias; (2) ligand binding site
detection is typically modeled as a discontinuous workflow, employing binary segmentation and subsequent clustering algorithms; (3) traditional evaluation metrics
do not adequately reflect the actual performance of different binding site prediction
methods. To address these issues, we first introduce UniSite-DS, the first UniProt
(Unique Protein)-centric ligand binding site dataset, which contains 4.81 times
more multi-site data and 2.08 times more overall data compared to the previously
most widely used datasets. We then propose UniSite, the first end-to-end ligand
binding site detection framework supervised by set prediction loss with bijective
matching. In addition, we introduce Average Precision based on Intersection over
Union (IoU) as a more accurate evaluation metric for ligand binding site prediction. Extensive experiments on UniSite-DS and several representative benchmark
datasets demonstrate that IoU-based Average Precision provides a more accurate
reflection of prediction quality, and that UniSite outperforms current state-of-theart methods in ligand binding site detection. The dataset and codes will be made
publicly available at https://github.com/quanlin-wu/unisite.

1

Introduction

The detection of ligand binding sites on target proteins is one of the most critical steps in modern
drug discovery strategies [1, 2, 3]. Structure-based drug design approaches begin with the threedimensional structure of the target protein, from which deep, druggable cavities are identified. These
regions, referred to as binding sites or binding pockets, are composed of sets of protein residues. Once
the protein’s sites are recognized, virtual screening of a molecular library can be performed using
methods such as protein–ligand docking and protein–ligand affinity prediction [4, 5]. Alternatively,
de novo molecular design [6, 7] can be conducted based on the local structure of the binding sites to
identify potential candidate compounds. As a fundamental step, the accurate identification of protein
binding sites can significantly facilitate and influence subsequent steps in drug discovery.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

