Revisiting Consensus Error: A Fine-grained Analysis
of Local SGD under Second-order Data Heterogeneity

Kumar Kshitij Patel∗
Institute for Foundations of Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
kumarkshitij.patel@yale.edu
Sebastian U. Stich
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
Saarbrücken, DE 66123
stich@cispa.de

Ali Zindari
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
Saarbrücken, DE 66123
ali.zindari@cispa.de
Lingxiao Wang
Department of Data Science
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Newark, NJ 07102
lw324@njit.edu

Abstract
Local SGD, or Federated Averaging, is one of the most widely used algorithms
for distributed optimization. Although it often outperforms alternatives such as
mini-batch SGD, existing theory has not fully explained this advantage under
realistic assumptions about data heterogeneity. Recent work has suggested that a
second-order heterogeneity assumption may suffice to justify the empirical gains of
local SGD. We confirm this conjecture by establishing new upper and lower bounds
on the convergence of local SGD. These bounds demonstrate how a low secondorder heterogeneity, combined with third-order smoothness, enables local SGD to
interpolate between heterogeneous and homogeneous regimes while maintaining
communication efficiency. Our main technical contribution is a refined analysis of
the consensus error, a central quantity in such results. We validate our theory with
experiments on a distributed linear regression task.

1

The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Local SGD

We study the following distributed optimization problem over M machines:


X
1
min F (x) :=
Fm (x) ,
M
x∈Rd

(1)

m∈[M ]

where Fm := Ezm ∼Dm [f (x; zm )] is the a stochastic optimization objective on machine m, defined
using a loss function f (·; z ∈ Z) and a data distribution Dm ∈ ∆(Z). Problem (1) appears widely
in machine learning—ranging from multi-GPU training in data centers [1] to decentralized training
on millions of edge devices [2, 3]. Perhaps the simplest, most basic, and most important distributed
setting for solving Problem (1) is that of intermittent communication (IC) [4]. In this model, illustrated
in Figure 1, M machines optimize the objective across R rounds of communication, and in each
round, each machine performs K sequential stochastic gradient updates before communicating.
Several variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) have been proposed for the IC setting [5, 6],
most of which build on Local SGD or Federated Averaging. In Local SGD, each machine performs
∗

Part of the work was done when the author was a student at Toyota Technological Institute, Chicago (TTIC).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

