STEAD: Robust Provably Secure Linguistic
Steganography with Diffusion Language Model
Yuang Qi† , Na Zhao† , Qiyi Yao, Benlong Wu,
Weiming Zhang, Nenghai Yu, Kejiang Chen∗
University of Science and Technology of China
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security
{qiyuang@mail., znzhaona@mail., chenkj@}ustc.edu.cn

Codes: https://github.com/7-yaya/STEAD

Abstract
Recent provably secure linguistic steganography (PSLS) methods rely on mainstream autoregressive language models (ARMs) to address historically challenging
tasks, that is, to disguise covert communication as “innocuous” natural language
communication. However, due to the characteristic of sequential generation of
ARMs, the stegotext generated by ARM-based PSLS methods will produce serious
error propagation once it changes, making existing methods unavailable under
an active tampering attack. To address this, we propose a robust provably secure
linguistic steganography with diffusion language models (DLMs). Unlike ARMs,
DLMs can generate text in partial parallel manner, allowing us to find robust positions for steganographic embedding that can be combined with error-correcting
codes. Furthermore, we introduce an error correction strategies, including pseudorandom error correction and neighborhood search correction, during steganographic
extraction. Theoretical proof and experimental results demonstrate that our method
is secure and robust. It can resist token ambiguity in stegotext segmentation and, to
some extent, withstand token-level attacks of insertion, deletion, and substitution.

1

Introduction

In the increasingly digital world, the relevance of linguistic steganography has grown significantly. It
offers a discreet method for covert communication across various applications, including intelligence
operations, secure corporate communications, and privacy preservation [1]. Furthermore, in regions
with strict censorship policies, linguistic steganography can serve as a means to bypass content
restrictions, enabling individuals to share and access information discreetly. Traditional linguistic
steganography methods typically embed secret messages directly into existing text by modification [2, 3] or by training a specialized text generation model to produce steganographic text [4, 5].
However, these methods’ security cannot be guaranteed, and they remain susceptible to detection
by sophisticated steganalysis techniques [6, 7, 8, 9]. Alternatively, provably secure steganography
(PSS) methods [10, 11, 12] theoretically guarantee the indistinguishability of the stego (the carrier
containing hidden data) and the cover (the original unaltered carrier).
In recent years, the progress of generative artificial intelligence has underscored the potential of
autoregressive models (ARMs) in the field of provably secure linguistic steganography [13, 14, 15,
16, 17]. ARMs [18, 19, 20] generate text sequentially by predicting the next token based on the
preceding context. They have played a particularly significant role in advancing provably secure
steganography due to the precise sampling they provide, a capability that is unattainable in natural
language environments [21].
∗

Corresponding author; †: equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

