Transition Matching:
Scalable and Flexible Generative Modeling

Neta Shaul∗,1,†

Uriel Singer∗,2

Itai Gat2

Yaron Lipman2

1

†

Weizmann Institute of Science, 2 FAIR at Meta,
Work done during internship at Meta FAIR, ∗ Joint first author

Abstract
Diffusion and flow matching models have significantly advanced media generation,
yet their design space is well-explored, somewhat limiting further improvements.
Concurrently, autoregressive (AR) models, particularly those generating continuous tokens, have emerged as a promising direction for unifying text and media
generation. This paper introduces Transition Matching (TM), a novel discrete-time,
continuous-state generative paradigm that unifies and advances both diffusion/flow
models and continuous AR generation. TM decomposes complex generation tasks
into simpler Markov transitions, allowing for expressive non-deterministic probability transition kernels and arbitrary non-continuous supervision processes, thereby
unlocking new flexible design avenues. We explore these choices through three
TM variants: (i) Difference Transition Matching (DTM), which generalizes flow
matching to discrete-time by directly learning transition probabilities, yielding
state-of-the-art image quality and text adherence as well as improved sampling
efficiency. (ii) Autoregressive Transition Matching (ARTM) and (iii) Full History
Transition Matching (FHTM) are partially and fully causal models, respectively,
that generalize continuous AR methods. They achieve continuous causal AR generation quality comparable to non-causal approaches and potentially enable seamless
integration with existing AR text generation techniques. Notably, FHTM is the first
fully causal model to match or surpass the performance of flow-based methods
on text-to-image task in continuous domains. We demonstrate these contributions
through a rigorous large-scale comparison of TM variants and relevant baselines,
maintaining a fixed architecture, training data, and hyperparameters.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in diffusion models and flow matching has significantly advanced media generation
(images, video, audio), achieving state-of-the-art results [31, 24, 34, 4]. However, the design space
of these methods has been extensively investigated [43, 20, 30, 40, 7], potentially limiting further
significant improvements with current modeling approaches. An alternative direction focuses on
autoregressive (AR) models to unify text and media generation. Earlier approaches generated media
as sequences of discrete tokens either in raster order [37, 54, 6]; or in random order [3]. Further
advancement was shown by switching to continuous token generation [25, 47], while also improving
performance at scale [10].
This paper introduces Transition Matching (TM), a general discrete-time continuous-state generation
paradigm that unifies diffusion/flow models and continuous AR generation. TM aims to advance
both paradigms and create new state-of-the-art generative models. Similar to diffusion/flow models,
TM breaks down complex generation tasks into a series of simpler Markov transitions. However,
unlike diffusion/flow, TM allows for expressive non-deterministic probability transition kernels and
arbitrary non-continuous supervision processes, offering new and flexible design choices.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

