Fair Representation Learning with Controllable High
Confidence Guarantees via Adversarial Inference
Yuhong Luo
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ, USA
y.luo@rutgers.edu

Austin Hoag
Sony AI
New York, NY, USA
austin.hoag@sony.com

Xintong Wang
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ, USA
xintong.wang@rutgers.edu

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA, USA
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Przemyslaw A. Grabowicz 1,2
University College Dublin, Ireland
2
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA
przemek.grabowicz@ucd.ie
1

Abstract
Representation learning is increasingly applied to generate representations that
generalize well across multiple downstream tasks. Ensuring fairness guarantees in
representation learning is crucial to prevent unfairness toward specific demographic
groups in downstream tasks. In this work, we formally introduce the task of
learning representations that achieve high-confidence fairness. We aim to guarantee
that demographic disparity in every downstream prediction remains bounded by
a user-defined error threshold ε, with controllable high probability. To this end,
we propose the Fair Representation learning with high-confidence Guarantees
(FRG) framework, which provides these high-confidence fairness guarantees by
leveraging an optimized adversarial model. We empirically evaluate FRG on
three real-world datasets, comparing its performance to six state-of-the-art fair
representation learning methods. Our results demonstrate that FRG consistently
bounds unfairness across a range of downstream models and tasks. The source
code for FRG is available at: https://github.com/JamesLuoyh/FRG.

1

Introduction

In every prediction task, machine learning algorithms assume two distinct roles: the data producer and
the data consumer [19, 48, 75]. The data consumer’s role is to make accurate predictions using the
data provided by the data producer. While the data producer may distribute raw data, it is common to
generate new representations via representation learning for the input data that are used as predictors
in downstream tasks. When multiple data consumers’ prediction tasks involve inputs of the same type,
such as natural language text or images, the data producer can generate general representations that
are predictive to multiple subsequent tasks. This is an increasing trend with examples including the
Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) [38] or recent language models such as BERT [16] and GPT-4 [58],
which are widely used as bases for downstream text classification tasks [13].
While representation learning can benefit various downstream predictions, it is also susceptible
to the risk of producing unintended or undesirable behaviors in the downstream tasks, specifically,
generating predictions that are unfair toward disadvantaged demographic groups. Especially in critical
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

