The Complexity of Finding Local Optima in
Contrastive Learning
Jingming Yan*1 , Yiyuan Luo*2 , Vaggos Chatziafratis2,3 , Ioannis Panageas1,3 ,
Parnian Shahkar1 , and Stelios Stavroulakis1
1

2

University of California, Irvine
University of California, Santa Cruz
3
Archimedes AI

Abstract
Contrastive learning is a powerful technique for discovering meaningful data
representations by optimizing objectives based on contrastive information, often
given as a set of weighted triplets {(xi , yi+ , zi− )}m
i=1 indicating that an “anchor” xi
is more similar to a “positive” example yi than to a “negative” example zi . The
goal is to find representations (e.g., embeddings in Rd or a tree metric) where
anchors are placed closer to positive than to negative examples. While finding
global optima of contrastive objectives is NP-hard, the complexity of finding local
optima—representations that do not improve by local search algorithms such as
gradient-based methods—remains open. Our work settles the complexity of finding
local optima in various contrastive learning problems by proving PLS-hardness in
discrete settings (e.g., maximize satisfied triplets) and CLS-hardness in continuous
settings (e.g., minimize Triplet Loss), where PLS (Polynomial Local Search) and
CLS (Continuous Local Search) are well-studied complexity classes capturing local
search dynamics in discrete and continuous optimization, respectively. Our results
imply that no polynomial time algorithm (local search or otherwise) can find a local
optimum for various contrastive learning problems, unless PLS ⊆ P (or CLS ⊆ P
for continuous problems). Even in the unlikely scenario that PLS ⊆ P (or CLS ⊆ P),
our reductions imply that there exist instances where local search algorithms need
exponential time to reach a local optimum, even for d = 1 (embeddings on a line).

1

Introduction

Extracting meaningful representations from complicated datasets is a cornerstone of machine learning.
For the past decades, algorithmic questions of how to find convenient representations (Euclidean
space, tree metrics, etc.) faithfully capturing distance relationships have been at the forefront of metric
embeddings and multidimensional scaling [Kruskal, 1964a, Borg and Groenen, 2007, Indyk et al.,
2017], yielding by now a vast literature with both practical successes and deep mathematical insights.
Due to the high cost of labeling datasets and obtaining accurate distances, many communities focus
instead on learning representations based on easier-to-obtain contrastive information, i.e., distance
comparisons [Agarwal et al., 2007, Tamuz et al., 2011, Jamieson and Nowak, 2011, Van Der Maaten
and Weinberger, 2012, Terada and Luxburg, 2014, Jain et al., 2016, Kleindessner and von Luxburg,
2017]. Contrastive information, like “item x is closer to item y than to z” or “among x, y, z, items x, z
are farthest apart” is much easier to obtain than numerical values (“how similar is x to y”), essentially
creating pseudo-labels with little to no supervision. Indeed, such triplets are standard in contrastive
learning, e.g., the popular “anchor-positive-negative” paradigm (x, y + , z − ) [Schroff et al., 2015],
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors jingmy1@uci.edu, yluo124@ucsc.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

