Does Representation Guarantee Welfare?

Jakob de Raaij
Harvard University
jderaaij@fas.harvard.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
A panel satisfies descriptive representation when its composition reflects the population. We examine the role of descriptive representation in collective decision
making through an optimization lens, asking whether representative panels make
decisions that maximize social welfare for the underlying population. Our main
results suggest that, in general, representation with respect to intersections of two
or more features guarantees higher social welfare than that achieved by the status
quo of proportionally representing individual features. Moreover, an analysis of
real data suggests that representation with respect to pairs of features is feasible
in practice. These results have significant implications for the design of citizens’
assemblies, which are gaining prominence in AI governance.

1

Introduction

A citizens’ assembly is a group of everyday people who come together to discuss a policy issue, with
the goal of informing decision makers [23, 25, 8, 18]. This paradigm has been on the rise around the
world, with some of the most prominent assemblies convened by European governments to tackle
constitutional questions and climate change. The success of citizens’ assemblies is driven, at least in
part, by several characteristics.
• Deliberation: Assembly members engage in a deliberative process over a period of weeks
or months.
• Random selection: The assembly is selected through a lottery.
• Descriptive representation: The lottery is designed to ensure that the assembly proportionally
reflects the population according to multiple features, such as age, gender, ethnicity, level of
education, geography, and even viewpoint.
In this paper, we are interested in better understanding the role of descriptive representation. Political
theorists have long argued that descriptive representation contributes to the legitimacy of citizens’
assemblies and promotes public trust in their recommendations. This thesis is largely supported by
experimental evidence [15], but it is disputed by some studies [16].
We steer clear of this (partly normative) debate as we examine descriptive representation through a
novel, quantitative lens. Our key research question is this:
If a panel satisfies descriptive representation, does it make decisions that optimize
social welfare for the underlying population?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

