Perception Encoder: The best visual embeddings are
not at the output of the network
Daniel Bolya1,* Po-Yao Huang1,* Peize Sun1,* Jang Hyun Cho1,2,*,† Andrea
Madotto1,* Chen Wei1 Tengyu Ma1 Jiale Zhi1 Jathushan Rajasegaran1 Hanoona
Rasheed3,† Junke Wang4,† Marco Monteiro1 Hu Xu1 Shiyu Dong1 Nikhila Ravi1
Daniel Li1 Piotr Dollár1 Christoph Feichtenhofer1
1
Meta 2 UT Austin 3 MBZUAI 4 Fudan University
*
Joint first author † Work done during internships at Meta

Abstract
We introduce Perception Encoder (PE), a family of state-of-the-art vision encoders
for image and video understanding. Traditionally, vision encoders have relied on
a variety of pretraining objectives, each excelling at different downstream tasks.
Surprisingly, after scaling a carefully tuned image pretraining recipe and refining
with a robust video data engine, we find that contrastive vision-language training alone can produce strong, general embeddings for all of these downstream
tasks. There is only one caveat: these embeddings are hidden within the intermediate layers of the network. To draw them out, we introduce two alignment
methods: language alignment for multimodal language modeling, and spatial
alignment for dense prediction. Together, our PE family of models achieves
state-of-the-art results on a wide variety of tasks, including zero-shot image
and video classification and retrieval; document, image, and video Q&A; and
spatial tasks such as detection, tracking, and depth estimation. We release our
models, code, and novel dataset of synthetically and human-annotated videos:
https://github.com/facebookresearch/perception_models

1

Introduction

For the last decade in computer vision, pretrained vision encoders have been the core building block for
most applications requiring perception. From million-scale ImageNet [25] pretrained convolutional
networks [41, 60, 79, 121, 128] to billion-scale web-pretrained transformers [19, 24, 28, 53, 127, 156],
the dominant strategy in vision has been to adapt large-scale pretrained encoders to downstream tasks.
Today, these pretraining objectives come in several flavors: vision-language contrastive losses [103,
158] learn a global vision and language embedding well-suited for zero-shot classification and retrieval
as well as provide vision-language alignment for open-world [68, 92] and generative tasks [105, 111];
captioning losses [36, 134] learn to predict image descriptions using a language decoder, which
transfers well to downstream multimodal language model (MLLM) tasks; and spatially self-supervised
losses [43, 96] learn dense spatial correspondences without language supervision, making them useful
for tasks requiring precise localization like object detection. Many works are now attempting to
combine two or more of these techniques in different ways [19, 33, 34, 36, 44, 88, 107, 156]. While
many have been successful, the complexity of these strategies grows exponentially with number of
use cases, which can make scaling difficult. There has not yet been shown a single, simple, and easily
scalable pretraining technique that can learn state-of-the-art features for all downstream tasks.
In this work, we discover that global vision-language contrastive learning alone can be one such
approach. We begin by building PEcore (Fig. 1, left), a large-scale contrastively pretrained model with
state-of-the-art zero-shot performance on both image and video (§2). To accomplish this, we first
focus on developing a strong image-only contrastive pretraining recipe to extract general knowledge
from billion-scale image-text data (§2.1). We then use the resulting model as a frame-based encoder
to develop a video data engine (§2.2) for generating well-aligned video captions. Finetuning on this
synthetic video-text data substantially improves performance on both image and video classification
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

