Chain-of-Model Learning for Language Model

Xiaohua Wang1,2,∗ Kaitao Song2,∗,† Xu Tan∗ Huiqiang Jiang2 Chengruidong Zhang2
Yongliang Shen3
Cen Lu2,5,6
Zihao Li2,7
Zifan Song2,8
Caihua Shan2
Yansen Wang2
Kan Ren2,4
Xiaoqing Zheng1
Tao Qin2
Yuqing Yang2
Dongsheng Li2
Lili Qiu2
Fudan University1
Microsoft Research2
Zhejiang University3
ShanghaiTech University4
5
6
7
Idiap Research Institute
EPFL
UIUC
Tongji University8

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel learning paradigm, termed “Chain-of-Model”
(CoM), which incorporates the causal relationship into the hidden states of each
layer as a chain style, thereby introducing great scaling efficiency in model training
and inference flexibility in deployment. We introduce the concept of “Chainof-Representation” (CoR), which formulates the hidden states at each layer as a
combination of multiple sub-representations (i.e., chains) at the hidden dimension
level. In each layer, each chain from the output representations can only view all
of its preceding chains in the input representations. Consequently, the model built
upon CoM framework can progressively scale up the model size by increasing the
chains based on the previous models (i.e., chains), and offer multiple sub-models
at varying sizes for elastic inference by using different chain numbers. Based on
this principle, we devise Chain-of-Language-Model (CoLM), which incorporates
the idea of CoM into each layer of Transformer architecture. Based on CoLM,
we further introduce CoLM-Air by introducing a KV sharing mechanism, that
computes all keys and values within the first chain and then shares across all chains.
This design demonstrates additional extensibility, such as enabling seamless LM
switching, prefilling acceleration and so on. Experimental results demonstrate our
CoLM family can achieve comparable performance to the standard Transformer,
while simultaneously enabling greater flexiblity, such as progressive scaling to
improve training efficiency and offer multiple varying model sizes for elastic
inference, paving a a new way toward building language models. Our code will be
released in the future at: https://github.com/microsoft/CoLM.

1

Introduction

With the advent of large language models (LLMs) [1–6], scaling up Transformer architecture [7–9]
has been considered as the de facto approach to revolutionize existing AI landscape and achieve
state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of different tasks. Therefore, there has a growing
trend in both industry and academia to explore strategies for scaling up Transformer models. Under
these circumstances, the parameter size of LLMs has been an exponential growth, scaling from the
billion to the trillion level. As a result, its explosive parameters also impose extremely expensive
burden on training and cannot offer varying inference usage for different deployment environments.
In light of this increasing trend of scaling laws, how to develop and harness LLMs effectively to
address user instructions in various scenarios has been an open and critical challenge among the
whole community.
* The first three authors have equal contributions.
†

Corresponding author: Kaitao Song (stillkeeptry@outlook.com)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

