Non-exchangeable Conformal Prediction with
Optimal Transport: Tackling Distribution Shifts
with Unlabeled Data
Alvaro H.C. Correia† Christos Louizos†
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{acorreia, clouizos}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Conformal prediction is a distribution-free uncertainty quantification method that
has gained popularity in the machine learning community due to its finite-sample
guarantees and ease of use. Its most common variant, dubbed split conformal
prediction, is also computationally efficient as it boils down to collecting statistics of the model predictions on some calibration data not yet seen by the model.
Nonetheless, these guarantees only hold if the calibration and test data are exchangeable, a condition that is difficult to verify and often violated in practice due
to so-called distribution shifts. The literature is rife with methods to mitigate the
loss in coverage in this non-exchangeable setting, but these methods require some
prior information on the type of distribution shift to be expected at test time. In
this work, we study this problem via a new perspective, through the lens of optimal
transport, and show that it is possible to estimate the loss in coverage and mitigate
arbitrary distribution shifts, offering a principled and broadly applicable solution.

1

Introduction

Conformal prediction [45] (CP) works under the assumption that calibration and test data are
exchangeable. Exchangeability is a weaker requirement than the more common i.i.d. assumption but
still implies that samples are identically distributed, which is hard to verify and ensure in practical
applications. Therefore, it is important to develop conformal methods capable of adapting to potential
distribution shifts or, at least, quantifying the gap in coverage caused by such shifts. In this paper, we
study the effect of distribution shifts in conformal prediction through the lens of optimal transport,
which proved instrumental in not only quantifying coverage gaps, but also alleviating them via a
reweighting of the calibration data.
We start by introducing the notion of total coverage gap: the expected coverage gap over all possible
target coverage rates in [0, 1]. This metric captures the aggregate effect of distribution shift on
conformal prediction and motivates the subsequent contributions, which build on this concept to
provide theoretical bounds and practical strategies for mitigating the gap.
1. We derive two new upper bounds to the total coverage gap, formulated in terms of optimal
transport distances between the distributions of calibration and test nonconformity scores.
2. We show that one of our upper bounds, which requires only unlabeled samples from the
test distribution, can be used to learn weights w = {wi }ni=1 for the calibration data. These
weights can then be used in CP to reduce the gap in coverage during test time.
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. † Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

