Probably Approximately Precision and Recall
Learning

Lee Cohen∗
Stanford
leecohencs@gmail.com
Shay Moran
Technion and Google Research
smoran@technion.ac.il

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com
Han Shao †
University of Maryland, College Park
hanshao@umd.edu

Abstract
Precision and Recall are fundamental metrics in machine learning tasks where
both accurate predictions and comprehensive coverage are essential, such as in
multi-label learning, language generation, medical studies, and recommender
systems. A key challenge in these settings is the prevalence of one-sided feedback,
where only positive examples are observed during training—e.g., in multi-label
tasks like tagging people in Facebook photos, we may observe only a few tagged
individuals, without knowing who else appears in the image. To address learning
under such partial feedback, we introduce a Probably Approximately Correct
(PAC) framework in which hypotheses are set functions that map each input to a
set of items, extending beyond single-label predictions and generalizing classical
binary, multi-class, and multi-label models. Our results reveal sharp statistical
and algorithmic separations from standard settings: classical methods such as
Empirical Risk Minimization provably fail, even for simple hypothesis classes.
We develop new algorithms that learn from positive data alone, achieving optimal
sample complexity in the realizable case, and establishing multiplicative—rather
than additive—approximation guarantees in the agnostic case, where achieving
additive regret is impossible.

1

Introduction

Precision and Recall are fundamental metrics in many machine learning applications, including multilabel learning, medical studies, generative models, information retrieval, and recommender systems,
where the goal is to learn a set for each input and both accurate prediction and comprehensive coverage
are critical. For example, in multi-label learning—where each input may correspond to multiple
labels (e.g., an image containing multiple objects or a group photo containing multiple people)—the
objective is to return the complete set of labels associated with each input. Recommender systems
also rely heavily on precision and recall; for instance, Netflix aims to recommend a list of shows
that includes all those a user would enjoy and excludes those they would not. In medical studies,
precision, called positive predictive value (PPV), and recall, called sensitivity, are key performance
metrics. For instance, if a test predicts that 10 patients have a condition and 9 truly have it, its PPV
(precision) is 90%. If 5 patients actually have the condition and the test correctly identifies 4 of them,
its sensitivity (recall) is 80%. In language identification and generation in the limit Gold (1967);
∗
†

Authors are ordered alphabetically.
Work done while at Harvard.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

