Replicable Online pricing

Kiarash Banihashem
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
kiarash@umd.edu

MohammadHossein Bateni
Google Research
New York City, New York, USA
bateni@google.com

Samira Goudarzi
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
samirag@umd.edu

Hossein Esfandiari
Google Research
London, UK
esfandiari@google.com

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
hajiaghayi@gmail.com

Abstract
We explore the concept of replicability, which ensures algorithmic consistency
despite input data variations, for online pricing problems, specifically prophet
inequalities and delegation. Given the crucial role of replicability in enhancing
transparency in economic decision-making, we present a replicable and nearly
optimal pricing strategy for prophet inequalities, achieving a sample complexity of
poly(log∗ |X |), where X is the ground set of distributions. Furthermore, we extend
these findings to the delegation problem and establish lower bound that proves
the necessity of the log∗ |X | dependence. En route to obtaining these results, we
develop a number of technical contributions which are of independent interest.
Most notably, we propose a new algorithm for a variant of the heavy hitter problem,
which has a nearly linear dependence on the inverse of the heavy hitter parameter,
significantly improving upon existing results which have a cubic dependence.

1

Introduction

Scientific research fundamentally relies on the ability to repeat experiments and achieve similar results.
This principle, known as “reproducibility” is critical to validating findings and ensuring progress
across fields. However, many researchers [HIB+ 18, IHGP17, LKM+ 18] have raised concerns about
a “reproducibility crisis” where studies often fail to replicate reliably. This has highlighted the
pressing need for methods that guarantee reproducibility and transparency in research.
A significant challenge in achieving reproducibility is the inherent variability in data, which often
stems from complex and stochastic processes. Even when researchers meticulously document their
methods, others may struggle to reproduce the results due to this randomness. This variability opens
the door to misleading findings, whether intentional or unintentional. For instance, practices such
as “p-hacking”—where researchers test multiple hypotheses until a significant result is found—can
undermine the validity of scientific conclusions.
To address these challenges from a theoretical perspective, Impagliazzo et al. [ILPS22] (STOC’22)
introduced the notion of replicable algorithms for statistical problems.1 Formally, an algorithm A
that takes as input a set of samples S ⊆ X n and a binary string r representing its internal randomness
is called ρ-replicable if, for any distribution D over X ,
PrS1 ,S2 ∼D,r∼R [A(S1 ; r) = A(S2 ; r)] ≥ 1 − ρ,

(1)

1
The original work used the term “reproducible” (to align with common usage), but subsequent works have
adopted “replicable”, the term we use here.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

