RoPECraft: Training-Free Motion Transfer with
Trajectory-Guided RoPE Optimization on Diffusion
Transformers
∗
1

Ahmet Berke Gökmen1,2

∗

Yiğit Ekin1

∗

Bahri Batuhan Bilecen1,3,4

Aysegul Dundar1

Bilkent University 2 INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski” 3 ETH Zurich 4 Max Planck Institute
Reference

RoPECraft

A robotic courier zips through a maze of an eco-friendly, automated warehouse, packages whizzing past on conveyor belts.

The silhouette of a ballerina leaps across a sunlit studio, delicate shadow dancing on polished hardwood floors.

A young woman riding a small skateboard through the misty rainforest.

A vintage steam locomotive rolls past a snowy station, its black iron body steaming in the frosty air.

A camel is seen walking in an abandoned, moonlit amphitheater.

A vintage biplane loops gracefully above an airfield.

Figure 1: Our method successfully transfers the motion from reference videos.

Abstract
We propose RoPECraft, a training-free video motion transfer method for diffusion
transformers that operates solely by modifying their rotary positional embeddings
(RoPE). We first extract dense optical flow from a reference video, and utilize
the resulting motion offsets to warp the complex-exponential tensors of RoPE,
effectively encoding motion into the generation process. These embeddings are then
further optimized during denoising time steps via trajectory alignment between the
predicted and target velocities using a flow-matching objective. To keep the output
faithful to the text prompt and prevent duplicate generations, we incorporate a
regularization term based on the phase components of the reference video’s Fourier
transform, projecting the phase angles onto a smooth manifold to suppress highfrequency artifacts. Experiments on benchmarks reveal that RoPECraft outperforms
all recently published methods, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence: berke.gokmen@insait.ai. Project page

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

