Finding and Reactivating Post-Trained LLMs’ Hidden
Safety Mechanisms

Mingjie Li1 , Wai Man Si1 , Michael Backes1 , Yang Zhang1 , Yisen Wang2,3∗
1
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
2
State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Despite the impressive performance of general-purpose large language models
(LLMs), they often require fine-tuning or post-training to excel at specific tasks.
For instance, large reasoning models (LRMs), such as the DeepSeek-R1 series,
demonstrate strong reasoning capabilities after post-training different general large
language models on diverse chain-of-thought (CoT) datasets. However, this additional training frequently comes at the cost of reduced safety, as the fine-tuned
or post-trained models tend to exhibit more harmful behaviors compared with the
regular LLMs before post-training or fine-tuning, potentially leading to harmful
outcomes due to their enhanced capabilities. Taking LRMs as an example, we
first investigate the underlying cause of this safety degradation in this paper. Our
analysis reveals that post-training can mask the original safety mechanisms of the
base LLM, while over-amplifying representations related to their post-training
ability. But luckily, we also find that LRMs’ safety mechanisms still exist instead of being removed during their post-training. Based on these findings, we
propose a lightweight and cost-effective solution called SafeReAct that restores
the suppressed safety behaviors by aligning with LoRA adapters on a few layers.
Experiments on four state-of-the-art LRMs show that our method significantly
improves safety on harmful prompts without compromising reasoning performance.
Besides LRMs, additional results on other domain-specific LLMs, like medical
models, further confirm the generality and effectiveness of our approach. Code is
available at https://github.com/homles11/SafeReAct.

1

Introduction

Recently, large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success due to their strong
capabilities in language understanding and generation [1, 2]. Beyond general-purpose models such
as LLaMA [3] and GPT [4], LLMs can be further trained to be enhanced on specific domains.
For instance, DeepSeek-R1 [5] is post-trained from DeepSeek-V3 [6] using instruction tuning and
reinforcement learning. Its distilled variants are also post-trained from widely used general models
like LLaMA-3 and Qwen [7]. Trained on carefully constructed long chain-of-thought (CoT) datasets,
these large reasoning models (LRMs) significantly improve their reasoning abilities, achieving
substantial gains on complex tasks such as mathematical problem solving and code generation. In
addition to reasoning models, various domain-specific chatbots [8, 9, 10] have also been developed
by post-training regular LLMs. These post-trained models enhance LLM performance on specialized
tasks, making them more effective for real-world applications.
∗

Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

