Storyboard-guided Alignment for Fine-grained Video
Action Recognition

Enqi Liu1 , Liyuan Pan1,2∗, Yan Yang3 , Yiran Zhong4 , Zhijing Wu1 , Xinxiao Wu1 , Liu Liu5
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing, China
3
BDSI, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
4
OpenNLPLab, Shanghai, China
5
Huawei, Beijing, China
{enqi.liu, liyuan.pan, zhijingwu, wuxinxiao}@bit.edu,
yan.yang@anu.edu.au, zhongyiran@gmail.com, liuliu33@huawei.com

Abstract
Fine-grained video action recognition can be formulated as a video–text matching problem. Previous approaches primarily rely on global video semantics to
consolidate video embeddings, often leading to misaligned video–text pairs due
to inaccurate atomic-level action understanding. This inaccuracy arises due to i)
videos with distinct global semantics may share similar atomic actions or visual
appearances, and ii) atomic actions can be momentary, gradual, or not directly
aligned with overarching video semantics. Inspired by storyboarding, where a
script is segmented into individual shots, we propose a multi-granularity framework, SFAR. SFAR generates fine-grained descriptions of common atomic actions
for each global semantic using a large language model. Unlike existing works that
refine global semantics with auxiliary video frames, SFAR introduces a filtering
metric to ensure correspondence between the descriptions and the global semantics, eliminating the need for direct video involvement and thereby enabling more
nuanced recognition of subtle actions. By leveraging both global semantics and
fine-grained descriptions, our SFAR effectively identifies prominent frames within
videos, thereby improving the accuracy of embedding aggregation. Extensive experiments on various video action recognition datasets demonstrate the competitive
performance of our SFAR in supervised, few-shot, and zero-shot settings.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained video action recognition has garnered increasing attention due to its broad applicability
in areas such as sports analytics [54], human-computer interaction [13], surveillance [44], and video
understanding [12]. In contrast to standard action recognition, fine-grained video action recognition
necessitates a more detailed understanding of actions with similar appearances, demanding greater
precision in capturing prominent frames with subtle actions.
The advent of large language models has revealed that a robust multimodal encoder like CLIP [30] can
consolidate significantly more potent learned embeddings compared to manually crafted embeddings
for action recognition [39, 21, 29, 2, 23, 28, 51, 15, 11, 47]. These methods involve using CLIP’s
visual encoder to extract video embeddings and its textual encoder to extract text embeddings. The
video and text embeddings are then aligned for video classification. However, the potential of the
textual encoder has not been fully explored.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

