B UNDLE F LOW: Deep Menus for Combinatorial
Auctions by Diffusion-Based Optimization

Tonghan Wang
Harvard University
twang1@g.harvard.edu

Yanchen Jiang
Harvard University
yanchen_jiang@g.harvard.edu

David C. Parkes
Harvard University
parkes@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
Differentiable economics—the use of deep learning for auction design—has driven
progress in multi-item auction design with additive and unit-demand valuations.
However, there has been little progress for combinatorial auctions (CAs), even in
the simplest and yet important single bidder case, due to exponential growth of the
bundle space with the number of items. We address this challenge by introducing a
deep network architecture for a menu-based CA, which supports the first dominantstrategy incentive compatible (DSIC), revenue-optimizing single-bidder CA. Our
idea is to generate a bundle distribution through an ordinary differential equation
(ODE) applied to a tractable initial distribution. Our method, B UNDLE F LOW,
learns suitable ODE-based transforms, one for each menu element, to optimize
expected revenue. B UNDLE F LOW achieves up to 2.23× higher revenue than
baselines on standard CA testbeds and scales up to 500 items. Compared with
other menu-learning baselines, B UNDLE F LOW also reduces training iterations by
3.6−9.5× and cuts training time by about 80% in settings with 50 and 100 items.

1

Introduction

When selling multiple items simultaneously, bidders often have complex valuations that exhibit
synergies among items. For instance, some items may act as complements, with their collective value
to a bidder exceed the sum of their individual values. Combinatorial auctions (CAs) support such
valuations by allowing bids on bundles of items. Recognized as early as 1922 [54] and formally
defined in 1982 [43], CAs have found a lot of application, from allocating airport runways to
auctioning spectrum licenses [9, 41], efforts whose far-reaching impact underpinned the 2020 Nobel
Prize in economics [46].
While multi-bidder CAs represent the most general framework, many real-world settings are singlebidder CAs: a streaming platform curating a collection of movies for a viewer (e.g., Prime Video UK
publicly listed 65+ channels on March 2, 2022 [1]), a cloud provider packaging compute features
(hundreds of AWS EC2 instance types with CPU/GPU, memory, bandwidth, and storage options [2]),
an integrated facilities vendor offering configurable service lines (custodial, HVAC, security, pest
control, energy, etc.) across multiple sites [4]. This problem has also been studied as the so-called
“FedEx problem" [15]. The single-bidder CA model is also applicable in settings with multiple
bidders as long as supply constraints apply independently to each bidders; e.g., with information
goods, or services that can be replicated and sold any number of times.
Despite their prominence, designing revenue optimal CAs remains fundamentally challenging. As
with auctions for additive or unit-demand valuations, it is typical to seek mechanisms that are (1)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

