TranSUN: A Preemptive Paradigm to Eradicate
Retransformation Bias Intrinsically from Regression
Models in Recommender Systems

Jiahao Yu∗†, Haozhuang Liu∗, Yeqiu Yang∗, Lu Chen, Jian Wu, Yuning Jiang, Bo Zheng
Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba, Beijing, China
{yujiahao.yjh,liuhaozhuang.lhz,yangyeqiu.yyq,chenyou.cl,
joshuawu.wujian,mengzhu.jyn,bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Regression models are crucial in recommender systems. However, retransformation
bias problem has been conspicuously neglected within the community. While many
works in other fields have devised effective bias correction methods, all of them are
post-hoc cures externally to the model, facing practical challenges when applied
to real-world recommender systems. Hence, we propose a preemptive paradigm
to eradicate the bias intrinsically from the models via minor model refinement.
Specifically, a novel TranSUN method is proposed with a joint bias learning
manner to offer theoretically guaranteed unbiasedness under empirical superior
convergence. It is further generalized into a novel generic regression model family,
termed Generalized TranSUN (GTS), which not only offers more theoretical
insights but also serves as a generic framework for flexibly developing various
bias-free models. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of our methods across data from various domains, which have been successfully
deployed in two real-world industrial recommendation scenarios, i.e. product and
short video recommendation scenarios in Guess What You Like business domain in
the homepage of Taobao App (a leading e-commerce platform with DAU > 300M),
to serve the major online traffic.

1

Introduction

Regression models play a pivotal role in recommender systems, which have been widely applied to
prediction tasks for targets including user engagement duration [38, 9, 23, 22], transaction amount [15,
42, 44], lifetime value [26, 41, 40, 21, 24], etc. Mean squared error (MSE) loss is a predominant
choice for loss functions of regression models, which adopts for target y and features x an apriori
assumption of y|x ∼ N (f (x; θ), σ 2 ), where N (f (x; θ), σ 2 ) is a Gaussian distribution with f (x; θ)
as mean and σ 2 as variance and f (x; θ) is a θ-parameterized predictor aiming to learn Ey∼P(Y|x) [y].
However, the real target distribution frequently violates the Gaussian assumption in recommendation
scenarios due to the high-skewed characteristics of the target data [7, 41, 40], which critically impedes
the model convergence. This problem motivates prevalent adoption of various transformations T for
target y in the MSE-based regression models, abbr. transformed MSE, which facilitates the conformity
between the transformed distribution P T(Y)|x and the hypothetical distribution N (f (x; θ), σ 2 ),
thereby improving the performance of model convergence [32, 31].
Though effective, it leads to the retransformation bias problem [2, 31, 37], i.e. the estimate
for Ey∼P(Y|x) [y] is biased when the prediction f (x; θ) of the transformed MSE model is back* These authors contributed equally to this research.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

