Neural Collapse is Globally Optimal in Deep
Regularized ResNets and Transformers

Peter Súkeník
Institute of Science and Technology (ISTA)
Austria
peter.sukenik@ista.ac.at

Christoph H. Lampert∗
Institute of Science and Technology (ISTA)
Austria
chl@ista.ac.at

Marco Mondelli∗
Institute of Science and Technology (ISTA)
Austria
marco.mondelli@ista.ac.at

Abstract
The empirical emergence of neural collapse—a surprising symmetry in the feature representations of the training data in the penultimate layer of deep neural
networks—has spurred a line of theoretical research aimed at its understanding.
However, existing work focuses on data-agnostic models or, when data structure is
taken into account, it remains limited to multi-layer perceptrons. Our paper fills
both these gaps by analyzing modern architectures in a data-aware regime: we
prove that global optima of deep regularized transformers and residual networks
(ResNets) with LayerNorm trained with cross entropy or mean squared error loss
are approximately collapsed, and the approximation gets tighter as the depth grows.
More generally, we formally reduce any end-to-end large-depth ResNet or transformer training into an equivalent unconstrained features model, thus justifying its
wide use in the literature even beyond data-agnostic settings. Our theoretical results
are supported by experiments on computer vision and language datasets showing
that, as the depth grows, neural collapse indeed becomes more prominent.

1

Introduction

In 2020, Papyan et al. [43] discovered a surprising geometric structure in learned representations
of deep neural networks (DNNs) at convergence. This structure—dubbed “neural collapse” (NC)—
was present in various architectures trained on many computer vision datasets, and it concerns the
representations of the training samples in the last layer of the network: the feature vectors of the
samples from the same class converge to the respective class-mean (NC1); the class-means form a
simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF), maximizing the pairwise angles (NC2); finally, the classmeans align with the rows of the weight matrix of the last layer (NC3). Similar structures were
also subsequently discovered for class-imbalanced classification [51], regression [1] and language
modeling [62], demonstrating that neural collapse is ubiquitous when training deep models.
The NC phenomenon raised significant interest in the machine learning community from both
theoreticians and practitioners, due to its high relevance in both areas. Theoreticians use it to improve
generalization understanding [64, 12, 59] both in-distribution and in transfer learning, OOD detection
[15], imbalanced learning understanding [67], theory of feature learning [28, 40], robustness [47], as
well as representation learning itself [41, 2, 5, 11, 56]. In practice, neural collapse has implications on
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

