Emergent Risk Awareness in Rational Agents
under Resource Constraints
Daniel Jarne Ornia∗
University of Oxford

Nicholas Bishop
University of Oxford

Doyne Farmer
University of Oxford

Joel Dyer
University of Oxford

Ani Calinescu
University of Oxford

Wei-Chen Lee
University of Oxford

Michael Wooldridge
University of Oxford

Abstract
Advanced reasoning models with agentic capabilities (AI agents) are deployed
to interact with humans and to solve sequential decision-making problems under
(approximate) utility functions and internal models. When such problems have
resource or failure constraints where action sequences may be forcibly terminated
once resources are exhausted, agents face implicit trade-offs that reshape their
utility-driven (rational) behaviour. Additionally, since these agents are typically
commissioned by a human principal to act on their behalf, asymmetries in constraint
exposure can give rise to previously unanticipated misalignment between human
objectives and agent incentives. We formalise this setting through a survival bandit
framework, provide theoretical and empirical results that quantify the impact of
survival-driven preference shifts, identify conditions under which misalignment
emerges and propose mechanisms to mitigate the emergence of risk-seeking or
risk-averse behaviours. As a result, this work aims to increase understanding and
interpretability of emergent behaviours of AI agents operating under such survival
pressure, and offer guidelines for safely deploying such AI systems in critical
resource-limited environments.

1

Introduction

Complex, highly capable reasoning models (AI agents) are being developed at an unprecedented pace,
and are being deployed to interact with humans on a daily basis, triggering the critical need to consider
safety problems resulting from such deployments [2]. These agents are often tasked (by humans)
[4, 6] to solve sequential decision-making problems for which they have (an approximation of) a
prescribed utility function and (again, an approximation of) an internal model. In many cases, such
problems imply some form of resource constraint, where the actions of the agent may be interrupted
if resources are depleted. For instance, financial institutions typically aim to maximise profit whilst
simultaneously avoiding bankruptcy [17]. Likewise, in nature, animals aim to gather energy resources
(food) in the most efficient way possible, since long unsuccessful periods (or catastrophic actions)
may lead to starvation. We investigate the complexities that emerge in rational agents and their
behaviours as a result of such constraints and characterise them in terms of intuitive preference shifts
based on survival and risk.
Furthermore, in most instances of AI agent deployments, for a set of different reasons the human may
not necessarily have the same constraints as the agent. For example, in a financial decision-making
problem where an AI agent is tasked with optimising returns, the agent will not be liable for debts at
the end of the process (e.g. if the company goes bankrupt and has debt, the reward collecting process
∗

daniel.jarneornia@cs.ox.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

