Continual Gaussian Mixture Distribution Modeling for
Class Incremental Semantic Segmentation

Guilin Zhu1

Runmin Wang2

Yuanjie Shao1

Nong Sang1

Weidong Yang1,∗

Changxin Gao1,∗

1
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University
{gzhu, shaoyuanjie,Yangwd,nsang,cgao}@hust.edu.cn,
runminwang@hunnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Class incremental semantic segmentation (CISS) enables a model to continually
segment new classes from non-stationary data while preserving previously learned
knowledge. Recent top-performing approaches are prototype-based methods that
assign a prototype to each learned class to reproduce previous knowledge. However,
modeling each class distribution relying on only a single prototype, which remains
fixed throughout the incremental process, presents two key limitations: (i) a single
prototype is insufficient to accurately represent the complete class distribution
when incoming data stream for a class is naturally multimodal; (ii) the features of
old classes may exhibit anisotropy during the incremental process, preventing fixed
prototypes from faithfully reproducing the matched distribution. To address the
aforementioned limitations, we propose a Continual Gaussian Mixture Distribution
(CoGaMiD) modeling method. Specifically, the means and covariance matrices
of the Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) are estimated to model the complete
feature distributions of learned classes. These GMMs are stored to generate pseudofeatures that support the learning of novel classes in incremental steps. Moreover,
we introduce a Dynamic Adjustment (DA) strategy that utilizes the features of
previous classes within incoming data streams to update the stored GMMs. This
adaptive update mitigates the mismatch between fixed GMMs and continually
evolving distributions. Furthermore, a Gaussian-based Representation Constraint
(GRC) loss is proposed to enhance the discriminability of new classes, avoiding
confusion between new and old classes. Extensive experiments on Pascal VOC
and ADE20K show that our method achieves superior performance compared to
previous methods, especially in more challenging long-term incremental scenarios.
The source code is available at https://github.com/zhu-gl-ux/CoGaMiD

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation has witnessed remarkable advancements over the decades, particularly with
the emergence of deep learning. A wide range of architectures, such as convolution neural networks
(CNNs) [23, 18] and Transformers [12, 42, 26], have been developed to tackle the challenge of
semantic segmentation. Traditional semantic segmentation networks acquire the ability to handle a
predefined number of semantic categories by conducting a one-time training process. However, in
realistic applications, the trained segmentation model is expected to learn new concepts continuously
under the situation that the previously labeled data are not available due to privacy or legal reasons.
∗

Co-corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

