FutureSightDrive: Thinking Visually
with Spatio-Temporal CoT for Autonomous Driving

Shuang Zeng1, 2 * , Xinyuan Chang2 , Mengwei Xie2 , Xinran Liu2 ,
Yifan Bai1, 3 , Zheng Pan2 , Mu Xu2 , Xing Wei1†
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Amap, Alibaba Group 3 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
zengshuang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, weixing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
{changxinyuan.cxy, xiemengwei.xmw, tom.lxr}@alibaba-inc.com,
{baiyifan.byf, panzheng.pan, xumu.xm}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Vision–Language–Action (VLA) models are increasingly used for end-to-end
driving due to their world knowledge and reasoning ability. Most prior work,
however, inserts textual chains-of-thought (CoT) as intermediate steps tailored to
the current scene. Such symbolic compressions can blur spatio-temporal relations
and discard fine visual cues, creating a cross-modal gap between perception and
planning. We propose FSDrive, a visual spatio-temporal CoT framework that
enables VLAs to think in images. The model first acts as a world model to
generate a unified future frame that overlays coarse but physically-plausible
priors—future lane dividers and 3D boxes—on the predicted future image. This
unified frame serves as the visual CoT, capturing both spatial structure and temporal
evolution. The same VLA then functions as an inverse-dynamics model, planning
trajectories from current observations and the visual CoT. To equip VLAs with
image generation while preserving understanding, we introduce a unified pretraining paradigm that expands the vocabulary to include visual tokens and jointly
optimizes VQA (for semantics) and future-frame prediction (for dynamics). A
progressive easy-to-hard scheme first predicts lane/box priors to enforce physical
constraints, then completes full future frames for fine details. On nuScenes and
NAVSIM, FSDrive improves trajectory accuracy and reduces collisions under both
ST-P3 and UniAD metrics, and attains competitive FID for future-frame generation
despite using lightweight autoregression. It also advances scene understanding
on DriveLM. Together, these results indicate that visual CoT narrows the crossmodal gap and yields safer, more anticipatory planning. Code is available at
https://github.com/MIV-XJTU/FSDrive.

1

Introduction

Recently, given the superior capabilities of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) in world
knowledge, reasoning ability, and interpretability, they have been widely applied in autonomous driving [20, 43, 87, 31]. One promising direction is the end-to-end vision-language-action (VLA) model,
which leverages pre-trained vision-language model (VLM) to directly extract scene features from
visual observations and language instructions, subsequently generating vehicle control commands
(e.g., speed and trajectory). This paradigm not only simplifies system architecture and minimizes
information loss, but also enables the utilization of the model’s world knowledge to analyze driving
environments and reason about safe decisions in complex scenarios.
∗
†

Work done during the internship at Amap, Alibaba Group.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

