Characterization and Learning of Causal Graphs from
Hard Interventions
Zihan Zhou*
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
zzhou150@jhu.edu

Muhammad Qasim Elahi*
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
elahi0@purdue.edu

Murat Kocaoglu
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
mkocaoglu@jhu.edu

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in the empirical sciences involves uncovering causal
structure through observation and experimentation. Causal discovery entails linking the conditional independence (CI) invariances in observational data to their
corresponding graphical constraints via d-separation. In this paper, we consider a
general setting where we have access to data from multiple experimental distributions resulting from hard interventions, as well as potentially from an observational
distribution. By comparing different interventional distributions, we propose a set
of graphical constraints that are fundamentally linked to Pearl’s do-calculus within
the framework of hard interventions. These graphical constraints associate each
graphical structure with a set of interventional distributions that are consistent with
the rules of do-calculus. We characterize the interventional equivalence class of
causal graphs with latent variables and introduce a graphical representation that
can be used to determine whether two causal graphs are interventionally equivalent, i.e., whether they are associated with the same family of hard interventional
distributions, where the elements of the family are indistinguishable using the
invariances from do-calculus. We also propose a learning algorithm to integrate
multiple datasets from hard interventions, introducing new orientation rules. The
learning objective is a tuple of augmented graphs which entails a set of causal
graphs. We also prove the soundness of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Understanding the behavior of complex systems through their causal relationships is a fundamental
problem in science. Researchers collect data and perform experiments to analyze how specific
phenomena arise or to investigate the structure and function of underlying systems, whether social,
biological, or economic [Hünermund and Bareinboim, 2023, Petersen et al., 2024, Sanchez et al.,
2022]. Causal discovery focuses on identifying causal relationships from both observational and
interventional data [Pearl, 1995, Spirtes et al., 2001, Peters et al., 2017]. A widely used approach for
causal discovery models the underlying system as a causal graph, represented by a directed acyclic
graph (DAG), where nodes denote random variables and directed edges between nodes (A → B)
signify causal relations [Pearl, 2009, Spirtes et al., 2001].
*

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

