Efficient Randomized Experiments
Using Foundation Models

Piersilvio De Bartolomeis
ETH Zurich & Harvard University
pdebartol@ethz.ch
Guanbo Wang
Harvard University
gwang@hsph.harvard.edu

Javier Abad
ETH Zurich
jabadmartine@ethz.ch

Konstantin Donhauser
ETH Zurich
donhausk@ethz.ch

Fanny Yang
ETH Zurich
fan.yang@inf.ethz.ch

Raymond M Duch
Oxford University
raymond.duch@ox.ac.uk

Issa J Dahabreh
Harvard University
idahabreh@hsph.harvard.edu

Abstract
Randomized experiments are the preferred approach for evaluating the effects
of interventions, but they are costly and often yield estimates with substantial
uncertainty. On the other hand, in silico experiments leveraging foundation models
offer a cost-effective alternative that can potentially attain higher statistical precision. However, the benefits of in silico experiments come with a significant risk:
statistical inferences are not valid if the models fail to accurately predict experimental responses to interventions. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that
integrates the predictions from multiple foundation models with experimental data
while preserving valid statistical inference. Our estimator is consistent and asymptotically normal, with asymptotic variance no larger than the standard estimator
based on experimental data alone. Importantly, these statistical properties hold
even when model predictions are arbitrarily biased. Empirical results across several
randomized experiments show that our estimator offers substantial precision gains,
equivalent to a reduction of up to 20% in the sample size needed to match the same
precision as the standard estimator based on experimental data alone.

1

Introduction

Randomized experiments are widely considered the preferred approach for evaluating the effects
of interventions in scientific research. However, obtaining sufficiently large sample sizes can be
costly and time-consuming, especially when studying rare outcomes. For example, Carlisle et al.
[11] reported that 481 out of 2579 recently completed clinical trials (19%) failed due to insufficient
patient recruitment to meet the required sample size. In cancer trials, this failure rate can be as
high as 40% due to strict eligibility and safety requirements [49]. As a result, there is growing
interest in exploring in silico experiments as a potential alternative to randomized experiments. In
silico experiments leverage the predictions from foundation models [6]—machine learning models
trained on massive datasets and applicable to many downstream tasks—to simulate the outcomes
of hypothetical randomized experiments. This approach has already shown promising results in
replicating the results of randomized experiments in several scientific disciplines, including clinical
research [26, 19, 14] and the social sciences [3, 5, 4].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

