Transferable Black-Box One-Shot Forging of
Watermarks via Image Preference Models

Tomáš Souček1 Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi1 Pierre Fernandez1 Nikola Jovanović2∗
Hady Elsahar1 Valeriu Lacatusu1 Tuan Tran1 Alexandre Mourachko1
1
Meta FAIR 2 ETH Zurich
soucek@meta.com

Abstract
Recent years have seen a surge in interest in digital content watermarking techniques, driven by the proliferation of generative models and increased legal pressure.
With an ever-growing percentage of AI-generated content available online, watermarking plays an increasingly important role in ensuring content authenticity
and attribution at scale. There have been many works assessing the robustness
of watermarking to removal attacks, yet, watermark forging, the scenario when a
watermark is stolen from genuine content and applied to malicious content, remains
underexplored. In this work, we investigate watermark forging in the context of
widely used post-hoc image watermarking. Our contributions are as follows. First,
we introduce a preference model to assess whether an image is watermarked. The
model is trained using a ranking loss on purely procedurally generated images
without any need for real watermarks. Second, we demonstrate the model’s capability to remove and forge watermarks by optimizing the input image through
backpropagation. This technique requires only a single watermarked image and
works without knowledge of the watermarking model, making our attack much
simpler and more practical than attacks introduced in related work. Third, we evaluate our proposed method on a variety of post-hoc image watermarking models,
demonstrating that our approach can effectively forge watermarks, questioning the
security of current watermarking approaches. Our code and further resources are
publicly available3 .

1

Introduction

Digital watermarking is an important technology that enables content identification and attribution by
embedding imperceptible signals into images without compromising their visual quality. In recent
years, the demand for such technology has increased, driven by the growth of online sharing platforms
and the development of generative AI models. It is also particularly appealing for moderation and
IP protection of user-generated content at scale, where copy detection and manual verification are
insufficient. More importantly, we now also need provenance verification systems to distinguish
genuine from machine-generated material, especially in settings involving misinformation, fraud, or
intellectual property claims. Regulatory frameworks such as the EU AI Act and the U.S. Executive
Order on AI now explicitly call for watermarking mechanisms to ensure transparency and traceability
in AI-generated content. Among the various watermarking approaches, post-hoc watermarking—
where the watermark is applied after content generation—has gained popularity for its modularity
and ease of deployment, in both of these scenarios. As a case in point, it is already integrated into
many practical systems to label and trace AI-generated images or videos [8, 9, 14], and to protect the
authenticity of photos of press agencies or taken with cameras [1, 33].
∗
3

Work done during an internship at Meta.
https://github.com/facebookresearch/videoseal/tree/main/wmforger

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

