Analyzing Fine-Grained Alignment and Enhancing
Vision Understanding in Multimodal Language Models
Jiachen Jiang† , Jinxin Zhou† , Bo Peng† , Xia Ning†,♢,♡ , Zhihui Zhu† ∗
†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University
♢
Translational Data Analytics Institute, The Ohio State University
♡
Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University
{jiang.2880, zhou.3820, peng.707, ning.104, zhu.3440}@osu.edu

Abstract
Achieving better alignment between vision embeddings and Large Language Models (LLMs) is crucial for enhancing the abilities of Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs),
particularly for recent models that rely on powerful pretrained vision encoders and
LLMs. A common approach to connect the pretrained vision encoder and LLM
is through a projector applied after the vision encoder. However, the projector is
often trained to enable the LLM to generate captions, and hence the mechanism by
which LLMs understand each vision token remains unclear. In this work, we first
investigate the role of the projector in compressing vision embeddings and aligning
them with word embeddings. We show that the projector significantly compresses
visual information, removing redundant details while preserving essential elements
necessary for the LLM to understand visual content. We then examine patch-level
alignment—the alignment between each vision patch and its corresponding semantic words—and propose a multi-semantic alignment hypothesis. Our analysis
indicates that the projector trained by caption loss improves patch-level alignment
but only to a limited extent, resulting in weak and coarse alignment. To address
this issue, we propose patch-aligned training to efficiently enhance patch-level
alignment. Our experiments show that patch-aligned training (1) achieves stronger
compression capability and improved patch-level alignment, enabling the MLLM
to generate higher-quality captions, (2) improves the MLLM’s performance by
16% on referring expression grounding tasks, 4% on question-answering tasks, and
3% on modern instruction-following benchmarks when using the same supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) setting. The proposed method can be easily extended to other
multimodal models.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have recently gained significant
attention and made notable progress. These models possess the ability to process and understand
both visual and textual information, enabling them to perform complex reasoning [8, 9], generate
textual descriptions from images [10], and answer image-related questions [11].
Consider an MLLM M = (E, L, P) where E is the vision encoder, L is the LLM, and P is the
lightweight projector that connects the two parts. The standardized training paradigm follows two key
phases: pretraining and instruction-tuning [1, 2]. During the pretraining phase, only the lightweight
projector P is trained leaving the vision encoder E and the LLM L frozen. In instruction-tuning stage,
both projector P and the LLM L are trainable. Despite the remarkable progress achieved through
∗

The corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

