Algorithm- and Data-Dependent Generalization
Bounds for Diffusion Models
Benjamin Dupuis∗1,2 , Dario Shariatian∗1,2,3 , Maxime Haddouche∗1,2 ,
Alain Durmus†3 , Umut Simsekli†1,2
1
INRIA, France
2
CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, France
3
Ecole Polytechnique, CMAP, IP Paris, France
∗†

indicate equal contributions.

Abstract
Score-based generative models (SGMs) have emerged as one of the most popular classes of generative models. A substantial body of work now exists on the
analysis of SGMs, focusing either on discretization aspects or on their statistical
performance. In the latter case, bounds have been derived, under various metrics,
between the true data distribution and the distribution induced by the SGM, often demonstrating polynomial convergence rates with respect to the number of
training samples. However, these approaches adopt a largely approximation theory
viewpoint, which tends to be overly pessimistic and relatively coarse. In particular,
they fail to fully explain the empirical success of SGMs or capture the role of the
optimization algorithm used in practice to train the score network. To support this
observation, we first present simple experiments illustrating the concrete impact of
optimization hyperparameters on the generalization ability of the generated distribution. Then, this paper aims to bridge this theoretical gap by providing the first
algorithmic- and data-dependent generalization analysis for SGMs. In particular,
we establish bounds that explicitly account for the optimization dynamics of the
learning algorithm, offering new insights into the generalization behavior of SGMs.
Our theoretical findings are supported by empirical results on several datasets.

1

Introduction

Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) are among the most popular classes of generative models
[HJA20a, SSDK+ 21, DN21, KAAL22a, EKB+ 24], with applications ranging from computer vision
and medicine to natural language processing; see [YZS+ 24] for a recent survey.
The starting point of Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) is to consider a stochastic process
→
−
( X t )t∈[0,T ] , referred to as the forward process, which is the solution of an ergodic diffusion over
→
−
the time interval [0, T ] and initialized from the data distribution µ. Typically, ( X t )t∈[0,T ] is either
a d-dimensional Brownian motion or an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process, with stationary distribution
given by the standard Gaussian, denoted by γ d [SSDK+ 21]. In this work, we focus on the latter case.
This construction defines a path measure connecting µ to γ d , and thus an ideal generative model
can be formed, by taking a large value of T and considering the time-reversed process associated
→
−
←
−
→
−
with ( X t )t∈[0,T ] , defined for any t ∈ [0, T ] as X t = X T −t . It turns out that the backward process
is itself a diffusion process, whose (non-homogeneous) drift (t, x) 7→ s(t, x) depends on the Stein
scores of the forward marginals [HP86], which can be characterized as the solution to a regression
→
−
problem [Vin11, Hyv05] involving simulations of the forward process ( X t )t∈[0,T ] . This drift can
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

