Denoising Trajectory Biases for Zero-Shot
AI-Generated Image Detection
Yachao Liang1,2 Min Yu1,2∗ Gang Li3 Jianguo Jiang1,2 Fuqiang Du1,2
Jingyuan Li4 Lanchi Xie5 Zhen Xu1,2 Weiqing Huang1,2
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Deakin University 4 Beijing Technology and Business University
5
Institute of Forensic Science, Ministry of Public Security
{liangyachao, yumin}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
The rapid advancement of generative models has led to the widespread emergence
of highly realistic synthetic images, making the detection of AI-generated content
increasingly critical. In particular, diffusion models have recently achieved unprecedented levels of visual fidelity, further raising concerns. While most existing
approaches rely on supervised learning, zero-shot detection methods have attracted
growing interest due to their ability to bypass data collection and maintenance.
Nevertheless, the performance of current zero-shot methods remains limited. In
this paper, we introduce a novel zero-shot AI-generated image detection method.
Unlike previous works that primarily focus on identifying artifacts in the final
generated images, our work explores features within the image generation process
that can be leveraged for detection. Specifically, we simulate the image sampling
process via diffusion-based inversion and observe that the denoising outputs of generated images converge to the target image more rapidly than those of real images.
Inspired by this observation, we compute the similarity between the original image
and the outputs along the denoising trajectory, which is then used as an indicator of
image authenticity. Since our method requires no training on any generated images,
it avoids overfitting to specific generative models or dataset biases. Experiments
across a wide range of generators demonstrate that our method achieves significant
improvements over state-of-the-art supervised and zero-shot counterparts. Code is
available here.

1

Introduction

Recent years, we have witnessed a spurt of development in the field of Artificial Intelligence Generated
Content (AIGC). With the advent of cutting-edge generative models, such as StyleGAN [28] and
Diffusion [24], the quality of synthetic images has been significantly improved. With tools like Stable
Diffusion [50] and ControlNet [67], people can quickly create artistic images conforming to their
ideas. Today, we can already see a large number of generated images on the Internet, which are
hard to distinguishable from real images for humans [42]. While image generation technology can
increase our enjoyment of life, the proliferation of fake images with misleading information also
bring huge security risks.
In response to this, different detection methods have been explored [18, 63, 8, 23]. Researchers
attempt to address this from different perspectives, e.g., frequency anomalies [18, 14, 60, 32] and
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

