Actor-Free Continuous Control via
Structurally Maximizable Q-Functions

1

Yigit Korkmaz1 * Urvi Bhuwania1 * Ayush Jain1, 2 † Erdem Bıyık1 †
Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, 2 Meta AI ‡

Abstract
Value-based algorithms are a cornerstone of off-policy reinforcement learning
due to their simplicity and training stability. However, their use has traditionally
been restricted to discrete action spaces, as they rely on estimating Q-values for
individual state-action pairs. In continuous action spaces, evaluating the Q-value
over the entire action space becomes computationally infeasible. To address
this, actor-critic methods are typically employed, where a critic is trained on
off-policy data to estimate Q-values, and an actor is trained to maximize the
critic’s output. Despite their popularity, these methods often suffer from instability
during training. In this work, we propose a purely value-based framework for
continuous control that revisits structural maximization of Q-functions, introducing
a set of key architectural and algorithmic choices to enable efficient and stable
learning. We evaluate the proposed actor-free Q-learning approach on a range
of standard simulation tasks, demonstrating performance and sample-efficiency
on par with state-of-the-art baselines, without the cost of learning a separate
actor. Particularly, in environments with constrained action spaces, where the
value functions are typically non-smooth, our method with structural maximization
outperforms traditional actor-critic methods with gradient-based maximization. We
have released our code at https://github.com/USC-Lira/Q3C.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been highly effective in many domains, ranging from robotics
to gaming and recommender systems [25, 29, 45, 1]. Value-based RL methods such as Deep QNetworks (DQNs) [34, 17] are widely used in discrete action spaces due to their simplicity, training
stability, and sample-efficiency. However, these methods require maximization over the action space,
which is feasible only in discrete action spaces, requiring alternative approaches for continuous
control.
In problems with continuous action spaces, policy-based methods are typically used, such as DDPG
[30], SAC [16], and TD3 [11]. These approaches employ an actor-critic architecture, where the actor
(policy) is updated based on feedback from the critic (Q-function) to select the optimal actions, and
both components are usually parameterized by neural networks. While powerful, actor-critic methods
often face instability due to the coupled training of actor and critic, hyperparameter sensitivity, and
predicting in high-dimensional action spaces. Moreover, gradient-based actor-critic methods struggle
when the action space is constrained, such as when actions require to be within specific safety bounds
[8, 24], because the gradient-ascending actor can only find locally optimal actions.
Can we develop an actor-free value-based algorithm that can efficiently select optimal actions in
continuous domains? In this work, we propose to extend the DQN framework to continuous action
spaces via a Q-function representation that is structurally maximizable. This has been explored for
*

Equal Contribution,

†

Equal Advising,

‡

Work performed in personal capacity outside of work at Meta.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

