Matryoshka Pilot: Learning to Drive Black-Box LLMs
with LLMs
Changhao Li1† , Yuchen Zhuang1† , Rushi Qiang1 , Haotian Sun1 ,
Hanjun Dai2,3∗, Chao Zhang1 , Bo Dai1,3
†
Equal Contribution, 1 Georgia Institute of Technology,
2
Precur AI, 3 Google DeepMind
{cli911, yczhuang, rqiang6, haotian.sun}@gatech.edu
hanjun@precur.ai, chaozhang@gatech.edu, bodai@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Despite the impressive generative abilities of black-box large language models
(LLMs), their inherent opacity hinders further advancements in capabilities such
as reasoning, planning, and personalization. Existing works aim to enhance LLM
capabilities via domain-specific adaptation, which require additional training on
accessible model parameters, an infeasible option for black-box LLMs. To address this challenge, we introduce Matryoshka Pilot (M-Pilot), a lightweight
white-box LLM controller that guides a large-scale black-box LLM generator by
decomposing complex tasks into a series of intermediate outputs. Specifically,
we consider the black-box LLM as an environment, with M-Pilot serving as a
policy to provide intermediate guidance through prompts for driving the black-box
LLM. M-Pilot is trained to pivot the outputs of the black-box LLM aligning
with preferences during iterative interaction, which enables controllable multi-turn
generation and self-improvement in optimizing intermediate guidance. Empirical
evaluations on diverse tasks demonstrate that our method effectively enhances the
capabilities of black-box LLMs in complex, long-horizon tasks.

1

Introduction

Most of the commercial large language models (LLMs) [29, 5, 1, 9, 46, 31] are black-box models [42, 63], where the model structure, parameters, or even output logits are not accessible. Although
these black-box LLMs have exhibited remarkable efficacy across a diverse array of applications,
revolutionizing natural language processing tasks such as text completion [29, 5], translation [62],
question-answering [17], etc, the applications of black-box LLMs continue to face significant challenges when faced with tasks that require more advanced cognitive capabilities, particularly in the
realms of reasoning [18, 50], planning [47, 64, 21, 26], and personalization problems [34, 43]. Enhancing such capabilities within black-box LLMs presents unique challenges, primarily due to the
lack of direct access to internal model parameters [20, 42, 63]. This opacity introduces substantial
complexity in efforts to refine and augment these advanced cognitive functions within the framework
of black-box architectures.
Existing research efforts for improving black-box LLM performance can be largely categorized into
two main methodological paradigms (Figure 1): (1) In-context learning (ICL)-based methods [41,
44, 63] that are designed to guide LLM in exhibiting specific capabilities or adhering to particular
directives. However, these frameworks necessitate meticulously constructing few-shot demonstrations
or prompts for LLMs to emulate or follow, which relies on heuristic prompts constructions. (2)
Adapter-based methods [42, 63, 37] that exploit the inherent randomness in LLM generation,
∗

Work performed while at Google DeepMind.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

