Understanding challenges to the interpretation of
disaggregated evaluations of algorithmic fairness

Stephen R. Pfohl
Google Research
spfohl@google.com
David Madras
Google DeepMind
Awa Dieng
Google DeepMind

Natalie Harris
Google Research

Vishwali Mhasawade
New York University

Katherine Heller
Google Research

Olawale Salaudeen
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Shannon Sequeira
Google Research

Lillian Sung
The Hospital for Sick Children

Chirag Nagpal
Google Research

Santiago Arciniegas
The Hospital for Sick Children

Nnamdi Ezeanochie
Google
Sanmi Koyejo
Stanford University

Heather Cole-Lewis
Google
Alexander D’Amour
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Disaggregated evaluation across subgroups is critical for assessing the fairness
of machine learning models, but its uncritical use can mislead practitioners. We
show that equal performance across subgroups is an unreliable measure of fairness
when data are representative of the relevant populations but reflective of real-world
disparities. Furthermore, when data are not representative due to selection bias,
both disaggregated evaluation and alternative approaches based on conditional
independence testing may be invalid without explicit assumptions regarding the
bias mechanism. We use causal graphical models to characterize fairness properties
and metric stability across subgroups under different data generating processes.
Our framework suggests complementing disaggregated evaluations with explicit
causal assumptions and analysis to control for confounding and distribution shift,
including conditional independence testing and weighted performance estimation.
These findings have broad implications for how practitioners design and interpret
model assessments given the ubiquity of disaggregated evaluation.

1

Introduction

A significant body of work uses disaggregated evaluation of machine learning models across subgroups (e.g., by race, ethnicity, or gender) to assess algorithmic fairness properties [1]. In this
paradigm, differences in a performance metric (e.g., accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value) or other statistical property (e.g. calibration or the distribution of predictions or covariates)
across subgroups are taken as evidence of a fairness violation. In healthcare contexts, for example,
this approach has been applied to a variety of settings to evaluate machine learning models across
patient subgroups [2–4], including prognostic models of cardiovascular disease risk [5–7] as well as
diagnostic classifiers for medical images [8, 9].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

