LILO: Learning to Reason at the Frontier of
Learnability

Thomas Foster†∗
Mattie Fellows†

Anya Sims†

Johannes Forkel†

Jakob Foerster†

Abstract
Reinforcement learning is a widely adopted component of large language model
post-training, especially for reasoning-style tasks such as maths questions. However, as we show, most existing methods will provably fail to learn from questions
that are too hard, where the model always fails, or too easy, where the model always
succeeds. Much human effort is therefore spent producing datasets of questions
of a suitable difficulty for state-of-the-art models. Given this, we consider how to
algorithmically identify questions that allow for maximally efficient training. We
introduce a method, LILO (Learnability Improves LLMs Optimally), that prioritises training on questions with high variance of success, known as learnability,
and we provide theory which shows that LILO enables the expected improvement
of the model to be large. We run a wide range of experiments over multiple base
models, algorithms and reasoning datasets to demonstrate that LILO consistently
reaches a higher final test accuracy, and can do so in 3× fewer training steps.
We explore how questions with high learnability can be efficiently identified, and
discuss how learnability can be scaled to produce LLM agents that autonomously
and open-endedly expand the frontier of human knowledge.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has become a crucial post-training step of many state-of-the-art
reasoning-focused large language models (LLMs), notably DeepSeek-R1 [1], Tulu [2], and OpenAI’s
O1 [3]. Policy-gradient algorithms—such as PPO, VinePPO, and GRPO—have become the de facto
standard, using advantage estimation to reinforce promising sections of answers and penalise errors.
However, as we show, many existing methods will provably fail to learn from questions that are too
hard, where the model always fails, or too easy, where the model always succeeds. Given that RL
with LLMs is extremely compute intensive, training on such questions is a huge waste of resources.
Much human effort and millions of pounds are therefore spent continually producing new datasets of
suitable difficulty for state-of-the-art models to train on.
In this work, we ask a fundamental question: Can we algorithmically identify questions that are
optimal to learn from? To answer this, we revisit the formal framing of teaching LLMs to reason
with RL, connecting it to the existing literature of automatic curriculum learning (ACL), unsupervised
environment design (UED) and learnability—defined as the variance of success of a model over
multiple attempts at a given question. We fill a vital gap in the literature, with a proof that the
expected improvement of the model is constrained by the the learnability of the questions attempted
during training.
This motivates us to develop a novel method for prioritising training on questions with high learnability.
We name it LILO- “Learnability Improves LLMs Optimally”. LILO continuously adapts to the
model’s ability during training, identifying questions that the model can answer correctly, but
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

