Next Semantic Scale Prediction via
Hierarchical Diffusion Language Models

Cai Zhou1,∗

Chenyu Wang1,∗ Dinghuai Zhang2,3,∗ Shangyuan Tong1 Yifei Wang1
Stephen Bates1,† Tommi Jaakkola1,†
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Microsoft Research 3 Mila - Quebec AI Institute
{caiz428, wangchy}@mit.edu dinzhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper we introduce Hierarchical Diffusion Language Models (HDLM) – a
novel family of discrete diffusion models for language modeling. HDLM builds
on a hierarchical vocabulary where low-level tokens with detailed semantics are
surjectively mapped to high-level tokens with coarse-grained meanings. In the
forward process, each token is independently perturbed to its higher-level ancestor
with more abstract semantics according to the scheduler, while in the reverse
process the model progressively predicts the next, more detailed semantics. Taken
together, HDLM provides a general time-varying next semantic scale prediction
process for language modeling. We derive closed-form expressions for the diffusion
Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), and show that HDLM can be implemented in
a flexible manner while including the existing MDLM as a special case. We
also propose practical training techniques based on the insights. Extensive text
generation experiments validate the effectiveness of HDLM, which demonstrates
consistently lower validation and generative perplexity than baselines.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive language models [1, 19, 36] are current state-of-the-art methods for language generation. However, the next-token prediction scheme fundamentally constrains their ability to revise
previously generated tokens. Alternative paradigms such as diffusion models [31, 13, 32] have hence
aroused researchers’ interest due to their capability for progressive denoising and refinement. Discrete
diffusion models, inherently compatible with the discrete nature of language, have recently gained
popularity [20, 30, 26]. There are mainly two types of discrete diffusion model with different forward
processes: uniform and masked (see [20] for more detailed descriptions). Nevertheless, both types
have several fundamental limitations. For masked discrete diffusion, (i) all masked tokens have
the same mask embeddings, lacking rich semantics; (ii) it cannot self-correct the tokens already
generated, reintroducing the same non-revisability limitation of autoregressive models. For uniform
discrete diffusion, it uniformly perturbs each token with a random token in the forward process.
Some consequent drawbacks include (i) the same token serves as noise with high probability in the
noisy stage but becomes semantically meaningful when it is decoded, resulting in inconsistency
and confusion in the semantics; (ii) empirically, uniform discrete diffusion does not perform well,
partially due to the higher difficulty in denoising from a more complex distribution.
Generalized Interpolating Discrete Diffusion (GIDD) [34] partially addresses these limitations by
establishing a general framework for a broader class of processes, especially the interpolation between
uniform and masked diffusion. GIDD combines both masking and uniform noise via a defined mixing
rate. However, it is notable that the noisy tokens - including the masked tokens and uniformly
∗

Equal contribution. † Equal senior supervision.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

