Class conditional conformal prediction for multiple
inputs by p-value aggregation

Jean-Baptiste Fermanian
IMAG, IROKO, Univ Montpellier, Inria, CNRS,
Montpellier, France
jean-baptiste.fermanian@inria.fr

Mohamed Hebiri
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel,
Paris, France
Mohamed.Hebiri@univ-eiffel.fr

Joseph Salmon
IMAG, IROKO, Univ Montpellier, Inria, CNRS,
Montpellier, France
joseph.salmon@inria.fr

Abstract
Conformal prediction methods are statistical tools designed to quantify uncertainty
and generate predictive sets with guaranteed coverage probabilities. This work
introduces an innovative refinement to these methods for classification tasks, specifically tailored for scenarios where multiple observations (multi-inputs) of a single
instance are available at prediction time. Our approach is particularly motivated
by applications in citizen science, where multiple images of the same plant or
animal are captured by individuals. Our method integrates the information from
each observation into conformal prediction, enabling a reduction in the size of
the predicted label set while preserving the required class-conditional coverage
guarantee. The approach is based on the aggregation of conformal p-values computed from each observation of a multi-input. By exploiting the exact distribution
of these p-values, we propose a general aggregation framework using an abstract
scoring function, encompassing many classical statistical tools. Knowledge of this
distribution also enables refined versions of standard strategies, such as majority
voting. We evaluate our method on simulated and real data, with a particular focus
on Pl@ntNet, a prominent citizen science platform that facilitates the collection
and identification of plant species through user-submitted images.

1

Introduction

As modern algorithms and the data they process become increasingly complex, the importance of
quantifying their uncertainty has grown significantly. One systematic method to meet this requirement
is (split) conformal prediction, which leverages a scoring function and labeled calibration data to
generate a set of potential outputs for a new instance (Vovk et al., 2005). For the users, the size of this
prediction set is intended to reflect the algorithm’s uncertainty. This approach requires the assumption
that the calibration data and new observations are exchangeable, (i.e., invariant by permutations) to
get a prescribed coverage. In classification tasks, the conformal set usually comprises a subset of
labels that, with a high degree of prescribed confidence, includes the true label of the new observation
(see Angelopoulos et al., 2023; Fontana et al., 2023 for overviews of conformal prediction and Chzhen
et al., 2021 for set valued classification).
In this work, we focus on a setting where each input to be classified (at testing) consists of multiple
observations, each of which can be independently processed prior to aggregation. This methodology
is commonly employed in machine learning-driven citizen science applications, such as Pl@ntNet
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

