Hierarchical Retrieval: The Geometry and
a Pretrain-Finetune Recipe

Chong You

Rajesh Jayaram
Ananda Theertha Suresh
Robin Nittka
Felix Yu
Sanjiv Kumar
Google
{cyou,rkjayaram,theertha,rnittka,felixyu,sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
Dual encoder (DE) models, where a pair of matching query and document are
embedded into similar vector representations, are widely used in information
retrieval due to their simplicity and scalability. However, the Euclidean geometry
of the embedding space limits the expressive power of DEs, which may compromise
their quality. This paper investigates such limitations in the context of hierarchical
retrieval (HR), where the document set has a hierarchical structure and the matching
documents for a query are all of its ancestors. We first prove that DEs are feasible
for HR as long as the embedding dimension is linear in the depth of the hierarchy
and logarithmic in the number of documents. Then we study the problem of learning
such embeddings in a standard retrieval setup where DEs are trained on samples
of matching query and document pairs. Our experiments reveal a lost-in-the-longdistance phenomenon, where retrieval accuracy degrades for documents further
away in the hierarchy. To address this, we introduce a pretrain-finetune recipe
that significantly improves long-distance retrieval without sacrificing performance
on closer documents. We experiment on a realistic hierarchy from WordNet
for retrieving documents at various levels of abstraction, and show that pretrainfinetune boosts the recall on long-distance pairs from 19% to 76%. Finally, we
demonstrate that our method improves retrieval of relevant products on a shopping
queries dataset.

1

Introduction

Information retrieval [23] is the task of finding the most relevant documents within a large database
in response to a user query. Dual Encoder (DE) is one of the most popular modeling architectures
for information retrieval due to their simplicity and scalability. It functions by encoding each query
and each document by a vector representation, e.g., by using a deep neural network [16, 9, 36]. Then,
similarity between a query and a document is calculated using their Euclidean distance or inner
product, enabling scalable retrieval through approximate nearest neighbor search [19, 17, 10].
This paper considers Hierarchical Retrieval (HR), a particular case of information retrieval where
the set of documents is organized into a (hidden) hierarchical structure. To motivate our retrieval
task on a hierarchy, consider the keyword targeting problem in online advertising where ad platforms
aim to display ads based on the relevance of the associated keywords to a user’s query. While many
notions of relevance exist, a particularly important case, known as Phrase Match [2, 1, 4], defines
relevant keywords as those that are semantically more general than the user’s query. This definition
motivates the modeling of advertiser keywords as a hierarchy, where higher level keywords are
semantically more general than the lower level keywords (see Figure 1 Left). Then, Phrase Match
may be expressed as the problem of retrieving not only the keyword that matches exactly the meaning
of a user query, but also all those at a higher level in the hierarchy. Motivated by Phrase Match, we
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

