The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Entropy
Minimization in LLM Reasoning

Shivam Agarwal, Zimin Zhang, Lifan Yuan, Jiawei Han, Hao Peng
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{shivama2, haopeng}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Entropy minimization (EM) trains the model to concentrate even more probability
mass on its most confident outputs. We show that this simple objective alone,
without any labeled data, can substantially improve large language models’ (LLMs)
performance on challenging math, physics, and coding tasks. We explore three
approaches: (1) EM-FT minimizes token-level entropy similarly to instruction
finetuning, but on unlabeled outputs drawn from the model; (2) EM-RL: reinforcement learning with negative entropy as the only reward to maximize; (3) EM-INF:
inference-time logit adjustment to reduce entropy without any training data or
parameter updates. On Qwen-7B, EM-RL, without any labeled data, achieves
comparable or better performance than strong RL baselines such as GRPO [68] and
RLOO [1] that are trained on 60K labeled examples. Furthermore, EM-INF enables
Qwen-32B to match or exceed the performance of proprietary models like GPT-4o,
Claude 3 Opus, and Gemini 1.5 Pro on the challenging SciCode benchmark [78],
while being 3x more efficient than self-consistency and sequential refinement. Our
findings reveal that many pretrained LLMs possess previously underappreciated
reasoning capabilities that can be effectively elicited through entropy minimization
alone, without any labeled data or even any parameter updates. 1

1

Introduction

Entropy minimization (EM) trains the model to concentrate even more probability mass on its most
confident outputs without any labeled data or external supervision [23, 60, 25]. It operates on a key
assumption and a simple intuition: if a model is reasonably capable, it is more likely to be correct
when it is confident [56]. Modern large language models (LLMs) are pretrained on massive data and
often undergo a dedicated annealing phase to enhance downstream task performance [59, 3, 92, 77].
It should be, therefore, fairly reasonable to treat them as capable models even before any supervised
finetuning (SFT) or reinforcement learning (RL) [90]. This naturally invites the questions: Can
entropy minimization alone improve their performance? And how far can they go without any labeled
data? This work answers both: yes, and surprisingly far, at least for reasoning tasks.
We present a systematic exploration of post-pretraining adaptation and inference-time scaling of
LLMs, using entropy minimization alone without any labeled data. We propose three novel methods,
each aligned with an established post-pretraining stage.
(1) Unsupervised finetuning by directly minimizing token-level entropy (EM-FT) mirrors SFT
and minimizes a token level loss, on unlabeled outputs sampled from the model conditioning
on the input prompts [46]. We find that EM-FT achieves surprisingly strong performance on
math and coding tasks, and can even outperform labeled GRPO and RLOO on LeetCode [26]
(coding) and Minerva [42] (math).
1

Code:https://github.com/shivamag125/EM_PT

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

