The Generative Leap: Tight Sample Complexity for
Efficiently Learning Gaussian Multi-Index Models

Alex Damian
PACM
Princeton University

Jason D Lee
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University

Joan Bruna
Courant Institute and Center for Data Science
New York University

Abstract
In this work we consider generic Gaussian Multi-index models, in which the labels
only depend on the (Gaussian) d-dimensional inputs through their projection onto
a low-dimensional r = Od (1) subspace, and we study efficient agnostic estimation
procedures for this hidden subspace. We introduce the generative leap exponent, a
natural extension of the generative exponent from Damian et al. [2024] to the multi⋆
index setting. We show that a sample complexity of n = Θ(d1∨k /2 ) is necessary
in the class of algorithms captured by the Low-Degree-Polynomial framework;
and also sufficient, by giving a sequential estimation procedure based on a spectral
U-statistic over appropriate Hermite tensors.

1

Introduction

We consider learning Gaussian multi-index models:
Definition 1. We say that (X, Y ) follows a Gaussian multi-index model with index r if X ∼
N (0, Id ) := γd and there exists a subspace U ⋆ ∈ G(r, d) such that the conditional law P[Y |X] only
depends on the orthogonal projection PU ⋆ X.
A Gaussian multi-index model can be thus specified by choosing a basis W ⋆ of U ⋆ (ie, an element of
the Stiefel manifold S(r, d)), and the law P of (Z, Y ) ∈ P(Rr × R) 1 , where Z = (W ⋆ )⊤ X. The
subspace U ⋆ is referred as the index space.
Given a joint distribution P of (Z, Y ), a natural statistical task associated with such a model is to
plant a subspace W ⋆ , uniformly drawn from the Haar measure of S(r, d), and draw n iid samples
from the multi-index distribution PW ⋆ ,P parametrized by W ⋆ and P. Our task will be then to recover
U ⋆ = span[W ⋆ ] given these samples. We note that this task is only well-posed when the ‘intrinsic’
dimension of the model is r, namely that P does not admit a factorization P = γr′ ⊗ PS , where
PS (zS , y) is the marginal of P over a subspace of Rr × R of dimension < r + 1 that includes the
last coordinate. We will assume this property from now on.
We place ourselves in the setting where r = Od (1), and consider the high-dimensional regime. Since
the dimensionality of S(r, d) is of order rd, one expects that a brute-force estimation procedure
that fits PP,Wj over a suitable ϵ-net of {Wj }j ⊂ S(r, d) requires O(dϵ−2 ) samples to estimate the
index space up to accuracy ϵ. Our main motivation is to understand this question from the lens of
computational-statistical gaps: how many samples are needed, as a function of d, P, to produce an
1

or, more precisely, the conditional law PZ of Y |Z, since the marginal of Z is γr .

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

