Table as a Modality for Large Language Models

Liyao Li1∗, Chao Ye1∗, Wentao Ye1 , Yifei Sun1 , Zhe Jiang3 , Haobo Wang1
Jiaming Tian1 , Yiming Zhang1 , Ningtao Wang2 , Xing Fu2 , Gang Chen1 , Junbo Zhao1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Ant Group 3 University of Michigan
{liliyao, ye.chao, j.zhao}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
To migrate the remarkable successes of Large Language Models (LLMs), the
community has made numerous efforts to generalize them to the table reasoning
tasks for the widely deployed tabular data. Despite that, in this work, by showing a
probing experiment on our proposed StructQA benchmark, we postulate that even
the most advanced LLMs (such as GPTs) may still fall short of coping with tabular
data. More specifically, the current scheme often simply relies on serializing the
tabular data, together with the meta information, then inputting them through the
LLMs. We argue that the loss of structural information is the root of this shortcoming. In this work, we further propose TA M O, which bears an ideology to treat the
tables as an independent modality integrated with the text tokens. The resulting
model in TA M O is a multimodal framework consisting of a hypergraph neural network as the global table encoder seamlessly integrated with the mainstream LLM.
Empirical results on various benchmarking datasets, including HiTab, WikiTQ,
WikiSQL, FeTaQA, and StructQA, have demonstrated significant improvements
on generalization with an average relative gain of 42.65%.

1

Introduction

Table reasoning, the process of generating task-specific responses based on one or more pre-structured
tables text, has emerged as a key research area. This encompasses various tasks such as table question
answering [Pasupat and Liang, 2015], table fact verification [Chen et al., 2019], text-to-SQL [Yu
et al., 2018], and predictive tasks [Ye et al., 2024a, Li et al., 2022, Van Breugel and Van Der Schaar,
2024]. Classical methods employ baselines such as BART [Lewis et al., 2020] or T5 [Raffel et al.,
2020] to generate answers, often augmented with external retrieval frameworks [Patnaik et al., 2024].
With the advent of large language models (LLMs), like GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023] and LLaMA [Touvron
et al., 2023], this field undergoes substantial transformations. These LLMs generally adopt identical
strategies, which involve serializing tables into text formats, often using markdown-like markup
languages to represent tables, occasionally accompanied by a few examples[Herzig et al., 2020], as
shown in Figure 1.
However, through a principled and empirical observation, we find that existing serialization strategies
may cause LLMs to lose their understanding of structural semantics of tables. This observation is
conducted on a specially designed diagnostic benchmark, named StructQA. This benchmark considers
a structural semantic property unique to tabular data: permutation invariance, which means that most
tables should retain consistent semantics regardless of row and column reordering. Ideally, LLMs
should maintain approximately the same downstream task performance for structurally equivalent
tables. However, as illustrated in Figure 2, our experiments reveal: leading LLMs, including Llama27B [Touvron et al., 2023], GPT-3.5 [OpenAI, 2022], GPT-4, and even TableLlama [Zhang et al.,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

