Activation Control for Efficiently Eliciting Long
Chain-of-thought Ability of Language Models

Zekai Zhao∗, Qi Liu∗ , Kun Zhou†, Zihan Liu, Yifei Shao, Zhiting Hu, Biwei Huang
University of California, San Diego.
kuzhou@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Despite the remarkable reasoning performance, eliciting the long chain-ofthought (CoT) ability in large language models (LLMs) typically requires costly
reinforcement learning or supervised fine-tuning on high-quality distilled data.
We investigate the internal mechanisms behind this capability and show that a
small set of high-impact activations in the last few layers, greatly govern the
long-form reasoning attributes, e.g., output length and self-reflection. Through
simply amplifying these activations and adding “wait” tokens, the long CoT ability
can be invoked without training, leading to significantly increased self-reflection
rate and accuracy. In addition, we also find that the activation changes follow
predictable trajectories, i.e., a sharp rise after special tokens and a subsequent
exponential decay. Based on these insights, we introduce a general training-free
activation control technique. It utilizes a few contrastive examples to identify
the relevant activations, and then incorporates simple analytic functions to adjust their values at inference time to elicit long CoTs. Extensive experiments
have verified the effectiveness of our methods in efficiently eliciting the long CoT
ability of LLMs and improving the performance. Besides, we further propose
a parameter-efficient fine-tuning method that trains only the last-layer activation
amplification module and a few LoRA layers, outperforming LoRA on reasoning
benchmarks with much fewer parameters. Our code and data are fully public
released at https://github.com/ZekaiZ123/EELo-CoT.

1

Introduction

On the path to artificial general intelligence (AGI), enhancing the reasoning ability of large language
models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] remains to be one of the most important challenges. Techniques like
chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [5] can elicit good performance on reasoning tasks by prompting
the LLM to generate intermediate reasoning steps. However, in complex reasoning tasks (e.g., math
competition problems), such a way is prone to make mistakes in intermediate steps, finally failing
to reach the accurate answer. Recently, long-CoT models and systems such as OpenAI-o1 [3]
and DeepSeek-R1 [6] have exhibited remarkable performance in solving complex tasks. These
methods can perform human-like slow-thinking behaviors, with quite a few careful deliberation and
self-reflection steps before generating the final answer [6].
To elicit the long CoT ability, existing work relies on either reinforcement learning (RL) on highquality instances with proper annotations, or supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on distilled data [7, 8, 9].
However, in practice, it is costly to collect enough well-annotated high-quality instances or distilled
data [8], especially for complex reasoning tasks that humans may also not perform well. Besides, the
RL process is also complicated, and requires expert knowledge to control the training stability and
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

