SOMBRL: Scalable and Optimistic Model-Based RL

Bhavya Sukhija
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
sukhijab@ethz.ch

Lenart Treven
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
trevenl@ethz.ch

Carmelo Sferrazza
Berkeley AI Research
UC Berkeley
csferrazza@berkeley.edu

Florian Dörfler
Department of Electrical Engineering
ETH Zurich
dorfler@ethz.ch

Pieter Abbeel
Berkeley AI Research
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@berekeley.edu

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
We address the challenge of efficient exploration in model-based reinforcement
learning (MBRL), where the system dynamics are unknown and the RL agent
must learn directly from online interactions. We propose Scalable and Optimistic
MBRL (SOMBRL), an approach based on the principle of optimism in the
face of uncertainty. SOMBRL learns an uncertainty-aware dynamics model
and greedily maximizes a weighted sum of the extrinsic reward and the agent’s
epistemic uncertainty. SOMBRL is compatible with any policy optimizers or
planners, and under common regularity assumptions on the system, we show that
SOMBRL has sublinear regret for nonlinear dynamics in the (i) finite-horizon,
(ii) discounted infinite-horizon, and (iii) non-episodic settings. Additionally,
SOMBRL offers a flexible and scalable solution for principled exploration. We
evaluate SOMBRL on state-based and visual-control environments, where it
displays strong performance across all tasks and baselines. We also evaluate
SOMBRL on a dynamic RC car hardware and show SOMBRL outperforms the
state-of-the-art, illustrating the benefits of principled exploration for MBRL.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Top: We showcase scalability of SOMBRL on visual control tasks from DMC and Atari.
Bottom: We evaluate SOMBRL on a highly dynamic RC car where we learn to perform a complex
parking maneuver in only 20 real-world episodes.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied to a variety of sequential-decision making
problems like games (Silver et al., 2017), robotics (Kober et al., 2013; Tang et al., 2025), mobile
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

