Multilevel neural simulation-based inference
Yuga Hikida
Aalto University
yuga.hikida@aalto.fi

Ayush Bharti
Aalto University
ayush.bharti@aalto.fi

Niall Jeffrey
University College London
n.jeffrey@ucl.ac.uk

François-Xavier Briol
University College London
f.briol@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural simulation-based inference (SBI) is a popular set of methods for Bayesian
inference when models are only available in the form of a simulator. These methods
are widely used in the sciences and engineering, where writing down a likelihood
can be significantly more challenging than constructing a simulator. However,
the performance of neural SBI can suffer when simulators are computationally
expensive, thereby limiting the number of simulations that can be performed. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach to neural SBI which leverages multilevel
Monte Carlo techniques for settings where several simulators of varying cost
and fidelity are available. We demonstrate through both theoretical analysis and
extensive experiments that our method can significantly enhance the accuracy of
SBI methods given a fixed computational budget.

1

Introduction

Simulation-based inference (SBI) [Cranmer et al., 2020] is a set of methods used to estimate parameters of complex models for which the likelihood is intractable but simulating data is possible. It is
particularly useful in fields such as cosmology [Jeffrey et al., 2021], epidemiology [Kypraios et al.,
2017], ecology [Beaumont, 2010], synthetic biology [Lintusaari et al., 2017], and telecommunications
engineering [Bharti et al., 2022a], where models describe intricate physical or biological processes
such as galaxy formation, spread of diseases, the interaction of cells, or propagation of radio signals.
For a long time, SBI was dominated by methods such as approximate Bayesian computation (ABC)
[Beaumont et al., 2002, Beaumont, 2019], which compared summary statistics of simulations and
of the observed data. However, SBI methods using neural networks to approximate likelihoods
[Papamakarios et al., 2019, Lueckmann et al., 2019, Boelts et al., 2022], likelihood ratios [Thomas
et al., 2022, Durkan et al., 2020, Hermans et al., 2020], or posterior distributions [Papamakarios and
Murray, 2016, Lueckmann et al., 2017, Greenberg et al., 2019, Radev et al., 2022] are now quickly
becoming the preferred approach. These neural SBI methods are often favoured because they allow
for amortisation [Zammit-Mangion et al., 2024], meaning that they require a large offline cost to train
the neural network, but once the network is trained, the method can rapidly infer parameters for new
observations or different priors without requiring additional costly simulations. This is particularly
useful when the simulator is computationally expensive, as it reduces the need to repeatedly run
simulations for each new inference task, making the overall process significantly less costly.
Nevertheless, the initial training phase of neural SBI methods typically still requires a large
number of simulations, preventing their application on computationally expensive (and often
more realistic) models which can take hours of compute time for simulating a single datapoint. Examples include most tsunami [Behrens and Dias, 2015], wind farm [Kirby et al.,
2023], nuclear fusion [Hoppe et al., 2021] and cosmology [Jeffrey et al., 2025] simulators.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

