Towards Reliable LLM-based Robot Planning via
Combined Uncertainty Estimation

Shiyuan Yin1 ,
1

∗

Chenjia Bai2 , Zihao Zhang1 , Junwei Jin1 ,
Chi Zhang2 , Xuelong Li2

Xinxin Zhang1 ,

School of Artificial Intelligence, Henan University of Technology
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate advanced reasoning abilities, enabling
robots to understand natural language instructions and generate high-level plans
with appropriate grounding. However, LLM hallucinations present a significant
challenge, often leading to overconfident yet potentially misaligned or unsafe plans.
While researchers have explored uncertainty estimation to improve the reliability of
LLM-based planning, existing studies have not sufficiently differentiated between
epistemic and intrinsic uncertainty, limiting the effectiveness of uncertainty estimation. In this paper, we present Combined Uncertainty estimation for Reliable
Embodied planning (CURE), which decomposes the uncertainty into epistemic and
intrinsic uncertainty, each estimated separately. Furthermore, epistemic uncertainty
is subdivided into task clarity and task familiarity for more accurate evaluation. The
overall uncertainty assessments are obtained using random network distillation and
multi-layer perceptron regression heads driven by LLM features. We validated our
approach in two distinct experimental settings: kitchen manipulation and tabletop
rearrangement experiments. The results show that, compared to existing methods,
our approach yields uncertainty estimates that are more closely aligned with the
actual execution outcomes. The code is at https://github.com/Firesuiry/CURE.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown exceptional versatility [1, 2, 3], as evidenced by their
ability to handle a wide array of tasks. These tasks include answering complex questions [4], solving
mathematical problems [5], generating computer code [6], and performing sophisticated reasoning
during inference [7]. When robots try to execute tasks instructed by language descriptions, they can
leverage LLM capabilities to interpret task instructions in natural language [8, 9], apply the common
sense reasoning of LLMs to understand their environment [10], and formulate high-level action plans
based on the robot’s abilities and available resources.
However, a significant challenge with current LLMs is their propensity to hallucinate [11]—i.e.,
to confidently generate outputs that appear plausible but are actually incorrect and practically infeasible. [12]. This misplaced confidence in erroneous outputs presents a considerable obstacle to
LLM-based planning in robotics. Additionally, natural language instructions in real-world environments often contain inherent or unintentional ambiguity from human instructors [13]. And following
a flawed plan with excessive confidence may lead to undesirable or even unsafe actions. Consequently,
offering an uncertainty estimation for the planning model prior to execution is desirable to reflect the
level of confidence in their plans, allowing for halting execution or seeking human assistance in cases
of high uncertainty.
∗

Correspondence to Chenjia Bai <baicj@chinatelecom.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

