Synergistic Tensor and Pipeline Parallelism
∗

Mengshi Qi 1 , Jiaxuan Peng1 , Jie Zhang, Juan Zhu, Yong Li, Huadong Ma1
1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{qms, pjx, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
In the machine learning system, the hybrid model parallelism combining tensor
parallelism (TP) and pipeline parallelism (PP) has become the dominant solution for distributed training of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Multimodal
LLMs (MLLMs). However, TP introduces significant collective communication
overheads, while PP suffers from synchronization inefficiencies such as pipeline
bubbles. Existing works primarily address these challenges from isolated perspectives, focusing either on overlapping TP communication or on flexible PP
scheduling to mitigate pipeline bubbles. In this paper, we propose a new synergistic
tensor and pipeline parallelism schedule that simultaneously reduces both types
of bubbles. Our proposed schedule decouples the forward and backward passes
in PP into fine-grained computation units, which are then braided to form a composite computation sequence. This compositional structure enables near-complete
elimination of TP-related bubbles. Building upon this structure, we further design
the PP schedule to minimize PP bubbles. Experimental results demonstrate that
our approach improves training throughput by up to 12% for LLMs and 16% for
MLLMs compared to existing scheduling methods. Our source code is avaiable at
https://github.com/MICLAB-BUPT/STP.

1

Introduction

Distributed systems [6, 23, 38, 11, 31] have become the cornerstone for the training of large-scale
machine learning models [1, 35, 28, 4, 19, 26, 27, 20], particularly since model scales have grown
to tens of billions of parameters. Data parallelism [12, 15, 5] is commonly employed to accelerate
training and is most effective for relatively smaller models. As the scale of the model increases,
researchers have turned to model parallelism [10, 32, 21], which partitions the model into smaller
components and distributes them between multiple devices. Model parallelism primarily consists
of two strategies: tensor parallelism (TP) [33] and pipeline parallelism (PP) [7, 23, 30]. Tensor
parallelism partitions model weights across devices according to predefined rules, thereby reducing
per-device memory requirements. While TP alleviates GPU memory pressure to some extent, it
introduces additional collective communication operations within TP groups, referred to as TP
bubbles that exhibit significant growth with increasing TP size, as shown in Figure 1. For instance, the
TP bubbles account for 27.5% of the overall time in the configuration of TP=8 and sequence length
of 6,144, which can significantly degrade the performance. In contrast, pipeline parallelism divides
the model into chunks along the layer dimension, which are assigned to PP stages according to the
PP strategy. Activations and gradients are then transmitted among PP stages during the forward and
backward passes. This strategy enables efficient utilization of computational resources but requires
careful synchronization between stages to minimize idle time, commonly referred to as PP bubbles.
To mitigate TP bubble issues, existing studies [37, 8, 2, 25] aim to overlap communication with
computation at the kernel level, such as customized CUDA kernels [2], or at the hardware level,
∗

Corresponding author: qms@bupt.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

