HyPINO: Multi-Physics Neural Operators via
HyperPINNs and the Method of Manufactured
Solutions
Rafael Bischof1

Michal Piovarči1

Siddhartha Mishra3

Michael A. Kraus2
Bernd Bickel1

1

2

Computational Design Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Institute of Structural Mechanics and Design, TU Darmstadt, Germany
3
Seminar for Applied Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
*Correspondence to rabischof@ethz.ch

Abstract
We present HyPINO, a multi-physics neural operator designed for zero-shot generalization across a broad class of PDEs without requiring task-specific fine-tuning.
Our approach combines a Swin Transformer-based hypernetwork with mixed supervision: (i) labeled data from analytical solutions generated via the Method
of Manufactured Solutions (MMS), and (ii) unlabeled samples optimized using
physics-informed objectives. The model maps PDE parameterizations to target
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) and can handle linear elliptic, hyperbolic, and parabolic equations in two dimensions with varying source terms,
geometries, and mixed Dirichlet/Neumann boundary conditions, including interior
boundaries. HyPINO achieves strong zero-shot accuracy on seven benchmark problems from PINN literature, outperforming U-Nets, Poseidon, and Physics-Informed
Neural Operators (PINO). Further, we introduce an iterative refinement procedure
that treats the residual of the generated PINN as "delta PDE" and performs another forward pass to generate a corrective PINN. Summing their contributions
and repeating this process forms an ensemble whose combined solution progressively reduces the error on six benchmarks and achieves a >100× lower L2 loss
in the best case, while retaining forward-only inference. Additionally, we evaluate the fine-tuning behavior of PINNs initialized by HyPINO and show that they
converge faster and to lower final error than both randomly initialized and Reptilemeta-learned PINNs on five benchmarks, performing on par on the remaining
two. Our results highlight the potential of this scalable approach as a foundation
for extending neural operators toward solving increasingly complex, nonlinear,
and high-dimensional PDE problems. The code and model weights are publicly
available at https://github.com/rbischof/hypino.

1

Introduction

Neural operators have emerged as a promising paradigm for solving partial differential equations
(PDEs). Their ability to generalize across families of PDEs, fast inference, and full differentiability
make them appealing for a wide range of scientific computing tasks. In the longer term, such
methods may serve as building blocks for general-purpose, foundational, and multi-physics simulators,
sometimes referred to as "world-model predictors" [9, 26, 50, 53].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

