Slow Transition to Low-Dimensional Chaos in
Heavy-Tailed Recurrent Neural Networks

Eva Yi Xie1,2 Stefan Mihalas1 Łukasz Kuśmierz1
1
Allen Institute, Seattle, WA, USA
2
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, NJ, USA
evayixie@princeton.edu, {stefanm, lukasz.kusmierz}@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Growing evidence suggests that synaptic weights in the brain follow heavy-tailed
distributions, yet most theoretical analyses of recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
assume Gaussian connectivity. We systematically study the activity of RNNs with
random weights drawn from biologically plausible Lévy alpha-stable distributions.
While mean-field theory for the infinite system predicts that the quiescent state is
always unstable—implying ubiquitous chaos—our finite-size analysis reveals a
sharp transition between quiescent and chaotic dynamics. We theoretically predict
the gain at which the finite system transitions from quiescent to chaotic dynamics,
and validate it through simulations. Compared to Gaussian networks, finite heavytailed RNNs exhibit a broader gain regime near the edge of chaos, namely, a slow
transition to chaos. However, this robustness comes with a tradeoff: heavier tails
reduce the Lyapunov dimension of the attractor, indicating lower effective dimensionality. Our results reveal a biologically aligned tradeoff between the robustness
of dynamics near the edge of chaos and the richness of high-dimensional neural
activity. By analytically characterizing the transition point in finite-size networks—
where mean-field theory breaks down—we provide a tractable framework for
understanding dynamics in realistically sized, heavy-tailed neural circuits.*

1

Introduction

Advances in connectomics yield increasingly detailed wiring diagrams of neural circuits across
species and brain regions [Dorkenwald et al., 2024, The MICrONS Consortium, 2025]. This progress
raises fundamental questions: what structural principles govern neural circuits, and how do they
support the brain’s remarkable computational power? One such prominent structural feature is the
presence of heavy-tailed [Foss et al., 2011] synaptic weight distributions, consistently observed across
the mammalian cortex [Song et al., 2005, Lefort et al., 2009, Dorkenwald et al., 2022], mammalian
hippocampus [Ikegaya et al., 2013], and even in the Drosophila central brain [Scheffer et al., 2020].
Notably, this feature stands in sharp contrast to the Gaussian weight assumptions that dominate
theoretical neuroscience studies and light-tailed distributions utilized in the standard initialization
schemes in modern artificial neural networks [LeCun et al., 2002, Glorot and Bengio, 2010, He et al.,
2015]. One way to formally model heavy tails is with the family of Lévy α-stable distributions
[Feller, 1971, Borak et al., 2005], which emerges as a natural generalization of the familiar Gaussian
distribution (α = 2) via the generalized central limit theorem. The family is parameterized by a
stability index α, where smaller values of α correspond to heavier tails. For α < 2, these distributions
feature heavy, power-law tails. Similarly to experimentally measured synaptic weights, samples
generated from such distributions consistently contain large outliers that dominate many sample
statistics. As we show in this paper, this can strongly affect neural dynamics.
* The codebase is publicly available at https://github.com/AllenInstitute/HeavyRNN_public.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

