Raw2Drive: Reinforcement Learning with Aligned
World Models for End-to-End Autonomous Driving
(in CARLA v2)

Zhenjie Yang1,3 , Xiaosong Jia2† , Qifeng Li1,3 , Xue Yang1 , Maoqing Yao4 , Junchi Yan1,3†
1. Sch. of CS, Sch. of AIS, Sch. of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2. Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
3. Asynscale AI 4. AgiBot
https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/Raw2Drive

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) can mitigate the causal confusion and distribution
shift inherent in imitation learning (IL). However, applying RL to end-to-end
autonomous driving (E2E-AD) remains an open problem for its training difficulty,
and IL is still the mainstream paradigm in both academia and industry. Recently
Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) have demonstrated promising
results in neural planning; however, these methods typically require privileged
information as input rather than raw sensor data. We fill this gap by designing
Raw2Drive, a dual-stream MBRL approach. Initially, we efficiently train an
auxiliary privileged world model paired with a neural planner that uses privileged
information as input. Subsequently, we introduce a raw sensor world model trained
via our proposed Guidance Mechanism, which ensures consistency between the
raw sensor world model and the privileged world model during rollouts. Finally,
the raw sensor world model combines the prior knowledge embedded in the heads
of the privileged world model to effectively guide the training of the raw sensor
policy. Raw2Drive is so far the only RL based end-to-end method on CARLA
Leaderboard 2.0, and Bench2Drive and it achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Beyond modular systems, end-to-end autonomous driving models [5, 6, 7, 8] are emerging, where
a unified model directly uses raw sensor inputs for planning. As shown in Figure 1, most of these
models [9, 10, 11, 12] are based on imitation learning (IL), which trains models to mimic expert
demonstrations. However, IL faces fundamental limitations such as poor generalization to unseen
situations [2, 13, 14, 15] and causal confusion [1, 16, 17], which occur when the model incorrectly
associates actions with the wrong causes. These issues become problematic in complex and dynamic
driving scenarios where decision-making must account for delicate interactions with environment.
Reinforcement learning (RL) [18, 19, 20] offers a promising alternative by optimizing driving policies
through reward-driven interactions with the dynamic environment [21, 22, 23], beyond the expert
demonstration in imitation learning. Recently, RL has been shown to achieve higher performance
bounds than IL in various domains, such as AlphaZero [24, 19], and OpenAI-O3/DeepSeek-R1 [25].
These successes highlight RL’s ability to adapt policies for complex decision-making tasks.
†
Correspondence Author. This work was in part supported by by NSFC (62222607,62506229) and
Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (25ZR1402268).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

