When and How Unlabeled Data Provably Improve
In-Context Learning

Yingcong Li1,4
Xiangyu Chang2
1
Xiaofeng Liu
Amit Roy-Chowdhury2
1

University of Michigan

2

Muti Kara3
Samet Oymak1

University of California, Riverside

3

Bilkent University

4

NJIT

Abstract
Recent research shows that in-context learning (ICL) can be effective even when
demonstrations have missing or incorrect labels. To shed light on this capability,
we examine a canonical setting where the demonstrations are drawn according to a
binary Gaussian mixture model (GMM) and a certain fraction of the demonstrations
have missing labels. We provide a comprehensive theoretical study to show that:
(1) The loss landscape of one-layer linear attention models recover the optimal
fully-supervised estimator but completely fail to exploit unlabeled data; (2) In
contrast, multilayer or looped transformers can effectively
leverage unlabeled data
P
by implicitly constructing estimators of the form i≥0 ai (X⊤ X)i X⊤ y with X and y
denoting features and partially-observed labels (with missing entries set to zero).
We characterize the class of polynomials that can be expressed as a function of depth
and draw connections to Expectation Maximization, an iterative pseudo-labeling
algorithm commonly used in semi-supervised learning. Importantly, the leading
polynomial power is exponential in depth, so mild amount of depth/looping suffices.
As an application of theory, we propose looping off-the-shelf tabular foundation
models to enhance their semi-supervision capabilities. Extensive evaluations on
real-world datasets show that our method significantly improves the semisupervised
tabular learning performance over the standard single pass inference.

1

Introduction

In-context learning (ICL) is an intriguing capability of modern language models and has enjoyed
remarkable empirical success (Brown et al., 2020; Min et al., 2022). This success is also being
extended to multimodal scenarios (Zhou et al., 2024) as well as other modalities such as tabular
data (Hollmann et al., 2022). The push toward test-time scaling and long-context models (Snell
et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025) has further boosted the benefits of ICL by allowing the model to
ingest a large number of demonstrations. For instance, in “Many-shot in-context learning” paper,
Agarwal et al. (2024) demonstrate that pushing more examples into context window can substantially
boost the accuracy. MAPLE (Chen et al., 2025) improves many-shot ICL by pseudo-labeling highimpact unlabeled examples and incorporating them into the prompt. The many-shot ICL setting
naturally raises the question of when and how ICL can succeed with weaker supervision. As we can
harness longer context models to boost predictive accuracy, we may indeed run out of high-quality
demonstrations with verified answers/chain-of-thoughts and may want to utilize weaker data sources.
This motivates our central question:
Q: When and how can transformers learn in context from unlabeled data?
We primarily investigate this question under a semisupervised ICL (SS-ICL) setting with Gaussian
mixture models (GMMs). Formally, given a prompt containing a dataset of feature-label pairs
(xi , yi )ni=1 ∈ Rd × R as demonstrations and a query feature x (see Eq. (3)), a model trained for ICL
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

