Unveiling Environmental Sensitivity of Individual
Gains in Influence Maximization
Xinyan Su1,2 , Zhiheng Zhang3,4∗, Jiyan Qiu1,2 , Zhaojuan Yue1 , Jun Li1∗
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Statistics and Data Science, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,
Shanghai 200433, P.R. China
4
Institute of Data Science and Statistics, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,
Shanghai 200433, P.R. China
{suxinyan,qiujiyan,yuezhaojuan,lijun}@cnic.cn
zhangzhiheng@mail.shufe.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Influence Maximization (IM) seeks a seed set to maximize information dissemination in a network. Elegant IM algorithms could naturally extend to cases where
each node is equipped with a specific weight, reflecting individual gains to measure
its importance. In prevailing literature, these gains are typically assumed to remain
constant throughout diffusion and are solvable through explicit formulas based on
node characteristics and network topology. However, this assumption is not always
feasible due to two key challenges: 1) Unobservability: The individual gains of
each node are primarily evaluated by the difference between the outputs in the
activated and non-activated states. In practice, we can only observe one of these
states, with the other remaining unobservable post-propagation. 2) Environmental
sensitivity: Beyond nodes’ inherent properties, individual gains are also sensitive to
the activation status of surrounding nodes, which change dynamically during propagation even when the network topology is fixed. To address these uncertainties, we
introduce a Causal Influence Maximization (CauIM) framework, leveraging causal
inference techniques to model dynamic individual gains. We propose two algorithms, G-CauIM and A-CauIM, where the latter incorporates a novel acceleration
technique. Theoretically, we establish the generalized lower bound of influence
spread and provide robustness analysis. Empirically, experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets validate the effectiveness and reliability of our approach.

1

Introduction

Information propagation over networks has been booming in recent years. Due to the power of the
"word-of-mouth" phenomenon, influence spread has proven to be essential in various applications,
such as viral marketing [7], HIV prevention [55], and recommendations [10]. The problem of
selecting the seed set to maximize information spread is known as the Influence Maximization
(IM) [28].
Beyond optimizing the total number of infected nodes, current research has focused on investigating
the individual gains of each node in real-world scenarios, referred to as weighted-IM [52, 53, 19].
Researchers endeavor to address the question: how can limited resources be utilized to maximize total
gains? This challenge manifests in various network scenarios, such as student networks and email
networks, involving activities like awareness dissemination and product promotion. For example,
∗

Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

