Improved Regret and Contextual Linear Extension for
Pandora’s Box and Prophet Inequality

Junyan Liu∗
University of Washington
junyanl1@cs.washington.edu

Ziyun Chen∗
University of Washington
ziyuncc@cs.washington.edu

Kun Wang∗
Purdue University
wang5675@purdue.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Lillian J. Ratliff
University of Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Abstract
We study the Pandora’s Box problem in an online learning setting with semi-bandit
feedback. In each round, the learner sequentially pays to open up to n boxes with
unknown reward distributions, observes rewards upon opening, and decides when
to stop. The utility of the learner is the maximum observed reward minus the
cumulative cost of opened boxes, and the goal is to minimize regret defined as
the gap between the cumulative expected utility
√ and that of the optimal policy.
We propose a new √
algorithm that achieves e
O( nT ) regret after T rounds, which
e
improves the O(n
T ) bound of Agarwal et al. [2024] and matches the known
lower bound up to logarithmic factors. To better capture real-life applications,
we then extend our results to a natural but challenging contextual linear setting,
where each box’s expected reward is linear in some known but time-varying ddimensional context and the noise distribution is fixed over time. We design an
algorithm
√ that learns both the linear function and the noise distributions, achieving
e
O(nd T ) regret. Finally, we show that our techniques also apply to the online
Prophet Inequality problem, where the learner must decide immediately whether
or not to accept a revealed reward. In both non-contextual and contextual settings,
our approach achieves similar improvements and regret bounds.

1

Introduction

Pandora’s Box is a fundamental problem in stochastic optimization, initiated by Weitzman [1978]. In
this problem, the learner is given n boxes, each associated with a known cost and a known reward
distribution. The learner may open a box at a time, paying the corresponding cost to observe a
realized reward. Based on the known distributions, the learner designs a policy that specifies the order
of inspecting boxes and a stopping rule for when to halt the process and select a reward. Weitzman
[1978] shows that the optimal policy computes a threshold (i.e., reservation value) for each box based
on its cost and distribution, and opens boxes in descending order of these thresholds until a stopping
condition is met. This model abstracts a wide range of sequential decision-making scenarios where
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

