Impartial Selection with Predictions∗

Javier Cembrano
Department of Algorithms and Complexity
Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik
Saarbrücken, Germany
Department of Industrial Engineering
Universidad de Chile
Santiago, Chile
jcembran@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Felix Fischer
School of Mathematical Sciences
Queen Mary University of London
London, UK
felix.fischer@qmul.ac.uk

Max Klimm
Institute of Mathematics
Technische Universität Berlin
Berlin, Germany
klimm@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
We study the selection of agents based on mutual nominations, a theoretical
problem with many applications from committee selection to AI alignment. As
agents both select and are selected, they may be incentivized to misrepresent
their true opinion about the eligibility of others to influence their own chances
of selection. Impartial mechanisms circumvent this issue by guaranteeing that
the selection of an agent is independent of the nominations cast by that agent.
Previous research has established strong bounds on the performance of impartial
mechanisms, measured by their ability to approximate the number of nominations
for the most highly nominated agents. We study to what extent the performance
of impartial mechanisms can be improved if they are given a prediction of a
set of agents receiving a maximum number of nominations. Specifically, we
provide bounds on the consistency and robustness of such mechanisms, where
consistency measures the performance of the mechanisms when the prediction is
accurate and robustness its performance when the prediction is inaccurate. For
the general setting where up to k agents are to be selected and agents nominate

any number of other agents,
we give a mechanism with consistency 1 − O k1 and

robustness 1 − 1e − O k1 . For the special case of selecting a single agent based on
a single nomination per agent, we prove that 1-consistency can be achieved while
guaranteeing 12 -robustness. A close comparison with previous results shows that
(asymptotically) optimal consistency can be achieved with little to no sacrifice in
terms of robustness.

1

Introduction

Majority voting is a simple but very important mechanism for collective decision making. Its use
dates back at least to ancient Athens, where it was employed for example to decide on the expulsion
of citizens from the city [18]. A much more recent proposal uses majority voting to aggregate the
solutions of multiple calls to large language models (LLMs) [14]. Some proposals even go so far as
∗

The full version of the paper can be accessed on arXiv:2510.19002.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

