Unveiling the Learning Mind of Language Models: A
Cognitive Framework and Empirical Study

Zhengyu Hu1,2 , Jianxun Lian3∗, Zheyuan Xiao1,2 , Seraphina Zhang4 ,
Tianfu Wang1,2 , Nicholas Jing Yuan5 , Xing Xie3 , Hui Xiong1,2
1
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Microsoft Research Asia 4 University of Cambridge 5 Microsoft.

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive capabilities across tasks
such as mathematics, coding, and reasoning, yet their learning ability, which is
crucial for adapting to dynamic environments and acquiring new knowledge, remains underexplored. In this work, we address this gap by introducing a framework
inspired by cognitive psychology and education. Specifically, we decompose general learning ability into three distinct, complementary dimensions: Learning from
Instructor (acquiring knowledge via explicit guidance), Learning from Concept
(internalizing abstract structures and generalizing to new contexts), and Learning
from Experience (adapting through accumulated exploration and feedback). We
conduct a comprehensive empirical study across the three learning dimensions
and identify several insightful findings, such as (i) interaction improves learning;
(ii) conceptual understanding is scale-emergent and benefits larger models; and
(iii) LLMs are effective few-shot learners but not many-shot learners. Based on
our framework and empirical findings, we introduce a benchmark that provides
a unified and realistic evaluation of LLMs’ general learning abilities across three
learning cognition dimensions. It enables diagnostic insights and supports evaluation and development of more adaptive and human-like models. The code is
available here 2 .

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [3, 2, 88, 46] have demonstrated impressive capabilities across
diverse tasks such as mathematics [97, 94, 92], coding [60, 11, 39], and reasoning [29, 90, 99, 50].
Despite these achievements, as LLM-driven systems increasingly integrate into societal roles, serving
as AI companions [87, 8, 64] or AI employees [6, 53, 75, 20, 37], they must possess robust learning
capabilities. Effective learning is essential for AI agents to adapt dynamically to diverse and changing
environments, continuously acquire new knowledge, and autonomously respond to novel contexts.
However, research on the learning ability of LLMs remains scarce, with little work systematically
investigating how well LLMs can acquire and generalize new knowledge across tasks.
To address this gap, we aim to systematically investigate the learning ability of LLMs. Drawing
insights from cognitive science and educational theory [24, 42, 14], we first analogize from human
learning processes to identify three fundamental dimensions of learning: (1) learning from instructor,
where the model acquires knowledge through guided interaction [18, 72]; (2) learning from concept,
∗
2

Corresponding author
https://aka.ms/learnarena

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

