Robust Sampling for Active Statistical Inference

Puheng Li
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
puhengli@stanford.edu

Tijana Zrnic
Department of Statistics and Stanford Data Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
tijana.zrnic@stanford.edu

Emmanuel J. Candès
Department of Statistics and Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
candes@stanford.edu

Abstract
Active statistical inference [51] is a new method for inference with AI-assisted
data collection. Given a budget on the number of labeled data points that can be
collected and assuming access to an AI predictive model, the basic idea is to improve estimation accuracy by prioritizing the collection of labels where the model
is most uncertain. The drawback, however, is that inaccurate uncertainty estimates can make active sampling produce highly noisy results, potentially worse
than those from naive uniform sampling. In this work, we present robust sampling strategies for active statistical inference. Robust sampling ensures that the
resulting estimator is never worse than the estimator using uniform sampling. Furthermore, with reliable uncertainty estimates, the estimator usually outperforms
standard active inference. This is achieved by optimally interpolating between
uniform and active sampling, depending on the quality of the uncertainty scores,
and by using ideas from robust optimization. We demonstrate the utility of the
method on a series of real datasets from computational social science and survey
research.

1

Introduction

Collecting high-quality labeled data remains a challenge in data-driven research, especially when
each label is costly and time-consuming to obtain. In response, many fields have embraced machine
learning as a practical solution for predicting unobserved labels, such as annotating satellite imagery
in remote sensing [46] and predicting protein structures in proteomics [24]. Prediction-powered
inference [1] is a methodological framework showing how to perform valid statistical inference
despite the inherent biases in such predicted labels.
Active statistical inference [51] was recently introduced to further enhance inference by actively
selecting which data points to label. The basic idea is to compute the model’s uncertainty scores for
all data points and prioritize collecting those labels for which the predictive model is most uncertain.
When the uncertainty scores appropriately reflect the model’s errors, Zrnic and Candès [51] show
that active inference can significantly outperform prediction-powered inference (which can essentially be thought of as active inference with naive uniform sampling), meaning it results in more
accurate estimates and narrower confidence intervals. However, when uncertainty scores are of poor
quality, active inference can result in overly noisy estimates and large confidence intervals. This
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

