Depth-Supervised Fusion Network for Seamless-Free
Image Stitching

Zhiying Jiang1
Ruhao Yan2
Zengxi Zhang2
Bowei Zhang2
Jinyuan Liu2∗
1
College of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University
2
School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology
zyjiang0630@gmail.com
atlantis918@hotmail.com

Abstract
Image stitching synthesizes images captured from multiple perspectives into a
single image with a broader field of view. The significant variations in object depth
often lead to large parallax, resulting in ghosting and misalignment in the stitched
results. To address this, we propose a depth-consistency-constrained seamless-free
image stitching method. First, to tackle the multi-view alignment difficulties caused
by parallax, a multi-stage mechanism combined with global depth regularization
constraints is developed to enhance the alignment accuracy of the same apparent
target across different depth ranges. Second, during the multi-view image fusion
process, an optimal stitching seam is determined through graph-based low-cost
computation, and a soft-seam region is diffused to precisely locate transition areas,
thereby effectively mitigating alignment errors induced by parallax and achieving
natural and seamless stitching results. Furthermore, considering the computational
overhead in the shift regression process, a reparameterization strategy is incorporated to optimize the structural design, significantly improving algorithm efficiency
while maintaining optimal performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superior performance of the proposed method against the existing methods. Code
is available at https://github.com/DLUT-YRH/DSFN.

1

Introduction

Image stitching is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming to combine multiple images captured
from different perspectives or positions into a single, high-resolution image with an extended field of
view. This task plays a crucial role in various applications, such as panoramic photography [1, 2],
remote sensing [3, 4], medical imaging [5, 6], and virtual reality [7, 8], where a comprehensive and
seamless representation of a scene is required.
Conventional stitching methods predominantly follow a feature-driven paradigm, relying on handcrafted local feature descriptors (e.g., SIFT [9], ORB [10]) for feature detection and robust matching
algorithms (e.g., RANSAC [11]) to compute homography transformation matrices for reference and
target images alignment. However, the planar scene assumption inherent to homography models fails
to accommodate the complex geometric relationships arising from multi-depth layers in real-world
scenarios, resulting in ghosting artifacts and structural misalignment in stitched results. To mitigate
these issues, conventional methods adopt two primary optimization strategies: (1) enhancing local
alignment accuracy through region-adaptive deformation techniques (e.g., mesh warping [12, 13, 14]),
and (2) concealing residual artifacts by optimizing seam paths via energy functions [15, 16]. While
effective in most scenarios, their performance is critically constrained by feature density and quality,
leading to failures in low-texture, repetitive patterns, or large parallax scenarios.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

