Protein Design with Dynamic Protein Vocabulary

Nuowei Liu1∗
Tao Ji2

Jiahao Kuang1∗

Changzhi Sun3

Man Lan1

Yanting Liu1
Yuanbin Wu1

1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
English Department, College of Foreign Languages and Literatures, Fudan University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
{nwliu@stu, jhkuang@stu, ybwu@cs}.ecnu.edu.cn, taoji@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Protein design is a fundamental challenge in biotechnology, aiming to design novel
sequences with specific functions within the vast space of possible proteins. Recent
advances in deep generative models have enabled function-based protein design
from textual descriptions, yet struggle with structural plausibility. Inspired by classical protein design methods that leverage natural protein structures, we explore
whether incorporating fragments from natural proteins can enhance foldability in
generative models. Our empirical results show that even random incorporation of
fragments improves foldability. Building on this insight, we introduce P RO DVA, a
novel protein design approach that integrates a text encoder for functional descriptions, a protein language model for designing proteins, and a fragment encoder to
dynamically retrieve protein fragments based on textual functional descriptions.
Experimental results demonstrate that our approach effectively designs protein
sequences that are both functionally aligned and structurally plausible. Compared
to state-of-the-art models, P RO DVA achieves comparable function alignment using
less than 0.04% of the training data, while designing significantly more well-folded
proteins, with the proportion of proteins having pLDDT above 70 increasing by
7.38% and those with PAE below 10 increasing by 9.62%. 1

1

Introduction

The natural world presents a remarkably intricate landscape of proteins that have evolved over
billions of years to perform diverse biochemical functions, such as catalyzing reactions and binding
specific molecules [1, 2, 3]. These natural proteins, found across all forms of life, represent only a
small fraction of the vast sequence space of possible proteins. Designing novel proteins that exhibit
user-specified functions remains a longstanding challenge in biotechnology.
Recent deep generative models have demonstrated promising potential in function-based protein
design. They accept texts as input, either in the form of simple control tags (e.g., ProGen [4], ESM3
[5]) or complex function descriptions containing rich and nuanced information (e.g., ProteinDT [6],
PAAG [7], Pinal [8]), and generate new protein sequences. One challenge (and a main shortcoming)
of current models is that, besides satisfying the requirements of input texts, the designed protein
should be able to fold into stable three-dimensional structures.
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding authors are Yuanbin Wu, Tao Ji, Changzhi Sun and Man Lan.
1
Datasets and codes are publicly available at https://github.com/sornkL/ProDVa.

#

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

