Thought Communication in Multiagent Collaboration

Yujia Zheng1,2 Zhuokai Zhao2 Zijian Li3 Yaqi Xie1
Mingze Gao2 Lizhu Zhang†,2 Kun Zhang†,1,3
1
CMU 2 Meta AI 3 MBZUAI
{yujiazh, kunz1}@cmu.edu {zhuokai, lizhu}@meta.com

Abstract
Natural language has long enabled human cooperation, but its lossy, ambiguous,
and indirect nature limits the potential of collective intelligence. While machines
are not subject to these constraints, most LLM-based multi-agent systems still
rely solely on natural language, exchanging tokens or their embeddings. To go
beyond language, we introduce a new paradigm, thought communication, which
enables agents to interact directly mind-to-mind, akin to telepathy. To uncover
these latent thoughts in a principled way, we formalize the process as a general
latent variable model, where agent states are generated by an unknown function of
underlying thoughts. We prove that, in a nonparametric setting without auxiliary
information, both shared and private latent thoughts between any pair of agents
can be identified. Moreover, the global structure of thought sharing, including
which agents share which thoughts and how these relationships are structured,
can also be recovered with theoretical guarantees. Guided by the established
theory, we develop a framework that extracts latent thoughts from all agents prior
to communication and assigns each agent the relevant thoughts, along with their
sharing patterns. This paradigm naturally extends beyond LLMs to all modalities,
as most observational data arise from hidden generative processes. Experiments on
both synthetic and real-world benchmarks validate the theory and demonstrate the
collaborative advantages of thought communication. We hope this work illuminates
the potential of leveraging the hidden world, as many challenges remain unsolvable
through surface-level observation alone, regardless of compute or data scale.

1

Introduction

Natural language has enabled human collaboration at scale, but it also imposes fundamental limitations. While powerful, language is inherently sequential, ambiguous, and imprecise, offering only an
indirect and fragmented reflection of thought [von Humboldt, 1988]. This constraint is deeply rooted
in human cognition, which lacks direct channels for transmitting mental content. Machines, however,
are not subject to the same physical constraints of speech or perception. This difference may be
one of the central reasons why superhuman intelligence is possible. Every transformative achievement, from scientific discovery to societal progress, relies on collaboration. Likewise, superhuman
intelligence will require not only individual reasoning beyond human capability but also collective
reasoning beyond human coordination [Vinge, 1993]. This calls for a new form of communication
that transcends the limits of language.
However, existing large language model (LLM)-based multi-agent systems (MAS) rely on natural
language as the medium of communication, exchanging information via tokens or their embeddings [Du et al., 2023, Liang et al., 2023, Pham et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2024a, Zeng et al., 2025,
Wang et al., 2025b]. These systems typically assume that multiple LLM agents exchange natural
language messages to convey internal ideas and coordinate toward a shared goal. However, natural
†

Equal advising.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

