A Theoretical Study on Bridging Internal Probability
and Self-Consistency for LLM Reasoning

Zhi Zhou 1 Yuhao Tan 1 Zenan Li 2 Yuan Yao 1
Lan-Zhe Guo 1,3 Yu-Feng Li 1,4∗ Xiaoxing Ma 1∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
4
School of Artifical Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
zhouz@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liyf@nju.edu.cn, xxm@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Test-time scaling seeks to improve the reasoning performance of large language
models (LLMs) by adding computational resources. A prevalent approach within
the field is sampling-based test-time scaling methods, which enhance reasoning by
generating multiple reasoning paths for a given input during inference. However,
despite its practical success, the theoretical foundations remain underexplored. In
this paper, we provide the first theoretical framework for analyzing sampling-based
test-time scaling methods, grounded in the perspective of confidence estimation.
Based on the framework, we analyze two dominant paradigms: self-consistency and
perplexity, and reveal key limitations: self-consistency suffers from high estimation
error while perplexity exhibits substantial modeling error and possible degradation
of the estimation error convergence. To address these limitations, we introduce R PC,
a hybrid method that leverages our theoretical insights through two key components:
Perplexity Consistency and Reasoning Pruning. Perplexity Consistency combines
the strengths of self-consistency and perplexity, boosting the convergence rate of
estimation error from linear to exponential while preserving model error. Reasoning Pruning prevents degradation by eliminating low-probability reasoning paths.
Both theoretical analysis and empirical results across seven benchmark datasets
demonstrate that R PC has a strong potential for reducing reasoning error. Notably,
R PC achieves reasoning performance comparable to self-consistency while not
only enhancing confidence reliability but also reducing sampling costs by 50%.
The code and resources are available at https://wnjxyk.github.io/RPC.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their remarkable reasoning
capabilities across diverse applications, including problem-solving [33, 35], planning [53, 13], and
decision-making [45, 48]. Test-time scaling methods [58, 57, 20] can further enhance reasoning
performance with additional computation. Among these strategies, the sampling-based test-time
scaling method has emerged as a simple yet effective technique. Through generating multiple
reasoning paths and selecting the most plausible one through a confidence estimation mechanism, such
as self-consistency [57] and perplexity [10], this approach has achieved significant improvements.
The success of sampling-based test-time scaling hinges on accurately estimating the confidence
of sampled reasoning paths, facilitating their comparison and enabling the selection of the most
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

