Learning Theory for Kernel Bilevel Optimization

Fares El Khoury∗
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France

Edouard Pauwels
Toulouse School of Economics,
Université Toulouse Capitole,
31080 Toulouse, France

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS & Université Côte d’Azur,
Laboratoire J. A. Dieudonné,
06108 Nice, France

Michael Arbel
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has emerged as a technique for addressing a wide range of
machine learning problems that involve an outer objective implicitly determined
by the minimizer of an inner problem. While prior works have primarily focused
on the parametric setting, a learning-theoretic foundation for bilevel optimization
in the nonparametric case remains relatively unexplored. In this paper, we take a
first step toward bridging this gap by studying Kernel Bilevel Optimization (KBO),
where the inner objective is optimized over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
This setting enables rich function approximation while providing a foundation
for rigorous theoretical analysis. In this context, we derive novel finite-sample
generalization bounds for KBO, leveraging tools from empirical process theory.
These bounds further allow us to assess the statistical accuracy of gradient-based
methods applied to the empirical discretization of KBO. We numerically illustrate
our theoretical findings on a synthetic instrumental variable regression task.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization involves a nested structure where one optimization problem, called outerlevel, is constrained by the solution of another one, called inner-level [19]. This formulation has
found applications in a broad spectrum of machine learning fields, including hyperparameter tuning
[43, 13, 28], meta-learning [14, 59], inverse problems [34], and reinforcement learning [35, 48],
making it a powerful tool in theoretical and practical contexts. Its widespread use naturally raises
fundamental questions about the generalization properties of models learned through this procedure
as the number of data samples increases. Several existing works have studied the generalization and
convergence of bilevel algorithms under the assumption that the inner-level problem is strongly convex
and that its parameters lie in a finite-dimensional space. These include analyses of the convergence
of stochastic bilevel optimization algorithms [3, 24, 29, 38] and approaches based on algorithmic
stability [7, 78]. The strong convexity assumption ensures a unique inner-level solution, which is
crucial for stability and convergence analysis in bilevel optimization. Moreover, restricting the innerlevel parameters to a finite-dimensional space does not cover possibly richer infinite-dimensional
spaces, as in kernel methods, where the parameter’s dimension may grow with the sample size.
This sample size dependence in nonparametric methods poses additional challenges as solutions
at different sample sizes are not directly comparable. In contrast, in the finite-dimensional setting,
generalization bounds can be derived by quantifying the convergence of inner-level finite-sample
solutions toward the infinite samples population solution limit, within a fixed Euclidean space.
∗

Correspondence to: fares.el-khoury@inria.fr.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

