ResponseRank: Data-Efficient Reward Modeling
through Preference Strength Learning

Timo Kaufmann
LMU Munich, MCML
timo.kaufmann@ifi.lmu.de

Yannick Metz
University of Konstanz
yannick.metz@uni-konstanz.de

Daniel Keim
University of Konstanz
keim@uni-konstanz.de

Eyke Hüllermeier
LMU Munich, MCML, DFKI
eyke@lmu.de

Abstract
Binary choices, as often used for reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF), convey only the direction of a preference. A person may choose apples
over oranges and bananas over grapes, but which preference is stronger? Strength
is crucial for decision-making under uncertainty and generalization of preference
models, but hard to measure reliably. Metadata such as response times and interannotator agreement can serve as proxies for strength, but are often noisy and
confounded. We propose ResponseRank to address the challenge of learning from
noisy strength signals. Our method uses relative differences in proxy signals to rank
responses to pairwise comparisons by their inferred preference strength. To control
for systemic variation, we compare signals only locally within carefully constructed
strata. This enables robust learning of utility differences consistent with strengthderived rankings while making minimal assumptions about the strength signal.
Our contributions are threefold: (1) ResponseRank, a novel method that robustly
learns preference strength by leveraging locally valid relative strength signals; (2)
empirical evidence of improved sample efficiency and robustness across diverse
tasks: synthetic preference learning (with simulated response times), language
modeling (with annotator agreement), and RL control tasks (with simulated episode
returns); and (3) the Pearson Distance Correlation (PDC), a novel metric that
isolates cardinal utility learning from ordinal accuracy.

1

Introduction

Consider an AI system choosing between a risky action (usually good, occasionally catastrophic) and
a safe one (consistently mediocre). Optimal decision-making in such uncertain scenarios requires
knowing not just which outcome is preferred, but by how much – the preference strength. A slight
preference for the good outcome over the mediocre one might favor safety, while a strong preference
could justify the risk. Knowing preference strength is essential for optimal decision-making when
outcomes are uncertain [1]. However, standard reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
typically only collects binary preferences, identifying the preference order but not this crucial strength
information – the distance between utilities.
In addition to the benefits for decision making under uncertainty, learning preference strength can
significantly improve reward model generalization [2, 3], providing benefits even in deterministic
tasks where the optimal policy only depends on the order of outcome returns. When assuming
that preferences adhere to a latent utility function, utility differences provide additional structural
information that aids learning this utility [4]. For example, if A is strongly preferred to C but only
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

