Evaluating LLMs in Open-Source Games

Swadesh Sistla
University of Washington
swad@cs.washington.edu

Max Kleiman-Weiner
University of Washington
maxkw@uw.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models’ (LLMs) programming capabilities enable their participation in open-source games: a game-theoretic setting in which players submit
computer programs in lieu of actions. These programs offer numerous advantages,
including interpretability, inter-agent transparency, and formal verifiability; additionally, they enable program equilibria, solutions that leverage the transparency of
code and are inaccessible within normal-form settings. We evaluate the capabilities
of leading open- and closed-weight LLMs to predict and classify program strategies and evaluate features of the approximate program equilibria reached by LLM
agents in dyadic and evolutionary settings. We identify the emergence of payoffmaximizing, cooperative, and deceptive strategies, characterize the adaptation of
mechanisms within these programs over repeated open-source games, and analyze
their comparative evolutionary fitness. We find that open-source games serve as
a viable environment to study and steer the emergence of cooperative strategy in
multi-agent dilemmas.

1

Introduction

Large Language Model (LLM) agents are moving from the chat window into the wild [6, 16, 34].
Unlike a single, centrally hosted chatbot that aims to serve every user, an LLM agent acts on behalf
of a particular principal, an individual or collective, with their own objectives and constraints. Such
agents may be deployed to take actions with substantial real-world consequences: a personal finance
agent may hold the keys to an individual’s bank account, a procurement agent may negotiate supplychain contracts, a customer-service agent may offer refunds while following a company’s policies.
These agents will operate across the same environments as many other LLM agents as well as people,
in each case navigating a world that is fundamentally multi-agent and therefore strategic [9, 12].
Game theory provides a formal framework to explain these strategic interactions. As the Prisoner’s
Dilemma illustrates, even highly capable agents can fail to reach cooperative outcomes under perverse
incentives. Centralized alignment paradigms, such as training models to be naively prosocial, are
often insufficient: an agent with access to personal finances shouldn’t altruistically give without
permission, a contract-negotiation agent shouldn’t “split the difference” if a better deal is possible,
and a customer service agent shouldn’t bend the company’s return policy for a uniquely persistent
caller. Instead, cooperation between self-interested parties must emerge from mutually beneficial
incentives, a central finding in the study of repeated games [4, 32, 37, 24]. Understanding when and
how agents achieve (or forfeit) cooperative equilibria becomes a first-order safety and performance
question for AI systems [18].
How can LLM agents successfully protect their principals whilst unlocking the surplus that cooperation makes possible? This is a fundamental challenge for Cooperative AI [12, 18]. One promising
route is to use the transparency afforded by code [17]. If each agent must share the program that
governs its actions, then opponents can reason over one another’s programs before play begins. In
open-source game theory, the action space shifts from “choose an action” to “submit a program.”
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

