Improved Bounds for Swap Multicalibration and
Swap Omniprediction

Haipeng Luo∗
USC
haipengl@usc.edu

Spandan Senapati∗
USC
ssenapat@usc.edu

Vatsal Sharan∗
USC
vsharan@usc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the related problems of multicalibration — a multigroup
fairness notion and omniprediction — a simultaneous loss minimization paradigm,
both in the distributional and online settings. The recent work of Garg et al. (2024)
√
raised the open problem of whether it is possible to efficiently achieve Õ( T )
ℓ2 -multicalibration error against bounded linear functions. In this paper, we answer
this question in a strongly affirmative sense. We propose an efficient algorithm
1
that achieves Õ(T 3 ) ℓ2 -swap multicalibration error (both in high probability and
expectation). On propagating this bound onward, we obtain significantly improved
rates for ℓ1 -swap multicalibration and swap omniprediction for a loss class of con2
vex Lipschitz functions. In particular, we show that our algorithm achieves Õ(T 3 )
ℓ1 -swap multicalibration and swap omniprediction errors, thereby improving upon
7
the previous best-known bound of Õ(T 8 ). As a consequence of our improved
online results, we further obtain several improved sample complexity rates in the
distributional setting. In particular, we establish a Õ(ε−3 ) sample complexity of
efficiently learning an ε-swap omnipredictor for the class of convex and Lipschitz
functions, Õ(ε−2.5 ) sample complexity of efficiently learning an ε-swap agnostic
learner for the squared loss, and Õ(ε−5 ), Õ(ε−2.5 ) sample complexities of learning ℓ1 , ℓ2 -swap multicalibrated predictors against linear functions, all of which
significantly improve on the previous best-known bounds.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed surprising connections between multicalibration — a multigroup fairness
perspective (Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018) and omniprediction — a simultaneous loss minimization
paradigm, first introduced by Gopalan et al. (2022a). In this paper, we consider multicalibration and
omniprediction in both the distributional (offline) and online settings. We begin by introducing these
two notions, starting with some notation. Let the instance space be X ⊂ Rd , label set be Y = {0, 1},
D be an unknown distribution over X × Y, ℓ : [0, 1] × Y → R be a loss function, L be a class of loss
functions, F be a collection of hypotheses over X , and p : X → [0, 1] be a predictor. Multicalibration
(for Boolean functions, e.g., Boolean circuits, decision trees F ⊂ {0, 1}X ) was introduced by
Hébert-Johnson et al. (2018) as a mechanism to incentivize fair predictions. For Boolean functions,
multicalibration can be interpreted as calibration (the property that the predictions of p are correct
conditional on themselves, i.e., v = E[y|p(x) = v] for all v ∈ Range(p)), which is additionally
conditioned on set membership. In its most general form, for an arbitrary bounded hypothesis class
F ⊂ RX , multicalibration translates to the understanding that the hypotheses in F do not have any
correlation with the residual error y − p(x) when conditioned on the level sets of p. On the other hand,
omnipredictors are sufficient statistics that simultaneously encode loss-minimizing predictions for a
*

Author ordering is alphabetical.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

