DSRF: A Dynamic and Scalable Reasoning
Framework for Solving RPMs

Chengtai Li1,2 Yuting He1,3 Jianfeng Ren1,4∗ Ruibin Bai1,4 Yitian Zhao2 Xudong Jiang5
1

The Digital Port Technologies Lab, School of Computer Science,
University of Nottingham Ningbo China
2
Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering,
Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Beacons of Excellence Research and Innovation Institute,
University of Nottingham Ningbo China
5
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{scxcl2, scxyh2, jianfeng.ren, ruibin.bai}@nottingham.edu.cn
yitian.zhao@nimte.ac.cn, exdjiang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Abstract Visual Reasoning (AVR) entails discerning latent patterns in visual data
and inferring underlying rules. Existing solutions often lack scalability and adaptability, as deep architectures tend to overfit training data, and static neural networks
fail to dynamically capture diverse rules. To tackle the challenges, we propose a
Dynamic and Scalable Reasoning Framework (DSRF) that greatly enhances the
reasoning ability by widening the network instead of deepening it, and dynamically adjusting the reasoning network to better fit novel samples instead of a static
network. Specifically, we design a Multi-View Reasoning Pyramid (MVRP) to
capture complex rules through layered reasoning to focus features at each view
on distinct combinations of attributes, widening the reasoning network to cover
more attribute combinations analogous to complex reasoning rules. Additionally, we propose a Dynamic Domain-Contrast Prediction (DDCP) block to handle
varying task-specific relationships dynamically by introducing a Gram matrix to
model feature distributions, and a gate matrix to capture subtle domain differences
between context and target features. Extensive experiments on six AVR tasks
demonstrate DSRF’s superior performance, achieving state-of-the-art results under
various settings. Code is available here: https://github.com/UNNCRoxLi/DSRF.

1

Introduction

Abstract Visual Reasoning (AVR) aims to identify latent patterns from visual clues and then derive
underlying rules [1]. It has been widely used for human IQ tests [2]. Recently, AVR has become a
common benchmark for evaluating the reasoning ability of LLMs [3–5]. Among various AVR tasks,
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs) are most popular [6–10], where the question set is typically
a 2×3 or 3×3 image matrix, with each row/column following a common rule and the bottom-right
slot to be filled in. RPMs reduce language and cultural barriers by creating rules using symbols and
geometric shapes, requiring pure reasoning ability without relying on prior knowledge.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

