MindJourney
Test-Time Scaling with World Models
for Spatial Reasoning

Yuncong Yang1∗, Jiageng Liu1∗, Zheyuan Zhang2 , Siyuan Zhou3 ,
Reuben Tan4 , Jianwei Yang4†, Yilun Du5 , Chuang Gan1
1
UMass Amherst, 2 JHU, 3 HKUST, 4 Microsoft Research, 5 Harvard
yuncongyang@umass.edu
https://umass-embodied-agi.github.io/MindJourney/

Abstract
Spatial reasoning in 3D space is central to human cognition and indispensable
for embodied tasks such as navigation and manipulation. However, state-of-theart vision–language models (VLMs) struggle frequently with tasks as simple as
anticipating how a scene will look after an egocentric motion: they perceive
2D images but lack an internal model of 3D dynamics. We therefore propose
MindJourney, a test-time scaling framework that grants a VLM with this missing
capability by coupling it to a controllable world model based on video diffusion.
The VLM iteratively sketches a concise camera trajectory, while the world model
synthesizes the corresponding view at each step. The VLM then reasons over
this multi-view evidence gathered during the interactive exploration. Without any
fine-tuning, our MindJourney achieves an average 7.7% performance boost on the
representative spatial reasoning benchmark SAT, showing that pairing VLMs with
world models for test-time scaling offers a simple, plug-and-play route to robust
3D reasoning. Meanwhile, our method also improves upon the test-time inference
VLMs trained through reinforcement learning, which demonstrates the potential of
our method that utilizes world models for test-time scaling.

1

Introduction

Humans inhabit—and effortlessly reason about—a three-dimensional world. Our innate 3D spatial
understanding allows us to plan routes, manipulate objects, and make decisions in cluttered environments. Spatial intelligence is a fundamental component of human cognition, developing progressively
throughout early life [Gardner, 2011, Vasilyeva and Lourenco, 2012, Tommasi and Laeng, 2012,
Lohman, 2013, Moore and Johnson, 2020, Lauer and Lourenco, 2016]. As such, reasoning underpins
almost every physical task, and endowing embodied agents with comparable 3D intelligence has
become a central goal of embodied AI research [Koh et al., 2021, 2023, Yang et al., 2023, Wang et al.,
2024b, Du et al., 2024, Zhu et al., 2025a]. Recent advances in vision–language models (VLMs)
have produced systems that are already comparable to human performance in visual recognition and
comprehension, even solving simple spatial-reasoning problems [Chen et al., 2024a, Zhang et al.,
2025b]. However, these models still fall short of reasoning about the actual 3D world that lies behind
a 2D image as humans do. Recent spatial reasoning benchmarks [Yang et al., 2024, Ray et al., 2025,
Zhang et al., 2025b,a] reveal that VLMs struggle on tasks that require imagining the consequences of
egocentric movements. Given a question shown in the upper-left corner of Fig. 1, a state-of-the-art
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work done while at Microsoft Research

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

