Efficient Policy Optimization in Robust Constrained
MDPs with Iteration Complexity Guarantees

Sourav Ganguly
Department of ECE
New Jersey Institute of Technology
New Jersey, USA
sg2786@njit.edu

Kishan Panaganti
Department of CMS
California Institute of Technology
(now at Tencent AI Lab, Seattle, WA)
kpb.research@gmail.com

Arnob Ghosh
Department of ECE
New Jersey Institute of Technology
New Jersey, USA
arnob.ghosh@njit.edu

Adam Wierman
Department of CMS
California Institute of Technology
California, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
Constrained decision-making is essential for designing safe policies in real-world
control systems, yet simulated environments often fail to capture real-world adversities. We consider the problem of learning a policy that will maximize the
cumulative reward while satisfying a constraint, even when there is a mismatch
between the real model and an accessible simulator/nominal model. In particular,
we consider the robust constrained Markov decision problem (RCMDP) where an
agent needs to maximize the reward and satisfy the constraint against the worst
possible stochastic model under the uncertainty set centered around an unknown
nominal model. Primal-dual methods, effective for standard constrained MDP
(CMDP), are not applicable here because of the lack of the strong duality property. Further, one cannot apply the standard robust value-iteration based approach
on the composite value function either as the worst case models may be different
for the reward value function and the constraint value function. We propose a
novel technique that effectively minimizes the constraint value function–to satisfy
the constraints; on the other hand, when all the constraints are satisfied, it can
simply maximize the robust reward value function. We prove that such an algorithm finds a policy with at most ϵ sub-optimality and feasible policy after O(ϵ−2 )
iterations. In contrast to the state-of-the-art methods, we do not need to employ a
binary search, thus, we reduce the computation time for larger value of discount
factor (γ), and achieve a better performance for large state space.

1

Introduction

Ensuring safety or satisfying constraints is important for implementation of the RL algorithms in
the real system. A poorly chosen action can lead to catastrophic consequences, making it crucial to
incorporate safety constraints into the design. For instance, in self-driving cars [1], a slight safety
violation can result in serious harm to the system. Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP)
can address such safety concerns where the agent aims to maximize the expected reward while keeping the expected constraint cost within a predefined safety boundary [2] (cf.(5)). CMDPs effectively
restricted agents from violating safety limits [3, 4]. However, in many practical problems, an algorithm is trained using a simulator which might be different from the real world. Thus, policies
obtained for CMDP in simulated environment can still violate the constraint in the real environment.
To resolve the above issues, recently, researchers considered robust CMDP (RCMDP) problem
where the constraint needs to be satisfied even when there is a model-mismatch due to the sim39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

