VRAG-RL: Empower Vision-Perception-Based RAG
for Visually Rich Information Understanding via
Iterative Reasoning with Reinforcement Learning

Qiuchen Wang1 , Ruixue Ding, Yu Zeng1 , Zehui Chen1 , Lin Chen1 ,
Shihang Wang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Feng Zhao1∗
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, USTC
qiuchenwang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Effectively retrieving, reasoning and understanding visually rich information remains a challenge for traditional Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) methods.
On the one hand, traditional text-based methods cannot handle visual-related information. On the other hand, current vision-based RAG approaches are often
limited by fixed pipelines and frequently struggle to reason effectively due to the
insufficient activation of the fundamental capabilities of models. As reinforcement
learning (RL) has been proven to be beneficial for model reasoning, we introduce
VRAG-RL, a novel RL framework tailored for complex reasoning across visually
rich information. With this framework, VLMs interact with search engines, autonomously sampling single-turn or multi-turn reasoning trajectories with the help
of visual perception tokens and undergoing continual optimization based on these
samples. Our approach highlights key limitations of RL in RAG domains: (i) Prior
Multi-modal RAG approaches tend to merely incorporate images into the context,
leading to insufficient reasoning token allocation and neglecting visual-specific
perception; and (ii) When models interact with search engines, their queries often
fail to retrieve relevant information due to the inability to articulate requirements,
thereby leading to suboptimal performance. To address these challenges, we define
an action space tailored for visually rich inputs, with actions including cropping and
scaling, allowing the model to gather information from a coarse-to-fine perspective.
Furthermore, to bridge the gap between users’ original inquiries and the retriever,
we employ a simple yet effective reward that integrates query rewriting and retrieval
performance with a model-based reward. Our VRAG-RL optimizes VLMs for
RAG tasks using specially designed RL strategies, aligning the model with realworld applications. Extensive experiments on diverse and challenging benchmarks
show that our VRAG-RL outperforms existing methods by 20% (Qwen2.5-VL-7B)
and 30% (Qwen2.5-VL-3B), demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. The
code is available at https://github.com/Alibaba-NLP/VRAG.

1

Introduction

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [12, 18, 4] enables Language Models (LMs) to leverage
external information to tackle problems. Due to the limitations of traditional textual RAG methods
in handling visually rich information , efforts have been made to introduce RAG into the visual
domain by integrating Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [1, 7, 33, 15, 34] with search engines.
However, current visual RAG methods still fall short in effectively reasoning with search engines and
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

