Minitron-SSM: Efficient Hybrid Language Model
Compression through Group-Aware SSM Pruning

Ali Taghibakhshi∗, Sharath Turuvekere Sreenivas∗, Saurav Muralidharan∗
Marcin Chochowski,∗ Yashaswi Karnati,∗ Raviraj Joshi, Ameya Sunil Mahabaleshwarkar
Zijia Chen, Yoshi Suhara, Oluwatobi Olabiyi, Daniel Korzekwa
Mostofa Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jan Kautz, Bryan Catanzaro
Ashwath Aithal, Nima Tajbakhsh, Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA
{ataghibakhsh, sharatht, sauravm, mchochowski, ykarnati, ravirajj,
ameyasunilm, zijiac, ysuhara, oolabiyi, dkorzekwa, mpatwary,
mshoeybi, jkautz, bcatanzaro, aaithal, ntajbakhsh, pmolchanov}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Hybrid language models that combine Attention and State Space Models (SSMs)
have been shown to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy and runtime performance. Recent work has also demonstrated that applying pruning and distillation to Attentiononly models yields smaller, more accurate models at a fraction of the training
cost. In this work, we explore the effectiveness of compressing Hybrid architectures. To this end, we introduce a novel group-aware pruning method for Mamba
layers that preserves the structural integrity of SSM blocks and their sequence
modeling capabilities. We combine this method with FFN, embedding dimension,
and layer pruning, along with knowledge distillation-based retraining to obtain
a unified compression recipe for hybrid models. Using this recipe, we compress
the Nemotron-H 8B Hybrid model down to 4B parameters with up to 40× fewer
training tokens compared to similarly-sized models. The resulting model surpasses
the accuracy of similarly-sized models while achieving ∼ 2× faster inference
throughput, significantly advancing the Pareto frontier.
Models on Hugging Face
Nemotron-H-4B-Base-8K

1

Nemotron-H-4B-Instruct-128K

Introduction

Recent advances in language modeling have led to the development of hybrid architectures that
combine Transformer layers [25] with State Space Models (SSMs) [11, 7]. These hybrid models
leverage the complementary strengths of both approaches: Transformers excel at capturing global
dependencies through self-attention mechanisms, while SSMs provide efficient sequence processing
with O(N ) scaling during training and O(1) cache size during inference. Mamba [11, 7] in particular
is a popular SSM designed for efficient sequence modeling with linear-time complexity and support
for long contexts and is often the preferred choice for non-attention layers in hybrid architectures.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

