MokA: Multimodal Low-Rank Adaptation for MLLMs

Yake Wei1,2,3 , Yu Miao1,2,3 , Dongzhan Zhou4 , Di Hu1,2,3∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
3
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
yakewei@ruc.edu.cn, ymiao@ruc.edu.cn
zhoudongzhan@pjlab.org.cn, dihu@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In this paper, we reveal that most current efficient multimodal fine-tuning methods
are hindered by a key limitation: they are directly borrowed from LLMs, often
neglecting the intrinsic differences of multimodal scenarios and even affecting the
full utilization of all modalities. Inspired by our empirical observation, we argue
that unimodal adaptation and cross-modal adaptation are two essential parts for the
effective fine-tuning of MLLMs. From this perspective, we propose Multimodal
low-rank Adaptation (MokA), a multimodal-aware efficient fine-tuning strategy
that takes multimodal characteristics into consideration. It compresses unimodal
information by modality-specific parameters while explicitly enhancing crossmodal interaction, ensuring both unimodal and cross-modal adaptation. Extensive
experiments cover three representative multimodal scenarios (audio-visual-text,
visual-text, and speech-text), and multiple LLM backbones (LLaMA2/3, Qwen2,
Qwen2.5-VL, etc). Consistent improvements indicate the efficacy and versatility of
the proposed method. Ablation studies and efficiency evaluation are also conducted
to fully asses our method. Overall, we think MokA provides a more targeted
solution for efficient adaptation of MLLMs, paving the way for further exploration.
The project page is at https://gewu-lab.github.io/MokA.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have gained remarkable popularity due to their impressive ability to
understand and generate content. To extend their capabilities to more general multimodal scenarios,
recent advancements of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [38, 40, 20] have focused
on aligning other modalities, such as images, with text tokens, thereby equipping LLMs with the
ability to interpret and process content of other modalities. However, due to the massive parameter
scale of LLMs, fully fine-tuning such models on downstream tasks is computationally prohibitive
and inefficient in most cases.
A promising direction has emerged in the field of LLM fine-tuning before, which involves selectively
updating a subset of parameters rather than the full model. These Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) strategies have seen widespread adoption and have been successfully extended to the finetuning of MLLMs. In particular, LoRA [12] and its variants, which assume that over-parameterized
models in fact reside on a low intrinsic dimension, have been broadly applied [6, 7, 39], demonstrating
strong adaptability and efficiency. However, the development of efficient multimodal LLM finetuning is at present obscured by a “dark cloud”: most current methods are directly borrowed from
LLMs, often overlooking the fundamental differences of multimodal scenarios. Indeed, prior studies
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

