DreamVLA: A Vision-Language-Action Model
Dreamed with Comprehensive World Knowledge

Wenyao Zhang124∗
Hongsi Liu27∗
Zekun Qi34∗
Yunnan Wang12∗
4
45
6
Xinqiang Yu
Jiazhao Zhang
Runpei Dong
Jiawei He4
He Wang45
Zhizheng Zhang4
Li Yi3
Wenjun Zeng2
Xin Jin2‡
1

SJTU

2

EIT

3

THU

Project Page

4

Galbot
Code

5

PKU

6

UIUC

7

USTC

Hugging Face

Abstract
Recent advances in vision-language-action (VLA) models have shown promise
in integrating image generation with action prediction to improve generalization
and reasoning in robot manipulation. However, existing methods are limited to
challenging image-based forecasting, which suffers from redundant information
and lacks comprehensive and critical world knowledge, including dynamic, spatial
and semantic information. To address these limitations, we propose DreamVLA,
a novel VLA framework that integrates comprehensive world knowledge forecasting to enable inverse dynamics modeling, thereby establishing a perceptionprediction-action loop for manipulation tasks. Specifically, DreamVLA introduces
a dynamic-region-guided world knowledge prediction, integrated with the spatial
and semantic cues, which provide compact yet comprehensive representations
for action planning. This design aligns with how humans interact with the world
by first forming abstract multimodal reasoning chains before acting. To mitigate
interference among the dynamic, spatial and semantic information during training,
we adopt a block-wise structured attention mechanism that masks their mutual
attention, preventing information leakage and keeping each representation clean
and disentangled. Moreover, to model the conditional distribution over future
actions, we employ a diffusion-based transformer that disentangles action representations from shared latent features. Extensive experiments on both real-world and
simulation environments demonstrate that DreamVLA achieves 76.7% success rate
on real robot tasks and 4.44 average length on the CALVIN ABC-D benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The evolution of robot learning has demonstrated impressive progress [1–13] in training policies
capable of performing diverse tasks across various environments [14–27]. One promising direction
is Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models, which leverage the rich understanding capabilities of
pre-trained Multimodal Large Language Models (MMLMs) [28–31] to directly map natural language
instructions and visual observations to robot actions [17, 1, 14]. Although these approaches [32–
34, 15, 1, 35–44] have achieved impressive results, their direct mapping from observations to actions
lacks the closed-loop forecasting capability that humans typically possess when understanding and
reasoning about future knowledge of environments.
To incorporate future knowledge prediction into VLA, most existing methods [45, 5, 46–57] leverage
a copilot generation model to generate future frames/keypoints, then predict action sequences conditioned on goal images. Several methods [58–63] integrate pixel-level image forecasting with the
∗

Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

