Beyond Single-Task: Robust Multi-Task Length
Generalization for LLMs
Yi Hu1,*

Shijia Kang1,* Haotong Yang1 Haotian Xu2 Muhan Zhang1,†
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Xiaohongshu Inc.

Abstract
Length generalization—the ability to solve problems longer than those seen during
training—remains a critical challenge for large language models (LLMs). Previous
work modifies positional encodings (PEs) and data formats to improve length
generalization on specific symbolic tasks such as addition and sorting. However,
these approaches are fundamentally limited to special tasks, often degrading general language performance. Furthermore, they are typically evaluated on small
transformers trained from scratch on single tasks and can cause performance drop
when applied during post-training stage of practical LLMs with general capabilities.
Hu et al. [19] proposed Rule-Following Fine-Tuning (RFFT) to improve length
generalization in the post-training stage of LLMs. Despite its compatibility with
practical models and strong performance, RFFT is proposed for single tasks too,
requiring re-training for each individual task with extensive examples. In this
paper, we study length generalization in multi-task settings and propose Meta
Rule-Following Fine-Tuning (Meta-RFFT), the first framework enabling robust
cross-task length generalization. As our first contribution, we construct a large
length generalization dataset containing 86 tasks spanning code execution, number processing, symbolic and logical reasoning, beyond the common addition or
multiplication tasks. Secondly, we show that cross-task length generalization is
possible with Meta-RFFT—after training on a large number of tasks and instances,
the models achieve remarkable length generalization ability on unseen tasks with
minimal fine-tuning or one-shot prompting. For example, after fine-tuning on 1
to 5 digit addition, our 32B model achieves 95% accuracy on 30 digit addition,
significantly outperforming the state-of-the-art reasoning models (DeepSeek-R1671B: 72%; QwQ-32B: 32%), despite never seeing this task during RF-pretraining.
Our code is available at https://github.com/MuLabPKU/Meta-RFFT.
.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved revolutionary performance in a wide range of tasks,
from natural language understanding and generation to complex reasoning [33, 34, 16, 38, 9, 8].
However, they still face challenges when processing some basic tasks seemingly intuitive to humans.
One of the challenging problems is the length generalization, where Nogueira et al. [31], Zhou et al.
[58, 60], Anil et al. [1] reveal that transformers suffer from a significant performance drop when
solution steps exceed the training range, suggesting that models fail to capture the inner mechanism
in these reasoning problems. A classic example is long-integer addition: models trained on addition
problems with fewer digits often fail to generalize to higher-digit cases.
*

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. Muhan Zhang <muhan@pku.edu.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

