Risk-aware Direct Preference Optimization
under Nested Risk Measure
Lijun Zhang1 , Lin Li1 , Yajie Qi1 , Huizhong Song1 , Yaodong Yang2 , Jun Wang3 , Wei Wei1∗
1. Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of
Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology,
Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.
2. Institute for AI, Peking University, Beijing, China.
3. University College London.

Abstract
When fine-tuning pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) to align with human
values and intentions, maximizing the estimated reward can lead to superior performance, but it also introduces potential risks due to deviations from the reference
model’s intended behavior. Most existing methods typically introduce KL divergence to constrain deviations between the trained model and the reference model;
however, this may not be sufficient in certain applications that require tight risk
control. In this paper, we introduce Risk-aware Direct Preference Optimization (RaDPO), a novel approach that incorporates risk-awareness by employing a class of
nested risk measures. This approach formulates a constrained risk-aware advantage
function maximization problem and converts the Bradley-Terry model into a tokenlevel representation. The objective function maximizes the likelihood of the policy
while suppressing the deviation between a trained model and the reference model
using a sequential risk ratio, thereby enhancing the model’s risk-awareness. Experimental results across three open-source datasets: IMDb Dataset, Anthropic HH
Dataset, and AlpacaEval, demonstrate the proposed method’s superior performance
in balancing alignment performance and model drift.

1

Introduction

Learning from human feedback, serving as a bridge to align LLMs with human preferences, is crucial
for ensuring that the generations are more helpful, factual, and ethical, among other desiderata [1, 2,
3, 4]. Alignment methods such as RLHF [2, 3] and DPO [5] have consistently proven more effective
than supervised finetuning (SFT) alone. Notably, DPO, featuring a simple and straightforward
training process, directly uses the likelihood of the policy to define an implicit reward fitted to
the preference data, which has emerged as a popular alternative since it bypasses explicit reward
modeling challenges while delivering competitive performance. Subsequently, a variety of DPO
variants have been proposed, such as f-DPO [6], IPO [7], RDPO [8], and SimPO [9], to enhance
performance. However, a key limitation of these methods is that they only consider evaluation at the
sentence level, ignoring the fact that the generation of these responses occurs sequentially, following
an auto-regressive approach.
Recently, a fresh perspective on LLMs alignment has been introduced, specifically a sequential and
token-level direct preference optimization known as TDPO [10]. This method allows for examining
divergence in relation to a reference model on a more granular, token-by-token basis. Specifically,
inspired by Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [11] from reinforcement learning (RL) field
[12, 13], TDPO redefines the objective of maximizing restricted rewards in a sequential manner and
∗

Correspondence to <weiwei@sxu.edu.cn>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

