When Worse is Better: Navigating the
Compression-Generation Trade-off for Visual
Tokenization
Vivek Ramanujan†‡
Armen Aghajanyan‡
†

Kushal Tirumala⋄

Luke Zettlemoyer⋄†

Ali Farhadi†

University of Washington ⋄ Meta FAIR
‡
Work done while at Meta FAIR
ramanv@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Current image generation methods are based on a two-stage training approach.
In stage 1, an auto-encoder is trained to compress an image into a latent space;
in stage 2, a generative model is trained to learn a distribution over that latent
space. This reveals a fundamental trade-off, do we compress more aggressively to
make the latent distribution easier for the stage 2 model to learn even if it makes
reconstruction worse? We study this problem in the context of discrete, autoregressive image generation. Through the lens of scaling laws, we show that
smaller stage 2 models can benefit from more compressed stage 1 latents even
if reconstruction performance worsens, demonstrating that generation modeling
capacity plays a role in this trade-off. Diving deeper, we rigorously study the connection between compute scaling and the stage 1 rate-distortion trade-off. Next,
we introduce Causally Regularized Tokenization (CRT), which uses knowledge
of the stage 2 generation modeling procedure to embed useful inductive biases in
stage 1 latents. This regularization improves stage 2 generation performance better
by making the tokens easier to model without affecting the stage 1 compression
rate and marginally affecting distortion: we are able to improve compute efficiency 2-3× over baseline. Finally, we use CRT with further optimizations to the
visual tokenizer setup to result in a generative pipeline that matches LlamaGen-3B
generation performance (2.18 FID) with half the tokens per image (256 vs. 576)
and a fourth the total model parameters (775M vs. 3.1B) while using the same
architecture and inference procedure.

1

Introduction

Modern image generation methods use a two-stage approach to training. In the first stage, a model
such as a VQGAN [13, 63, 46] is trained to compress images to a latent representation. In the
second stage, a generative model is trained on these latent representations. This setup implies a
deep interaction between the stage 1 and stage 2 models. Since the stage 1 model does not have to
reconstruct the image perfectly, it can compress the image more aggressively to achieve a simpler
latent distribution for the stage 2 model to learn. However, we ultimately care about the quality of
the generated images, which depends on both the stage 1 model’s ability to reconstruct and the stage
2 model’s ability to learn the latent distribution. On one extreme, if the stage 1 model compresses
to a constant, the resulting latent distribution is easy to model but can only generate one image. At
the other extreme, the stage 1 model does not compress at all and we get no benefit from latent
distribution modeling.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

