Unifying Re-Identification, Attribute Inference, and
Data Reconstruction Risks in Differential Privacy

Bogdan Kulynych
Lausanne University Hospital
Jamie Hayes
Google DeepMind

Juan Felipe Gomez
Harvard University
Borja Balle
Google DeepMind

Georgios Kaissis
Google DeepMind
Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard University

Jean Louis Raisaro
Lausanne University Hospital
University of Lausanne

Abstract
Differentially private (DP) mechanisms are difficult to interpret and calibrate
because existing methods for mapping standard privacy parameters to concrete
privacy risks—re-identification, attribute inference, and data reconstruction—are
both overly pessimistic and inconsistent. In this work, we use the hypothesistesting interpretation of DP (f -DP), and determine that bounds on attack success
can take the same unified form across re-identification, attribute inference, and data
reconstruction risks. Our unified bounds are (1) consistent across a multitude of
attack settings, and (2) tunable, enabling practitioners to evaluate risk with respect
to arbitrary, including worst-case, levels of baseline risk. Empirically, our results
are tighter than prior methods using ε-DP, Rényi DP, and concentrated DP. As a
result, calibrating noise using our bounds can reduce the required noise by 20% at
the same risk level, which yields, e.g., an accuracy increase from 52% to 70% in
a text classification task. Overall, this unifying perspective provides a principled
framework for interpreting and calibrating the degree of protection in DP against
specific levels of re-identification, attribute inference, or data reconstruction risk.

1

Introduction

Releases of models and statistics derived from personal data—such as de-identified and synthetic
data releases, outcomes of statistical analyses, and machine-learning models—can reveal information
about individuals in the data. These releases can be classified into record-level (releasing de-identified
or obfuscated records) and aggregate (releasing statistical properties and models) (Gadotti et al.,
2024). The disclosure of such information incurs different types of privacy risks, which are legislated
differently across jurisdictions and regulatory frameworks.
In record-level releases, information leakage can occur via singling out of an individual (Cohen and
Nissim, 2020), e.g., determining that there is only one Colombian woman fluent in Mandarin over
the age of 60 in the dataset. When combined with external information, singling out can result in
a person’s re-identification. Re-identification is harmful when it enables inference of previously
unknown personal attributes by an attacker, e.g., disease status or voting record (Sweeney, 2002).
Although in aggregate releases there is no one-to-one mapping between the released information and
individuals, sensitive information can still be inferred via attribute inference or data reconstruction
attacks (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Yeom et al., 2018; Balle et al., 2022), in which the adversary could,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

