Scaffolding Dexterous Manipulation
with Vision-Language Models

Vincent de Bakker1,2
Joey Hejna1
Tyler Ga Wei Lum1
2
2
Onur Celik
Aleksandar Taranovic
Denis Blessing2
Gerhard Neumann2
Jeannette Bohg1
Dorsa Sadigh1
1
2
Stanford University
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

Abstract
Dexterous robotic hands are essential for performing complex manipulation tasks,
yet remain difficult to train due to the challenges of demonstration collection
and high-dimensional control. While reinforcement learning (RL) can alleviate
the data bottleneck by generating experience in simulation, it typically relies on
carefully designed, task-specific reward functions, which hinder scalability and
generalization. Thus, contemporary works in dexterous manipulation have often
bootstrapped from reference trajectories. These trajectories specify target hand
poses that guide the exploration of RL policies and object poses that enable dense,
task-agnostic rewards. However, sourcing suitable trajectories—particularly for
dexterous hands—remains a significant challenge. Yet, the precise details in explicit
reference trajectories are often unnecessary, as RL ultimately refines the motion.
Our key insight is that modern vision-language models (VLMs) already encode the
commonsense spatial and semantic knowledge needed to specify tasks and guide
exploration effectively. Given a task description (e.g., “open the cabinet”) and a
visual scene, our method uses an off-the-shelf VLM to first identify task-relevant
keypoints (e.g., handles, buttons) and then synthesize 3D trajectories for hand
motion and object motion. Subsequently, we train a low-level residual RL policy
in simulation to track these coarse trajectories or “scaffolds” with high fidelity.
Across a number of simulated tasks involving articulated objects and semantic
understanding, we demonstrate that our method is able to learn robust dexterous
manipulation policies. Moreover, we showcase that our method transfers to realworld robotic hands without any human demonstrations or handcrafted rewards. 1

1

Introduction

Dexterous manipulation is essential for a range of real-world tasks – such as using a power-drill
or twisting a door knob – which require the fine-grained control offered by human-like hands [2].
Enabling dexterous capabilities has therefore been a long-standing goal in robotics. Despite the
intrinsic advantages of dexterous hands over simpler end-effectors, existing learning paradigms have
struggled to cope with their complexity [56]. The prevailing approach for training generalist policies
– imitation learning from demonstrations [5, 49] – has achieved limited success with robot hands,
primarily due to the challenges of collecting accurate data with dexterous hardware, resulting in a
scarcity of high-quality demonstrations [54, 66]. While alternative approaches attempt to re-target
demonstrations from easier interfaces [19, 25, 32, 53, 57, 71, 73, 78], e.g., human hands, such
approaches often induce irrecoverable errors for fine-grained tasks.
To avoid both data scarcity and the embodiment gap, a combination of reinforcement learning (RL)
and sim-to-real transfer has emerged as a promising approach by enabling large-scale experience
generation [3]. However, using RL simply shifts the burden from data collection to reward design.
1

Videos at https://sites.google.com/view/vlm-scaffolding/home

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

