Tradeoffs between Mistakes and ERM Oracle Calls in
Online and Transductive Online Learning

Idan Attias ∗

Steve Hanneke†

Arvind Ramaswami‡

Abstract
We study online and transductive online learning in settings where the learner
can interact with the concept class only via Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
or weak consistency oracles on arbitrary subsets of the instance domain. This
contrasts with standard online models, where the learner has full knowledge of
the concept class. The ERM oracle returns a hypothesis that minimizes the loss
on a given subset, while the weak consistency oracle returns only a binary signal
indicating whether the subset is realizable by a concept in the class. The learner’s
performance is measured by the number of mistakes and oracle calls.
In the standard online setting with ERM access, we establish tight lower
√bounds
in both the realizable and agnostic cases: Ω(2dLD ) mistakes and Ω( T 2dLD )
regret, respectively, where T is the number of timesteps and dLD is the Littlestone
dimension of the class. We further show how existing results for online learning
with ERM access translate to the setting with a weak consistency oracle, at the cost
of increasing the number of oracle calls by O(T ).
We then consider the transductive online model, where the instance sequence is
known in advance but labels are revealed sequentially. For general Littlestone
classes, we show that the optimal mistake bound in the realizable case and in the
agnostic case can be achieved using O(T dVC +1 ) weak consistency oracle calls,
where dVC is the VC dimension of the class. On the negative side, we show that
Ω(T ) weak consistency queries are necessary for transductive online learnability,
and that Ω(T ) ERM queries are necessary to avoid exponential dependence on
the Littlestone dimension. Finally, for special families of concept classes, we
demonstrate how to reduce the number of oracle calls using randomized algorithms
while maintaining similar mistake bounds. In particular, for Thresholds on an
unknown ordering, O(log T ) ERM queries suffice, and for k-Intervals, O(T 3 22k )
weak consistency queries suffice.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a fundamental sequential prediction framework in which a learner receives a stream
of instances and must predict their labels one at a time, observing the true label after each prediction
[CBL06, SS+ 12, MRT12, SSBD14]. The goal is to minimize the number of mistakes compared to
the best concept in a fixed concept class. A closely related framework is transductive online learning,
where the entire sequence of instances is revealed in advance, removing instance uncertainty and
isolating the challenge of predicting the labels [BDKM97, KK05, CBS13, HMS23, HRSS24]. This
intermediate model retains the sequential nature of online learning while allowing the learner to
prepare for the specific instances it will encounter.
∗
Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms, and Learning (IDEAL), hosted by UIC and TTIC;
idanattias88@gmail.com.
†
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University; steve.hanneke@gmail.com.
‡
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University; ramaswa4@purdue.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

