Role-aware Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for
Coordinated Emergency Traffic Control

Ming Cheng
Central South University
Changsha, China
244701028@csu.edu.cn

Hao Chen
City University of Macau
Macao, China
sundaychenhao@gmail.com

Jia Wang
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Suzhou, China
jia.wang02@xjtlu.edu.cn

Zhiqing Li
City University of Macau
Macao, China
zhiqinglizzy@gmail.com

Senzhang Wang∗
Central South University
Changsha, China
szwang@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Emergency traffic control presents an increasingly critical challenge, requiring
seamless coordination among emergency vehicles, regular vehicles, and traffic
lights to ensure efficient passage for all vehicles. Existing models primarily only
focus on traffic light control, leaving emergency and regular vehicles prone to
delay due to the lack of navigation strategies. To address this issue, we propose
the Role-aware Multi-agent Traffic Control (RMTC) framework, which dynamically assigns appropriate roles to traffic components for better cooperation
by considering their relations with emergency vehicles and adaptively adjusting
their policies. Specifically, RMTC introduces a Heterogeneous Temporal Traffic
Graph (HTTG) to model the spatial and temporal relationships among all traffic components (traffic lights, regular and emergency vehicles) at each time step.
Furthermore, we develop a Dynamic Role Learning model to infer the evolving
roles of traffic lights and regular vehicles based on HTTG. Finally, we present
a Role-aware Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning approach that learns traffic
policies conditioned on the dynamically roles. Extensive experiments across
four public traffic scenarios show that RMTC outperforms existing traffic light
control methods by significantly reducing emergency vehicle travel time, while
effectively preserving traffic efficiency for regular vehicles. The code is released
at https://github.com/mingchenghexi/RMTC.

1

Introduction

Quick arrival of Emergency Vehicles (EMVs), such as fire trucks, ambulances, and police cars, is
crucial in modern emergencies, including medical crises [1], fires [2], and accidents [3]. However,
managing emergency traffic response is inherently complex, as EMVs not only impact the travel time
of regular vehicles (REVs), but the congestion caused by REVs also affects the arrival time of EMVs.
As illustrated in Figure 1, when traffic congestion occurs, traditional traffic light control often routes
emergency vehicles (EMVs) along the shortest path. In contrast, by integrating vehicle navigation,
EMVs can be guided to bypass congested segments, while surrounding REVs are steered away from
the paths that EMVs will traverse. This coordination alleviates conflicts and improves overall traffic
efficiency. In this context, the challenge lies in how to navigate both emergency and regular vehicles
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

