What is Your Data Worth to GPT?
LLM-Scale Data Valuation with Influence Functions
Sang Keun Choe1∗ Hwijeen Ahn1† Juhan Bae2† Kewen Zhao1†
Minsoo Kang3 Youngseog Chung1 Adithya Pratapa1 Willie Neiswanger4
Emma Strubell1 Teruko Mitamura1 Jeff Schneider1 Eduard Hovy1 Roger Grosse2 Eric Xing1,5
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Toronto 3 Georgia Tech 4 USC 5 MBZUAI

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are trained on a vast amount of human-written data,
but data providers often remain uncredited. In response to this issue, data valuation
(or data attribution2 ), which quantifies the contribution or value of each data to the
model output, has been discussed as a potential solution. Nevertheless, applying
existing data valuation methods to recent LLMs and their vast training datasets has
been largely limited by prohibitive compute and memory costs. In this work, we
focus on influence functions, a popular gradient-based data valuation method, and
significantly improve its scalability with an efficient gradient projection strategy
called L O G RA that leverages the gradient structure in backpropagation. We then
provide a theoretical motivation of gradient projection approaches to influence
functions to promote trust in the data valuation process. Lastly, we lower the barrier
to implementing data valuation systems by introducing L OGIX, a software package
that can transform existing training code into data valuation code with minimal
effort. In our data valuation experiments, L O G RA achieves competitive accuracy
against more expensive baselines while showing up to 6,500×/5× improvements
in compute/memory efficiency in influence computations as well as 2× speed-up
in gradient statistics logging when applied to Llama3-8B-Instruct and the 1B-token
subset of the OpenWebText dataset.

1

Introduction

Despite the well-recognized importance of training data in advancing the capabilities of large language
models (LLMs) [7, 32, 48], there is no agreed-upon mechanisms for crediting or compensating data
providers. As LLMs are increasingly integrated into our society and economy, the absence of such
mechanisms has aggravated a tension between data and model providers, exemplified by recent
legal challenges involving major tech companies [30, 40]. In this atmosphere, data valuation, which
quantifies the contribution of each training data to the model output, has been discussed as a potential
technical solution for tackling these societal issues [13, 15, 26, 29, 57, 63].
At a high level, most data valuation algorithms interpret the model output as a coalition of its training
data, and evaluate the contribution of each example based on its influence on the model output when
included or excluded from the training dataset [15, 27, 33, 36]. If an inclusion of a specific training
example consistently improves model performance, high value can be assigned to this example for
its contribution. However, applying existing data valuation methods to recent LLMs and their vast
training datasets has faced significant scalability challenges to date. For instance, sampling-based
methods, such as the Shapley value [15, 36] or Datamodels [27], require retraining the model multiple
∗

Lead author: sangkeun00@gmail.com. † Main contributors.
Noting that the leave-one-out error [33], a basis for most data attribution methods, is a semivalue [10, 36, 54],
we use “data valuation” as a unified term in this work.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

