Every Rollout Counts: Optimal Resource Allocation
for Efficient Test-Time Scaling

Xinglin Wang1 , Yiwei Li1 , Shaoxiong Feng2†, Peiwen Yuan1 , Yueqi Zhang1 ,
Jiayi Shi1 , Chuyi Tan1 , Boyuan Pan2 , Yao Hu2 , Kan Li1†
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Xiaohongshu Inc
{wangxinglin,liyiwei,peiwenyuan,zhangyq,shijiayi,tanchuyi,likan}@bit.edu.cn
{shaoxiongfeng2023}@gmail.com {panboyuan,xiahou}@xiaohongshu.com

Abstract
Test-Time Scaling (TTS) improves the performance of Large Language Models
(LLMs) by using additional inference-time computation to explore multiple reasoning paths through search. Yet how to allocate a fixed rollout budget most effectively
during search remains underexplored, often resulting in inefficient use of compute
at test time. To bridge this gap, we formulate test-time search as a resource allocation problem and derive the optimal allocation strategy that maximizes the
probability of obtaining a correct solution under a fixed rollout budget. Within this
formulation, we reveal a core limitation of existing search methods: solution-level
allocation tends to favor reasoning directions with more candidates, leading to theoretically suboptimal and inefficient use of compute. To address this, we propose
Direction-Oriented Resource Allocation (DORA), a provably optimal method that
mitigates this bias by decoupling direction quality from candidate count and allocating resources at the direction level. To demonstrate DORA’s effectiveness, we
conduct extensive experiments on challenging mathematical reasoning benchmarks
including MATH500, AIME2024, and AIME2025. The empirical results show that
DORA consistently outperforms strong baselines with comparable computational
cost, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy. We hope our findings contribute to a
broader understanding of optimal TTS for LLMs.1

1

Introduction

As the challenges of scaling up computation and data resources for pretraining continue to grow,
scaling test-time computation has emerged as a critical paradigm for enhancing model performance
(Brown et al., 2024; Snell et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025a). By allocating additional computation at
inference time, Test-Time Scaling (TTS) improves the performance of LLMs on complex tasks such
as mathematical reasoning by enabling deeper exploration of possible solutions (Qwen Team, 2024;
Kimi Team et al., 2025; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). One prominent approach to scaling test-time
computation is through search, where diverse candidate solutions are proposed and filtered using a
Process Reward Model (PRM) to guide the procedure (Chen et al., 2024b; Snell et al., 2024; Beeching
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025a; Liu et al., 2025). By pruning low-quality paths early and focusing
computation on more promising ones, these strategies help steer the search process toward trajectories
that are more likely to yield correct answers (Setlur et al., 2025b).
While these strategies yield promising performance gains, the question of how to optimally allocate
a fixed rollout budget across competing candidate trajectories remains underexplored. In practice,
†
1

Corresponding author.
Our code and data have been released on https://github.com/WangXinglin/DORA.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

