Asymmetric Duos: Sidekicks Improve Uncertainty

Tim G. Zhou1,2∗
Evan Shelhamer1,2
Geoff Pleiss1,2
1
2
University of British Columbia Vector Institute

Abstract
The go-to strategy to apply deep networks in settings where uncertainty informs
decisions—ensembling multiple training runs with random initializations—is illsuited for the extremely large-scale models and practical fine-tuning workflows of
today. We introduce a new cost-effective strategy for improving the uncertainty
quantification and downstream decisions of a large model (e.g. a fine-tuned ViTB): coupling it with a less accurate but much smaller “sidekick” (e.g. a fine-tuned
ResNet-34) with a fraction of the computational cost. We propose aggregating
the predictions of this Asymmetric Duo by simple learned weighted averaging.
Surprisingly, despite their inherent asymmetry, the sidekick model almost never
harms the performance of the larger model. In fact, across five image classification
benchmarks and a variety of model architectures and training schemes (including
soups), Asymmetric Duos significantly improve accuracy, uncertainty quantification, and selective classification metrics with only ∼10 − 20% more computation.
Code is available at: https://github.com/timgzhou/asymmetric-duos.

1

Introduction

Deep ensembles [29] have endured as a de facto method in settings that require uncertainty quantification (UQ) for safety or downstream decision making [4, 9, 31]. When models are trained
from scratch with different random seeds, this simple strategy yields strong performance across UQ
and decision-making benchmarks [22, 39], provides robustness under distribution shifts [42], and
requires no modification to model training methodology.
However, as the modern machine learning paradigm increasingly revolves around larger and larger
pre-trained models fine-tuned for specific downstream tasks [12, e.g.], deep ensembles become increasingly ineffective and impractical. First, unlike training models from scratch, fine-tuning from a
pre-trained model is much less sensitive to hyperparameters and training randomness. While ensembling multiple fine-tuning runs can yield performance increases, it pales in comparison to the gains
obtained when ensembling trained-from-scratch models [19, 49]. Second, and more critically, the
growing size of modern models makes ensembling more expensive than ever. Even with moderatesized models like ResNet-50 [24], training and inference costs were a concern [1, 13, 26]; with large
architectures such as ViT-H [10], these costs become even more prohibitive. Deploying a single one
of these models can approach the limit of practical resources. Ensembling with double, triple, or
larger multiples of the computation may be out of the question.
The smallest deep ensemble requires two models, which with standard approaches needs 2× the
computation for both training and inference. In this paper, we reduce this cost to a fractional amount
(e.g. 10 − 20%) while still obtaining meaningful improvements in accuracy, uncertainty quantification, and downstream decision making. Our Asymmetric Duo framework pairs a base model with
a smaller “sidekick” to make better predictions together. For instance, we can pair a larger ViT-B
with a smaller ResNet-34, while fine-tuning each separately, to improve over either alone. As the
∗

tgzhou@cs.ubc.ca

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

