Towards Understanding Transformers in Learning
Random Walks
Wei Shi
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
shiwei1997@connect.hku.hk

Yuan Cao
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
yuancao@hku.hk

Abstract
Transformers have proven highly effective across various applications, especially
in handling sequential data such as natural languages and time series. However,
transformer models often lack clear interpretability, and the success of transformers
has not been well understood in theory. In this paper, we study the capability and
interpretability of transformers in learning a family of classic statistical models,
namely random walks on circles. We theoretically demonstrate that, after training
with gradient descent, a one-layer transformer model can achieve optimal accuracy
in predicting random walks. Importantly, our analysis reveals that the trained
model is interpretable: the trained softmax attention serves as a token selector,
focusing on the direct parent state; subsequently, the value matrix executes a onestep probability transition to predict the location of the next state based on this
parent state. We also show that certain edge cases not covered by our theory are
indeed failure cases, demonstrating that our theoretical conditions are tight. By
investigating these success and failure cases, it is revealed that gradient descent
with small initialization may fail or struggle to converge to a good solution in
certain simple tasks even beyond random walks. Experiments are conducted to
support our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

In recent years, transformers [31] have revolutionized many fields such as natural language processing
[2, 23, 31], computer vision [8, 24], reinforcement learning [5, 13, 15], and have rapidly emerged
as a key component in state-of-the-art deep learning models due to their ability to capture complex
dependencies in data. While transformers exhibit remarkable practical performance, the underlying
mechanisms of transformers are still not well understood due to their complex architecture.
In order to theoretically understand transformers, a number of recent works have investigated their
capability in learning from sequential data that follows certain classic statistical models. Specifically,
[4, 22] studied sequential data with an underlying causal graph, and theoretically showed how
transformers can encode the causal structure with the self-attention mechanism for in-context learning.
[6, 9] considered the task of in-context learning of Markov chains, and investigated how two-layer
transformers can make predictions for Markov chains according to the context. [12] considered
Markov chain forecasting tasks and reveals a connection between a context-conditioned Markov chain
and the self-attention mechanism. [21] characterized the loss landscape of a one-layer transformer
and demonstrated the existence of global minima and bad local minima in learning Markovian data
with vocabularies of size two. Although these works provided valuable insights, there remain many
open questions that require further exploration. Notably, the Markov chain data studied in [21] can be
essentially understood as a random walk over a space of only two states. Therefore, given the results
in [21], a natural question is when and how transformers can learn more general random walks over a
larger state space.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

