Conformal Information Pursuit for
Interactively Guiding Large Language Models

Kwan Ho Ryan Chan∗ Yuyan Ge

Edgar Dobriban

Hamed Hassani

René Vidal

University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
A significant use case of instruction-finetuned Large Language Models (LLMs) is
to solve question-answering tasks interactively. In this setting, an LLM agent is
tasked with making a prediction by sequentially querying relevant information from
the user, as opposed to a single-turn conversation. This paper explores sequential
querying strategies that aim to minimize the expected number of queries. One such
strategy is Information Pursuit (IP), a greedy algorithm that at each iteration selects
the query that maximizes information gain or equivalently minimizes uncertainty.
However, obtaining accurate estimates of mutual information or conditional entropy
for LLMs is very difficult in practice due to over- or under-confident LLM probabilities, which leads to suboptimal query selection and predictive performance. To
better estimate the uncertainty at each iteration, we propose Conformal Information
Pursuit (C-IP), an alternative approach to sequential information gain based on
conformal prediction sets. More specifically, C-IP leverages a relationship between
prediction sets and conditional entropy at each iteration to estimate uncertainty
based on the average size of conformal prediction sets. In contrast to conditional
entropy, we find that conformal prediction sets are a distribution-free and robust
method of measuring uncertainty. Experiments with 20 Questions show that C-IP
obtains better predictive performance and shorter query-answer chains compared
to previous approaches to IP and uncertainty-based chain-of-thought methods.
Furthermore, extending to an interactive medical setting between a doctor and a
patient on the MediQ dataset, C-IP achieves competitive performance with direct
single-turn prediction while offering greater interpretability.

1

Introduction

Init. Info: A 25-year-old woman comes to
the physician for an examination.
🧠 Uncertain à Ask a query

…

Doctor: Is the patient's body temperature
Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 3, 7, 42, 83] fine🤖
within the normal range?
tuned on instruction datasets are capable of generating
human-like dialogues. Although many use-cases con😷 Patient: The patient's body temperature is
36.6 ℃ (98.0 ℉).
strain these models to single-turn interactions [99, 111,
138], where a single prompt typically provides all context
🧠 Uncertain à Ask a query
and examples, more realistic conversations behave interDoctor: What is the serum ferritin level in
🤖
ng/mL?
actively [12, 70]. In this work, we are interested in the
setting where LLMs interactively solve a prediction task
😷 Patient: The patient's serum ferritin level
is 170 ng/mL.
in a multi-turn, information-seeking environment by ask🧠 Confident à Final Prediction
ing queries and obtaining information sequentially [71].
🤖
Prediction: (D) Intravascular hemolysis
Popular examples of such settings include the game of 20
Questions (20Q) [11, 84, 143] and Interactive Medical
Figure 1: Example of diagnosis via Patient
Question Answering [70] (Figure 1).

and Doctor LLM interaction.

∗

Corresponding author. Email: ryanckh@seas.upenn.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

