Parameter Efficient Fine-tuning via Explained
Variance Adaptation

Fabian Paischer1,3*
Lukas Hauzenberger1*
Thomas Schmied1
1,3
2
Benedikt Alkin
Marc Peter Deisenroth
Sepp Hochreiter1,4
1
ELLIS Unit, LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz, Austria
2
University College London
3
EMMI AI, Linz
4
NXAI GmbH, Linz, Austria
paischer@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Foundation models (FMs) are pre-trained on large-scale datasets and then finetuned for a specific downstream task. The most common fine-tuning method is
to update pretrained weights via low-rank adaptation (LoRA). Existing initialization strategies for LoRA often rely on singular value decompositions (SVD)
of gradients or weight matrices. However, they do not provably maximize the
expected gradient signal, which is critical for fast adaptation. To this end, we
introduce Explained Variance Adaptation (EVA), an initialization scheme that uses
the directions capturing the most activation variance, provably maximizing the
expected gradient signal and accelerating fine-tuning. EVA performs incremental
SVD on minibatches of activation vectors and selects the right-singular vectors for
initialization once they converged. Further, by selecting the directions that capture
the most activation-variance for a given rank budget, EVA accommodates adaptive
ranks that reduce the number of trainable parameters. We apply EVA to a variety
of fine-tuning tasks as language generation and understanding, image classification,
and reinforcement learning. EVA exhibits faster convergence than competitors
and achieves the highest average score across a multitude of tasks per domain
while reducing the number of trainable parameters through rank redistribution.
In summary, EVA establishes a new Pareto frontier compared to existing LoRA
initialization schemes in both accuracy and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021, FMs) are usually trained on large-scale data and then
fine-tuned towards a particular downstream task. This training paradigm has led to significant
advances in the realm of language modeling (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Reid et al., 2024),
computer vision (Dehghani et al., 2023; Oquab et al., 2023), and reinforcement learning (Brohan
et al., 2023; Zitkovich et al., 2023). With an increasing number of model parameters, fine-tuning (FT)
becomes prohibitively expensive. This results in the need for efficient alternatives to fine-tuning all
parameters of the pre-trained model.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) approaches are commonly used as an efficient alternative to
full fine-tuning (FFT). They modify the pre-trained model by introducing a small number of new
trainable parameters, while the pre-trained weights remain frozen. A particularly successful approach,
LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), introduces new weights in the form of a low-rank decomposition for each
*

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

