Moment- and Power-Spectrum-Based Gaussianity
Regularization for Text-to-Image Models

Jisung Hwang

Jaihoon Kim
Minhyuk Sung
KAIST
{4011hjs,jh27kim,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel regularization loss that enforces standard Gaussianity, encouraging samples to align with a standard Gaussian distribution. This facilitates a range
of downstream tasks involving optimization in the latent space of text-to-image
models. We treat elements of a high-dimensional sample as one-dimensional standard Gaussian variables and define a composite loss that combines moment-based
regularization in the spatial domain with power spectrum-based regularization
in the spectral domain. Since the expected values of moments and power spectrum distributions are analytically known, the loss promotes conformity to these
properties. To ensure permutation invariance, the losses are applied to randomly
permuted inputs. Notably, existing Gaussianity-based regularizations fall within
our unified framework: some correspond to moment losses of specific orders,
while the previous covariance-matching loss is equivalent to our spectral loss but
incurs higher time complexity due to its spatial-domain computation. We showcase
the application of our regularization in generative modeling for test-time reward
alignment with a text-to-image model, specifically to enhance aesthetics and text
alignment. Our regularization outperforms previous Gaussianity regularization,
effectively prevents reward hacking and accelerates convergence.

1

Introduction

The Gaussian distribution plays a central role in numerous machine learning applications, widely used
to model measurement noise, uncertainty, and the mean of independent samples. Its mathematical
simplicity and analytical tractability have made it a default modeling choice in many contexts.
In particular, within generative modeling, the standard Gaussian is commonly used as the latent
distribution mapped to complex data distributions.
Given the pervasive presence of Gaussianity not only in machine learning but also across the broader
sciences, quantifying how closely a data point follows—or deviates from—a Gaussian distribution,
i.e., measuring Gaussianity, has become a fundamental technique [1, 32, 2, 9, 22, 31, 13, 30, 16,
10, 3]. In generative modeling in particular, measuring Gaussianity can facilitate optimization by
identifying the latent Gaussian variable that best maps to a desired data point, thereby enabling
more precise and controllable generation. For example, in the context of widely used text-to-image
models [20, 11, 6, 23, 25], prior work has shown that Gaussianity-based regularization can improve
downstream tasks such as aesthetic image generation [33] and text-image alignment [12].
In this work, we study the structural properties of the standard Gaussian distribution and propose a
novel regularization loss that unifies various existing approaches under a unified theoretical framework.
Leveraging the identity covariance of the standard Gaussian, we treat a high-dimensional sample
as a collection of i.i.d. scalar standard Gaussian variables—that is, as D samples drawn from a
one-dimensional standard Gaussian. With a specific ordering, we analyze the distribution of these
scalar values in both the one-dimensional spatial and spectral domains. In the spatial domain, we
utilize the moments of the samples—the expected values of their powers—and define a moment-based
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

