Distortion of AI Alignment: Does Preference
Optimization Optimize for Preferences?

Paul Gölz
Cornell University
paulgoelz@cornell.edu

Nika Haghtalab
UC Berkeley
nika@berkeley.edu

Kunhe Yang
UC Berkeley
kunheyang@berkeley.edu

Abstract
After pre-training, large language models are aligned with human preferences based
on pairwise comparisons. State-of-the-art alignment methods (such as PPO-based
RLHF and DPO) are built on the assumption of aligning with a single preference
model, despite being deployed in settings where users have diverse preferences. As
a result, it is not even clear that these alignment methods produce models that satisfy
users on average — a minimal requirement for pluralistic alignment. Drawing on
social choice theory and modeling users’ comparisons through individual BradleyTerry (BT) models, we introduce an alignment method’s distortion: the worst-case
ratio between the optimal achievable average utility, and the average utility of the
learned policy. The notion of distortion helps draw sharp distinctions between
alignment methods: Nash Learning from Human Feedback achieves the minimax
optimal distortion of ( 12 +o(1))·β (for the BT temperature β), robustly across utility
distributions, distributions of comparison pairs, and permissible KL divergences
from the reference policy. RLHF and DPO, by contrast, suffer ≥ (1−o(1)) · β
distortion already without a KL constraint, and eΩ(β) or even unbounded distortion
in the full setting, depending on how comparison pairs are sampled.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [38, 43, 18, 59] has become the dominant
paradigm for aligning large language models (LLMs) with human values and preferences. In a
typical alignment pipeline, human feedback is provided as ordinal comparisons between pairs of
candidate model outputs. This feedback is used to fine-tune a pre-trained model, steering it toward
the preferences expressed in these comparisons. A major limitation of RLHF and of many proposed
alternatives (including DPO [43], ΦPO [5], KTO [24], SimPO [34], χPO [30]) is that they do not
take into account that users will disagree on which model outputs are most useful or least harmful. A
growing body of evidence — from both the general public and the research community [1, 47, 20, 8] —
suggests that this blind spot of current alignment methods can lead to unfair outcomes. For example,
Chakraborty et al. [13] argue that RLHF may align with a majority group’s preferences and ignore
the preferences of a minority.
In this work, we study a more basic question: do current alignment methods reliably lead to a high
average utility across the users? Even such a minimal requirement might not be automatically met
since alignment methods such as RLHF were originally designed with a single, perhaps representative,
user in mind whose noisy ordinal preferences are assumed to be consistent with an underlying utility
model. As a result, RLHF fits a single reward model to the observed ordinal comparisons of a
population of users with different utility functions, effectively constructing a utility function for a
“mythical” representative user. Could it be that optimizing a model for this mythical user leads to
poor outcomes on average for real users? More fundamentally, do ordinal preferences even contain
enough information to ensure high average utility across a heterogeneous user population?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

