Can Large Language Models Master
Complex Card Games?

Wei Wang12 , Fuqing Bie3 , Junzhe Chen2 , Dan Zhang2
Shiyu Huang4 , Evgeny Kharlamov5 , Jie Tang2∗
1
Nankai University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4
Zhipu AI, 5 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
weiwangorg@163.com

Abstract
Complex games have long been an important benchmark for testing the progress of
artificial intelligence algorithms. AlphaGo, AlphaZero, and MuZero have defeated
top human players in Go and Chess, garnering widespread societal attention towards
artificial intelligence. Concurrently, large language models (LLMs) have exhibited
remarkable capabilities across various tasks, raising the question of whether LLMs
can achieve similar success in complex games. In this paper, we explore the
potential of LLMs in mastering complex card games. We systematically assess
the learning capabilities of LLMs across eight diverse card games, evaluating the
impact of fine-tuning on high-quality gameplay data, and examining the models’
ability to retain general capabilities while mastering these games. Our findings
indicate that: (1) LLMs can approach the performance of strong game AIs through
supervised fine-tuning on high-quality data, (2) LLMs can achieve a certain level
of proficiency in multiple complex card games simultaneously, with performance
augmentation for games with similar rules and conflicts for dissimilar ones, and
(3) LLMs experience a decline in general capabilities when mastering complex
games, but this decline can be mitigated by integrating a certain amount of general
instruction data. The evaluation results demonstrate strong learning ability and
versatility of LLMs. The code is available at https://github.com/THUDM/
LLM4CardGame

1

Introduction

A long-term goal of artificial intelligence is to achieve superhuman performance in highly challenging
domains [1–3]. Games, particularly complex ones such as Chess and Go, have become the best
testing grounds for artificial intelligence algorithms [4–7]. In recent years, artificial intelligence
algorithms have made significant breakthroughs in the realm of games. AlphaGo is the first to
defeat human professional players in Go by using supervised learning from expert human data and
reinforcement learning [4]. Following this, a general reinforcement learning algorithm, AlphaZero,
achieves superhuman performance in three challenging games: Chess, Shogi (Japanese chess), and
Go [6]. MuZero even achieves performance equivalent to AlphaZero without needing to know the
rules of the game [7].
Recently, large language models (LLMs) [8–11] have achieved remarkable performance, even
surpassing human levels, across a wide range of tasks including general knowledge question answering [12, 13], mathematics [14, 15], coding [16, 17], and agent [18, 19]. This naturally raises the
question: can language models achieve superhuman performance in complex games, or at least reach
the same level as the best reinforcement learning algorithms? In this paper, we focus on card games.
* Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

