Seeing the Wind from a Falling Leaf

Zhiyuan Gao1∗ Jiageng Mao1∗ Hong-Xing Yu2 Haozhe Lou1 Emily Yue-Ting Jia1
Jernej Barbic1 Jiajun Wu2 Yue Wang1
1
University of Southern California 2 Stanford University
{gaozhiyu, jiagengm, haozhelo, eyjia, jnb, yue.w}@usc.edu
{koven, jiajunwu}@cs.stanford.edu
Input Video

Recovered Force Field

Physics-based Video Generation

Input Video

Recovered Force Field

Physics-based Motion Editing

Figure 1: We propose an end-to-end differentiable framework capable of estimating invisible forces
directly from video data, mimicking the human ability to perceive unseen physical effects through
vision alone. This approach enables applications such as physics-based video generation, where new
objects can be seamlessly introduced into a scene and simulated within the same force field. Force
strength: from low to high (best viewed in colors).

Abstract
A longstanding goal in computer vision is to model motions from videos, while
the representations behind motions, i.e. the invisible physical interactions that
cause objects to deform and move, remain largely unexplored. In this paper, we
study how to recover the invisible forces from visual observations, e.g., estimating
the wind field by observing a leaf falling to the ground. Our key innovation is an
end-to-end differentiable inverse graphics framework, which jointly models object
geometry, physical properties, and interactions directly from videos. Through
backpropagation, our approach enables the recovery of force representations from
object motions. We validate our method on both synthetic and real-world scenarios, and the results demonstrate its ability to infer plausible force fields from
videos. Furthermore, we show the potential applications of our approach, including
physics-based video generation and editing. We hope our approach sheds light on
understanding and modeling the physical process behind pixels, bridging the gap
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

