DynamicVerse: A Physically-Aware Multimodal
Framework for 4D World Modeling

Kairun Wen1∗† , Yuzhi Huang1∗ , Runyu Chen1 , Hui Zheng1 , Yunlong Lin1 , Panwang Pan1 ,
Chenxin Li2 , Wenyan Cong3 , Jian Zhang1 , Junbin Lu4 , Chenguo Lin5 , Dilin Wang6 , Zhicheng Yan6 ,
Hongyu Xu6 , Justin Theiss6 , Yue Huang1 , Xinghao Ding1B , Rakesh Ranjan6 , Zhiwen Fan3
* Equal Contribution; † Project Leader; B Corresponding Author
1
XMU 2 CUHK 3 UT Austin 4 UW 5 PKU 6 Meta

Project Website: https://dynamic-verse.github.io/
Video Frames

Dynamic Content (Moving Object & Camera)

Annotations

……………………

……………………

Object Mask
& Category

Object
Caption

Scene
Caption

Camera
Caption

Metric-scale Metric-scale
Camera
PointMap

Object Category: Running Lady
Camera Caption: The camera moves forward, following the running lady from behind, resulting in slightly unsteady motion with
shaking. As the video concludes, the camera stops tracking, tilts up, and pans left to reveal the scene ahead.
Object Caption: An elderly lady with short white hair, wearing a vibrant multicolored blouse and black pants, walks with a
steady, rhythmic gait. Their arms are slightly bent, holding a small object. Maintaining an upright posture with
head tilted forward, they move at a consistent pace, suggesting focus, purpose, or familiarity with their path.
Scene Caption: A lively scene inside a spacious, well-lit restaurant, characterized by wooden floors, large windows with natural
light, and a mix of modern and rustic decor including exposed brick walls and furniture. An elderly lady walks
purposefully through the warm, inviting space, her stride steady, bustling with diverse patrons seated enjoying
meals or conversations at many tables set with cutlery and glasses. The ambiance is cozy yet sophisticated.

Figure 1: The overview of physically-aware multi-modal world modeling framework DynamicVerse.

Abstract
Understanding the dynamic physical world, characterized by its evolving 3D
structure, real-world motion, and semantic content with textual descriptions, is
crucial for human-agent interaction and enables embodied agents to perceive and
act within real environments with human-like capabilities. However, existing
datasets are often derived from limited simulators or utilize traditional Structurefrom-Motion for up-to-scale annotation and offer limited descriptive captioning,
which restricts the capacity of foundation models to accurately interpret real-world
dynamics from monocular videos, commonly sourced from the internet.
To bridge these gaps, we introduce DynamicVerse, a physical-scale, multimodal
4D world modeling framework for dynamic real-world video. We employ large
vision, geometric, and multimodal models to interpret metric-scale static geometry,
real-world dynamic motion, instance-level masks, and holistic descriptive captions.
By integrating window-based Bundle Adjustment with global optimization, our
method converts long real-world video sequences into a comprehensive 4D multimodal format. DynamicVerse delivers a large-scale dataset consists of 100K+
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

