TOMCAT : Test-time Comprehensive Knowledge
Accumulation for Compositional Zero-Shot Learning

1

Xudong Yan 1,2 Songhe Feng 1,2 ∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Artificial Intelligence in
Transportation (Beijing Jiaotong University), Ministry of Education
{xud_yan, shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims to recognize novel attributeobject compositions based on the knowledge learned from seen ones. Existing
methods suffer from performance degradation caused by the distribution shift of
label space at test time, which stems from the inclusion of unseen compositions
recombined from attributes and objects. To overcome the challenge, we propose
a novel approach that accumulates comprehensive knowledge in both textual and
visual modalities from unsupervised data to update multimodal prototypes at test
time. Building on this, we further design an adaptive update weight to control the
degree of prototype adjustment, enabling the model to flexibly adapt to distribution
shift during testing. Moreover, a dynamic priority queue is introduced that stores
high-confidence images to acquire visual knowledge from historical images for
inference. Considering the semantic consistency of multimodal knowledge, we
align textual and visual prototypes by multimodal collaborative representation
learning. Extensive experiments indicate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance on four benchmark datasets under both closed-world and open-world
settings. Code will be available at https://github.com/xud-yan/TOMCAT.

1

Introduction

Integrating familiar concepts and expanding to novel compositions stand as one of the striking hallmarks of human intelligence [9, 10, 24]. For example, even when confronted with a completely new
composition browned cheese, humans can swiftly apprehend and recognize it by combining known
atomic concepts browned and cheese. These capacities for compositionality and generalization
enable us to infer a wide range of combinations from limited atomic concepts [1], and have spurred
the emergence of Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) [39, 46, 2, 26, 35]. Specifically, CZSL
aims to recognize unseen attribute-object compositions based on the primitive (i.e., attributes and
objects) knowledge learned from seen ones [60].
Traditional CZSL approaches either project both images and attribute-object labels into a joint space
to learn compositional representations [40, 36, 22], or use two classifiers to predict attributes and
objects separately [50, 25, 13]. Recently, benefiting from the impressive multimodal representational
abilities of large pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP [49], there have been further
significant advancements in CZSL [42, 34, 14, 28]. These methods employ the prompt tuning
technique [73], i.e., replacing the hard prompt like "a photo of [attribute] [object]" with
learnable soft prompt tokens to align images and textual composition labels, thereby fine-tuning
VLMs for adaptation to the CZSL task.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

