Improved Algorithms for Overlapping and Robust
Clustering of Edge-Colored Hypergraphs: An
LP-Based Combinatorial Approach

Changyeol Lee∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Yonsei University
Seoul, South Korea
777john@yonsei.ac.kr

Yongho Shin∗
Institute of Computer Science
University of Wrocław
Wrocław, Poland
yongho@cs.uni.wroc.pl

Hyung-Chan An†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Yonsei University
Seoul, South Korea
hyung-chan.an@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental task in both machine learning and data mining. Among
various methods, edge-colored clustering (ECC) has emerged as a useful approach
for handling categorical data. Given a hypergraph with (hyper)edges labeled by
colors, ECC aims to assign vertex colors to minimize the number of edges where
the vertex color differs from the edge’s color. However, traditional ECC has
inherent limitations, as it enforces a nonoverlapping and exhaustive clustering. To
tackle these limitations, three versions of ECC have been studied: L OCAL ECC
and G LOBAL ECC, which allow overlapping clusters, and ROBUST ECC, which
accounts for vertex outliers. For these problems, both linear programming (LP)
rounding algorithms and greedy combinatorial algorithms have been proposed.
While these LP-rounding algorithms provide high-quality solutions, they demand
substantial computation time; the greedy algorithms, on the other hand, run very
fast but often compromise solution quality. In this paper, we present a family of
algorithms that combines the strengths of LP with the computational efficiency of
combinatorial algorithms. Both experimental and theoretical analyses show that our
algorithms efficiently produce high-quality solutions for all three problems: L OCAL,
G LOBAL, and ROBUST ECC. We complement our algorithmic contributions with
complexity-theoretic inapproximability results and integrality gap bounds, which
suggest that significant theoretical improvements are unlikely. Our results also
answer two open questions previously raised in the literature.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental task in both machine learning and data mining [24, 35, 25]. Edge-colored
clustering (ECC), in particular, is a useful model when interactions between the items to be clustered
are represented as categorical data [8, 4]. To provide intuition, let us consider the following simple,
illustrative example from prior work [34, 4, 37, 51, 48, 19, 20]: given a set of food ingredients,
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

