Anchored Diffusion Language Model

Litu Rout

Constantine Caramanis

Sanjay Shakkottai

The University of Texas at Austin
{litu.rout, constantine, sanjay.shakkottai}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Diffusion Language Models (DLMs) promise parallel generation and bidirectional
context, yet they underperform autoregressive (AR) models in both likelihood
modeling and generated text quality. We identify that this performance gap arises
when important tokens (e.g., key words or low-frequency words that anchor a
sentence) are masked early in the forward process, limiting contextual information
for accurate reconstruction. To address this, we introduce the Anchored Diffusion
Language Model (ADLM), a novel two-stage framework that first predicts distributions over important tokens via an anchor network, and then predicts the likelihoods
of missing tokens conditioned on the anchored predictions. ADLM significantly
improves test perplexity on LM1B and OpenWebText, achieving up to 25.4% gains
over prior DLMs, and narrows the gap with strong AR baselines. It also achieves
state-of-the-art performance in zero-shot generalization across seven benchmarks
and surpasses AR models in MAUVE score, which marks the first time a DLM
generates better human-like text than an AR model. Theoretically, we derive an
Anchored Negative Evidence Lower Bound (ANELBO) objective and show that
anchoring improves sample complexity and likelihood modeling. Beyond diffusion,
anchoring boosts performance in AR models and enhances reasoning in math and
logic tasks, outperforming existing chain-of-thought approaches. Please see our
project page: https://anchored-diffusion-llm.github.io/ for code and demo.

1

Introduction

Large autoregressive language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in next-token
prediction, powering high quality text generation and emergent reasoning capabilities in AI systems.
By generating tokens sequentially, autoregressive (AR) models like GPT (Brown et al., 2020),
Gemini (Team-Gemini et al., 2023), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), and Claude (Anthropic, 2024)
condition on a growing prefix and excel at fitting the distribution of the next token. However, their
sequential generation process makes it challenging to solve complex reasoning tasks, since the model
does not see the entire sequence all at once.
An alternative paradigm has recently emerged in the form of Diffusion Language Models (DLMs),
which perform masked-token prediction via iterative refinement. Inspired by diffusion models for
continuous data (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), these approaches corrupt text (e.g., by masking (Lou
et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Sahoo et al., 2024; Ou et al., 2025) or random flipping (Austin et al.,
2021; Lou et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025)) and train a model to denoise or reconstruct the original
sequence over multiple steps (Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022a; Lou et al., 2024; Sahoo et al.,
2024; Shi et al., 2024; Ou et al., 2025). DLMs generate the entire sequence in parallel, allowing
bidirectional attention for better context and potential gains in controllable generation, complex
reasoning, and fast sampling. Despite their promise, masked diffusion models still lag behind AR
models in modeling the likelihood of missing tokens and generated text quality. Even with modern
training improvements, DLMs often achieve worse (higher) perplexity than AR transformers on
standard benchmarks (Lou et al., 2024; Sahoo et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Arriola et al., 2025).
We identify a key limitation in existing DLMs: when important tokens (e.g., low-frequency or
semantically important words) are masked early in the forward process, the model lacks sufficient
context to accurately reconstruct the original sequence. To address this, we propose the Anchored
Diffusion Language Model (ADLM)(§3), which modifies the noising process such that important
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

