Versatile Transferable Unlearnable Example
Generator
Zhihao Li1,∗ Jiale Cai1,∗ Gezheng Xu1,† Hao Zheng1,2 Qiuyue Li3
Fan Zhou3 Shichun Yang3 Charles Ling1,4 Boyu Wang1,4,†
1
Western University 2 Central South University 3 Beihang University 4 Vector Institute
{zli3446,jcai336,gxu86,charles.ling}@uwo.ca zhenghaocsu@gmail.com
{liqiuyue23,zhoufan,yangshichun}@buaa.edu.cn
bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract
The rapid growth of publicly available data has fueled deep learning advancements
but also raises concerns about unauthorized data usage. Unlearnable Examples
(UEs) have emerged as a data protection strategy that introduces imperceptible perturbations to prevent unauthorized learning. However, most existing UE methods
produce perturbations strongly tied to specific training sets, leading to a significant
drop in unlearnability when applied to unseen data or tasks. In this paper, we
argue that for broad applicability, UEs should maintain their effectiveness across
diverse application scenarios. To this end, we conduct the first comprehensive
study on the transferability of UEs across diverse and practical yet demanding
settings. Specifically, we identify key scenarios that pose significant challenges for
existing UE methods, including varying styles, out-of-distribution classes, resolutions, and architectures. Moreover, we propose Versatile Transferable Generator
(VTG), a transferable generator designed to safeguard data across various conditions. Specifically, VTG integrates Adversarial Domain Augmentation (ADA) into
the generator’s training process to synthesize out-of-distribution samples, thereby
improving its generalizability to unseen scenarios. Furthermore, we propose a
Perturbation-Label Coupling (PLC) mechanism that leverages contrastive learning to directly align perturbations with class labels. This approach reduces the
generator’s reliance on data semantics, allowing VTG to produce unlearnable perturbations in a distribution-agnostic manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness and broad applicability of our approach. Code is available at
https://github.com/zhli-cs/VTG.

1

Introduction

The abundance of free internet data has facilitated the construction of numerous datasets, significantly
advancing the field of deep learning [1, 2, 3, 4]. Despite their pivotal roles, growing concerns exist
over the potential unauthorized exploitation of online personal data. To safeguard individual privacy,
Unlearnable Examples (UEs) [5, 6, 7] have gained prominence in recent years. Models trained on
unlearnable data tend to learn the correspondence between labels and perturbations instead of real
semantics, resulting in poor classification accuracy on clean test images.
However, most existing UE methods generate perturbations that are highly dependent on specific
training data, resulting in a significant performance drop when applied to unseen data or tasks.
For instance, several initial works [5, 8, 9, 10] only achieve unlearnability when both training and
∗
†

Equal contribution. The author order was determined by a coin flip.
Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

