Non-Clairvoyant Scheduling with Progress Bars

Ziyad Benomar
CREST, ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique,
Fairplay joint team,
Palaiseau, France
ziyad.benomar@ensae.fr
Alexander Lindermayr
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
UC Berkeley
alex.lindermayr@berkeley.edu

Romain Cosson
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
rc6142@nyu.edu

Jens Schlöter
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI)
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Jens.Schloter@cwi.nl

Abstract
In non-clairvoyant scheduling, the goal is to minimize the total job completion
time without prior knowledge of individual job processing times. This classical
online optimization problem has recently gained attention through the framework
of learning-augmented algorithms. We introduce a natural setting in which the
scheduler receives continuous feedback in the form of progress bars—estimates
of the fraction of each job completed over time. We design new algorithms for
both adversarial and stochastic progress bars and prove strong competitive bounds.
Our results in the adversarial case surprisingly induce improved guarantees for
learning-augmented scheduling with job size predictions. We also introduce a
general method for combining scheduling algorithms, yielding further insights in
scheduling with predictions. Finally, we propose a stochastic model of progress
bars as a more optimistic alternative to conventional worst-case models, and present
an asymptotically optimal scheduling algorithm in this setting.

1

Introduction

We study the fundamental problem of scheduling on a single machine: there are n jobs, each with a
processing time pj , available at time 0, and the goal is to preemptively (i.e., jobs can be interrupted
and resumed later) schedule them to minimize the sum of the completion times. In the clairvoyant
(or offline) setting, i.e., when all processing times are known to the scheduler, the optimal solution is
to schedule jobs in increasing order of processing times. This rule is known as Shortest Processing
Time First, or as Smith’s rule in reference to a 1956 paper that first formalized it [Smi56]. In many
practical applications, such as operating systems or high-performance computing, the scheduler does
not know the jobs’ processing times upfront. This restriction led to the model of non-clairvoyant
(or online) scheduling, where the scheduler learns about the processing time of a job only when this
job is completed. For this online problem, introduced in the early 90s [FST94, SWW91, MPT94], a
classical algorithm is Round-Robin, which simply allocates the same amount of computing power to
all unfinished jobs. It approximates the optimal solution within a factor (called competitive ratio)
of 2, and it is well-known that this value is optimal among non-clairvoyant algorithms [MPT94].
The clairvoyant and non-clairvoyant models have a stark contrast in their information model, which
is the amount of information (feedback) the online algorithm receives over time. In this paper, we
introduce and study a model of scheduling with progress bars that interpolates between these two
settings. Non-clairvoyant scheduling has already been investigated through the lens of learningaugmented algorithms (aka algorithms with predictions) [LV21, MV20, LM25b]. Therein, algorithms
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

