Private Continual Counting of Unbounded Streams

Ben Jacobsen
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin — Madison
bjacobsen3@wisc.edu

Kassem Fawaz
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin — Madison
kfawaz@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of differentially private continual counting in the unbounded
setting where the input size n is not known in advance. Current state-of-the-art
algorithms based on optimal instantiations of the matrix mechanism [33] cannot
be directly applied here because their privacy guarantees only hold when key
parameters are tuned to n. Using the common ‘doubling trick’ avoids knowledge
of n but leads to suboptimal and non-smooth error. We solve this problem by
introducing novel matrix factorizations based on logarithmic perturbations of the
1
function √1−z
studied in prior works, which may be of independent interest.
The resulting algorithm has smooth error, and for any α > 0 and t ≤ n it is
able to privately estimate the sum of the first t data points with O(log2+2α (t))
variance. It requires O(t) space and amortized O(log t) time per round, compared
to O(log(n) log(t)) variance, O(n) space and O(n log n) pre-processing time for
the nearly-optimal bounded-input algorithm of Henzinger et al. [27]. Empirically,
we find that our algorithm’s performance is also comparable to theirs in absolute
terms: our variance is less than 1.5× theirs for t as large as 224 .

1

Introduction

Differentially private counting under continual observation [11, 18] refers to the problem of maintaining accurate running totals over streams of sensitive data. It has attracted a great deal of attention
in recent years [3, 4, 6, 7, 14, 16, 23, 27, 28, 35] for its wide-ranging applications in optimization [13, 12, 14, 21, 32, 36], as well as online learning and the private analysis of streaming data more
broadly [1, 10, 30, 38, 40]. It has also been used in many large-scale deployments of differential
privacy, such as Google’s private next-word prediction [34] and Smart Select models [26]. To a
large extent, this flurry of activity has been prompted by recent algorithmic improvements in matrix
factorizations for streaming data [14, 23, 27, 33], which have dramatically improved privacy/utility
tradeoffs compared to classical approaches based on binary trees [11, 18, 29].
One challenge when applying matrix-based algorithms to streaming settings is that they largely
assume access to the input size n as a parameter. While this is a very natural assumption in contexts
like private model training, researchers from the beginning have also motivated their work with
appeals to applications like public health [18] where it is much less clear how the assumption could
hold. In fact, it is known that difficulties related to unbounded inputs have influenced practical
deployments of DP [2]: famously, after Apple announced that it planned to use differential privacy to
collect user data, Tang et al. [39] discovered that their implementation achieved this by guaranteeing
privacy only over a single day while allowing privacy loss per-user to grow without bound over time.
Simple solutions to this problem all carry fundamental tradeoffs. Lifting a bounded-input algorithm
to the unbounded case with some form of doubling trick [11] asymptotically preserves performance,
but it also leads to non-smooth growth in error over time, undermining one of the major selling points
of matrix methods over binary trees [27]. Using a bounded matrix mechanism alongside the classical
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

