RAPTR: Radar-based 3D Pose Estimation
using Transformer
Sorachi Kato1,2→, Ryoma Yataka1,3 , Pu (Perry) Wang1†, Pedro Miraldo1 ,
Takuya Fujihashi2 , Petros Boufounos1
1
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), USA
2
The University of Osaka, Japan
3
Information Technology R&D Center (ITC), Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Japan

Abstract
Radar-based indoor 3D human pose estimation typically relied on fine-grained
3D keypoint labels, which are costly to obtain especially in complex indoor settings involving clutter, occlusions, or multiple people. In this paper, we propose RAPTR (RAdar Pose esTimation using tRansformer) under weak supervision, using only 3D BBox and 2D keypoint labels which are considerably easier and more scalable to collect. Our RAPTR is characterized by a two-stage
pose decoder architecture with a pseudo-3D deformable attention to enhance
(pose/joint) queries with multi-view radar features: a pose decoder estimates
initial 3D poses with a 3D template loss designed to utilize the 3D BBox labels and mitigate depth ambiguities; and a joint decoder refines the initial poses
with 2D keypoint labels and a 3D gravity loss. Evaluated on two indoor radar
datasets, RAPTR outperforms existing methods, reducing joint position error by
34.3% on HIBER and 76.9% on MMVR. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/merlresearch/radar-pose-transformer.

1

Introduction

Accurate human perception is essential for indoor applications, including elderly monitoring, smart
building management, and robotic navigation. Although vision sensors offer high spatial resolution,
they raise privacy concerns and perform poorly under low light, occlusions, and hazardous conditions
(fire or smoke). In contrast, radar provides penetration capability, robustness to adverse conditions,
and low deployment cost, ideal for privacy-preserving indoor sensing [44, 18, 23, 30, 26].
By processing 4D radar tensors, RF-Pose 3D [48] demonstrated through-the-wall 3D pose estimation
with a convolutional neural network (CNN), while HRRadarPose [11] employed an hourglass neural
network HRNet [34]. mRI [1] is a multi-modal 3D human pose estimation dataset that integrates
mmWave radar, RGB-D cameras, and inertial sensors to facilitate research in human pose estimation and action detection. QRFPose [33] is a novel approach that adopts a DETR [3]-style query
mechanism for end-to-end 3D regression using multi-view radar perceptions. Existing pipelines often
rely on expensive fine-grained 3D keypoint labels [35], typically collected using non-portable 3D
motion capture systems such as VICON, or using LiDAR, which can still suffer from occlusions and
incomplete observations.
Collecting cheaper, lower-cost labels, such as fine-grained 2D keypoints in the image plane and/or
coarse-grained 3D bounding boxes (BBoxes), is considerably easier and more scalable particularly in
complex indoor settings (e.g., cluttered, occlusion, multi-person), compared with acquiring dense
→
†

The work was initiated during his internship at MERL.
Project Lead.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

