Does Reinforcement Learning Really Incentivize
Reasoning Capacity in LLMs Beyond the Base Model?

Yang Yue 1 ∗ † Zhiqi Chen 1 ∗ Rui Lu 1 Andrew Zhao 1 Zhaokai Wang 2 Yang Yue 1
Shiji Song 1 Gao Huang 1 B
1

2
LeapLab, Tsinghua University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{le-y22, zq-chen23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

https://limit-of-rlvr.github.io

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) has recently demonstrated notable success in enhancing the reasoning performance of large language
models (LLMs), particularly in mathematics and programming tasks. It is widely
believed that, similar to how traditional RL helps agents to explore and learn new
strategies, RLVR enables LLMs to continuously self-improve, thus acquiring novel
reasoning abilities that exceed the capacity of the corresponding base models. In
this study, we take a critical look at the current state of RLVR by systematically
probing the reasoning capability boundaries of RLVR-trained LLMs across various
model families, RL algorithms, and math/coding/visual reasoning benchmarks,
using pass@k at large k values as the evaluation metric. While RLVR improves
sampling efficiency towards correct paths, we surprisingly find that current training does not elicit fundamentally new reasoning patterns. We observe that while
RLVR-trained models outperform their base models at smaller values of k (e.g.,
k=1), base models achieve higher pass@k score when k is large. Moreover, we
observe that the reasoning capability boundary of LLMs often narrows as RLVR
training progresses. Further coverage and perplexity analysis shows that the reasoning paths generated by RLVR models are already included in the base models’
sampling distribution, suggesting that their reasoning abilities originate from and
are bounded by the base model. From this perspective, treating the base model as
an upper bound, our quantitative analysis shows that six popular RLVR algorithms
perform similarly and remain far from optimal in fully leveraging the potential of
the base model. In contrast, we find that distillation can introduce new reasoning
patterns from the teacher and genuinely expand the model’s reasoning capabilities.
Taken together, our findings suggest that current RLVR methods have not fully
realized the potential of RL to elicit genuinely novel reasoning abilities in LLMs.
This underscores the need for improved RL paradigms–such as continual scaling
and multi-turn agent-environment interaction–to unlock this potential.

1

Introduction

The development of reasoning-centric large language models (LLMs), such as OpenAI-o1 [1],
DeepSeek-R1 [2], and Kimi-1.5 [3], has significantly advanced the frontier of LLM capabilities,
particularly in solving complex logical tasks involving mathematics and programming. In contrast to
traditional instruction-tuned approaches that rely on human-curated annotations [4, 5], the key driver
∗
Equal Contribution. † Project Lead. B Corresponding Author. The first author Yang Yue (乐洋) and the
sixth author Yang Yue (乐阳) share the same English name but different Chinese names.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

