Domain-Specific Pruning of Large Mixture-of-Experts
Models with Few-shot Demonstrations
Zican Dong1,2∗, Han Peng1,2∗ , Peiyu Liu3†, Wayne Xin Zhao1,2†,
Dong Wu5 , Feng Xiao4 , Zhifeng Wang4
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
3
University of International Business and Economics
4
YanTron Technology Co. Ltd 5 EBTech Co. Ltd
{dongzican, panospeng}@ruc.edu.cn
liupeiyustu@163.com, batmanfly@gmail.com,
wudong@yantronic.com, {fengx, zhifengw}@ebtech.com

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models achieve a favorable trade-off between performance and inference efficiency by activating only a subset of experts. However,
the memory overhead of storing all experts remains a major limitation, especially
in large-scale MoE models such as DeepSeek-R1 (671B). In this study, we investigate domain specialization and expert redundancy in large-scale MoE models and
uncover a consistent behavior we term few-shot expert localization, with only a
few in-domain demonstrations, the model consistently activates a sparse and stable
subset of experts on tasks within the same domain. Building on this observation,
we propose a simple yet effective pruning framework, EASY-EP, that leverages
a few domain-specific demonstrations to identify and retain only the most relevant experts. EASY-EP comprises two key components: output-aware expert
importance assessment and expert-level token contribution estimation. The
former evaluates the importance of each expert for the current token by considering
the gating scores and L2 norm of the outputs of activated experts, while the latter
assesses the contribution of tokens based on representation similarities before and
after routed experts. Experiments on DeepSeek-R1 and DeepSeek-V3-0324 show
that our method can achieve comparable performances and 2.99× throughput under
the same memory budget as the full model, with only half the experts. Our code is
available at https://github.com/RUCAIBox/EASYEP.

1

Introduction

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures have been widely adopted as the backbones of various
large language models (LLMs) due to their efficiency of scaling parameters without proportional
computational overhead [1–4]. However, the deployment of large MoE models imposes substantial
memory requirements. Taking DeepSeek-R1 (671B) [1] as an example, it takes about 1500 GB
under BF16 precision and 750 GB under FP8 precision, necessitating 4×8 A800 or 2×8 H800 GPU
configurations, respectively. This underscores the critical need to explore lite deployment strategies
for large-scale MoE models like DeepSeek-R1.
Various training-free approaches have been proposed to alleviate the inference memory demands of
MoE models. Expert pruning reduces memory by removing less important experts. Among them,
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

