Curriculum Abductive Learning

Wen-Chao Hu1,2 Qi-Jie Li1,2 Lin-Han Jia1 Cunjing Ge1,2
Yu-Feng Li1,2 Yuan Jiang1,2 Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{huwc,liqj,jialh,liyf,jiangy,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn,gecunjing@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Abductive Learning (ABL) integrates machine learning with logical reasoning
in a loop: a learning model predicts symbolic concept labels from raw inputs,
which are revised through abduction using domain knowledge and then fed back
for retraining. Due to the nondeterminism of abduction, the training process often
suffers from instability, especially when the knowledge base is large and complex,
resulting in a prohibitively large abduction space. While prior works focus on
improving candidate selection within this space, they typically treat the knowledge base as a static black box. In this work, we propose Curriculum Abductive
Learning (C-ABL), a method that explicitly leverages the internal structure of the
knowledge base to address the ABL training challenges. C-ABL partitions the
knowledge base into a sequence of sub-bases, progressively introduced during
training. This reduces the abduction space throughout training and enables the
model to incorporate logic in a stepwise, smooth way. Experiments across multiple
tasks show that C-ABL outperforms previous ABL implementations, significantly
improves training stability, convergence speed, and final accuracy, especially under
complex knowledge setting.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in data-driven machine learning methods have achieved remarkable success across
a wide range of tasks [Zhou, 2021]. However, when it comes to leverage structured, formal knowledge—such as logic rules or domain-specific constraints—these methods often fall short, therefore
mitigating their interpretability and reliability. This has motivated the emergence of data- and
knowledge-driven artificial intelligence, which aims to tightly integrate learning from data with
logical reasoning [Hitzler, 2022, Yang et al., 2025].
Abductive Learning (ABL) [Zhou, 2019, Zhou and Huang, 2022] is a representative framework
that integrates machine learning with logical reasoning in a balanced loop. In ABL, a machine
learning model first predicts symbolic concept labels from input data, which may initially violate
domain knowledge when the model is under-trained; abduction then generates a set of concept label
candidates compatible with domain knowledge, and from which the best candidate is selected via
consistency optimization. The selected candidate is subsequently used to supervise the model’s next
update. This loop iterates, enabling the system to gradually align predictions with logical constraints.
While elegant in principle, this loop setup often introduces training inefficiency and instability [Yang
et al., 2024, He and Li, 2025]. Due to the nondeterminism of abduction [Magnani et al., 2009],
often multiple candidates compatible with the domain knowledge exist. When the knowledge base is
complex, the resulting abduction space can become prohibitively large, causing the model to oscillate
among many plausible yet incorrect concept labels. This undermines the reliability of the supervision
signal and hinders the training process.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

