A Statistical Theory of Contrastive Learning via
Approximate Sufficient Statistics

Licong Lin
UC Berkeley
liconglin@berkeley.edu

Song Mei
UC Berkeley
songmei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning—a modern approach to extract useful representations from
unlabeled data by training models to distinguish similar samples from dissimilar ones—has driven significant progress in foundation models. In this work,
we develop a new theoretical framework for analyzing data augmentation-based
contrastive learning, with a focus on SimCLR as a representative example. Our
approach is based on the concept of approximate sufficient statistics, which we
extend beyond its original definition in Oko et al. [28] for contrastive languageimage pretraining (CLIP) using KL-divergence. We generalize it to equivalent
forms and general f-divergences, and show that minimizing SimCLR and other
contrastive losses yields encoders that are approximately sufficient. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that these near-sufficient encoders can be effectively adapted to
downstream regression and classification tasks, with performance depending on
their sufficiency and the error induced by data augmentation in contrastive learning.
Concrete examples in linear regression and topic classification are provided to
illustrate the broad applicability of our results.

1

Introduction

Leveraging massive unlabeled data to learn useful representations has played a central role in recent
advances in foundation models. A prominent approach of this kind is contrastive learning, which has
driven significant progress in visual representation learning [5, 14], large-scale speech processing [3],
and multimodal AI [31, 21].
In short, contrastive learning finds useful representations of the data by maximizing similarity
between paired samples while minimizing it for non-paired samples. Consider SimCLR [5] for
visual representation learning as an illustrative example. Given a dataset of images x P X , SimCLR
generates two augmented views pz p1q , z p2q q P X ˆ X for each image x using random transformations
(i.e., data augmentations) such as random cropping, random color distortions, and random Gaussian
blur, etc. It then trains an encoder f that aligns the paired views and separates the non-paired views
through minimizing the loss in Eq. (2). The learned representation f pxq (or f pz p1q q) can then be
adapted to downstream tasks with few labeled samples and minimal fine-tuning.
Despite its remarkable empirical performance, the theoretical aspects of contrastive learning remain
an active area of study [32, 28]. In this work, we present a theoretical analysis of data augmentationbased contrastive learning, with a specific focus on the SimCLR framework [5] as a representative
example. Notably, recent work by Oko et al. [28] has introduced new theoretical insights into
contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP). They first introduced the concept of approximate
sufficient statistics, showing that the image and text encoders obtained from the empirical risk
minimizer of CLIP are approximately sufficient. Additionally, under the joint graphical hierarchical
model (JGHM) assumption for image and text data, they demonstrated that such encoders can be
efficiently adapted to various downstream multimodal tasks.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

