Influence Functions for Edge Edits
in Non-Convex Graph Neural Networks

Jaeseung Heo1 , Kyeongheung Yun2 , Seokwon Yoon2 ,
MoonJeong Park1 , Jungseul Ok1,2 , Dongwoo Kim1,2
1
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
POSTECH, South Korea
{jsheo12304,yuonsinsa,swyoon,mjeongp,jungseul,dongwookim}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding how individual edges influence the behavior of graph neural networks (GNNs) is essential for improving their interpretability and robustness.
Graph influence functions have emerged as promising tools to efficiently estimate
the effects of edge deletions without retraining. However, existing influence prediction methods rely on strict convexity assumptions, exclusively consider the
influence of edge deletions while disregarding edge insertions, and fail to capture
changes in message propagation caused by these modifications. In this work, we
propose a proximal Bregman response function specifically tailored for GNNs,
relaxing the convexity requirement and enabling accurate influence prediction for
standard neural network architectures. Furthermore, our method explicitly accounts
for message propagation effects and extends influence prediction to both edge deletions and insertions in a principled way. Experiments with real-world datasets
demonstrate accurate influence predictions for different characteristics of GNNs.
We further demonstrate that the influence function is versatile in applications such
as graph rewiring and adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated that leveraging structural relationships, often
encoded as connectivity between data points, can enhance the predictive performance of neural networks across many tasks. Although the literature clearly identifies the importance of the relationship,
the individual contribution of each connectivity, i.e., an edge, remains poorly understood.
Several recent studies have explored edge importance from a particular perspective. For example,
Nguyen et al. [26] propose an edge rewiring method to mitigate the problem of over-smoothing [23],
a phenomenon where the learned node representation becomes indistinguishable as the depth of the
GNN increases. Alon and Yahav [2] suggest edge rewiring methods to overcome the over-squashing,
which occurs when information propagation encounters bottlenecks between distant nodes.
Despite progress in addressing individual challenges, a unified framework for quantifying edge
influence across these perspectives would provide a more comprehensive understanding of their role
in graph neural networks. For instance, it would allow us to assess how modifying a single edge
affects model behavior from both over-smoothing and over-squashing perspectives. On the other
hand, influence functions have been introduced to quantify the impact on evaluation metrics, such
as validation loss, when a training data point is removed [21]. To do so, the function estimates the
changes in model parameters when the target data point is excluded from the training.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

