Stability and Sharper Risk Bounds with Convergence
Rate Õ(1/n2)

Bowei Zhu1,2,3 , Shaojie Li1,2,3,∗ , Mingyang Yi1,∗ , Yong Liu1,2,3,∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
3
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE
{bowei.zhu, lishaojie95, yimingyang, liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Prior work (Klochkov & Zhivotovskiy, 2021) establishes at most O (log(n)/n)
excess risk bounds via algorithmic stability for strongly-convex learners with high
probability. We show that under the similar common assumptions — PolyakLojasiewicz condition,
smoothness, and Lipschitz continous for losses — rates

of O log2 (n)/n2 are at most achievable. To our knowledge, our analysis also
provides the tightest high-probability bounds for gradient-based generalization
gaps in nonconvex settings.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic stability is a fundamental concept in learning theory [3], which can be traced back to the
foundational works of Vapnik and Chervonenkis [46] and has a deep connection with learnability
[37, 40, 39]. Roughly speaking, an algorithm is stable if a substitution of single example in the
training dataset leads to a minor change of the output model. With such algorithmic stability, the
generalization ability of model is guaranteed. Owing to the relationship, the algorithmic stability is
recognized as a powerful tool to explore the generalization.
In practice, researchers built the generalization bounds expressed in-expectation or in-high probability. While providing in-expectation bounds is relatively straightforward, their high probability
counterparts are more crucial for practical optimization algorithms [12, 4, 20]. Because we often
train models single time in practice, and high probability bounds offer more informative insights.
Therefore, we focus on improving high probability risk bounds through an exploration of algorithmic
stability.
Exploring the high-probability generalization gap bounded via algorithmic stability was firstly chased
to Bousquet and Elisseeff [3], and was further developed by Feldman and Vondrak [11, 12]. Within
these literature, the√optimal high-probability bound of generalization error consists of the “sampling
error” O (log(n)/ n) plus the algorithmic stability parameter for bounded loss function. Owing to
the existence of sampling error, deriving the bound within the framework
in [4] can not be improved,
√
since the lower bound of sampling error is proven to be O(1/ n). To resolve this, Klochkov
and Zhivotovskiy [20] propose to alternatively explore the excess risk, which directly reveals the
performance of learned model, and can be decomposed into optimization and generalization errors.
Without considering the sampling error, Klochkov and Zhivotovskiy [20] improve the high-probability
bound to excess risk of O(log (n)/n) plus algorithmic stability parameter, under a Bernstein type
condition [49]. Moreover, under strongly convexity condition, the algorithmic stability parameter
of projected gradient descent (PGD) is O (log(n)/n) [20]. Following this, the algorithmic stability∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

