Learning Interestingness in Automated Mathematical
Theory Formation

George Tsoukalas
UT Austin
george.tsoukalas@utexas.edu

Rahul Saha
UT Austin
rahul.saha@utexas.edu

Sabrina Reguyal
Princeton University, Stanford University
sreguyal@stanford.edu

Amitayush Thakur
UT Austin
amitayush@utexas.edu
Swarat Chaudhuri
UT Austin
swarat@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We take two key steps in automating the open-ended discovery of new mathematical theories, a grand challenge in artificial intelligence. First, we introduce
F ERMAT, a reinforcement learning (RL) environment that models concept discovery and theorem-proving using a set of symbolic actions, opening up a range of
RL problems relevant to theory discovery. Second, we explore a specific problem through F ERMAT: automatically scoring the interestingness of mathematical
objects. We investigate evolutionary algorithms for synthesizing nontrivial interestingness measures. In particular, we introduce an LLM-based evolutionary
algorithm that features function abstraction, leading to notable improvements in discovering elementary number theory and finite fields over hard-coded baselines. We
open-source the F ERMAT environment at github.com/trishullab/Fermat.

1

Introduction

AI researchers have dreamed of building an “automated mathematician” since the 1950s [29]. Such a
system would allow human mathematicians to harness the vast processing capacity of computers to
discover entirely new areas of mathematics [42]. An emerging body of work seeks to realize this
dream using the tools of modern machine learning. In particular, the AI community has developed a
wide range of systems that can prove formal theorems [13, 47] and search for programs discovering
mathematical constructions [31, 40].
However, a key limitation of much of this research is that it is focused on solving predefined problems.
Mathematicians develop theories through an open-ended process of defining new concepts, studying
their properties, making conjectures, and proving or finding counterexamples. While some work [35]
has offered systems that construct new problems in addition to solving them, there is currently no
framework that supports the full theory-formation process, including, for example, the synthesis of
new definitions in addition to problems.
A central challenge in this open-ended process is guiding the search. The space of possible definitions
and conjectures is combinatorially vast, and most paths lead to trivial or dull mathematics. Human
mathematicians navigate this space using a nuanced, intuitive sense of “interestingness" — a judgment
of scientific potential that directs their focus. An explicit formulation of this concept has long been
debated, with different perspectives valuing properties such as the surprising connection between
disparate fields [36], depth and generality [22], or its unexpected real-world applicability [49].
In this paper, we take two key steps towards addressing these challenges. First, we provide a
reinforcement learning (RL) framework, called F ERMAT (Figure 1), which can be used to design and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

