Generalization Error Analysis for Selective
State-Space Models Through the Lens of Attention

Arya Honarpisheh
Mustafa Bozdag
Octavia Camps
Mario Sznaier
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
{honarpisheh.a, bozdag.m}@northeastern.edu,
{camps, msznaier}@coe.neu.edu

Abstract
State-space models (SSMs) have recently emerged as a compelling alternative
to Transformers for sequence modeling tasks. This paper presents a theoretical
generalization analysis of selective SSMs, the core architectural component behind
the Mamba model. We derive a novel covering number-based generalization bound
for selective SSMs, building upon recent theoretical advances in the analysis of
Transformer models. Using this result, we analyze how the spectral abscissa of the
continuous-time state matrix influences the model’s stability during training and its
ability to generalize across sequence lengths. We empirically validate our findings
on a synthetic majority task, the IMDb sentiment classification benchmark, and the
ListOps task, demonstrating how our theoretical insights translate into practical
model behavior.

1

Introduction

Foundation models trained on large-scale datasets have become the dominant paradigm in modern
machine learning following the introduction of the Transformer architecture [1]. Although they
are very effective in sequence processing, the global nature of self-attention imposes limitations: a
finite sequence window and quadratic scaling w.r.t. the window length. Recently, a new family of
models named state-space models (SSMs) became a popular alternative to address this problem [2, 3].
These models are rooted in the classical state-space representations from control theory introduced
by Kalman et al. [4]. Theoretical analysis of SSMs has primarily focused on linear time-invariant
(LTI) settings. Rácz et al. [5] derive a length-independent generalization bound for deep stable LTI
SSMs using Rademacher contraction techniques, while Liu and Li [6] establishes a length-dependent
bound and proposes corresponding initialization and regularization schemes. These results rely on
system stability from control theory, ensuring that operator norms remain well-defined and finite. LTI
architectures allow for an easy imposition of the stability assumption, making them well-suited for
bounded-norm analysis.
The state-of-the-art SSMs that form the core of the Mamba and Mamba-2 architectures are selective
and inherently nonlinear [7, 8]. They employ a selective-scan mechanism to capture long-term
dependencies, allowing for adaptive and efficient sequence processing. This design, however, makes
their analysis distinct from LTI SSMs and more closely aligned with self-attention. Despite their
growing empirical success, theoretical understanding of their capabilities remains limited, with the
exceptions of Ali et al. [9] and Dao and Gu [8], who establish a connection between Transformers
and SSMs, Yu et al. [10] who studies the initialization and training behavior of SSMs, and other
recent works that examine their expressive power [11–15].
Alongside expressive power, which characterizes model bias, an equally important question is that of
generalization, which captures the variance component of the bias–variance tradeoff, and it is central
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

