Demystifying Spectral Feature Learning for
Instrumental Variable Regression

Dimitri Meunier∗
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Antoine Moulin
Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Jakub Wornbard
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Vladimir R. Kostic
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia & University of Novi Sad

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Abstract
We address the problem of causal effect estimation in the presence of hidden
confounders, using nonparametric instrumental variable (IV) regression. A leading
strategy employs spectral features - that is, learned features spanning the top
eigensubspaces of the operator linking treatments to instruments. We derive a
generalization error bound for a two-stage least squares estimator based on spectral
features, and gain insights into the method’s performance and failure modes. We
show that performance depends on two key factors, leading to a clear taxonomy of
outcomes. In a good scenario, the approach is optimal. This occurs with strong
spectral alignment, meaning the structural function is well-represented by the
top eigenfunctions of the conditional operator, coupled with this operator’s slow
eigenvalue decay, indicating a strong instrument. Performance degrades in a bad
scenario: spectral alignment remains strong, but rapid eigenvalue decay (indicating
a weaker instrument) demands significantly more samples for effective feature
learning. Finally, in the ugly scenario, weak spectral alignment causes the method
to fail, regardless of the eigenvalues’ characteristics. Our synthetic experiments
empirically validate this taxonomy. We further introduce a practical procedure to
estimate these spectral properties from data, allowing practitioners to diagnose
which regime a given problem falls into. We apply this method to the dSprites
dataset, demonstrating its utility.

1

Introduction

We study the nonparametric instrumental variable (NPIV) model [1, 32]
Y = h0 (X) + U,

E[U | Z] = 0,

Z ̸⊥⊥ X,

(1)

where X is the treatment, Y the outcome, Z the instrument, U an unobserved confounder, and
h0 ∈ L2 (X) is the structural function to be learned, where we denoted L2 (X) the L2 space
corresponding to the distribution PX . We assume no common confounder of Z and Y . To illustrate
this setting, consider a simplified example inspired by [20]. Suppose we want to determine how
ticket price (X) affects the number of flight tickets sold (Y ). A potential confounder (U ) could be a
major event (e.g., a large conference or festival) occurring at the destination. This event would likely
increase demand for flights, and airline pricing algorithms would result in more expensive seats being
sold; the confounder U influences both X and Y . A naive regression of sales on price might then
misleadingly suggest that higher prices lead to higher sales. This occurs because the analysis fails to
account for the event, which independently drives up both demand (sales) and prices. To obtain a less
biased estimate of the price effect, we could use an instrument (Z), such as the cost of jet fuel. The
∗

direct correspondence to dimitri.meunier.21@ucl.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

