On Evaluating LLM Alignment by Evaluating
LLMs as Judges

Yixin Liu1
1

Pengfei Liu2

Arman Cohan1

Yale University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yixin.liu, arman.cohan}@yale.edu

Abstract
Alignment with human preferences is an important evaluation aspect of LLMs, requiring them to be helpful, honest, safe, and to precisely follow human instructions.
Evaluating large language models’ (LLMs) alignment typically involves directly
assessing their open-ended responses, requiring human annotators or strong LLM
judges. Conversely, LLMs themselves have also been extensively evaluated as
judges for assessing alignment. In this work, we examine the relationship between
LLMs’ generation and evaluation capabilities in aligning with human preferences.
To this end, we first conduct a comprehensive analysis of the generation-evaluation
consistency (GE-consistency) among various LLMs, revealing a strong correlation between their generation and evaluation capabilities when evaluated by a
strong LLM preference oracle. Utilizing this finding, we propose a benchmarking
paradigm that measures LLM alignment with human preferences without directly
evaluating their generated outputs, instead assessing LLMs in their role as evaluators. Our evaluation shows that our proposed benchmark, A LIGN E VAL, matches or
surpasses widely used automatic LLM evaluation benchmarks, such as AlpacaEval
and Arena-Hard, in capturing human preferences when ranking LLMs. Our study
offers valuable insights into the connection between LLMs’ generation and evaluation capabilities, and introduces a benchmark that assesses alignment without
directly evaluating model outputs.1

1

Introduction

Alignment with human preferences is a key property of LLMs, requiring them to accurately follow
user instructions, generate responses that meet user needs, and reflect human values [29, 4]. Evaluating
LLM alignment2 typically involves human evaluations of model outputs in response to various user
queries, since it requires assessing LLMs’ capabilities in various open-ended tasks. However, such
large-scale and reliable human evaluations are often complex, expensive, and time-consuming [46].
To scale this process, the widely used ChatBot Arena benchmark [5] relies on crowd-sourced
annotations, where each instance consists of a pairwise comparison between two model outputs for
a given instruction. To reduce reliance on the expensive process of human evaluation, automatic
alignment benchmarks have been proposed [45, 22, 21, 24], where LLMs as judges are used in
place of human annotators, enabling faster evaluation while maintaining a reasonably high level
of agreement with human preferences. Consequently, this LLMs-as-Judges paradigm has been
commonly used for LLM evaluation in alignment and other open-ended tasks.
1

A LIGN E VAL is available at https://github.com/yale-nlp/AlignEval.
In this work, we use “LLM alignment” to refer to LLMs’ general capabilities in following human instructions
and providing helpful, high-quality responses, which goes beyond safety or harmlessness alignment.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

