Measuring AI Ability to Complete Long Software
Tasks
Thomas Kwa∗, Ben West†∗, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia,
Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx
Ryan Bloom, Thomas Broadley, Haoxing Du, Brian Goodrich, Nikola Jurkovic,
Luke Harold Miles‡, Seraphina Nix, Tao Lin, Chris Painter, Neev Parikh, David Rein,
Lucas Jun Koba Sato, Hjalmar Wijk, Daniel M. Ziegler§
Elizabeth Barnes, Lawrence Chan
Model Evaluation & Threat Research (METR)

Abstract
Despite rapid progress on AI benchmarks, the real-world meaning of benchmark
performance remains unclear. To quantify the capabilities of AI systems in terms
of human capabilities, we propose a new metric: 50%-task-completion time horizon, the time humans typically take to complete tasks that AI agents can complete
with 50% success rate. We first timed humans with relevant domain expertise
on a combination of RE-Bench, HCAST, and 66 novel shorter tasks. On these
tasks, agents built using current frontier AI models such as o3 have a 50% time
horizon of around 110 minutes. Furthermore, frontier AI time horizon has doubled approximately every seven months since 2019, though the trend may have
accelerated since 2024. The increase in AI agents’ time horizons seems to be primarily driven by greater reliability, ability to adapt to mistakes, logical reasoning,
and capacity for tool use. We discuss the limitations of our results—including
their degree of external validity—and the implications of increased autonomy for
dangerous capabilities. If these results generalize to real-world software tasks, extrapolation of this trend predicts that within 5 years, AI systems will be capable of
automating many software tasks that currently take humans a month.

1

Introduction

In the last five years, frontier AI systems have undergone a dramatic transformation in capabilities, evolving from basic text generation [1] to autonomously executing complex multi-hour machine learning research projects [2]. Sufficiently capable AIs could perform dangerous, highly complex actions like autonomous development of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons
(CBRN) and self-replication and adaptation outside human control [3]. Understanding AI capabilities helps inform the development of safety guardrails as systems become increasingly powerful. In
particular, many frontier AI developers have committed to using measures of specific AI capabilities to determine the necessary risk mitigations for their frontier AI systems. Robust benchmarks
that can accurately track and forecast AI capabilities thus form the foundation for responsible AI
governance and risk mitigation.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author, thomas.kwa@metr.org.
‡
Ohm Chip. Work done at METR.
§
Anthropic. Work done at METR.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

