Enhancing Contrastive Learning with Variable
Similarity

Haowen Cui1 , Shuo Chen2,3∗, Jun Li1 , Jian Yang1∗
PCA Lab†, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN National Science Institute, Japan
1

Abstract
Contrastive learning has achieved remarkable success in self-supervised learning
by pretraining a generalizable feature representation based on the augmentation
invariance. Most existing approaches assume that different augmented views of
the same instance (i.e., the positive pairs) remain semantically invariant. However,
the augmentation results with varying extent may introduce semantic discrepancies
or even content distortion, and thus the conventional (pseudo) supervision from
augmentation invariance may lead to misguided learning objectives. In this paper,
we propose a novel method called Contrastive Learning with Variable Similarity
(CLVS) to accurately characterize the intrinsic similarity relationships between
different augmented views. Our method dynamically adjusts the similarity based on
the augmentation extent, and it ensures that strongly augmented views are always
assigned lower similarity scores than weakly augmented ones. We provide a theoretical analysis to guarantee the effectiveness of the variable similarity in improving
model generalizability. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
approach, achieving gains of 2.1% on ImageNet-100 and 1.4% on ImageNet-1k
compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Learning effective feature representations [1, 2, 3] is a fundamental task in machine learning, with
profound implications for various applications, including image classification [4, 5], object detection
[6, 7], and segmentation [8, 9]. In recent years, self-supervised learning has emerged as a leading
paradigm for unsupervised visual representation learning [10, 11, 12, 13]. Among various pretext
tasks in self-supervised learning, contrastive learning constructs self-supervisory signals by treating
different augmented views of the same image as positive pairs, enabling the extraction of high-quality
feature representations without extensive labeled data. This paradigm has achieved remarkable
success, demonstrating its potential to bridge the gap between supervised and unsupervised learning.

∗

Corresponding Authors
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of
Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

