Self-Boost via Optimal Retraining: An Analysis via
Approximate Message Passing

Adel Javanmard
University of Southern California
Google Research
ajavanma@usc.edu

Rudrajit Das
Google Research
dasrudrajit@google.com

Alessandro Epasto
Google Research
aepasto@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Retraining a model using its own predictions together with the original, potentially
noisy labels is a well-known strategy for improving the model’s performance.
While prior works have demonstrated the benefits of specific heuristic retraining
schemes, the question of how to optimally combine the model’s predictions and
the provided labels remains largely open. This paper addresses this fundamental
question for binary classification tasks. We develop a principled framework based
on approximate message passing (AMP) to analyze iterative retraining procedures
for two ground truth settings: Gaussian mixture model (GMM) and generalized
linear model (GLM). Our main contribution is the derivation of the Bayes optimal
aggregator function to combine the current model’s predictions and the given labels,
which when used to retrain the same model, minimizes its prediction error. We also
quantify the performance of this optimal retraining strategy over multiple rounds.
We complement our theoretical results by proposing a practically usable version of
the theoretically-optimal aggregator function and demonstrate its superiority over
baseline methods under different label noise models.

1

Introduction

Learning effectively from data with noisy labels remains a significant challenge in supervised machine
learning (ML). A simple approach to mitigate the impact of label noise involves leveraging the
trained model’s own (soft or hard) predictions to ameliorate the learning process. More specifically,
prior works [25, 11, 10, 32, 9] have shown that retraining an already trained model using its own
predictions and the given labels (with which the model is initially trained) can lead to higher model
accuracy, especially when the given labels are noisy. [11, 10, 32, 9] theoretically quantify the gains
of simple retraining schemes and also provide principled explanations of why retraining is beneficial,
such as the predicted labels leading to variance-reduction, leveraging large separability of the classes,
etc. However, a key question that remains unanswered is the following:
“What is the optimal way to utilize the model’s predicted labels and the given labels?”
In this work, we address this question for binary classification problems where the underlying ground
truth model is: (i) a Gaussian mixture model (GMM), or (ii) a generalized linear model (GLM).
Further, we also analyze the effect of multiple rounds of retraining. More specifically, for a sample x,
suppose ŷ is the given noisy label and y t is the model’s predicted label at the tth round of retraining,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

