Structural Causal Bandits under Markov Equivalence
Min Woo Park1

Andy Arditi2

Elias Bareinboim2∗ Sanghack Lee1∗

1
Seoul National University 2 Columbia University
alsdn0110@snu.ac.kr ava2123@columbia.edu
eb@cs.columbia.edu sanghack@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In decision-making processes, an intelligent agent with causal knowledge can
optimize action spaces to avoid unnecessary exploration. A structural causal
bandit framework provides guidance on how to prune actions that are unable to
maximize reward by leveraging prior knowledge of the underlying causal structure
among actions. A key assumption of this framework is that the agent has access
to a fully-specified causal diagram representing the target system. In this paper,
we extend the structural causal bandits to scenarios where the agent leverages a
Markov equivalence class. In such cases, the causal structure is provided to the
agent in the form of a partial ancestral graph (PAG). We propose a generalized
framework for identifying potentially optimal actions within this graph structure,
thereby broadening the applicability of structural causal bandits.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) [Robbins, 1952, Lai and Robbins, 1985, Lattimore and Szepesvári,
2020] problem is a central topic in decision-making studies, where an agent aims to maximize cumulative rewards by repeatedly choosing actions based on observed reward, balancing the explorationexploitation trade-off. Traditionally, MAB problems assume independence among the rewards of
different arms, meaning that the reward obtained from one arm provides no information about the
others, e.g., KL-UCB [Cappé et al., 2013] and Thompson sampling [Thompson, 1933]. Although this
independence assumption simplifies the problem, it limits its applicability to real-world scenarios
where dependencies among actions are common, e.g., in a movie recommendation system, a user’s
positive reaction to one genre may indicate a higher likelihood of a positive reaction to similar genres.
Recent research has increasingly recognized the importance of structured dependencies among arms
and reward [Li et al., 2010, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011, Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2012], leading
to the development of structured bandits. Concurrently, the integration of causal inference into the
MAB framework has opened new avenues for modeling and solving decision problems with richer
dependency structures [Bareinboim et al., 2024]. Causal diagrams [Pearl, 1995] have been employed
to represent causal relationships among actions, rewards, and other relevant factors. This approach
enables agents to make informed decisions by considering how each action causally influences
the reward through causal pathways. Existing studies [Bareinboim et al., 2015, Lattimore et al.,
2016, Forney et al., 2017] have shown that causality-aware strategies can significantly outperform
MAB algorithms that do not account for such underlying causal relationships. Subsequent work has
explored various specialized settings by introducing additional structural assumptions, such as the
availability of both observational and experimental distributions, or linear mechanisms [Zhang and
Bareinboim, 2017, Lu et al., 2020, Bilodeau et al., 2022, Feng and Chen, 2023, Varici et al., 2023].
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

