Absorb and Converge: Provable Convergence
Guarantee for Absorbing Discrete Diffusion Models

Yuchen Liang†∗ , Renxiang Huang‡∗ ,
†
The Ohio State University

Lifeng Lai‡ , Ness Shroff† , Yingbin Liang†
‡
University of California, Davis

Abstract
Discrete state space diffusion models have shown significant advantages in applications involving discrete data, such as text and image generation. It has also been
observed that their performance is highly sensitive to the choice of rate matrices,
particularly between uniform and absorbing rate matrices. While empirical results
suggest that absorbing rate matrices often yield better generation quality compared
to uniform rate matrices, existing theoretical works have largely focused on the
uniform rate matrices case. Notably, convergence guarantees and error analyses
for absorbing diffusion models are still missing. In this work, we provide the first
finite-time error bounds and convergence rate analysis for discrete diffusion models
using absorbing rate matrices. We begin by deriving an upper bound on the KL
divergence of the forward process, introducing a surrogate initialization distribution
to address the challenge posed by the absorbing stationary distribution, which is
a singleton and causes the KL divergence to be ill-defined. We then establish the
first convergence guarantees for both the τ -leaping and uniformization samplers
under absorbing rate matrices, demonstrating improved rates over their counterparts
using uniform rate matrices. Furthermore, under suitable assumptions, we provide
convergence guarantees without early stopping. Our analysis introduces several
new technical tools to address challenges unique to absorbing rate matrices. These
include a Jensen-type argument for bounding forward process convergence, novel
techniques for bounding absorbing score functions, and a non-divergent upper
bound on the score near initialization that removes the need of early-stopping.

1

Introduction

The diffusion model is one of the key branches of generative models. Inspired by non-equilibrium
statistical physics, it was first introduced in [1] and was subsequently refined and extended by [2].
In recent years, the diffusion model has achieved many breakthroughs in the generation tasks under
both continuous state spaces [3, 4] and discrete state spaces [5, 6]. A growing body of work suggests
that for discrete data such as natural language and graphs, discrete diffusion models offer greater
advantages and more flexibility than their continuous counterparts [7, 8, 9].
Diffusion models typically include a forward noising diffusion process and a backward denoising
process. Under the continuous-time formulation of discrete diffusion models, the forward process
can be characterized by continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs), with some specially designed
rate matrix. Commonly used rate matrices include the uniform rate matrix, which leads to a uniform
stationary distribution; and the absorbing rate matrix, which results in a singleton (absorbing)
stationary distribution. The generation quality is typically highly sensitive to the choice of the CTMC
rate matrix. It was first reported by [5] that using the absorbing rate yields better performance
than using the uniform rate in terms of both perplexity and negative log-likelihood (NLL) for text
generation tasks. This empirical advantage was further confirmed subsequently by [9, 10, 11], where
consistent improvement was observed using the absorbing rate matrix. Moreover, [5] established
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

