D2SA: Dual-Stage Distribution and Slice Adaptation
for Efficient Test-Time Adaptation in MRI
Reconstruction
Lipei Zhang1∗, Rui Sun2,3∗, Zhongying Deng1 , Yanqi Cheng1 ,
Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb1 , Angelica I Aviles-Rivero4
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge
2
Shenzhen Future Network of Intelligence Institute
and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
4
Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Variations in Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanners and acquisition protocols
cause distribution shifts that degrade reconstruction performance on unseen data.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) offers a promising solution to address this discrepancies.
However, previous single-shot TTA approaches are inefficient due to repeated
training and suboptimal distributional models. Self-supervised learning methods
may risk over-smoothing in scarce data scenarios. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel Dual-Stage Distribution and Slice Adaptation (D2SA) via
MRI implicit neural representation (MR-INR) to improve MRI reconstruction
performance and efficiency, which features two stages. In the first stage, an
MR-INR branch performs patient-wise distribution adaptation by learning shared
representations across slices and modelling patient-specific shifts with mean and
variance adjustments. In the second stage, single-slice adaptation refines the output
from frozen convolutional layers with a learnable anisotropic diffusion module,
preventing over-smoothing and reducing computation. Experiments across five
MRI distribution shifts demonstrate that our method can integrate well with various
self-supervised learning (SSL) framework, improving performance and accelerating
convergence under diverse conditions.

1

Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) captures detailed tissue structures using k-space sampling. In
clinical practice, MRI is often under-sampled to accelerate scan time and reduce patient burden.
However, under-sampling results in an ill-posed inverse problem, making accurate MRI reconstruction
challenging [23]. Traditional compressed sensing techniques attempt to address this through iterative
reconstruction algorithms [4, 5, 3, 28], but these methods are computationally expensive and less
accurate. Recent advances in deep learning have significantly improved both reconstruction speed and
quality by learning direct mappings from raw data [18], such as unrolled networks [27], plug-and-play
frameworks [1], and diffusion models [8].
Despite these advancements, deep learning models struggle with adapting to diverse clinical scenarios
due to two primary challenges. Firstly, limited MRI data for model adaptation: MRI datasets are
difficult to collect, making it challenging to generalise deep models without overfitting. Secondly,
∗

These authors contributed equally.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

