Scaling Laws for Robust Comparison of Open
Foundation Language-Vision Models and Datasets

Marianna Nezhurina1,2,5§∗ Tomer Porian1,2,5∗ Giovanni Puccetti3 Tommie Kerssies1,4
Romain Beaumont1 Mehdi Cherti1,2,5§°∗ Jenia Jitsev1,2,5°∗
1
LAION 2 Juelich Supercomputing Center (JSC), Research Center Juelich (FZJ)
3
Institute of Information Science and Technologies “A. Faedo” - CNR Pisa
4
Eindhoven University of Technology
5
Open-Ψ (Open-Sci) Collective
§ equal first, ° equal senior, ∗ core contribution
{m.nezhurina,m.cherti,j.jitsev}@fz-juelich.de,contact@laion.ai

Abstract
In studies of transferable learning, scaling laws are obtained for various important
foundation models to predict their properties and performance at larger scales.
Taking language-vision learning as example, we show here how scaling law derivation can also be used for model and dataset comparison, allowing to decide which
procedure is to be preferred for pre-training. Full scaling laws based on dense
measurements across a wide span of model and samples seen scales are derived
for two important language-vision learning procedures, CLIP and MaMMUT, that
use either contrastive only or contrastive and captioning text generative loss. For
the first time, we use derived scaling laws to compare both models and three
open datasets, DataComp-1.4B, Re-LAION-1.4B and DFN-1.4B, while ensuring
sufficient prediction accuracy on held out points. From comparison, we obtain
evidence for (i) MaMMUT’s stronger improvement with scale and better sample
efficiency than standard CLIP (ii) DFN-1.4B outperforming other open datasets.
To strengthen validity of the comparison, we show scaling laws for various downstream tasks, classification, retrieval, and segmentation, observing consistently the
same scaling trends for models and datasets across tasks. We show that comparison
can also be performed when deriving scaling laws with a constant learning rate
schedule, reducing compute cost. Accurate derivation of scaling laws provides thus
means to perform model and dataset comparison on aligned common compute axis
across large scale span, avoiding misleading conclusions based on measurements
from few isolated single reference scales only. This paves road for guided collective
improvement of open foundation models and training datasets, as scaling law based
comparisons from various studies executed in common frame can be combined to
identify overall better procedures. We release all the pre-trained models with their
intermediate checkpoints, including openMaMMUT-L/14, which achieves 80.3%
zero-shot ImageNet-1k accuracy, trained on 12.8B samples from DataComp-1.4B1 .

1

Introduction

Foundation models [1] pre-trained on generic, diverse large datasets enabled massive improvements
in transfer learning, showing strong and efficient adaptability across a wide range of downstream
tasks not shown during pre-training. Thanks to learning procedures leading to foundation models,
1

Code for reproducing experiments in the paper and raw experiments data can be found in the repository

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

