Enhancing Text-to-Image Diffusion Transformer via
Split-Text Conditioning

Yu Zhang1 Jialei Zhou1 Xinchen Li1 Qi Zhang1 Zhongwei Wan2
Duoqian Miao1∗ Changwei Wang1 Longbing Cao3
1

Tongji University

Original Caption
(Complete-Text)

2

The Ohio State University

LLM-Enhanced Caption
(Complete-Text)

Our Caption
(Split-Text)

3

Macquarie University

Stable Diffusion v3

DiT-ST-M (Ours)

On the marble table, there is a yellow tablecloth. kife and fork, and several aples. Among
them, one of the apples im the bowl apears to be unripe and is partly green in color.

Some customers are selecting from market stalls filled with
neatly arranged colorful vegetables and fruits, with prices of
goods next to them.

A red backpack adorned with a small pink ribbon bow rests on an old wooden bench along a
quiet city street, shaded by green trees.

A racing driver is sitting in the garage with his helmet on his
green car, with white markings sprayed on its body. His
bicycle is placed against the steel plate wall.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Images generated by MM-DiT 8B-E using different forms of the same caption. Our split-text
caption enables the model to notice details, such as unripe and partly green, pink ribbon bow, and display them
in the generated image. (b) Comparison of text-to-image generation results between Stable Diffusion v3 and
ours. Obviously, ours has better semantic details and mitigates the attribute misbinding such as green car.

Abstract
Current text-to-image diffusion generation typically employs complete-text conditioning. Due to the intricate syntax, diffusion transformers (DiTs) inherently suffer
from a comprehension defect of complete-text captions. One-fly complete-text
input either overlooks critical semantic details or causes semantic confusion by
simultaneously modeling diverse semantic primitive types. To mitigate this defect
of DiTs, we propose a novel split-text conditioning framework named DiT-ST. This
framework converts a complete-text caption into a split-text caption, a collection
of simplified sentences, to explicitly express various semantic primitives and their
interconnections. The split-text caption is then injected into different denoising
stages of DiT-ST in a hierarchical and incremental manner. Specifically, DiT-ST
leverages Large Language Models to parse captions, extracting diverse primitives
and hierarchically sorting out and constructing these primitives into a split-text
input. Moreover, we partition the diffusion denoising process according to its differential sensitivities to diverse semantic primitive types and determine the appropriate
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

