Hybrid-Collaborative Augmentation and Contrastive
Sample Adaptive-Differential Awareness for Robust
Attributed Graph Clustering

Tianxiang Zhao1 Youqing Wang1 Jinlu Wang2 Jiapu Wang2
Mingliang Cui1 Junbin Gao3 Jipeng Guo1∗
1
College of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology
2
Beijing University of Technology
3
The University of Sydney Business School, The University of Sydney
1
{tianxiangzhao, 2021400208, guojipeng}@buct.edu.cn, wang_youqing@mail.buct.edu.cn
2
wangjinlu@emails.bjut.edu.cn, jiapuwang9@gmail.com
3
junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Due to its powerful capability of self-supervised representation learning and clustering, contrastive attributed graph clustering (CAGC) has achieved great success,
which mainly depends on effective data augmentation and contrastive objective
setting. However, most CAGC methods utilize edges as auxiliary information to
obtain node-level embedding representation and only focus on node-level embedding augmentation. This approach overlooks edge-level embedding augmentation
and the interactions between node-level and edge-level embedding augmentations
across various granularity. Moreover, they often treat all contrastive sample pairs
equally, neglecting the significant differences between hard and easy positivenegative sample pairs, which ultimately limits their discriminative capability. To
tackle these issues, a novel robust attributed graph clustering (RAGC), incorporating hybrid-collaborative augmentation (HCA) and contrastive sample adaptivedifferential awareness (CSADA), is proposed. First, node-level and edge-level
embedding representations and augmentations are simultaneously executed to establish a more comprehensive similarity measurement criterion for subsequent
contrastive learning. In turn, the discriminative similarity further consciously
guides edge augmentation. Second, by leveraging pseudo-label information with
high confidence, a CSADA strategy is elaborately designed, which adaptively
identifies all contrastive sample pairs and differentially treats them by an innovative weight modulation function. The HCA and CSADA modules mutually
reinforce each other in a beneficent cycle, thereby enhancing discriminability in
representation learning. Comprehensive graph clustering evaluations over six
benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed RAGC against
several state-of-the-art CAGC methods. The code of RAGC could be available at
https://github.com/TianxiangZhao0474/RAGC.git.

1

Introduction

Attributed graph representation learning, as an effective method, fully leverages both attribute features
and the neighborhood structure among samples [1]. Graph data is widely present in practice, making
graph representation learning essential across various fields such as node classification [2, 3, 4, 5],
∗

Corresponding author: Jipeng Guo

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

