Whole-Body Conditioned
Egocentric Video Prediction

1

Yutong Bai∗ 1

Danny Tran∗ 1

Amir Bar∗ 2

Yann LeCun† 2,3

Trevor Darrell† 1

Jitendra Malik† 1,2

UC Berkeley (BAIR)

2

FAIR, Meta

3

New York University

Abstract
We train models to Predict Ego-centric Video from human Actions (PEVA), given
the past video and an action represented by the relative 3D body pose. By conditioning on kinematic pose trajectories, structured by the joint hierarchy of the body,
our model learns to simulate how physical human actions shape the environment
from a first-person point of view. We train an auto-regressive conditional diffusion
transformer on Nymeria, a large-scale dataset of real-world egocentric video and
body pose capture. We further design a hierarchical evaluation protocol with increasingly challenging tasks, enabling a comprehensive analysis of the model’s
embodied prediction and control abilities. Our work represents an initial attempt to
tackle the challenges of modeling complex real-world environments and embodied
agent behaviors with video prediction from the perspective of a human.1

1 Introduction
Human movement is rich, continuous, and physically grounded (Rosenhahn et al., 2008; Aggarwal
and Cai, 1999). The way we walk, lean, turn, or reach—often subtle and coordinated—directly shapes
what we see from a first-person perspective. For embodied agents to simulate and plan like humans,
they must not only predict future observations (Von Helmholtz, 1925), but also understand how visual
input arises from whole-body action (Craik, 1943). This understanding is essential because many
aspects of the environment are not immediately visible–we need to move our bodies to reveal new
information and achieve our goals.
Vision serves as a natural signal for long-term planning (LeCun, 2022; Hafner et al., 2023; Ebert
et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2022). We look at our environment to plan and act, using our egocentric view
as a predictive goal (Sridhar et al., 2024; Bar et al., 2025). When we consider our body movements,
we should consider both actions of the feet (locomotion and navigation) and the actions of the hand
(manipulation), or more generally, whole-body control (Nvidia et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2024; He
et al., 2024b; Radosavovic et al., 2024; He et al., 2024a; Hansen et al., 2024). For example, when
reaching for an object, we must anticipate how our arm movement will affect what we see, even
before the object comes into view. This ability to plan based on partial visual information is crucial
for embodied agents to operate effectively in real-world environments.
Building a model that can effectively learn from and predict based on whole-body motion presents
several fundamental challenges. First, representing human actions requires capturing both global
body dynamics and fine-grained joint articulations, which involves high-dimensional, structured
data with complex temporal dependencies. Second, the relationship between body movements and
* Equal contribution; † Equal advising.
Project page: https://dannytran123.github.io/PEVA.

1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

