Reasoning is Periodicity? Improving Large Language
Models Through Effective Periodicity Modeling

Yihong Dong1 , Ge Li1,2 , Xue Jiang1 , Yongding Tao1 , Kechi Zhang1 , Hao Zhu1 , Huanyu Liu1 ,
Jiazheng Ding2 , Jia Li ♂1 , Jinliang Deng3 , and Hong Mei1,4
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 aiXcoder
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Advanced Institute of Big Data
dongyh@stu.pku.edu.cn, lige@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Periodicity, as one of the most important basic characteristics, lays the foundation for facilitating structured knowledge acquisition and systematic cognitive
processes within human learning paradigms. However, the potential flaws of periodicity modeling in Transformer affect the learning efficiency and establishment
of underlying principles from data for large language models (LLMs) built upon
it. In this paper, we demonstrate that integrating effective periodicity modeling
can improve the learning efficiency and performance of LLMs. We introduce
FANformer, which adapts Fourier Analysis Network (FAN) into attention mechanism to achieve efficient periodicity modeling, by modifying the feature projection
process of attention mechanism. Extensive experimental results on language modeling show that FANformer consistently outperforms Transformer when scaling up
model size and training tokens, underscoring its superior learning efficiency. Our
pretrained FANformer-1B exhibits marked improvements on downstream tasks
compared to open-source LLMs with similar model parameters or training tokens.
Moreover, we reveal that FANformer exhibits superior ability to learn and apply
rules for reasoning compared to Transformer. The results position FANformer as
an effective and promising architecture for advancing LLMs. Our code is available
at https://github.com/YihongDong/FANformer..

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable progress across various
natural language processing tasks, establishing themselves as a cornerstone of modern artificial
intelligence [Brown et al., 2020, Zhao et al., 2023, Minaee et al., 2024]. The decoder-only Transformer
architecture, in particular, has emerged as the de facto standard for LLM development due to its
superior performance and scalability [OpenAI, 2023, DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024a, Groeneveld et al.,
2024]. Besides these advancements, Transformer-based models are also known for their immense
demand for data and computational resources during training [Kaplan et al., 2020, Hoffmann et al.,
2022, Chowdhery et al., 2023]. In comparison, humans are able to accomplish similar learning
tasks with far fewer resources. This discrepancy suggests that existing LLM architectures still suffer
from low learning efficiency, leaving substantial room for improvement in their ability to extract and
generalize the knowledge from data.
Periodicity, characterized by recurring patterns, is a ubiquitous phenomenon in human life and
learning processes [Buzsaki, 2006, Lake et al., 2017]. The human brain leverages pattern recognition
mechanisms to process information and acquire knowledge efficiently [Zalta et al., 2020, Edalati
et al., 2023, Zhan et al., 2018]. However, general network architectures represented by Transformers
have potential flaws in periodicity modeling, which could hinder their learning efficiency [Dong et al.,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

