Brain network science modelling of sparse neural
networks enables Transformers and LLMs to perform
as fully connected

Yingtao Zhang1,2 , Diego Cerretti1,2 , Jialin Zhao1,2 , Ziheng Liao1,2 , Wenjing Wu1,2
Umberto Michieli4,5 & Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci1,2,3∗
2

1
Center for Complex Network Intelligence (CCNI)†
Dept. of Computer Science & Technology, 3 School of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University
4
University of Padova, 5 Canva Research

Abstract
This study aims to enlarge our current knowledge on the application of braininspired network science principles for training artificial neural networks (ANNs)
with sparse connectivity. Dynamic sparse training (DST) emulates the synaptic
turnover of real brain networks, reducing the computational demands of training and inference in ANNs. However, existing DST methods face difficulties in
maintaining peak performance at high connectivity sparsity levels. The CannistraciHebb training (CHT) is a brain-inspired method that is used in DST for growing
synaptic connectivity in sparse neural networks. CHT leverages a gradient-free,
topology-driven link regrowth mechanism, which has been shown to achieve ultrasparse (1% connectivity or lower) advantage across various tasks compared to
fully connected networks. Yet, CHT suffers two main drawbacks: (i) its time
complexity is O(N · d3 )- N node network size, d node degree - hence it can be
efficiently applied only to ultra-sparse networks. (ii) it rigidly selects top link
prediction scores, which is inappropriate for the early training epochs, when the
network topology presents many unreliable connections. Here, we design the first
brain-inspired network model - termed bipartite receptive field (BRF) - to initialize
the connectivity of sparse artificial neural networks. Then, we propose a matrix
multiplication GPU-friendly approximation of the CH link predictor, which reduces
the computational complexity to O(N 3 ), enabling a fast implementation of link
prediction in large-scale models. Moreover, we introduce the Cannistraci-Hebb
training soft rule (CHTs), which adopts a flexible strategy for sampling connections
in both link removal and regrowth, balancing the exploration and exploitation
of network topology. Additionally, we propose a sigmoid-based gradual density
decay strategy, leading to an advanced framework referred to as CHTss. Empirical results show that BRF offers performance advantages over previous network
science models. Using 1% of connections, CHTs outperforms fully connected
networks in MLP architectures on visual classification tasks, compressing some
networks to less than 30% of the nodes. Using 5% of the connections, CHTss
outperforms fully connected networks in two Transformer-based machine translation tasks. Finally, with only 30% of the connections, both CHTs and CHTss
achieve superior performance over other dynamic sparse training methods, and
perform on par with—or even surpass—their fully connected counterparts in language modeling across various sparsity levels within the LLaMA model family.
∗

Corresponding author: kalokagathos.agon@gmail.com
Research Center in Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI), Department of Psychological
and Cognitive Sciences.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

