Learning Latent Variable Models via
Jarzynski-adjusted Langevin Algorithm

James Cuin
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
London, UK
jamie.cuin23@imperial.ac.uk

Davide Carbone
Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Université PSL, CNRS,
Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris
Paris, France
davide.carbone@phys.ens.fr

O. Deniz Akyildiz
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
London, UK
deniz.akyildiz@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We utilise a sampler originating from nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, termed
here Jarzynski-adjusted Langevin algorithm (JALA), to build statistical estimation
methods in latent variable models. We achieve this by leveraging Jarzynski’s
equality and developing algorithms based on a weighted version of the unadjusted
Langevin algorithm (ULA) with recursively updated weights. Adapting this for
latent variable models, we develop a sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) method that
provides the maximum marginal likelihood estimate of the parameters, termed
JALA-EM. Under suitable regularity assumptions on the marginal likelihood, we
provide a nonasymptotic analysis of the JALA-EM scheme implemented with
stochastic gradient descent and show that it provably converges to the maximum
marginal likelihood estimate. We demonstrate the performance of JALA-EM on a
variety of latent variable models and show that it performs comparably to existing
methods in terms of accuracy and computational efficiency. Importantly, the
ability to recursively estimate marginal likelihoods—an uncommon feature among
scalable methods—makes our approach particularly suited for model selection,
which we validate through dedicated experiments.

1

Introduction

Real world data often contains latent structures (Whiteley et al., 2025) that can be described well
with a latent variable model (LVM). As a result, LVMs have become ubiquitous in modern statistical
research, from natural language processing (Wang et al., 2023) to bioinformatics (Shen et al., 2009),
due to their flexibility in capturing complex and hidden processes underlying observed data. It is
therefore of significant interest to fit LVMs, i.e., learn its parameters from data.
A particularly prominent estimation paradigm for LVMs is that of maximum marginal likelihood
estimation (MMLE) (Dempster et al., 1977). Given some fixed observed data y, the task of MMLE is to
compute the maximum likelihood estimate of the parameters, denoted θ, by maximising the marginal
likelihood pθ (y). This intractable quantity is defined through marginalising the joint likelihood of the
observed data y and the latent variable x, over the latent variable x. More precisely, let y ∈ Rdy be
the observed data, x ∈ Rdx be the latent variables, and θ ∈ Rdθ be the parameters of interest. Given
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

