Smooth Sailing: Lipschitz-Driven Uncertainty
Quantification for Spatial Association

David R. Burt∗ Renato Berlinghieri∗ Stephen Bates Tamara Broderick
MIT LIDS
{dburt,renb,s_bates,tamarab}@mit.edu

Abstract
Estimating associations between spatial covariates and responses — rather than
merely predicting responses — is central to environmental science, epidemiology,
and economics. For instance, public health officials might be interested in whether
air pollution has a strictly positive association with a health outcome, and the magnitude of any effect. Standard machine learning methods often provide accurate
predictions but offer limited insight into covariate-response relationships. And we
show that existing methods for constructing confidence (or credible) intervals for
associations can fail to provide nominal coverage in the face of model misspecification and nonrandom locations — despite both being essentially always present
in spatial problems. We introduce a method that constructs valid frequentist confidence intervals for associations in spatial settings. Our method requires minimal
assumptions beyond a form of spatial smoothness and a homoskedastic Gaussian
error assumption. In particular, we do not require model correctness or covariate
overlap between training and target locations. Our approach is the first to guarantee
nominal coverage in this setting and outperforms existing techniques in both real
and simulated experiments. Our confidence intervals are valid in finite samples
when the noise of the Gaussian error is known, and we provide an asymptotically
consistent estimation procedure for this noise variance when it is unknown.

1

Introduction

Scientists and social scientists often seek to understand the direction and magnitude of associations in
settings where variables vary spatially. And since these associations are often used to inform policy,
communicating uncertainties is crucial. Example associations of interest include the relationship
between aerosol concentrations and regional precipitation changes [76], the link between proximity to
major highways and the prevalence of dementia [35], and the link between air pollution exposure and
birth weight [34]. In each case, the covariates (e.g., aerosol concentrations, proximity to highways,
and air pollution) may be viewed as functions of spatial location. Moreover, scientists often have
data at some spatial locations but want to infer associations at others. For instance, a country might
measure birth weight and air pollution at the municipal level for some municipalities and wish to
understand their relationship in municipalities without data.
Our goal in the present work is to provide valid and useful confidence intervals for an estimator of
these associations when (i) the underlying model may be misspecified and (ii) inference is needed at
spatial locations that may differ from those in the observed data. First we argue that existing methods
do not already solve this problem. In particular, we make this argument in turn for modern flexible
machine learning methods, linear methods, spatial regression methods, and debiasing approaches.
∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

