Learning-Augmented Online Bipartite Fractional
Matching

Davin Choo∗ §
Harvard John A. Paulson School Of Engineering And Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
davinchoo@seas.harvard.edu
Billy Jin† §
Daniels School of Business
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
jin608@purdue.edu

Yongho Shin‡ §
Institute of Computer Science
University of Wrocław
Wrocław, Poland
yongho@cs.uni.wroc.pl

Abstract
Online bipartite matching is a fundamental problem in online optimization, extensively studied both in its integral and fractional forms due to its theoretical
significance and practical applications, such as online advertising and resource
allocation. Motivated by recent progress in learning-augmented algorithms, we
study online bipartite fractional matching when the algorithm is given advice in the
form of a suggested matching in each iteration. We develop algorithms for both the
vertex-weighted and unweighted variants that provably dominate the naïve “coin
flip” strategy of randomly choosing between the advice-following and advice-free
algorithms. Moreover, our algorithm for the vertex-weighted setting extends to the
AdWords problem under the small bids assumption, yielding a significant improvement over the seminal work of Mahdian, Nazerzadeh, and Saberi (EC 2007, TALG
2012). Complementing our positive results, we establish a hardness bound on the
robustness-consistency tradeoff that is attainable by any algorithm. We empirically
validate our algorithms through experiments on synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Online bipartite matching is a fundamental problem in online optimization with significant applications in areas such as online advertising [MSVV07, FKM+ 09], resource allocation [DJSW19], and
ride-sharing platforms [DSSX21, FNS24]. In its classical formulation [KVV90, AGKM11], the input
is a bipartite graph where one side of (possibly weighted) offline vertices is known in advance, while
the other side of online vertices arrives sequentially one at a time. When an online vertex v arrives,
its incident edges are revealed, and the algorithm irrevocably decides whether to match v and, if so,
to which currently unmatched neighbor. The objective is to maximize the total weight of the matched
offline vertices. Algorithms for online bipartite matching are often evaluated by their competitive
ratio: An algorithm is ρ-competitive if it always outputs a matching whose (expected) total weight is
∗

Part of work done while the author was affiliated with the National University of Singapore, Singapore.
Work done while the author was at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, USA.
‡
Part of work done while the author was affiliated with Yonsei University, South Korea.
§
Equal contribution.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

