True Zero-Shot Inference of Dynamical Systems
Preserving Long-Term Statistics

Christoph Jürgen Hemmer1,3 , Daniel Durstewitz1,2,3
1
Dept. of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany
2
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University, Germany
3
Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
{christoph.hemmer, daniel.durstewitz}@zi-mannheim.de

Abstract
Complex, temporally evolving phenomena, from climate to brain activity, are
governed by dynamical systems (DS). DS reconstruction (DSR) seeks to infer
generative surrogate models of these from observed data, reproducing their longterm behavior. Existing DSR approaches require purpose-training for any new
system observed, lacking the zero-shot and in-context inference capabilities known
from LLMs. Here we introduce DynaMix, a novel multivariate ALRNN-based
mixture-of-experts architecture pre-trained for DSR, the first DSR model able to
generalize zero-shot to out-of-domain DS. Just from a provided context signal,
without any re-training, DynaMix faithfully forecasts the long-term evolution of
novel DS where existing time series (TS) foundation models, like Chronos, fail –
at a fraction of the number of parameters (0.1%) and orders of magnitude faster
inference times. DynaMix outperforms TS foundation models in terms of longterm statistics, and often also short-term forecasts, even on real-world time series,
like traffic or weather data, typically used for training and evaluating TS models,
but not at all part of DynaMix’ training corpus. We illustrate some of the failure
modes of TS models for DSR problems, and conclude that models built on DS
principles may bear a huge potential also for advancing the TS prediction field.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: DynaMix achieves zero-shot DSR of attractor geometry and long-term temporal properties
(power spectrum) from a short context signal while Chronos [2] fails.
Most real-world processes, from atmospheric phenomena and stock markets to brain activity or
ecological networks, can be described as dynamical systems (DS) [58, 16, 88, 61]. Reconstructing
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

