Hamiltonian Descent Algorithms for Optimization:
Accelerated Rates via Randomized Integration Time

Qiang Fu
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
qiang.fu@yale.edu

Andre Wibisono
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
andre.wibisono@yale.edu

Abstract
We study the Hamiltonian flow for optimization (HF-opt), which simulates the
Hamiltonian dynamics for some integration time and resets the velocity to 0 to
decrease the objective function; this is the optimization analogue of the Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo algorithm for sampling. For short integration time, HF-opt has the
same convergence rates as gradient descent for minimizing strongly and weakly
convex functions. We show that by randomizing the integration time in HF-opt, the
resulting randomized Hamiltonian flow (RHF) achieves accelerated convergence
rates in continuous time, similar to the rates for accelerated gradient flow. We
study a discrete-time implementation of RHF as the randomized Hamiltonian
gradient descent (RHGD) algorithm. We prove that RHGD achieves the same
accelerated convergence rates as Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent (AGD) for
minimizing smooth strongly and weakly convex functions. We provide numerical
experiments to demonstrate that RHGD is competitive with classical accelerated
methods such as AGD across all settings and outperforms them in certain regimes.

1

Introduction

Optimization plays a central role in machine learning, with algorithms such as gradient descent (GD)
and accelerated gradient descent (AGD) [Nesterov, 1983] serving as essential tools for optimizing
objective functions. A growing body of work has explored optimization algorithms in the framework
of continuous-time dynamical systems, which provides insights into algorithmic behaviors and convergence properties. In this paper, we develop a novel family of accelerated optimization algorithms
that are designed based on the Hamiltonian flow.
Hamiltonian flow (HF) originates from classical mechanics, describing the continuous-time evolution
of physical systems. At a fundamental level, Hamiltonian flow governs how the positions and
momenta of moving bodies evolve while conserving energy. Beyond its roots in physics, Hamiltonian
flows have inspired computational algorithms such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [Duane
et al., 1987], a classical method widely employed for sampling from complex, high-dimensional
probability distributions [Neal et al., 2011, Betancourt, 2017, Hoffman et al., 2014]. Due to its
effectiveness, HMC has found extensive applications in Bayesian inference, statistical physics, and
machine learning [Gelman et al., 1995, Kruschke, 2014, Lelievre and Stoltz, 2016].
There has been growing interest in exploring the connections between optimization and sampling, as
they share deep theoretical foundations and many algorithmic similarities. Notably, the Langevin
dynamics for sampling can be viewed as the gradient flow for minimizing the relative entropy or
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence in the space of probability distributions [Jordan et al., 1998].
Many works build on this perspective to use techniques from optimization to analyze Langevin-based
algorithms [Wibisono, 2018, Bernton, 2018, Durmus et al., 2019, Ma et al., 2021] or develop novel
sampling algorithms inspired by optimization [Salim et al., 2020, Lee et al., 2021, Lambert et al.,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

