Valid Inference with Imperfect Synthetic Data

Yewon Byun1 , Shantanu Gupta1 , Zachary C. Lipton1 , Rachel Leah Childers2 , Bryan Wilder1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University1
University of Zurich2
{yewonb, shantang, zlipton, bwilder}@cs.cmu.edu, rachel.childers@df.uzh.ch

Abstract
Predictions and generations from large language models are increasingly being
explored as an aid in limited data regimes, such as in computational social science
and human subjects research. While prior technical work has mainly explored the
potential to use model-predicted labels for unlabeled data in a principled manner,
there is increasing interest in using large language models to generate entirely new
synthetic samples (e.g., synthetic simulations), such as in responses to surveys.
However, it remains unclear by what means practitioners can combine such data
with real data and yet produce statistically valid conclusions upon them. In this
paper, we introduce a new estimator based on generalized method of moments,
providing a hyperparameter-free solution with strong theoretical guarantees to
address this challenge. Intriguingly, we find that interactions between the moment
residuals of synthetic data and those of real data (i.e., when they are predictive of
each other) can greatly improve estimates of the target parameter. We validate the
finite-sample performance of our estimator across different tasks in computational
social science applications, demonstrating large empirical gains.

1

Introduction

Practitioners increasingly leverage large language models (LLMs) as cheap but noisy labelers for
automating tasks traditionally reliant on manual human annotations Ziems et al. [2024]. Beyond
annotation, recently, practitioners have started to explore the possibility of leveraging LLMs for more
diverse and open-ended forms of model-generated data, such as outputting entirely new synthetic
samples, e.g., simulating human responses to surveys or human participants in early pilot studies
[Argyle et al., 2023, Brand et al., 2023, Dominguez-Olmedo et al., 2024, Anthis et al., 2025, Hwang
et al., 2025b]. Determining the extent to which researchers should integrate LLM simulations—
whether by simulating all samples, combining simulated and real samples, or relying entirely on
human participants—remains an open and task-dependent question. While such pipelines leveraging
fully synthetic simulations have yet to be fully realized, reliable mechanisms for aggregating these
data sources are indeed what will inform both the feasibility of such design choices and how such
pipelines should be implemented in practice.
A persistent challenge, however, is that naively aggregating synthetic samples with real data for
downstream inference often leads to greatly biased estimates, compromising the statistical validity of
downstream conclusions. Ideally, we would like to realize the benefits of incorporating information
from these additional data sources while retaining favorable statistical properties—consistency and
proper asymptotic coverage. We consider the setting where practitioners have access to a corpus of
unlabeled text and a small set of human-annotated samples with labeled covariates and outcomes.
Here, practitioners can leverage LLMs to (1) predict covariates and outcomes for the unlabeled text
samples; and (2) generate new text samples conditioned on available samples and label the covariates
and outcomes for them similarly to (1).
First of all, it is not immediately obvious how to even produce synthetic samples such that they can
be used in a principled manner. Naively drawing samples from a generative model and treating them
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

