GFM-RAG: Graph Foundation Model for Retrieval
Augmented Generation

Linhao Luo1∗, Zicheng Zhao2∗, Gholamreza Haffari1 , Chen Gong3 , Dinh Phung1 , Shirui Pan4†
1
Monash University, 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 Griffith University,
{Linhao.Luo,gholamreza.haffari,dinh.phung}@monash.edu,
zicheng.zhao@njust.edu.cn, chen.gong@sjtu.edu.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au
Project page: https://rmanluo.github.io/gfm-rag

Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has proven effective in integrating knowledge into large language models (LLMs). However, conventional RAGs struggle
to capture complex relationships between pieces of knowledge, limiting their performance in intricate reasoning that requires integrating knowledge from multiple
sources. Recently, graph-enhanced retrieval augmented generation (GraphRAG)
builds graph structure to explicitly model these relationships, enabling more effective and efficient retrievers. Nevertheless, its performance is still hindered by the
noise and incompleteness within the graph structure. To address this, we introduce
GFM-RAG, a novel graph foundation model (GFM) for retrieval augmented generation. GFM-RAG is powered by an innovative graph neural network that reasons
over graph structure to capture complex query-knowledge relationships. The GFM
with 8M parameters undergoes a two-stage training process on large-scale datasets,
comprising 60 knowledge graphs with over 14M triples and 700k documents. This
results in impressive performance and generalizability for GFM-RAG, making it the
first graph foundation model applicable to unseen datasets for retrieval without any
domain-specific fine-tuning required. Extensive experiments on three multi-hop
QA datasets and seven domain-specific RAG datasets demonstrate that GFM-RAG
achieves state-of-the-art performance while maintaining efficiency and alignment
with neural scaling laws, highlighting its potential for further improvement.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) [47, 42, 70] have greatly propelled the
evolution of natural language processing, positioning them as foundational models for artificial
general intelligence (AGI). Despite the remarkable reasoning ability [48], LLMs are still limited
in accessing real-time information and lack of domain-specific knowledge, which is outside the
pre-training corpus. To address these limitations, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [12] has
become a popular paradigm in adding new knowledge to the static LLMs by retrieving relevant
documents into the context of LLM generation.
Existing RAG methods typically retrieve documents independently, making it difficult to capture complex relationships between pieces of knowledge [30, 5, 43]. This limitation hampers the performance
of LLMs in integrating knowledge across document boundaries, particularly in multi-hop reasoning
tasks [72, 63] and real-world applications like legal judgment [28] and medical diagnoses [25], which
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

