Benign Overfitting in Single-Head Attention

Roey Magen∗
Weizmann Institute of Science
roey.magen@weizmann.ac.il
Spencer Frei‡
UC Davis
sfrei@ucdavis.edu

Shuning Shang∗†
Princeton University
shuning@princeton.edu
Wei Hu§
University of Michigan
vvh@umich.edu

Zhiwei Xu
University of Michigan
zhiweixu@umich.edu
Gal Vardi§
Weizmann Institute of Science
gal.vardi@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
The phenomenon of benign overfitting, where a trained neural network perfectly fits
noisy training data but still achieves near-optimal test performance, has been extensively studied in recent years for linear models and fully-connected/convolutional
networks. In this work, we study benign overfitting in a single-head softmax
attention model, which is the fundamental building block of Transformers. We
prove that under appropriate conditions, the model exhibits benign overfitting in
a classification setting already after two steps of gradient descent. Moreover, we
show conditions where a minimum-norm/maximum-margin interpolator exhibits
benign overfitting. We study how the overfitting behavior depends on the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) of the data distribution, namely, the ratio between norms of
signal and noise tokens, and prove that a sufficiently large SNR is both necessary
and sufficient for benign overfitting.

1

Introduction

Neural networks often exhibit a remarkable phenomenon, known as benign overfitting, where they
achieve a perfect fit to noisy training examples and still generalize well to unseen data [1, 2]. This
phenomenon contradicts classical wisdom in machine learning, and has become a central research
question in the theory of deep learning. Existing works on benign overfitting study under what
conditions the phenomenon occurs in different architectures. These works focus on linear models,
and on shallow fully-connected and convolutional neural networks.
In recent years, Transformers [3] have emerged as a leading neural network architecture, with
impactful applications across a wide range of domains such as natural language processing and
computer vision. The fundamental building block of Transformers is the attention mechanism, which
allows them to process sequences and focus on different parts of the input. Despite the central role of
the attention mechanism, we currently do not understand its overfitting behavior and the conditions
under which it exhibits benign overfitting.
In this work, we show benign-overfitting results for the attention mechanism. We consider classification with a single-head softmax attention model, and study the conditions that allow for benign
overfitting. In our results, the data distribution consists of multiple tokens: a signal token, which can
∗

Equal contribution
Work performed while visiting the University of Michigan
‡
Now at Google DeepMind
§
Equal advising
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

