Explaining the Law of Supply and Demand via Online
Learning

Stratis Skoulakis
Aarhus University
stratis@cs.au.dk

Abstract
The law of supply and demand asserts that in a perfectly competitive market, the
price of a good adjusts to a market clearing price. In a market clearing price p⋆ the
number of sellers willing to sell the good at p⋆ equals the number of sellers willing
to buy the good at price p⋆ . In this work, we provide a mathematical foundation
on the law of supply and demand through the lens of online learning. Specifically,
we demonstrate that if each seller employs a no-swap regret algorithm to set their
individual selling price—aiming to maximize its individual revenue—the collective
pricing dynamics converge to the market-clearing price p⋆ . Our findings offer a
novel perspective on the law of supply and demand, framing it as the emergent
outcome of an adaptive learning processes among sellers.

1

Introduction

The law of supply and demand is a fundamental economic principle explaining the price of a good in
a perfectly competitive market [25]. A perfectly competitive market consists of a large number of
sellers and buyers where each seller is interested in selling one unit of an indistinguishable good and
each buyer is interested in buying one unit of the good. The market is thus described by a supply S
and a demand curve D where S(p)/D(p) is the number of sellers/buyers willing to sell/buy the good
at price p. The law of supply and demand states that the price of the good will converge to the market
clearing price p⋆ where S(p⋆ ) = D(p⋆ )-the number of sellers equals the number of buyers [22, 28].
The idea behind the law of supply and demand is very intuitive 1 . If the price is higher than p⋆ then
more sellers are willing to sell than buyers willing to buy, leading to a market surplus. As a result,
some sellers are not able to sell good and will lower their prices to attract buyers. As prices fall, more
buyers are willing to buy, and fewer sellers are willing to sell. Conversely, if the price is below p⋆ this
will create a market shortage that will in turn cause an upward trend of the prices. These adjustments
continue until all selling prices reach p⋆ where there is neither market surplus or shortage [25, 22, 28].
However, upon closer examination, the explanation above does not rule out the possibility of persistent
price fluctuations—where a market surplus leads to a shortage, which then causes another surplus,
and so on—preventing the selling prices from ever converging to the market-clearing price. The latter
raises the following fundamental question:
Question 1. Why do selling prices eventually stabilize to the market clearing price p⋆ instead of
constantly oscillating around it?
Surprisingly, despite the law of supply and demand being one of the most fundamental principles in
modern economics, this question remains unanswered. In this work, we provide answers to Question 1
through the lens of game theory and online learning.
1

Se also https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/law-of-supply-demand.asp?

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

