Incentivizing Desirable Effort Profiles in Strategic
Classification: The Role of Causality & Uncertainty

Valia Efthymiou
MIT ORC
valia554@mit.edu

Chara Podimata
MIT Sloan School of Management &
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
podimata@mit.edu

Diptangshu Sen
Georgia Tech ISyE
dsen30@gatech.edu

Juba Ziani
Georgia Tech ISyE
jziani3@gatech.edu

Abstract
We study strategic classification in binary decision-making settings where agents
can modify their features in order to improve their classification outcomes. Importantly, our work considers the causal structure across different features, acknowledging that effort in one feature may affect other features. The main goal of our
work is to understand when and how much agent effort is invested towards desirable
features, and how this is influenced by the deployed classifier, the causal structure
of the agent’s features, their ability to modify them, and the information available
to the agent about the classifier and the feature causal graph. We characterize
conditions under which agents with full information about the causal structure
and the principal’s classifier align with the principal’s goals of incentivizing effort
mostly in “desirable” features, and identify cases where designing such classifiers
(from the principal’s side) is still tractable despite general non-convexity. Under
incomplete information, we show that uncertainty leads agents to prioritize features
with high expected impact and low variance, which may often be misaligned with
the principal’s goals. Finally, using numerical experiments based on a cardiovascular disease risk study, we illustrate how to incentivize desirable modifications even
under uncertainty.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of automated decision-making systems has brought significant attention
to the issue of strategic classification—a machine learning setting where individuals modify their
features to secure favorable outcomes. This phenomenon is common in many domains: students
enroll in preparatory courses to enhance their chances at college admission; job seekers tailor
their resumes to align them with AI-based hiring algorithms, and individuals adjust their financial
behaviors to improve credit scores. Some of these modifications reflect genuine efforts to enhance
one’s qualifications or financial responsibility (e.g., acquiring new skills or consistently paying off
loans), while others effectively game the system, (e.g., artificially boosting credit scores by opening
new credit lines or strategically targeting specific keywords in algorithmic resume screening).
The distinction between desirable and undesirable modifications is not always clear-cut. While
gaming is typically regarded as problematic, even genuine improvements can vary in how desirable
they are. For example, in healthcare, encouraging patients to adopt preventive lifestyle changes (such
as improved diet and regular exercise) may be preferable to medical interventions like medication
or surgery for conditions such as obesity or hyperlipidemia. This highlights the nuanced nature of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

