Estimating cognitive biases with
attention-aware inverse planning

Sounak Banerjee1,∗ Daphne Cornelisse1 Deepak Gopinath2 Emily Sumner2
Jonathan DeCastro2 Guy Rosman2 Eugene Vinitsky1 Mark K. Ho1
1
New York University 2 Toyota Research Institute
{sounak.banerjee, dc4971, vinitsky.eugene, mark.ho}@nyu.edu
{deepak.gopinath, emily.sumner, jonathan.decastro, guy.rosman}@tri.global

Abstract
People’s goal-directed behaviors are influenced by their cognitive biases, and autonomous systems that interact with people should be aware of this. For example,
people’s attention to objects in their environment will be biased in a way that systematically affects how they perform everyday tasks such as driving to work. Here,
building on recent work in computational cognitive science, we formally articulate
the attention-aware inverse planning problem, in which the goal is to estimate a
person’s attentional biases from their actions. We demonstrate how attention-aware
inverse planning systematically differs from standard inverse reinforcement learning and how cognitive biases can be inferred from behavior. Finally, we present an
approach to attention-aware inverse planning that combines deep reinforcement
learning with computational cognitive modeling. We use this approach to infer the
attentional strategies of RL agents in real-life driving scenarios selected from the
Waymo Open Dataset, demonstrating the scalability of estimating cognitive biases
with attention-aware inverse planning.

1

Introduction

Conventional wisdom suggests that people are not always rational, and this truism is now backed
by over half a century of research in cognitive science [Simon, 1955, Tversky and Kahneman,
1974, Gigerenzer et al., 2000]. It is remarkable, then, that standard approaches to modeling goaldirected human behavior in machine learning and artificial intelligence (e.g., inverse reinforcement
learning) assume that people act optimally—or at least approximately optimally—with respect to
their goals [Ng and Russell, 2000, Arora and Doshi, 2021]. What explains this disconnect between
psychological reality and basic modeling assumptions? How can we bridge this gap?
One reason why machine learning models of human behavior assume (approximate-)optimality is
that although this assumption is false in fundamental ways, it underpins expected utility theory [von
Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947, McFadden, 1974], which itself provides the basis for developing
scalable algorithms that can make generalizable predictions about human behavior [Ho and Griffiths,
2022]. In contrast, general and scalable frameworks that account for why, when, and how people
deviate from idealized rationality have not been previously available. This has changed in recent years:
Building off of classic ideas in bounded rationality [Simon, 1990], cognitive scientists have begun to
go beyond just describing deviations from ideal rationality to systematically explaining, predicting,
and influencing those deviations by developing general theories of resource-limited cognition [Lewis
et al., 2014, Griffiths et al., 2015, Gershman et al., 2015, Shenhav et al., 2017, Bhui et al., 2021]. The
present work aims to apply these recent insights to the development of generalizable and scalable
algorithms for modeling human decision-making.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

