Large language models can learn and generalize
steganographic chain-of-thought under process
supervision

Joey Skaf∗
Mentorship for Alignment Research Students (MARS)
joey.skaf@centrale-med.fr

Luis Ibanez-Lissen∗
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
luibanez@pa.uc3m.es

Robert McCarthy∗
ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS)
and University College London
robertmccarthy97@gmail.com

Connor Watts
Queen Mary University of London
c.watts@qmul.ac.uk

Vasil Georgiev
ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS)
vasil.g.georgiev39@gmail.com

Hannes Whittingham
Meridian Impact, Cambridge
hannes@meridiancambridge.org

Lorena Gonzalez-Manzano
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
lgmanzan@inf.uc3m.es

David Lindner†
ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS)
mail@davidlindner.me

Cameron Tice† Edward James Young† Puria Radmard†
Geodesic Research and University of Cambridge
{cam, edward, puria}@geodesicresearch.org

Abstract
Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning not only enhances large language model
performance but also provides critical insights into decision-making processes,
marking it as a useful tool for monitoring model intent and planning. However,
recent works have shown that banning the mention of a specific example of reward
hacking causes obfuscation of the undesired reasoning traces but the persistence of
the undesired behavior, threatening the reliability of CoT monitoring. We provide
an extension to these results with regard to the ability of models to learn a specific
type of obfuscated reasoning: steganography. First, we show that penalizing
the use of specific strings within load-bearing reasoning traces causes models to
substitute alternative strings. Crucially, this does not alter the underlying method
by which the model performs the task, demonstrating that the model can learn
to steganographically encode its reasoning. We further demonstrate that models
can generalize an encoding scheme. When the penalized strings belong to an
overarching class, the model learns not only to substitute strings seen in training,
but also develops a general encoding scheme for all members of the class which it
can apply to held-out testing strings.
∗
†

Equal contribution; joint first authors.
Equal contribution; joint last authors. Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

