Beyond Benign Overfitting in
Nadaraya-Watson Interpolators

Daniel Barzilai
Weizmann Institute of Science
daniel.barzilai@weizmann.ac.il

Guy Kornowski
Weizmann Institute of Science
guy.kornowski@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
In recent years, there has been much interest in understanding the generalization
behavior of interpolating predictors, which overfit on noisy training data. Whereas
standard analyses are concerned with whether a method is consistent or not, recent
observations have shown that even inconsistent predictors can generalize well.
In this work, we revisit the classic interpolating Nadaraya-Watson (NW) estimator (also known as Shepard’s method), and study its generalization capabilities
through this modern viewpoint. In particular, by varying a single bandwidth-like
hyperparameter, we prove the existence of multiple overfitting behaviors, ranging
non-monotonically from catastrophic, through benign, to tempered. Our results
highlight how even classical interpolating methods can exhibit intricate generalization behaviors. In addition, for the purpose of tuning the hyperparameter, the results
suggest that over-estimating the intrinsic dimension of the data is less harmful than
under-estimating it. Numerical experiments complement our theory, demonstrating
the same phenomena.

1

Introduction

The incredible success of over-parameterized machine learning models has spurred a substantial
body of work, aimed at understanding the generalization behavior of interpolating methods (which
perfectly fit the training data). In particular, according to classical statistical analyses, interpolating
inherently noisy training data can be harmful in terms of test error, due to the bias-variance tradeoff.
However, contemporary interpolating methods seem to defy this common wisdom [1, 2]. Therefore,
a current fundamental question in statistical learning is to understand when models that perfectly fit
noisy training data can still achieve strong generalization performance.
The notion of what it means to generalize well has somewhat changed over the years. Classical
analysis has been mostly concerned with whether or not a method is consistent, meaning that
asymptotically (as the training set size increases), the excess risk converges to zero. By now, several
settings have been identified where even interpolating models may be consistent, a phenomenon
known as “benign overfitting” [3–6]. However, following Mallinar et al. [7], a more nuanced view
of overfitting has emerged, based on the observation that not all inconsistent learning rules are
necessarily unsatisfactory.
In particular, it has been argued both empirically and theoretically that in many realistic settings,
benign overfitting may not occur, yet interpolating methods may still overfit in a “tempered” manner,
meaning that their excess risk is proportional to the Bayes error. On the other hand, in some situations
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

