Eve3D: Elevating Vision Models for Enhanced 3D
Surface Reconstruction via Gaussian Splatting

Jiawei Zhang1∗ Youmin Zhang2† Fabio Tosi4 Meiying Gu1 Jiahe Li1 Xiaohan Yu5
Jin Zheng1,3 Xiao Bai1‡ Matteo Poggi4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Complex Critical
Software Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
2
Rawmantic AI 3 State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beijing
4
University of Bologna 5 Macquarie University

View Synthesis

Reference

2DGS

GOF

Eve3D

Eve3D
Depth

Figure 1: Geometric Reconstruction and Rendering. Examples from a challenging scene [11]
showing our Eve3D method’s accurate geometry and appearance. Left: Normal maps highlight
superior surface reconstruction over 2DGS [18] and GOF [55], particularly on flat surfaces and object
boundaries. Right: Photorealistic view synthesis alongside its detailed depth map rendering.

Abstract
We present Eve3D, a novel framework for dense 3D reconstruction based on 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). While most existing methods rely on imperfect priors
derived from pre-trained vision models, Eve3D fully leverages these priors by
jointly optimizing both them and the 3DGS backbone. This joint optimization
creates a mutually reinforcing cycle: the priors enhance the quality of 3DGS, which
in turn refines the priors, further improving the reconstruction. Additionally, Eve3D
introduces a novel optimization step based on bundle adjustment, overcoming the
limitations of the highly local supervision in standard 3DGS pipelines. Eve3D
achieves state-of-the-art results in surface reconstruction and novel view synthesis
on the Tanks & Temples, DTU, and Mip-NeRF360 datasets. while retaining fast
convergence, highlighting an unprecedented trade-off between accuracy and speed.

1

Introduction

Dense 3D scene reconstruction is a crucial task in computer vision and graphics, supporting applications ranging from virtual reality and simulating environments to robotic navigation. Recent
breakthroughs in this field draw inspiration from the adjacent literature concerning novel view
∗

This work was conducted during Jiawei Zhang’s research internship at Rawmantic AI.
Project Lead
‡
Corresponding author
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

