FreeInv: Free Lunch for Improving DDIM Inversion

Yuxiang Bao1,2∗, Huijie Liu1∗ , Xun Gao2 , Huan Fu2 , Guoliang Kang1†
1
Beihang University, 2 HUJING Digital Media & Entertainment Group
{bbao5802, liuhuijie6410, kgl.prml}@gmail.com

Abstract
Naive DDIM inversion process usually suffers from a trajectory deviation issue, i.e.,
the latent trajectory during reconstruction deviates from the one during inversion.
To alleviate this issue, previous methods either learn to mitigate the deviation or design a cumbersome compensation strategy to reduce the mismatch error, exhibiting
substantial time and computation cost. In this work, we present a nearly free-lunch
method (named FreeInv) to address the issue more effectively and efficiently. In
FreeInv, we randomly transform the latent representation and keep the transformation the same between the corresponding inversion and reconstruction time-step.
It is motivated from a statistical perspective that an ensemble of DDIM inversion
processes for multiple trajectories yields a smaller trajectory mismatch error on
expectation. Moreover, through theoretical analysis and empirical study, we show
that FreeInv performs an efficient ensemble of multiple trajectories. FreeInv can be
freely integrated into existing inversion-based image and video editing techniques.
Especially for inverting video sequences, it brings more significant fidelity and
efficiency improvements. Comprehensive quantitative and qualitative evaluation
on PIE benchmark and DAVIS dataset shows that FreeInv remarkably outperforms
conventional DDIM inversion, and is competitive among previous state-of-the-art
inversion methods, with superior computation efficiency.

1

Introduction

The recent developments of large-scale text-guided diffusion models, e.g. Stable Diffusion [36], have
fueled the rise of image and video editing. To ensure the editing results are faithful to the original
input, these methods typically employ Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) inversion [38]
techniques. The DDIM inversion process involves mapping an image back to its noisy latent
representation, from which the original image is expected to be reconstructed with high fidelity.
However, the reconstruction process usually suffers from a trajectory deviation issue, i.e., the latent
trajectory of the reconstruction process deviates from that of the inversion process, which means the
error of latent representations between inversion and reconstruction may be accumulated along the
denoising steps. This is because the ideal DDIM inversion and reconstruction process is theoretically
based on the local linear assumption, i.e., ϵθ (xt ) ≈ ϵθ (xt+1 ), where ϵθ (·) denotes the noise predicted
by a neural network parameterized with θ. The assumption usually does not hold in practice. Thus,
the error introduced in each step will be accumulated and lead to a non-negligible deviation between
the inversion and reconstruction trajectory, hampering the quality of reconstructed and edited results.
To mitigate the trajectory deviation, previous works focus on reducing the mismatch error of latent
representations between inversion and reconstruction processes, i.e., reducing |ϵθ (xt ) − ϵθ (xt+1 )| in
each time-step. Learning-based methods [25, 5] aim to minimize the mismatch error through backpropagating the gradients to the null-text embedding (see Fig. 1(a)). Another group of methods [17,
∗
Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. Code is available at https://github.com/yuxiangbao/
FreeInv. Project page is available at https://yuxiangbao.github.io/FreeInv/.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

