Attack by Yourself: Effective and Unnoticeable
Multi-Category Graph Backdoor Attacks with
Subgraph Triggers Pool

Jiangtong Li∗ ,1,2 , Dongyi Liu∗,1 , Kun Zhu1,2 , Dawei Cheng#,1,2 , Changjun Jiang#,1,2 ,
1. Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing,
Ministry of Education, Tongji University
2. School of Computer Science and Technology,
Tongji University
{jiangtongli, 2152833, kzhu00, dcheng, cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved significant success in various
real-world applications, including social networks, finance systems, and traffic
management. Recent researches highlight their vulnerability to backdoor attacks
in node classification, where GNNs trained on a poisoned graph misclassify a test
node only when specific triggers are attached. These studies typically focus on
single attack categories and use adaptive trigger generators to create node-specific
triggers. However, adaptive trigger generators typically have a simple structure,
limited parameters, and lack category-aware graph knowledge, which makes them
struggle to handle backdoor attacks across multiple categories as the number of
target categories increases. We address this gap by proposing a novel approach
for Effective and Unnoticeable Multi-Category (EUMC) graph backdoor attacks,
leveraging subgraph from the attacked graph as category-aware triggers to precisely
control the target category. To ensure the effectiveness of our method, we construct
a Multi-Category Subgraph Triggers Pool (MC-STP) using the subgraphs of the
attacked graph as triggers. We then exploit the attachment probability shifts of
each subgraph trigger as category-aware priors for target category determination.
Moreover, we develop a “select then attach” strategy that connects suitable categoryaware trigger to attacked nodes for unnoticeability. Extensive experiments across
different real-world datasets confirm the efficacy of our method in conducting multicategory graph backdoor attacks on various GNN models and defense strategies.
Code is released at https://github.com/novdream/EUMC.

1

Introduction

In recent years, GNNs [1, 2] have achieved significant success in modeling real-world graph-structured
data, including social networks [3], financial interactions [4, 5], and traffic flows [6]. GNNs typically
update node representations by aggregating information from their neighbors, which preserves the
features of the neighbors and captures the local graph topology. However, GNNs are vulnerable to
attacks, and numerous methods have been developed to deceive these networks [7].
In graph adversarial attacks, adversaries can modify existing nodes or edges in the graph (Graph
Modification Attack, GMA) [8] or inject malicious nodes to the graph (Graph Injection Attack,
GIA) [9] in evasion or poison settings. For instance, TDGIA [10] traverses the original graph to
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this research. # Corresponding Authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

