FlashMD: long-stride, universal prediction
of molecular dynamics

Filippo Bigi∗
Institute of Materials
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
filippo.bigi@epfl.ch
Agustinus Kristiadi
Department of Computer Science
Western University & Vector Institute
London, ON N6A 3K7, Canada
akristi@uwo.ca

Sanggyu Chong∗
Institute of Materials
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
sanggyu.chong@epfl.ch
Michele Ceriotti
Institute of Materials
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
michele.ceriotti@epfl.ch

Abstract
Molecular dynamics (MD) provides insights into atomic-scale processes by integrating over time the equations that describe the motion of atoms under the action
of interatomic forces. Machine learning models have substantially accelerated MD
by providing inexpensive predictions of the forces, but they remain constrained
to minuscule time integration steps, which are required by the fast time scale of
atomic motion. In this work, we propose FlashMD, a method to predict the evolution of positions and momenta over strides that are between one and two orders of
magnitude longer than typical MD time steps. We incorporate considerations on the
mathematical and physical properties of Hamiltonian dynamics in the architecture,
generalize the approach to allow the simulation of any thermodynamic ensemble,
and carefully assess the possible failure modes of such a long-stride MD approach.
We validate FlashMD’s accuracy in reproducing equilibrium and time-dependent
properties, using both system-specific and general-purpose models, extending the
ability of MD simulation to reach the long time scales needed to model microscopic
processes of high scientific and technological relevance.

1

Introduction

Simulations of atomic-scale systems are at the core of computational physics, chemistry, biology, and
materials science [1]. Molecular dynamics (MD) in particular is a powerful tool for investigating the
behavior of microscopic systems, from proteins [2–5] to chemical reactions [6–8] and materials [9–
11]. MD elucidates atomic-scale structure and mechanisms by numerically solving the equations
of atomic motion, driven by forces that can be estimated by quantum ground state electronicstructure calculations [12]. This has allowed simulating the time-evolution of various systems at the
atomic scale, and probing thermodynamic and kinetic properties that are often difficult to measure
experimentally.
Despite its utility, MD has long been hindered by the trade-off between computational cost and
accuracy of employed methods. Machine learning interatomic potentials [13–19] (MLIPs) have remedied this in part by allowing the cheap approximation of otherwise expensive quantum mechanical
∗

These two authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

