Robust SuperAlignment: Weak-to-Strong Robustness
Generalization for Vision-Language Models
∗

†

Junhao Dong1,2 , Cong Zhang3 , Xinghua Qu4 , Zejun Ma3 ,
†
Piotr Koniusz5,6,7 , and Yew-Soon Ong1,2
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, 3 TikTok, Singapore,
4
Bytedance, 5 Data61 CSIRO, 6 University of New South Wales, 7Australian National University

Abstract
Numerous well-established studies have demonstrated the superhuman capabilities
of modern Vision-Language Models (VLMs) across a wide range of tasks. However,
growing is the doubt about the continuing availability of reliable high-quality
labeling (supervision) from human annotators, leading to stagnation of the model’s
performance. To address this challenge, “superalignment” employs the so-called
weak-to-strong generalization paradigm, where the supervision from a weak model
can provide generalizable knowledge for a strong model. While effective in aligning
knowledge for clean samples between the strong and weak models, the standard
weak-to-strong approach typically fails to capture adversarial robustness, exposing
strong VLMs to adversarial attacks. This inability to transfer adversarial robustness
is because adversarial samples are normally missing in the superalignment stage.
To this end, we are the first to propose the weak-to-strong (adversarial) robustness
generalization method to elicit zero-shot robustness in large-scale models by an
unsupervised scheme, mitigating the unreliable information source for alignment
from two perspectives: alignment re-weighting and source guidance refinement.
We analyze settings under which robustness generalization is possible. Extensive
experiments across various vision-language benchmarks validate the effectiveness
of our method in numerous scenarios, demonstrating its plug-and-play applicability
to large-scale VLMs.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) enjoy remarkable prediction capabilities, frequently surpassing
human performance on diverse multimodal tasks, ranging from zero-shot recognition to multimodal
reasoning [60, 42, 49] to task unlearning [24]. Despite these outstanding achievements, they suffer
from an emerging issue: as models become highly capable, human annotators fail to reliably guide
and/or evaluate their outputs, especially given the complexity and ambiguity inherent in visionlanguage paired data due to inherent limitations in cognitive capacity and scalability [7, 4]. This
fundamental limitation has prompted the super-intelligence alignment (superalignment) [41], a
conceptualized framework to align (future) superhuman models with human values and goals based
on limited human supervision. One seminal approach toward superalignment is weak-to-strong
generalization [5], which explores supervision from a weak (lightweight) teacher model to guide a
strong (large-scale) student model, enabling the student to generalize beyond the original limitations
of its supervision source (reference model) on unforeseen data.
However, while existing weak-to-strong generalization methods focus on distilling knowledge from a
teacher model, we demonstrate that robustness, a distinct form of knowledge, cannot be transferred
∗
†

The research work was done during Junhao’s internship at TikTok Singapore.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

