Diffusion Transformers as Open-World
Spatiotemporal Foundation Models

Yuan Yuan1 , Chonghua Han1 , Jingtao Ding1 , Guozhen Zhang2 , Depeng Jin1 , Yong Li1,*
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
TsingRoc.ai
Beijing, China
*
Corresponding author: liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The urban environment is characterized by complex spatio-temporal dynamics
arising from diverse human activities and interactions. Effectively modeling these
dynamics is essential for understanding and optimizing urban systems. In this
work, we introduce UrbanDiT, a foundation model for open-world urban spatiotemporal learning that successfully scales up diffusion transformers in this field.
UrbanDiT pioneers a unified model that integrates diverse data sources and types
while learning universal spatio-temporal patterns across different cities and scenarios. This allows the model to unify both multi-data and multi-task learning, and
effectively support a wide range of spatio-temporal applications. Its key innovation lies in the elaborated prompt learning framework, which adaptively generates
both data-driven and task-specific prompts, guiding the model to deliver superior
performance across various urban applications. UrbanDiT offers three advantages:
1) It unifies diverse data types, such as grid-based and graph-based data, into a
sequential format; 2) With task-specific prompts, it supports a wide range of tasks,
including bi-directional spatio-temporal prediction, temporal interpolation, spatial
extrapolation, and spatio-temporal imputation; and 3) It generalizes effectively
to open-world scenarios, with its powerful zero-shot capabilities outperforming
nearly all baselines with training data. UrbanDiT sets up a new benchmark for
foundation models in the urban spatio-temporal domain. Code and datasets are
publicly available at https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/UrbanDiT.

1

Introduction

The urban environment is characterized by complex spatio-temporal dynamics arising from diverse
human activities and interactions within the city. These dynamics are reflected in different types
of data. For example, grid-based data divides urban space into regular cells, often used to track
crowd flows. In contrast, graph-based data represents spatial structures like road networks as nodes
and edges, such as traffic speeds on roads. The data from different cities are usually with unique
layouts, infrastructures, and planning strategies. Effectively modeling their spatio-temporal dynamics
is crucial for optimizing urban services and understanding how cities function. Therefore, it raises an
essential research question: can we develop a foundation model, similar to those in natural language
processing [41, 4] and computer vision [3, 26, 10], that learns universal spatio-temporal patterns and
serves as a general-purpose model for various urban applications?
In the context of urban spatio-temporal modeling, recent advancements such as GPD [53], UrbanGPT [23], and UniST [51] have opened exciting avenues for understanding complex urban
dynamics. As compared in Table 1, these models either utilize LLMs [23] or develop unified models
from scratch [51, 53] tailored for urban spatio-temporal predictions. By training on multiple datasets,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

