ALTER: All-in-One Layer Pruning and Temporal
Expert Routing for Efficient Diffusion Generation

Xiaomeng Yang1∗ , Lei Lu1∗ , Qihui Fan1 , Changdi Yang1 , Juyi Lin1 ,
Yanzhi Wang1 , Xuan Zhang1 , Shangqian Gao2†
1
Northeastern University 2 Florida State University
1
{yang.xiaome, lu.lei1, fan.qih, yang.changd, lin.juy, yanz.wang,
2
xuan.zhang}@northeastern.edu
sgao@cs.fsu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated exceptional capabilities in generating highfidelity images. However, their iterative denoising process results in significant
computational overhead during inference, limiting their practical deployment in
resource-constrained environments. Existing acceleration methods often adopt
uniform strategies that fail to capture the temporal variations during diffusion generation, while the commonly adopted sequential pruning-then-fine-tuning strategy
suffers from sub-optimality due to the misalignment between pruning decisions
made on pretrained weights and the model’s final parameters. To address these limitations, we introduce ALTER: All-in-One Layer Pruning and Temporal Expoert
Routing, a unified framework that transforms diffusion models into a mixture of
efficient temporal experts. ALTER achieves a single-stage optimization that unifies
layer pruning, expert routing, and model fine-tuning by employing a trainable
hypernetwork, which dynamically generates layer pruning decisions and manages
timestep routing to specialized, pruned expert sub-networks throughout the ongoing
fine-tuning of the UNet. This unified co-optimization strategy enables significant
efficiency gains while preserving high generative quality. Specifically, ALTER
achieves same-level visual fidelity to the original 50-step Stable Diffusion v2.1
model while utilizing only 25.9% of its total MACs with just 20 inference steps
and delivering a 3.64× speedup through 35% sparsity.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1, 2, 3] emerged as a leading class of generative models, achieving quality results
in diverse tasks such as image generation [4, 5, 6, 7], image editing [8, 9] and personalized content
generation [10, 11]. However, they face application limits due to costly inference: repeated fullnetwork denoising causes latency and memory use, restricting real-time and low-resource deployment.
To mitigate the high computational cost of diffusion models, two primary strategies have emerged:
one focuses on reducing the number of denoising steps in the temporal dimension, and the other
explores model-level compression to reduce the per-step computational burden. Extensive research
has been devoted to the former, including improved samplers [12, 13, 14], distillation methods [15]
and feature caching [16]. In this work, we focus on the latter: how model compression can be further
improved to enhance efficiency without sacrificing performance? Pruning has been a long-standing
approach for reducing model complexity, with recent advances focusing on structured pruning
to enable hardware-friendly acceleration. Among various structured pruning schemes, layer-wise
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

