Enforcing convex constraints in Graph Neural
Networks
Ahmed Rashwan ˚ Keith Briggs
University of Bath
BT Research

Chris Budd
University of Bath

Lisa Kreusser
University of Bath and Monumo

Abstract
Many machine learning applications require outputs that satisfy complex, dynamic constraints. This task is particularly challenging in Graph Neural Network
models due to the variable output sizes of graph-structured data. In this paper,
we introduce ProjNet, a Graph Neural Network framework which satisfies inputdependant constraints. ProjNet combines a sparse vector clipping method with the
Component-Averaged Dykstra (CAD) algorithm, an iterative scheme for solving
the best-approximation problem. We establish a convergence result for CAD and
develop a GPU-accelerated implementation capable of handling large-scale inputs efficiently. To enable end-to-end training, we introduce a surrogate gradient
for CAD that is both computationally efficient and better suited for optimization
than the exact gradient. We validate ProjNet on four classes of constrained optimisation problems: linear programming, two classes of non-convex quadratic
programs, and radio transmit power optimization, demonstrating its effectiveness
across diverse problem settings.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning (ML) applications, model outputs must satisfy certain constraints to ensure feasibility, safety, or interpretability [22, 40]. A common approach to enforcing constraints
is through activation functions (e.g., Sigmoid, Softmax) in the output layer [41], which restrict
outputs to a predefined set. However, while effective for simple linear or box constraints, this approach is not applicable for more complicated types of constraints. Many real-world applications
require complex, data-dependent constraints. For example, in robotics, constraints can encode feasible movements or collision avoidance [21, 54, 63]. Similarly, in energy systems, power generation
limits vary with demand fluctuations [48], and in industrial processes, physical constraints must be
respected [46]. Such tasks are often modelled as optimisation problems with convex constraints.
Several approaches have been proposed for enforcing a given set of convex constraints C in ML
models, each with distinct strengths and drawbacks. Many existing methods provide only approximate feasibility, typically by incorporating the constraints into the training loss using barrier functions or duality [22, 27, 33]. Instead, we will only be considering methods which yield strict feasibility guarantees. One common strategy involves first selecting an arbitrary reference point within
C, and then using an ML model to compute an adjustment vector about this reference, ensuring
that the final output remains feasible and accomplishes the desired task; we refer to this as the vector clipping method [39, 52, 59]. Typically, the reference point is obtained using a convex solver,
which is generally more computationally expensive than evaluating the adjustment vector. While
this approach works well for fixed constraint sets, it becomes significantly more costly when the
constraints vary with the model input, as a new reference point must be computed for each instance.
This limitation makes training vector clipping models with larger batch sizes impractical.
˚

email: ar3009@bath.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

