Born a Transformer – Always a Transformer? On the
Effect of Pretraining on Architectural Abilities

Mayank Jobanputra1∗, Yana Veitsman1∗, Yash Sarrof 1 , Aleksandra Bakalova1 ,
Vera Demberg1 , Ellie Pavlick2 , Michael Hahn1
1

Saarland University

2

Brown University

{mayank,mhahn}@lst.uni-saarland.de

Abstract
Transformers have theoretical limitations in modeling certain sequence-to-sequence
tasks, yet it remains largely unclear if these limitations play a role in large-scale
pretrained LLMs, or whether LLMs might effectively overcome these constraints
in practice due to the scale of both the models themselves and their pretraining
data. We explore how these architectural constraints manifest after pretraining,
by studying a family of retrieval and copying tasks inspired by Liu et al. [2024a].
We use a recently proposed framework for studying length generalization [Huang
et al., 2025] to provide guarantees for each of our settings. Empirically, we observe
an induction-versus-anti-induction asymmetry, where pretrained models are better
at retrieving tokens to the right (induction) rather than the left (anti-induction) of
a query token. This asymmetry disappears upon targeted fine-tuning if lengthgeneralization is guaranteed by theory. Mechanistic analysis reveals that this
asymmetry is connected to the differences in the strength of induction versus
anti-induction circuits within pretrained transformers. We validate our findings
through practical experiments on real-world tasks demonstrating reliability risks.
Our results highlight that pretraining selectively enhances certain transformer
capabilities, but does not overcome fundamental length-generalization limits1 .

1

Introduction

Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] have become the backbone of most LLMs [Radford et al., 2019,
Brown et al., 2020, Touvron et al., 2023]. Given the widespread usage of LLMs, there has been a long
line of research to understand their theoretical underpinnings. Early analyses showed that transformers
can approximate any sequence-to-sequence function at fixed input length [Yun et al., 2019] and
even simulate Turing machines [Pérez et al., 2019] when given unbounded compute. However,
subsequent studies have uncovered fundamental expressibility and learnability limitations, finding
classes of problems which transformers cannot express across arbitrary input lengths [e.g. Hahn,
2020, Strobl et al., 2024, Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023, Sanford et al., 2024], or which transformers
systematically struggle to learn and generalize on [e.g. Hahn and Rofin, 2024, Zhou et al., 2024].
Empirical work confirms that small transformers trained from scratch do instantiate such limitations
[e.g. Bhattamishra et al., 2020, Huang et al., 2025, Delétang et al., 2023, Zhou et al., 2024]. For
instance, transformers trained from scratch struggle to generalize to longer or more challenging
examples even on tasks as simple as copying a long string with repeated symbols [Zhou et al., 2024],
or retrieving which token followed the last occurrence of some query token in a long context [Liu
et al., 2024a] — findings in close agreement with theoretical arguments about transformer’s learning
biases [Huang et al., 2025].
∗
1

These authors contributed equally.
https://github.com/lacoco-lab/always_a_transformer

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

