A Tale of Two Symmetries: Exploring the Loss
Landscape of Equivariant Models

YuQing Xie
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
xyuqing@mit.edu

Tess Smidt
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
tsmidt@mit.edu

Abstract
Equivariant neural networks have proven to be effective for tasks with known
underlying symmetries. However, optimizing equivariant networks can be tricky
and best training practices are less established than for standard networks. In
particular, recent works have found small training benefits from relaxing equivariance constraints. This raises the question: do equivariance constraints introduce
fundamental obstacles to optimization? Or do they simply require different hyperparameter tuning? In this work, we investigate this question through a theoretical
analysis of the loss landscape geometry. We focus on networks built using permutation representations, which we can view as a subset of unconstrained MLPs.
Importantly, we show that the parameter symmetries of the unconstrained model
has nontrivial effects on the loss landscape of the equivariant subspace and under
certain conditions can provably prevent learning of the global minima. Further,
we empirically demonstrate in such cases, relaxing to an unconstrained MLP can
sometimes solve the issue. Interestingly, the weights eventually found via relaxation corresponds to a different choice of group representation in the hidden layer.
From this, we draw 3 key takeaways. (1) By viewing the unconstrained version of
an architecture, we can uncover hidden parameter symmetries which were broken
by choice of constraint enforcement (2) Hidden symmetries give important insights
on loss landscapes and can induce critical points and even minima (3) Hidden
symmetry induced minima can sometimes be escaped by constraint relaxation
and we observe the network jumps to a different choice of constraint enforcement.
Effective equivariance relaxation may require rethinking the fixed choice of group
representation in the hidden layers.

1

Introduction

It was the best of models, it was the worst of models, it was the age of augmentation, it was the age of
equivariance...
Many domains possess latent symmetries, inspiring the development of equivariant networks which
by design already account for these symmetries [12, 13, 47, 53, 54]. Such networks have proven to
be extremely effective in a wide variety of tasks including molecular force fields [6, 7, 37], catalyst
discovery [35], charge density prediction [23], generative models [27], protein structure prediction
[29, 33], and particle physics [9, 10]. One of the major benefits of equivariance is improved sample
complexity, and better generalizability, both of which have concrete theoretical support [8, 19, 36].
However, it also has been observed that equivariant networks can be tricky to optimize and best
training practices for equivariant networks are less established [30, 35, 51]. In addition, there have
been a number of works exploring the relaxation of equivariance constraints [43, 49, 50, 52]. The
motivation for these works is model misspecification. Real world data may not have the perfect
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

