Information-Theoretic Reward Decomposition for
Generalizable RLHF

1

Liyuan Mao1∗ , Haoran Xu2 , Amy Zhang2 , Weinan Zhang1† , Chengjia Bai3†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 UT Austin, 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, China Telecom
maoliyuan@sjtu.edu.cn, wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn, baicj@chinatelecom.cn

Abstract
A generalizable reward model is crucial in Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF) as it enables correctly evaluating unseen prompt-response pairs.
However, existing reward models can lack this ability, as they are typically trained
by increasing the reward gap between the chosen and rejected responses, while
overlooking the prompts that the responses are conditioned on. Consequently,
when the trained reward model is evaluated on prompt-response pairs that lie
outside the data distribution, neglecting the effect of prompts may result in poor
generalization of the reward model. To address this issue, we decompose the reward
value into two independent components: prompt-free reward and prompt-related
reward. Prompt-free reward represents the evaluation that is determined only by
responses, while the prompt-related reward reflects the reward that derives from
both the prompt and the response. We extract these two components from an
information-theoretic perspective, which requires no extra models. Subsequently,
we propose a new reward learning algorithm by prioritizing data samples based
on their prompt-free reward values. Through toy examples, we demonstrate that
the extracted prompt-free and prompt-related rewards effectively characterize the
two parts of the reward value. Further, standard evaluations show that our method
improves both the alignment performance and the generalization capability of the
reward model.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is an effective approach for Large Language
Models (LLMs) alignment [8, 5]. Within a wide range of RLHF methods, reward learning plays a
pivotal role. These methods typically first train a reward model on a static dataset and then leverage it
to do Reinforcement Learning (RL) [28, 11]. Compared with methods that are free of using reward
models [30, 40], the advantage of such methods is their capacity to leverage the generalization
capability of the reward model to evaluate outside-of-distribution prompt-response pairs. These
prompt-response pairs with generated rewards can be used to further improve the LLM’s performance
[36, 42].
Clearly, learning a generalizable reward model is central to this scenario. However, we found that
standard reward training does not guarantee sufficient generalization capability. In reward model
training, the primary goal is typically better distinguishing between chosen and rejected responses.
To achieve this, the reward model does not necessarily require consideration of the corresponding
prompt. Taking reward learning based on Bradley-Terry (BT) model as an example. Since the
potential response space is vastly larger than the dataset size, different data samples typically contain
distinct response pairs. As long as the reward gap within each response pair increases, the training loss
∗
†

Work done during the internship at Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

