Cost-Efficient LLM Training with Lifetime-Aware
Tensor Offloading via GPUDirect Storage

Ziqi Yuan1 , Haoyang Zhang1 , Yirui Eric Zhou1 ,
Apoorve Mohan2 , I-Hsin Chung2 , Seetharami Seelam2 , Jian Huang1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 IBM Research
{ziqiy6, zhang402, yiruiz2, jianh}@illinois.edu
apoorve.mohan@ibm.com, {ihchung, sseelam}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We present the design and implementation of a new lifetime-aware tensor offloading
framework for GPU memory expansion using low-cost PCIe-based solid-state
drives (SSDs). Our framework, T ERAIO, is developed explicitly for large language
model (LLM) training with multiple GPUs and multiple SSDs. Its design is driven
by our observation that the active tensors take only a small fraction (1.7% on
average) of allocated GPU memory in each LLM training iteration, the inactive
tensors are usually large and will not be used for a long period of time, creating
ample opportunities for offloading/prefetching tensors to/from slow SSDs without
stalling the GPU training process. T ERAIO accurately estimates the lifetime (active
period of time in GPU memory) of each tensor with the profiling of the first few
iterations in the training process. With the tensor lifetime analysis, T ERAIO will
generate an optimized tensor offloading/prefetching plan and integrate it into the
compiled LLM program via PyTorch. T ERAIO has a runtime tensor migration
engine to execute the offloading/prefetching plan via GPUDirect storage, which
allows direct tensor migration between GPUs and SSDs for alleviating the CPU
bottleneck and maximizing the SSD bandwidth utilization. In comparison with
state-of-the-art studies such as ZeRO-Offload and ZeRO-Infinity, we show that
T ERAIO improves the training performance of various LLMs by 1.47× on average,
and achieves 80.7% of the ideal performance assuming unlimited GPU memory.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have been widely employed in various application domains [31, 46,
42]. However, training LLMs is still a well-known challenging problem, as its memory demand
is increasing at a much faster speed than the scaling speed of GPU memory [18, 25]. Scaling the
GPU memory capacity is both technically challenging and prohibitively expensive. Due to space
constraints and DRAM scaling issues [19, 15], it is hard to scale up the GPU memory capacity
on each server machine. Scaling out LLM training with a cluster of GPU servers can increase the
aggregated memory capacity, however, it inevitably increases operational cost, placing a major barrier
for researchers and developers to entry into cutting-edge LLM development.
To overcome the GPU memory wall, prior studies proposed expanding GPU memory with external
memory devices. One common approach is to allow tensor offloading from GPU memory to host
memory [17, 39, 11, 44, 32, 41, 43, 20]. However, due to the fundamental DRAM scalability
challenge, such an approach is still limited by the host memory. Recent studies have extended tensor
offloading to PCIe-based SSDs that offer larger capacity at a much lower cost [1, 37, 16, 23, 47,
51, 29, 50]. But due to the incapability of efficiently utilizing the SSD bandwidth and hiding the
slow SSD accesses, these offloading solutions still deliver suboptimal performance. For instance,
ZeRO-infinity [37] enabled the offloading of tensors to SSDs at the granularity of deep neural network
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

