Taming Hyperparameter Sensitivity in Data
Attribution: Practical Selection Without Costly
Retraining

Weiyi Wang1

Junwei Deng2 Yuzheng Hu2 Shiyuan Zhang2 Xirui Jiang1
Runting Zhang1 Han Zhao2 Jiaqi W. Ma2
1
University of Michigan Ann Arbor 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{wweiyi,xirui,runtingz}@umich.edu
{junweid2,yh46,sz54,hanzhao,jiaqima}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Data attribution methods, which quantify the influence of individual training data
points on a machine learning model, have gained increasing popularity in datacentric applications in modern AI. Despite a recent surge of new methods developed
in this space, the impact of hyperparameter tuning in these methods remains underexplored. In this work, we present the first large-scale empirical study to understand
the hyperparameter sensitivity of common data attribution methods. Our results
show that most methods are indeed sensitive to certain key hyperparameters. However, unlike typical machine learning algorithms—whose hyperparameters can be
tuned using computationally-cheap validation metrics—evaluating data attribution
performance often requires retraining models on subsets of training data, making
such metrics prohibitively costly for hyperparameter tuning. This poses a critical
open challenge for the practical application of data attribution methods. To address
this challenge, we advocate for better theoretical understandings of hyperparameter behavior to inform efficient tuning strategies. As a case study, we provide a
theoretical analysis of the regularization term that is critical in many variants of
influence function methods. Building on this analysis, we propose a lightweight
procedure for selecting the regularization value without model retraining, and
validate its effectiveness across a range of standard data attribution benchmarks.
Overall, our study identifies a fundamental yet overlooked challenge in the practical
application of data attribution, and highlights the importance of careful discussion
on hyperparameter selection in future method development.

1

Introduction

Data attribution methods quantify the contribution of individual training samples to a machine
learning model’s predictions or overall performance [22, 9]. These methods have been successfully
applied to a range of data-centric tasks in modern AI, including training data selection [37], mislabel
detection [22], and copyright compensation [7]. Recently, this field has witnessed a surge of novel
methods [11, 18, 30, 12, 29, 6, 3, 35], each promising improvements in efficiency, efficacy, or
theoretical soundness.
Despite this rapid progress, a crucial practical aspect remains largely underexplored: the hyperparameter sensitivity of data attribution methods. Existing benchmark studies [19, 8] largely adopt
the hyperparameter settings used in the original papers proposing the methods. While some of the
original papers include limited ablation studies, few of them offer practical guidance for hyperparameter selection, and many methods include implicit tunable knobs that have received little scrutiny.
Moreover, the optimal hyperparameter choices can vary across datasets and models.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

