Hyperbolic Dataset Distillation

Wenyuan Li
Hokkaido University
wenyuan@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Guang Li∗
Hokkaido University
guang@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Keisuke Maeda
Hokkaido University
maeda@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Takahiro Ogawa
Hokkaido University
ogawa@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Miki Haseyama
Hokkaido University
mhaseyama@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Abstract
To address the computational and storage challenges posed by large-scale datasets
in deep learning, dataset distillation has been proposed to synthesize a compact
dataset that replaces the original while maintaining comparable model performance.
Unlike optimization-based approaches that require costly bi-level optimization,
distribution matching (DM) methods improve efficiency by aligning the distributions of synthetic and original data, thereby eliminating nested optimization. DM
achieves high computational efficiency and has emerged as a promising solution.
However, existing DM methods, constrained to Euclidean space, treat data as
independent and identically distributed points, overlooking complex geometric
and hierarchical relationships. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel
hyperbolic dataset distillation method, termed HDD. Hyperbolic space, characterized by negative curvature and exponential volume growth with distance, naturally
models hierarchical and tree-like structures. HDD embeds features extracted by
a shallow network into the Lorentz hyperbolic space, where the discrepancy between synthetic and original data is measured by the hyperbolic (geodesic) distance
between their centroids. By optimizing this distance, the hierarchical structure
is explicitly integrated into the distillation process, guiding synthetic samples to
gravitate towards the root-centric regions of the original data distribution while
preserving their underlying geometric characteristics. Furthermore, we find that
pruning in hyperbolic space requires only 20% of the distilled core set to retain
model performance, while significantly improving training stability. Notably, HDD
is seamlessly compatible with most existing DM methods, and extensive experiments on different datasets validate its effectiveness. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work to incorporate the hyperbolic space into the dataset distillation
process. The code is available at https://github.com/Guang000/HDD.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated outstanding performance across a wide
range of tasks. However, the continuous performance improvement has led to increasingly large
datasets, which in turn have escalated storage costs and computational demands, emerging as key
∗

Correspondence to: Guang Li <guang@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

