On the Role of Hidden States of Modern Hopfield
Network in Transformer
Tsubasa Masumura∗ Masato Taki∗
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence and Science, Rikkyo University, Japan
{25wr001m,taki_m}@rikkyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Associative memory models based on Hopfield networks and self-attention based
on key-value mechanisms have been popular approaches in the study of memory
mechanisms in deep learning. It has been pointed out that the state update rule
of the modern Hopfield network (MHN) in the adiabatic approximation is in
agreement with the self-attention layer of Transformer. In this paper, we go
beyond this approximation and investigate the relationship between MHN and selfattention. Our results show that the correspondence between Hopfield networks
and Transformers can be established in a more generalized form by adding a
new variable, the hidden state derived from the MHN, to self-attention. This new
attention mechanism, modern Hopfield attention (MHA), allows the inheritance
of attention scores from the input layer of the Transformer to the output layer,
which greatly improves the nature of attention weights. In particular, we show
both theoretically and empirically that MHA hidden states significantly improve
serious problem of deep Transformers known as rank collapse and token uniformity.
We also confirm that MHA can systematically improve accuracy without adding
training parameters to the Vision Transformer or GPT. Our results provide a new
case in which Hopfield networks can be a useful perspective for improving the
Transformer architecture.

1

Introduction

The relationship between associative memory in Hopfield networks [22, 1], which has attracted
interest from neuroscientists, and Transformers [46] based on key-value memory that have been
studied in machine learning has attracted interest from the research community [45, 42, 3, 48, 21].
One of the most interesting results is the finding in [40, 31] that translating modern Hopfield networks
into neural networks yields the Transformer architecture that has been very successful in natural
language processing [38, 9] and computer vision [12]. What, then, do more general modern Hopfield
networks imply for deep learning? This paper gives a concrete answer to this question.
Hopfield networks [22, 1] are a class of models for associative memory. Despite these interesting
properties, classical Hopfield networks have the limitation of small storage capacity. Recently, [30]
proposed Dense Associative Memory which can achieve storage capacity that scales exponentially
or power-wise with respect to the number of neurons by introducing high nonlinearity [7]. These
models with large storage capacity are collectively referred to as modern Hopfield networks [40, 31].
Recent advances in Transformer architecture, including its application to language models, have led
to significant advances in the study of self-attention mechanisms. These advances have also shed new
light on Hopfield networks. In [40], it was shown that the state update rules of modern continuous
Hopfield networks (MCHNs) have a mathematical structure exactly equivalent to that of the selfattention mechanism. Furthermore, [31] developed this relationship theoretically, pointing out that
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

