Distances for Markov chains from sample streams

Sergio Calo Anders Jonsson Gergely Neu Ludovic Schwartz
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

Javier Segovia-Aguas

{sergio.calo,anders.jonsson,gergely.neu,ludovic.schwartz,javier.segovia}@upf.edu

Abstract
Bisimulation metrics are powerful tools for measuring similarities between stochastic processes, and specifically Markov chains. Recent advances have uncovered that
bisimulation metrics are, in fact, optimal-transport distances, which has enabled the
development of fast algorithms for computing such metrics with provable accuracy
and runtime guarantees. However, these recent methods, as well as all previously
known methods, assume full knowledge of the transition dynamics. This is often
an impractical assumption in most real-world scenarios, where typically only sample trajectories are available. In this work, we propose a stochastic optimization
method that addresses this limitation and estimates bisimulation metrics based
on sample access, without requiring explicit transition models. Our approach is
derived from a new linear programming (LP) formulation of bisimulation metrics,
which we solve using a stochastic primal-dual optimization method. We provide
theoretical guarantees on the sample complexity of the algorithm and validate its
effectiveness through a series of empirical evaluations.

1

Introduction

Computing similarity metrics between stochastic processes is an important mathematical problem
with numerous promising use cases in diverse areas such as mathematical finance, computational
neuroscience, biology, and computer science. Within machine learning, potential applications include
representation learning for dynamical systems and reinforcement learning [Zhang et al., 2021, Chen
and Pan, 2022], fitting and comparing sequence models [Xu et al., 2020, Tao et al., 2024] or prediction
tasks on graph-structured data [Titouan et al., 2019, Brugère et al., 2024]. While there exist several
rigorous frameworks for defining such similarity metrics and studying their properties, computing
them typically requires full knowledge of the probability law of the processes to compare, which is
not available in just about any case of practical interest. In this paper, we address this problem by
developing methods for estimating similarity metrics for a family of stochastic processes, based only
on sample streams and without requiring any prior information about the underlying process laws.
We focus on a family of similarity metrics known as bisimulation metrics, originating from theoretical
computer science for purposes of formal verification of computer programs [Park, 1981, Milner,
1989, Desharnais et al., 1999, van Breugel and Worrell, 2001]. This notion of process similarity
has gained popularity within reinforcement learning (RL), where its potential for learning state
representations has been recognized by the early works of Givan et al. [2003] and Ferns et al. [2004]
and the possibility of using it as a basis of practical methods for representation learning has been
explored in a long line of subsequent works [Castro, 2020, Zhang et al., 2021, Chen and Pan, 2022,
Kemertas and Jepson, 2022]. Another popular framework for studying similarities between structured
probability distributions is that of optimal transport (OT, cf. Villani, 2009), which has received
serious attention within machine learning in the last decade, largely owing to the work of Cuturi
[2013]. Very recently, Calo et al. [2024] pointed out that bisimulation metrics also fall within the
family of OT distances, which not only allowed them to connect two distinct areas of mathematics
but also import tools from the literature of computational optimal transport [Peyré and Cuturi, 2019]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

