Codifying Character Logic in Role-Playing

Letian Peng, Jingbo Shang∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, San Diego
{lepeng, jshang}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces Codified Profiles for role-playing, a novel approach that represents character logic as structured, executable functions for behavioral decisionmaking. Converted by large language model (LLM) from textual profiles, each
codified profile defines a set of functions parse_by_scene(scene) that output multiple logic-grounded assertions according to scene, using both explicit
control structures (e.g., if-then-else) and flexible check_condition(scene,
question) functions where each question is a semantically meaningful prompt
about the scene (e.g., “Is the character in danger?”) discriminated by the roleplaying LLM as true, false, or unknown. This explicit representation offers three
key advantages over traditional prompt-based textual profiles, which append character descriptions directly into text prompts: (1) Persistence, by enforcing complete
and consistent execution of character logic, rather than relying on the model’s
implicit reasoning; (2) Updatability, through systematic inspection and revision of
behavioral logic, which is difficult to track or debug in prompt-only approaches;
(3) Controllable Randomness, by supporting stochastic behavior directly within the
logic, enabling fine-grained variability that prompting alone struggles to achieve.
To validate these advantages, we introduce a new benchmark constructed from 83
characters and 5,141 scenes curated from Fandom, using natural language inference
(NLI)-based scoring to compare character responses against ground-truths. Our
experiments demonstrate the significant benefits of codified profiles in improving persistence, updatability, and behavioral diversity. Notably, by offloading a
significant portion of reasoning to preprocessing, codified profiles enable even
1B-parameter models to perform high-quality role-playing, providing an efficient,
lightweight foundation for local deployment of role-play agents. 2

1

Introduction

Role-playing [Chen et al., 2024a,b] has emerged as an iconic capability of modern large language
models (LLMs) [OpenAI, 2023, Touvron et al., 2023], enabling them to simulate characters with
distinct personas. This ability has spurred a surge of interest in both research [Shao et al., 2023,
Wang et al., 2023a,b, Sadeq et al., 2024] and applications3 , ranging from emotional companions and
storytelling assistants [Brahman et al., 2021, Qin et al., 2024] to non-playable game characters [Yu
et al., 2025] and metaverse agents [Zhou, 2023, Lifelo et al., 2024].
Despite this progress, current LLM-based role-playing systems interpret character logic by appending
character descriptions directly into prompts. This approach lacks persistence and controllability:
character behavior is governed by the LLM’s implicit reasoning, which is often brittle and inconsistent.
∗

Corresponding author.
Codes and datasets are available at https://github.com/KomeijiForce/Codified_Profile_Koishiday_2025
3
https://character.ai/
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

