Pre-trained Large Language Models Learn to Predict
Hidden Markov Models In-context
Yijia Dai∗ Zhaolin Gao

Yahya Sattar

Sarah Dean

Jennifer J. Sun

Cornell University

Abstract
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are foundational tools for modeling sequential data with latent Markovian structure, yet fitting them to real-world data remains computationally challenging. In this work, we show that pre-trained large
language models (LLMs) can effectively model data generated by HMMs via
in-context learning (ICL)—their ability to infer patterns from examples within
a prompt. On a diverse set of synthetic HMMs, LLMs achieve predictive accuracy approaching the theoretical optimum. We uncover novel scaling trends
influenced by HMM properties, and offer theoretical conjectures for these empirical observations. We also provide practical guidelines for scientists on using
ICL as a diagnostic tool for complex data. On real-world animal decision-making
tasks, ICL achieves competitive performance with models designed by human
experts. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that ICL can learn to
predict HMM-generated sequences—an advance that deepens our understanding
of in-context learning in LLMs and establishes its potential as a powerful tool for
uncovering hidden structure in complex scientific data. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DaiYijia02/icl-hmm.

1

Introduction

Many natural and artificial systems, from animal decision-making to ecological processes to climate
patterns, generate observations governed by underlying, unobservable states that follow Markovian
dynamics [3, 17, 34, 48, 57]. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [39] provide a powerful framework
for studying such phenomena. However, accurately modeling these systems presents significant
challenges. Parameter estimation and model fitting require complex algorithms like Baum-Welch [5],
and Gibbs Sampling [16]. These methods are often computationally intensive and can be algorithmically unstable, demanding extensive domain expertise [8, 9]. For scientists across disciplines, these
accessibility and computational bottlenecks limit the practical applications of HMM modeling tools.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) [1, 18] have reshaped the landscape of AI. Trained on
vast amounts of sequential text data, they have achieved unprecedented performance across natural
language processing tasks and exhibit remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capabilities—the ability
to learn patterns and perform new tasks directly from examples provided in the input context, without
explicit parameter updates [7]. While prior theoretical and empirical works [13, 33, 40] have demonstrated LLMs’ capabilities as Bayesian learners and their ability to model fully observed Markov
processes, their capacity to implicitly learn Hidden Markov Models—with latent states, complex
transition dependencies, and observation emissions—remains largely unexplored. Understanding this
capacity could illuminate the mechanisms underlying in-context learning HMMs, and reveal new
ways to leverage LLMs for analyzing complex sequential phenomena in scientific contexts.
∗

Correspondence to yd73@cornell.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

