Composition and Alignment of Diffusion Models using
Constrained Learning

Shervin Khalafi∗
University of Pennsylvania
shervink@seas.upenn.edu

Ignacio Hounie
University of Pennsylvania
ihounie@seas.upenn.edu

Dongsheng Ding∗
University of Tennessee, Knoxville
dongshed@utk.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have become prevalent in generative modeling due to their ability
to sample from complex distributions. To improve the quality of generated samples
and their compliance with user requirements, two commonly used methods are: (i)
Alignment, which involves finetuning a diffusion model to align it with a reward;
and (ii) Composition, which combines several pretrained diffusion models together,
each emphasizing a desirable attribute in the generated outputs. However, trade-offs
often arise when optimizing for multiple rewards or combining multiple models, as
they can often represent competing properties. Existing methods cannot guarantee
that the resulting model faithfully generates samples with all the desired properties.
To address this gap, we propose a constrained optimization framework that unifies
alignment and composition of diffusion models by enforcing that the aligned model
satisfies reward constraints and/or remains close to each pretrained model. We
provide a theoretical characterization of the solutions to the constrained alignment
and composition problems and develop a Lagrangian-based primal-dual training algorithm to approximate these solutions. Empirically, we demonstrate our proposed
approach in image generation, applying it to alignment and composition, and show
that our aligned or composed model satisfies constraints effectively. Our implementation can be found at: https://github.com/shervinkhalafi/constrained_comp_align

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as the tool of choice for generative modeling in a variety of settings
[38, 3, 50, 9], image generation being most prominent among them [37]. Users of these diffusion
models would like to adapt them to their specific preferences, but this aspiration is hindered by
the often enormous cost and complexity of their training [48, 56]. For this reason, alignment and
composition of what, in this context, become pretrained models, has become popular [29, 31].
Regardless of whether the goal is alignment or composition, we want to balance what are most
likely conflicting requirements. In alignment, we want to stay close to the pretrained model while
deviating sufficiently so as to affect some rewards of interest [17, 13]. In composition, given several
pretrained models, our goal is to sample from the union or intersection of their distributions [14, 1].
The standard approach to balance these requirements involves the use of weighted averages. This can
be a linear combination of score functions in composition [14, 1] or may involve a loss given by a
linear combination of a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence and a reward [17] in the case of alignment.
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

