A Counterfactual Semantics for
Hybrid Dynamical Systems

Andy Zane1,2
andy@basis.ai

Dmitry Batenkov1
dima@basis.ai

Jeremy Zucker3
jeremy.zucker@pnnl.gov

Rafal Urbaniak1
rafal@basis.ai
Sam Witty4˚
sam@sorbus.ai

1

Basis Research Institute, New York, NY
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA
3
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA
4
Sorbus AI
2

Abstract
Models of hybrid dynamical systems are widely used to answer questions about
the causes and effects of dynamic events in time. Unfortunately, existing causal
reasoning formalisms lack support for queries involving the dynamically triggered,
discontinuous interventions that characterize hybrid dynamical systems. This
mismatch can lead to ad-hoc and error-prone causal analysis workflows in practice. To bridge the gap between the needs of hybrid systems users and current
causal inference capabilities, we develop a rigorous counterfactual semantics by
formalizing interventions as transformations to the constraints of hybrid systems.
Unlike interventions in a typical structural causal model, however, interventions
in hybrid systems can easily render the model ill-posed. Thus, we identify mild
conditions under which our interventions maintain solution existence, uniqueness,
and measurability by making explicit connections to established hybrid systems
theory. To illustrate the utility of our framework, we formalize a number of canonical causal estimands and explore a case study on the probabilities of causation
with applications to fishery management. Our work simultaneously expands the
modeling possibilities available to causal inference practitioners and begins to
unlock decades of causality research for users of hybrid systems.

1

Introduction

Models of continuous-time dynamical systems are powerful tools for describing real-world mechanisms. From contrastive queries about system behavior under different control policies (Kirk, 2004),
to sensitivity analyses designed to aid in understanding which parameters drive system variation
(Cacuci, 2003), scientists, policy makers, and engineers often use such models to answer their
“what-if” and causal questions. Unfortunately, causal reasoning with continuous-time systems can be
ad-hoc, manual, and error-prone in daily practice.
In parallel, researchers in causal inference have built rigorous tools for answering an expansive
taxonomy of causal queries. For example, causal questions about effect estimation (Pearl, 2009;
Rubin, 1974; Imbens & Rubin, 2015), counterfactual reasoning (Pearl, 2009, Ch. 7), mediation
˚

Research conducted at Basis.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

