Interactive Anomaly Detection for Articulated Objects
via Motion Anticipation

Ankan Bhunia Changjian Li Hakan Bilen
University of Edinburgh
https://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/vico/research/interactiveAD/

Abstract
This paper presents a novel problem, interactive anomaly detection (AD) for articulated objects, and introduces a tailored solution that detects functional anomalies
by integrating vision, interaction, and anticipation. Unlike traditional AD methods
that rely on passive visual observations, our approach actively manipulates objects
to reveal anomalies that would otherwise remain hidden. Our method learns to
generate a sequence of actions to interact exclusively with normal objects and
to anticipate the resulting normal motion. During inference, the model applies
predicted actions to the object and compares the observed motion with the anticipated motion to detect anomalies. Additionally, we introduce a new benchmark,
PartNet-IAD, for interactive AD, which includes articulated objects with realistic
functional anomalies. Experiments show strong generalization to detect anomalies
in both seen and unseen object categories.

1

Introduction

Humans possess a remarkable ability to interact effortlessly with a wide range of objects in everyday
life. This capability stems from our intuitive understanding of how objects function–we assess their
potential uses, apply appropriate forces, and anticipate the outcomes of our actions. Importantly, we
adjust our behavior when the actual response of an object deviates from our expectations. These
discrepancies often serve as key feedback signals, especially when an object fails to operate as
intended–what we refer to as functional anomalies. This work aims to develop a perception system
that mirrors this human capability by detecting functional anomalies in articulated objects through a
combination of vision, physical interaction, and motion anticipation.
Detecting functional anomalies in articulated objects is essential for quality inspection in manufacturing (e.g., drawers, washing machines, laptops) and for robotic manipulation tasks. Unlike standard
anomaly detection (AD) benchmarks that focus on identifying visually apparent defects from static
observations [2, 46, 15, 5, 8, 3], many functional anomalies in articulated objects are not visually
observable and only become evident during physical interaction. As such, detecting these anomalies
requires an active approach–manipulating objects, anticipating their normal behavior, and identifying
deviations from expected motion (see Fig. 1).
This paper presents a novel perspective on AD by proposing an interactive AD framework that
addresses two central challenges: (1) learning how to interact with objects to reveal hidden anomalies,
and (2) anticipating their normal motion response during interaction. Unlike the prior work [28, 13,
40] which focuses on interaction with articulated objects without modeling expected outcome, our
approach predicts anomalies by comparing observed object motion after manipulation with the motion
expected under normal conditions. Given an RGBD image or partial point cloud and an atomic action
(e.g., pushing or pulling), our model predicts: (i) the 3D segmentation and motion of the target part,
and (ii) a motion confidence score, and an interaction end state indicating whether the part has reached
an interaction end state (e.g., a door fully opened). Importantly, the model is trained exclusively on
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

