Training Language Models to Reason Efficiently

Daman Arora
Carnegie Mellon University
damana@andrew.cmu.edu

Andrea Zanette
Carnegie Mellon University
zanette@cmu.edu

Abstract
Scaling model size and training data has led to great advances in the performance
of Large Language Models (LLMs). However, the diminishing returns of this
approach necessitate alternative methods to improve model capabilities, particularly
in tasks requiring advanced reasoning. Large reasoning models, which leverage
long chain-of-thoughts, bring unprecedented breakthroughs in problem-solving
capabilities but at a substantial deployment cost associated to longer generations.
Reducing inference costs is crucial for the economic feasibility, user experience,
and environmental sustainability of these models.
In this work, we propose to train large reasoning models to reason efficiently.
Our method incentivizes models to minimize unnecessary computational overhead
while largely maintaining accuracy, thereby achieving substantial deployment
efficiency gains. It enables the derivation of a family of reasoning models with
varying efficiency levels, controlled via a single hyperparameter. Experiments
on two open-weight large reasoning models demonstrate significant reductions in
inference cost while preserving most of the accuracy.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have made significant advancements by pre-training larger models
with extensive datasets (Kaplan et al., 2020), but this approach faces diminishing returns due to
limited high-quality training data. An alternative to improve model capabilities, especially in domains
involving careful reasoning, involves allowing models to “think" before answering, as seen in frontier
reasoning models like OpenAI’s o1 (OpenAI et al., 2024), Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking Experimental,
and DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025). These models produce intermediate tokens during inference,
collectively referred to as chain-of-thoughts (Wei et al., 2022), to perform additional computations
before returning an answer. The process of generating a long chain of thought before answering
the user query is called reasoning. More precisely, large reasoning models with chain-of-thoughts
capable of performing advanced reasoning emerge from RL (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Guo et al., 2025)
on base models using ground-truth scoring functions (e.g., correctness on math problems).
These reasoning models use test-time compute in the form of very long chain-of-thoughts, an approach
that incur a high inference cost due to the quadratic cost of the attention mechanism and linear growth
of the KV cache for transformer-based architectures Vaswani (2017). However, effective deployment
of LLMs demands models that are not only capable but also computationally efficient to serve. Even
for resource-rich organizations such as large tech companies that have the resources to train reasoning
models, excessive inference costs may mean operating at a loss rather than at a profit in order to match
the competitor’s offering. Furthermore, reducing inference costs often reduces latency, improves
responsiveness, and therefore improves user experience. Finally, lowering the inference computation
positively benefits the environment by reducing carbon emissions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

