Return of ChebNet: Understanding and Improving an
Overlooked GNN on Long-Range Tasks

Ali Hariri1,*,†

Álvaro Arroyo2,*

Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb4

Alessio Gravina3,*

Davide Bacciu3

Xiaowen Dong2

Moshe Eliasof4

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli5

Pierre Vandergheynst1

Abstract
ChebNet, one of the earliest spectral GNNs, has largely been overshadowed by
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs), which gained popularity for their
simplicity and effectiveness in capturing local graph structure. Despite their success,
MPNNs are limited in their ability to capture long-range dependencies between
nodes. This has led researchers to adapt MPNNs through rewiring or make use
of Graph Transformers, which compromises the computational efficiency that
characterized early spatial message-passing architectures, and typically disregards
the graph structure. Almost a decade after its original introduction, we revisit
ChebNet to shed light on its ability to model distant node interactions. We find that
out-of-box, ChebNet already shows competitive advantages relative to classical
MPNNs and GTs on long-range benchmarks, while maintaining good scalability
properties for high-order polynomials. However, we uncover that this polynomial
expansion leads ChebNet to an unstable regime during training. To address this
limitation, we cast ChebNet as a stable and non-dissipative dynamical system,
which we coin Stable-ChebNet. Our Stable-ChebNet model allows for stable
information propagation, and has controllable dynamics which do not require
the use of eigendecompositions, positional encodings, or graph rewiring. Across
several benchmarks, Stable-ChebNet achieves near state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [81, 43, 74, 67, 14, 25, 44] have emerged as a prevalent framework
for handling data defined on graphs. Graph convolutional networks have their roots in spectral
approaches that extend convolutional filters to non-Euclidean domains. The first practical instantiation
of a GNN was proposed by [14], which leveraged the eigenbasis of the graph Laplacian to perform
spectral filtering, as an attempt to generalize image convolutions to non-euclidean structures. However,
this formulation required costly eigen-decompositions at each layer. Defferrard et al. [25] addressed
this inefficiency by approximating spectral filters with truncated Chebyshev polynomials, giving
rise to ChebNet, the first tractable and localized spectral GNN. By parameterizing filters as K-order
polynomials of the Laplacian, ChebNet could aggregate information from K-hop neighborhoods
without repeated eigendecompositions, thereby enabling scalable spectral convolution on large graphs.
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
University of Oxford
3
University of Pisa
4
University of Cambridge
5
NVIDIA Research
* Equal contribution
†
Correspondence to: Ali Hariri (ali.hariri@epfl.ch)
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

