Vision-and-Language Training Helps Deploy
Taxonomic Knowledge but Does Not
Fundamentally Alter It

Yulu Qin,1,∗ Dheeraj Varghese,2,∗ Adam Dahlgren Lindström,3 Lucia Donatelli,4
Kanishka Misra,5,6,† and Najoung Kim1,†
1
Boston University, 2 University of Amsterdam, 3 Umeå University,
4
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 5 TTIC, 6 The University of Texas at Austin
https://taxonomigqa.github.io

Abstract
Does vision-and-language (VL) training change the linguistic representations of
language models in meaningful ways? Most results in the literature have shown
inconsistent or marginal differences, both behaviorally and representationally. In
this work, we start from the hypothesis that the domain in which VL training
could have a significant effect is lexical-conceptual knowledge, in particular its
taxonomic organization. Through comparing minimal pairs of text-only LMs and
their VL-trained counterparts, we first show that the VL models often outperform
their text-only counterparts on a text-only question-answering task that requires
taxonomic understanding of concepts mentioned in the questions. Using an array
of targeted behavioral and representational analyses, we show that the LMs and
VLMs do not differ significantly in terms of their taxonomic knowledge itself, but
they differ in how they represent questions that contain concepts in a taxonomic
relation vs. a non-taxonomic relation. This implies that the taxonomic knowledge
itself does not change substantially through additional VL training, but VL training
does improve the deployment of this knowledge in the context of a specific task,
even when the presentation of the task is purely linguistic.

1

Introduction

Humans readily integrate perceptual and linguistic signals to form generalizable mappings from
semantic information to language, allowing them to reason about concepts beyond their immediate
environment [57, 18]. Approaches to concept grounding in AI, which traditionally relied on annotated
datasets to specify how language links to people, objects, and events [72, 26], have rapidly shifted in
light of the impressive capabilities of vision-language models (VLMs).
Many standard VLMs [33, 30, i.a.] often build on top of a pretrained language model (LM) by
adding visual conditioning to its next token prediction task, often also updating the parameters
of the language model. Analyses of VLM capabilities often focus on the multimodal tasks this
additional modality enables. But (how) does this vision-and-language (VL) training change the
linguistic capacity of the model? Answering this question requires comparing VL-tuned LMs to
their original LM counterparts. Empirical evidence in this literature is rather sparse, often comparing
such “VLM-LM minimal pairs” on general benchmarks such as MMLU [17] and GLUE [65]. In this
paper, we consider a more targeted investigation (like [73]) of VLM-LM pairs in a particular domain:
∗ †

, : Equal contribution; Code can be found at https://github.com/tinlaboratory/taxonomigqa

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

