Ada-R1: Hybrid CoT via Bi-Level Adaptive
Reasoning Optimization

Haotian Luo1,2∗, Haiying He3∗, Yibo Wang4 , Jinluan Yang5 , Rui Liu6
Naiqiang Tan6 , Xiaochun Cao1 , Dacheng Tao7 , Li Shen1,2†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University;
2
Center for AI Theoretical Foundation and Systems, Shenzhen Loop Area Institute;
3
China Agricultural University; 4 Tsinghua University; 5 Zhejiang University;
6
Didichuxing Co. Ltd; 7 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Recently, long-thought reasoning models achieve strong performance on complex
reasoning tasks, but often incur substantial inference overhead, making efficiency a
critical concern. Our empirical analysis reveals that the benefit of using Long-CoT
varies across problems: while some problems require elaborate reasoning, others
show no improvement—or even degraded accuracy. This motivates adaptive reasoning strategies that tailor reasoning depth to the input. However, prior work primarily
reduces redundancy within long reasoning paths, limiting exploration of more efficient strategies beyond the Long-CoT paradigm. To address this, we propose a
novel two-stage framework for adaptive and efficient reasoning. First, we construct
a hybrid reasoning model by merging long and short CoT models to enable diverse
reasoning styles. Second, we apply bi-level preference training to guide the model
to select suitable reasoning styles (group-level), and prefer concise and correct
reasoning within each style group (instance-level). Experiments demonstrate that
our method significantly reduces inference costs compared to other baseline approaches, while maintaining performance. Notably, on five mathematical datasets,
the average length of reasoning is reduced by more than 50%, highlighting the
potential of adaptive strategies to optimize reasoning efficiency in large language
models. Our code is coming soon at https://github.com/StarDewXXX/AdaR1

1

Introduction

Recent large language models (LLMs) such as OpenAI’s O1[1] and Deepseek’s R1[2] adopt extended
and structured reasoning processes (Long-CoT) for LLMs to enhance problem-solving, achieving
strong performance through human-like deliberation. Similarly, [3] and [4] enable MLLMs to
possess such capabilities as well. However, the improved reasoning comes with high inference costs,
including increased latency and resource consumption[5–7], which limits deployment in real-time or
resource-constrained scenarios. Existing efficiency-oriented methods operate within the Long-CoT
distribution, aiming to reduce redundancy through pruning or compression[8, 9, 6]. While effective
to some extent, these approaches do not question whether long reasoning is necessary, overlooking
potential gains from fundamentally shorter reasoning strategies. CoT-Valve[10] enables both long and
short outputs but lacks adaptive selection based on input complexity, leading to suboptimal results.
Our investigation (presented in Section 3) about the benefit of Long-CoT reasoning reveals a crucial
insight: the utility of long, elaborate reasoning chains is highly problem-dependent. While complex
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding Author: Li Shen (shenli6@mail.sysu.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

