Robust Distributed Estimation: Extending Gossip
Algorithms to Ranking and Trimmed Means

Anna van Elst Igor Colin Stephan Clémençon
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
{anna.vanelst, igor.colin, stephan.clemencon}@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of robust estimation in gossip algorithms over
arbitrary communication graphs. Gossip algorithms are fully decentralized, relying
only on local neighbor-to-neighbor communication, making them well-suited for
situations where communication is constrained. A fundamental challenge in existing mean-based gossip algorithms is their vulnerability to malicious or corrupted
nodes. In this paper, we show that an outlier-robust mean can be computed by
globally estimating a robust statistic. More specifically, we propose a novel gossip
algorithm for rank estimation, referred to as G O R ANK, and leverage it to design
a gossip procedure dedicated to trimmed mean estimation, coined G OT RIM. In
addition to a detailed description of the proposed methods, a key contribution of
our work is a precise convergence analysis: we establish an O(1/t) rate for rank
estimation and an O(1/t) rate for trimmed mean estimation, where by t is meant
the number of iterations. Moreover, we provide a breakdown point analysis of
G OT RIM. We empirically validate our theoretical results through experiments on
diverse network topologies, data distributions and contamination schemes.

1

Introduction

Distributed learning has gained significant attention in machine learning applications where data
is naturally distributed across a network, either due to resource or communication constraints [7].
The rapid development of the Internet of Things has further amplified this trend, as the number of
connected devices continues to grow, producing large volumes of data at the edge of the network. As
a result, edge computing, where computation is performed closer to the data source, has emerged
as a viable alternative to conventional cloud computing [6, 36]. By reducing reliance on centralized
servers, edge computing offers several advantages, including lower energy consumption, improved
data security, and reduced latency [6, 36]. In this context, several distributed learning frameworks,
including Gossip Learning and Federated Learning, have been developed. Federated Learning depends
on a central server for model aggregation [26], which introduces challenges such as communication
bottlenecks and a single point of failure. In contrast, Gossip Learning provides a fully decentralized
alternative where nodes communicate only with their nearby neighbors [18]. In addition, Gossip
learning is particularly well-suited for situations where communication is constrained, such as in
peer-to-peer or sensor networks.
One of the central challenges in distributed learning is robustness to corrupted nodes—scenarios
where some nodes may contain contaminated data due to hardware faults, or even adversarial
attacks [8, 39]. Consider a network of sensors deployed to monitor the temperature in a small
region, as described in [5]. In idealized scenarios, sensor noise is typically modeled by a zeromean Gaussian. However, a recent survey (see [1]) mentions that sensor networks are especially
prone to outliers due to their reliance on imperfect sensing devices. Indeed, in practice, sensors
can malfunction (e.g., become miscalibrated, get stuck at constant values, or report extreme values
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

