Dynamic Masking and Auxiliary Hash Learning for
Enhanced Cross-Modal Retrieval
Shuang Zhang1,2 , Yue Wu1 , Lei Shi3,∗ , Yingxue Zhang4 , Feifei Kou5,6 ,
Huilong Jin1 , Pengfei Zhang7 , Meiyu Liang5 , Mingying Xu8
1
College of Engineering, Hebei Normal University
2
Hebei Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Fusion and Intelligent Control
3
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China
4
College of Computer and Cyber Security, Hebei Normal University
5
School of Computer Science (National Pilot School of Software Engineering), BUPT
6
key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service, BUPT, Ministry of Education
7
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Anhui University of Science of Technology
8
School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, North China University of Technology
*Corresponding author: leiky_shi@cuc.edu.cn

Abstract
The demand for multimodal data processing drives the development of information
technology. Cross-modal hash retrieval has attracted much attention because it
can overcome modal differences and achieve efficient retrieval, and has shown
great application potential in many practical scenarios. Existing cross-modal
hashing methods have difficulties in fully capturing the semantic information of
different modal data, which leads to a significant semantic gap between modalities.
Moreover, these methods often ignore the importance differences of channels, and
due to the limitation of a single goal, the matching effect between hash codes is
also affected to a certain extent, thus facing many challenges. To address these
issues, we propose a Dynamic Masking and Auxiliary Hash Learning (AHLR)
method for enhanced cross-modal retrieval. By jointly leveraging the dynamic
masking and auxiliary hash learning mechanisms, our approach effectively resolves
the problems of channel information imbalance and insufficient key information
capture, thereby significantly improving the retrieval accuracy. Specifically, we
introduce a dynamic masking mechanism that automatically screens and weights
the key information in images and texts during the training process, enhancing
the accuracy of feature matching. We further construct an auxiliary hash layer
to adaptively balance the weights of features across each channel, compensating
for the deficiencies of traditional methods in key information capture and channel
processing. In addition, we design a contrastive loss function to optimize the
generation of hash codes and enhance their discriminative power, further improving
the performance of cross-modal retrieval. Comprehensive experimental results on
NUS-WIDE, MIRFlickr-25K and MS-COCO benchmark datasets show that the
proposed AHLR algorithm outperforms several existing algorithms.

1

Introduction

In the field of information retrieval, although traditional unimodal data representation is efficient
in processing single-type data, it is difficult to capture data associations and semantic details in
the face of increasingly popular cross-modal data. Cross-modal retrieval[1][2][3] as an emerging
solution, it effectively bridges the gap between heterogeneous modalities by establishing connections
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

