scSplit: Bringing Severity Cognizance to
Image Decomposition in Fluorescence Microscopy

Ashesh Ashesh
Human Technopole

Florian Jug
Human Technopole

ashesh.ashesh@fht.org

florian.jug@fht.org

Abstract
Fluorescence microscopy, while being a key driver for progress in the life sciences,
is also subject to technical limitations. To overcome them, computational multiplexing techniques have recently been proposed, which allow multiple cellular
structures to be captured in a single image and later be unmixed. Existing image
decomposition methods are trained on a set of superimposed input images and the
respective unmixed target images. It is critical to note that the relative strength
(mixing ratio) of the superimposed images for a given input is a priori unknown.
However, existing methods are trained on a fixed intensity ratio of superimposed
inputs, making them not cognizant of the range of relative intensities that can
occur in fluorescence microscopy. In this work, we propose a novel method called
scSplit that is cognizant of the severity of the above-mentioned mixing ratio. Our
idea is based on InDI, a popular iterative method for image restoration, and an
ideal starting point to embrace the unknown mixing ratio in any given input. We
introduce (i) a suitably trained regressor network that predicts the degradation
level (mixing ratio) of a given input image and (ii) a degradation-specific normalization module, enabling degradation-aware inference across all mixing ratios.
We show that this method solves two relevant tasks in fluorescence microscopy,
namely image splitting and bleedthrough removal, and empirically demonstrate
the applicability of scSplit on 5 public datasets. The source code with pre-trained
models is hosted at https://github.com/juglab/scSplit/.

1

Introduction

Fluorescence microscopy is a widely utilized imaging technique in the life sciences, enabling
researchers to visualize specific cellular and subcellular structures with high specificity. It employs
distinct fluorescent markers to target different components, which are subsequently captured in
separate image channels. The global fluorescence microscopy market, valued at 9.83$ billion in
2023, is projected to expand significantly in the coming years, reflecting its critical role in advancing
biological research [1].
Still, there are practical limitations on the maximum number of structures that can be imaged in one
sample. To mitigate this, the idea of imaging multiple structures into a single image channel has
recently been gaining popularity [2, 3]. In such approaches, the image produced by the microscope is
a superposition of multiple structures, and a deep-learning-based setup is then used to perform the
image decomposition task, thereby yielding the constituent structures present in the superimposed
input as separate images.
While these approaches have been beneficial, they have not explicitly addressed a particular aspect of
this problem. The relative intensity of the superimposed structures in the input can vary significantly
depending on sample properties, labeling densities, and microscope configuration. For instance,
in a superimposed image of nuclei and mitochondria, nuclei may be dominant in their intensities,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

