Rethinking Nighttime Image Deraining via
Learnable Color Space Transformation

Qiyuan Guan∗
Dalian Polytechnic University
qyuanguan@gmail.com

Xiang Chen∗
Nanjing University of
Science and Technology
chenxiang@njust.edu.cn

Guiyue Jin†
Dalian Polytechnic University
guiyue.jin@dlpu.edu.cn

Jiyu Jin†
Dalian Polytechnic University
jiyu.jin@dlpu.edu.cn

Shumin Fan
Dalian Martime University
shuminfan@163.com

Tianyu Song
Dalian Martime University
songtienyu@163.com

Jinshan Pan
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
jspan@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Compared to daytime image deraining, nighttime image deraining poses significant
challenges due to inherent complexities of nighttime scenarios and the lack of
high-quality datasets that accurately represent the coupling effect between rain
and illumination. In this paper, we rethink the task of nighttime image deraining
and contribute a new high-quality benchmark, HQ-NightRain, which offers higher
harmony and realism compared to existing datasets. In addition, we develop an
effective Color Space Transformation Network (CST-Net) for better removing
complex rain from nighttime scenes. Specifically, we propose a learnable color
space converter (CSC) to better facilitate rain removal in the Y channel, as nighttime
rain is more pronounced in the Y channel compared to the RGB color space.
To capture illumination information for guiding nighttime deraining, implicit
illumination guidance is introduced enabling the learned features to improve the
model’s robustness in complex scenarios. Extensive experiments show the value of
our dataset and the effectiveness of our method. The source code and datasets are
available at https://github.com/guanqiyuan/CST-Net.

1

Introduction

Images degraded by complex nighttime rain significantly affect downstream vision tasks, such as
autonomous driving and video surveillance [8, 35, 58]. Unlike daytime images, nighttime scenes
present unique challenges due to low illumination and varying light sources, which together amplify
the visibility and complexity of rain artifacts. Thus, it is of great interest to develop an effective
algorithm to recover high-quality rain-free images from nighttime scenarios. Recently, several
efforts [35, 22, 7, 24, 16] have been made to address nighttime image deraining, with the emergence
of some synthetic datasets, including GTAV-NightRain [53] and Raindrop Clarity [30]. However,
we note that most existing synthetic datasets [2, 46, 21] feature a global uniform distribution of
rain, as random rain masks are added linearly to nighttime backgrounds. This naturally leads to
∗
†

Co-first authorship
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

