Recurrent Self-Attention Dynamics:
An Energy-Agnostic Perspective from Jacobians

Akiyoshi Tomihari1,2

Ryo Karakida1,3

1

2

Artificial Intelligence Research Center, AIST, Japan
Department of Computer Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project

tomihari@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, karakida.ryo@aist.go.jp

Abstract
The theoretical understanding of self-attention (SA) has been steadily progressing. A prominent line of work studies a class of SA layers that admit an energy
function decreased by state updates. While it provides valuable insights into inherent biases in signal propagation, it often relies on idealized assumptions or
additional constraints not necessarily present in standard SA. Thus, to broaden
our understanding, this work aims to relax these energy constraints and provide
an energy-agnostic characterization of inference dynamics by dynamical systems
analysis. In more detail, we first consider relaxing the symmetry and single-head
constraints traditionally required in energy-based formulations. Next, we show that
analyzing the Jacobian matrix of the state is highly valuable when investigating
more general SA architectures without necessarily admitting an energy function.
It reveals that the normalization layer plays an essential role in suppressing the
Lipschitzness of SA and the Jacobian’s complex eigenvalues, which correspond to
the oscillatory components of the dynamics. In addition, the Lyapunov exponents
computed from the Jacobians demonstrate that the normalized dynamics lie close
to a critical state, and this criticality serves as a strong indicator of high inference
performance. Furthermore, the Jacobian perspective also enables us to develop
regularization methods for training and a pseudo-energy for monitoring inference
dynamics.

1

Introduction

The theoretical understanding of self-attention (SA), a central component of Transformer architectures [Vaswani et al., 2017], has deepened in recent years, including phenomena such as rank
collapse [Noci et al., 2022] and expressive capacity [Yun et al., 2020, Kajitsuka and Sato, 2024,
Kingma and Ba, 2025]. One major line of research formulates attention mechanisms as processes that
minimize explicit or implicit energy functions [Ramsauer et al., 2021, Yang et al., 2022, Hoover et al.,
2023]. Since these energy functions serve as potential functions for gradient flows or as Lyapunov
functions, they offer convergence guarantees and provide intuitive explanations for behaviors such as
clustering and rank collapse in recurrent SA architectures [Geshkovski et al., 2025, 2023, 2024, Bruno
et al., 2025]. They restrict attention dynamics to a hypersphere, typically as a result of normalization.
This facilitates theoretical analysis and can yield well-behaved functional properties [Castin et al.,
2024].
However, energy-based formulations often rely on idealized assumptions and require architectural
modifications. These include imposing constraints on the weight matrices, limiting the number
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

