Rethinking Joint Maximum Mean Discrepancy for
Domain Adaptation

Wei Wang1 Haifeng Xia1 Chao Huang1∗ Zhengming Ding2
Cong Wang3 Haojie Li4 Xiaochun Cao1
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
3
University of California, San Francisco 4 Shandong University of Science and Technology
{wangwei29, xiahf5, huangch253, caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
supercong94@gmail.com hjli@sdust.edu.cn

zding1@tulane.edu

Abstract
In domain adaption (DA), joint maximum mean discrepancy (JMMD), as a famous distribution-distance metric, aims to measure joint probability distribution
difference between the source domain and target domain, while it is still not fully
explored and especially hard to be applied into a subspace-learning framework as
its empirical estimation involves a tensor-product operator whose partial derivative is difficult to obtain. To solve this issue, we deduce a concise JMMD based
on the Representer theorem that avoids the tensor-product operator and obtains
two essential findings. First, we reveal the uniformity of JMMD by proving that
previous marginal, class conditional, and weighted class conditional probability
distribution distances are three special cases of JMMD with different label reproducing kernels. Second, inspired by graph embedding, we observe that the
similarity weights, which strengthen the intra-class compactness in the graph of
Hilbert Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC), take opposite signs in the graph of
JMMD, revealing why JMMD degrades the feature discrimination. This motivates
us to propose a novel loss JMMD-HSIC by jointly considering JMMD and HSIC to
promote discrimination of JMMD. Extensive experiments on several cross-domain
datasets could demonstrate the validity of our revealed theoretical results and the
effectiveness of our proposed JMMD-HSIC.

1

Introduction

Domain adaptation (DA) has emerged as an effective technology to solve the well-known problem of
domain discrepancy that frequently occurs in reality [1–5]. Many promising approaches have been
suggested to mitigate this issue from different perspectives [6–10]. A major issue in DA is how to
formulate a favorable probability distribution distance that can be applied to measure the proximity of
two different probability distributions, thus numerous probability distribution-distance metrics have
been proposed over the years. For example, the Quadratic and Kullback-Leibler distances derived
from the Bregman divergence and generated by different convex functions are introduced to match
two different probability distributions explicitly [11]. However, extending them into different models
may be inflexible since they are parametric and require an intermediate density estimation [12]. The
Wasserstein distance derived from the optimal transport problem exploits a transportation plan to
align two different marginal [13], class conditional [14] or joint [15] probability distributions, but
it might be inconvenient to be applied into a subspace-learning framework because it often comes
down to a complex bi-level optimization problem [16].
* Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

