Scaling Laws For Scalable Oversight
Joshua Engels∗
MIT
jengels@mit.edu

David D. Baek∗
MIT
dbaek@mit.edu

Subhash Kantamneni∗
MIT
subhashk@mit.edu

Max Tegmark
MIT
tegmark@mit.edu

Abstract
Scalable oversight, the process by which weaker AI systems supervise stronger
ones, has been proposed as a key strategy to control future superintelligent systems.
However, it is still unclear how scalable oversight itself scales. To address this gap,
we propose a framework that quantifies the probability of successful oversight as a
function of the capabilities of the overseer and the system being overseen. Specifically, our framework models oversight as a game between capability-mismatched
players; the players have oversight-specific Elo scores that are a piecewise-linear
function of their general intelligence, with two plateaus corresponding to task
incompetence and task saturation. We validate our framework with a modified
version of the game Nim and then apply it to four oversight games: Mafia, Debate,
Backdoor Code and Wargames. For each game, we find scaling laws that approximate how domain performance depends on general AI system capability. We then
build on our findings in a theoretical study of Nested Scalable Oversight (NSO),
a process in which trusted models oversee untrusted stronger models, which then
become the trusted models in the next step. We identify conditions under which
NSO succeeds and derive numerically (and in some cases analytically) the optimal
number of oversight levels to maximize the probability of oversight success. We
also apply our theory to our four oversight games, where we find that NSO success
rates at a general Elo gap of 400 are 13.5% for Mafia, 51.7% for Debate, 10.0%
for Backdoor Code, and 9.4% for Wargames; these rates decline further when
overseeing stronger systems.

1

Introduction

Many frontier AI companies are rapidly advancing toward their stated goal of building artificial
general intelligence (AGI) and beyond. This has intensified interest in techniques for ensuring that
such systems remain controllable and behave in beneficial ways. One major cluster of such techniques
includes Recursive Reward Modeling (Leike et al., 2018), Iterated Amplification (Christiano et al.,
2018), Scalable Oversight (Bowman et al., 2022), Weak-to-Strong Generalization (Burns et al., 2023),
Hierarchical Supervision (Shah et al., 2025), and Recursive Oversight (Anthropic Alignment Science
Team, 2025). These methods share a central goal: enabling weaker systems to oversee stronger ones
(weak-to-strong oversight), ultimately enabling us to oversee superhuman systems. A key idea is that
scalable oversight can be bootstrapped: weaker systems oversee stronger ones, which then oversee
even stronger models in the next stage—allowing oversight to scale alongside capabilities recursively.
We refer to this iterated process as Nested Scalable Oversight, or NSO for brevity.
To date, most guarantees for NSO have been qualitative. However, safety standards for other high-risk
technologies are quantitative. For instance, the U.S. requires aircraft to have a fatality rate below
10−5 per hour (Federal Aviation Administration, 2023) and nuclear reactors to have a core damage
frequency below 10−4 per year (US Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2001). Motivated by these risk
thresholds, this paper takes a first step towards quantifying NSO failure rates:
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

