Hybrid Latent Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning

Zhenrui Yue1 , Bowen Jin1 , Huimin Zeng1 , Honglei Zhuang2 , Zhen Qin2 , Jinsung Yoon2 ,
Lanyu Shang3 , Jiawei Han1 , Dong Wang1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 Google, 3 LMU
{zhenrui3,bowenj4,huiminz3,lshang3,hanj,dwang24}@illinois.edu,
{hlz,zhenqin,jinsungyoon}@google.com, lanyu.shang@lmu.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have introduced latent reasoning
as a promising alternative to autoregressive reasoning. By performing internal
computation with hidden states from previous steps, latent reasoning benefit from
more informative features rather than sampling a discrete chain-of-thought (CoT)
path. Yet latent reasoning approaches are often incompatible with LLMs, as their
continuous paradigm conflicts with the discrete nature of autoregressive generation.
Moreover, these methods rely on CoT traces for training and thus fail to exploit
the inherent reasoning patterns of LLMs. In this work, we explore latent reasoning
by leveraging the intrinsic capabilities of LLMs via reinforcement learning (RL).
To this end, we introduce hybrid reasoning policy optimization (HRPO), an RLbased hybrid latent reasoning approach that (1) integrates prior hidden states into
sampled tokens with a learnable gating mechanism, and (2) initializes training with
predominantly token embeddings while progressively incorporating more hidden
features. This design maintains LLMs’ generative capabilities and incentivizes
hybrid reasoning using both discrete and continuous representations. In addition,
the hybrid HRPO introduces stochasticity into latent reasoning via token sampling, thereby enabling RL-based optimization without requiring CoT trajectories.
Extensive evaluations across diverse benchmarks show that HRPO outperforms
prior methods in both knowledge- and reasoning-intensive tasks. Furthermore,
HRPO-trained LLMs remain interpretable and exhibit intriguing behaviors like
cross-lingual patterns and shorter completion lengths, highlighting the potential of
our RL-based approach and offer insights for future work in latent reasoning.

1

Introduction

Latent reasoning has emerged as a compelling alternative to traditional autoregressive reasoning
methods in large language models (LLMs) [8, 35, 39]. In contrast to the conventional chain-of-thought
(CoT) [43, 17, 10], which relies on the discrete decoding and sampling process, latent reasoning
enables LLMs to reason internally with continuous hidden representations from the previous steps.
For instance, Coconut [11] achieves latent reasoning by utilizing the model’s last hidden state
as ‘continuous thought’, feeding it back as input embeddings to the next reasoning step, thereby
matching the performance of CoT on reasoning-intensive tasks. To show the difference between the
autoregressive generation and latent reasoning, we compare both approaches in Figure 1.
Nevertheless, existing methods in latent reasoning utilize extensive CoT traces for training. That is,
CoT trajectories are required to learn informative latent representations. An example is CODI [35],
which adopts self-distillation to train on discrete CoT tokens and transfers learnt features into
continuous thoughts. Although recurrent latent reasoning removes the need for CoT data, it relies
on training a multi-block LLM from scratch to reason internally [8]. Moreover, these methods
employ tailored training paradigms for latent representation learning, incurring high training costs
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

