Decomposing motor units through elimination for
real-time intention driven assistive neurotechnology

Nicholas Tacca1 Bryan R. Schlink1 Jackson T. Levine2,3 Mary K. Heimann1
Collin Dunlap1 Samuel C. Colachis IV1 Philip Putnam1 Matthew A. Zeglen1
Daniel J. Brobston4 Austin M. Bollinger4 José L. Pons2,3
Lauren Wengerd1,5 Eric C. Meyers4 David A. Friedenberg1
1

Battelle Memorial Institute 2 Shirley Ryan AbilityLab 3 Northwestern University
4
University of Texas at Dallas 5 The Ohio State University
{tacca,friedenbergd}@battelle.org

Abstract
Extracting neural signals at the single motor neuron level provides an optimal
control signal for neuroprosthetic applications. However, current algorithms to
decompose motor units from high-density electromyography (HD-EMG) are timeconsuming and inconsistent, limiting their application to controlled scenarios in a
research setting. We introduce MUelim, an algorithm for efficient motor unit decomposition that uses approximate joint diagonalization with a subtractive approach
to rapidly identify and refine candidate sources. The algorithm incorporates an
extend-lag procedure to augment data for enhanced source separability prior to diagonalization. By systematically iterating and eliminating redundant or noisy sources,
MUelim achieves high decomposition accuracy while significantly reducing computational complexity, making it well-suited for real-time applications. We validate
MUelim by demonstrating its ability to extract motor units in both simulated and
physiological HD-EMG grid data. Across six healthy participants performing ramp
and maximum voluntary contraction paradigms, MUelim achieves up to a 36×
speed increase compared to existing state-of-the-art methods while decomposing
a similar number of high signal-to-noise sources. Furthermore, we showcase a
real-world application of MUelim in a clinical setting in which an individual with
spinal cord injury controlled an EMG-driven neuroprosthetic to perform functional
tasks. We demonstrate the ability to decode motor intent in real-time using a
spiking neural network trained on the decomposed motor unit spike trains to trigger
functional electrical stimulation patterns that evoke hand movements during task
practice therapy. We show that motor unit-based decoding enables nuanced motor
control, highlighting the potential of MUelim to advance assistive neurotechnology
and rehabilitation through precise, intention-driven neuroprosthetic systems.

1

Introduction

Electromyography (EMG) provides a natural motor interface for humans to interact with machines,
capturing the electrical activity of muscles to facilitate intuitive control. At the core of physiological
motor control is the motor unit, the smallest functional unit of muscle activation, consisting of a
single motor neuron and the fibers it innervates [Heckman and Enoka, 2012]. EMG signals recorded
at the periphery consist of a summation of motor unit action potentials and noise, with the input signal
originating from the central nervous system, providing a direct link to neuromotor intent [Farina and
Negro, 2015]. As a result, decomposing the physiological motor input to muscles via motor unit
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

