Discrete Neural Flow Samplers with Locally
Equivariant Transformer

Zijing Ou1 , Ruixiang Zhang2 , Yingzhen Li1
1
Imperial College London, 2 Apple
{z.ou22, yingzhen.li}@imperial.ac.uk ruixiang_zhang2@apple.com

Abstract
Sampling from unnormalised discrete distributions is a fundamental problem across
various domains. While Markov chain Monte Carlo offers a principled approach, it
often suffers from slow mixing and poor convergence. In this paper, we propose
Discrete Neural Flow Samplers (DNFS), a trainable and efficient framework for
discrete sampling. DNFS learns the rate matrix of a continuous-time Markov
chain such that the resulting dynamics satisfy the Kolmogorov equation. As this
objective involves the intractable partition function, we then employ control variates
to reduce the variance of its Monte Carlo estimation, leading to a coordinate
descent learning algorithm. To further facilitate computational efficiency, we
propose locally equivaraint Transformer, a novel parameterisation of the rate matrix
that significantly improves training efficiency while preserving powerful network
expressiveness. Empirically, we demonstrate the efficacy of DNFS in a wide
range of applications, including sampling from unnormalised distributions, training
discrete energy-based models, and solving combinatorial optimisation problems.

1

Introduction

We consider the task of sampling
from a discrete distribution π(x) = ρ(x)
Z , known only up to a
P
normalising constant Z = x ρ(x). This problem is foundamental in a wide range of scientific
domains, including Bayesian inference (Murray et al., 2012), statistical physics (Newman & Barkema,
1999), and computational biology (Lartillot & Philippe, 2004). However, efficient sampling from
such unnormalised distributions remains challenging, especially when the state space is large and
combinatorially complex, making direct enumeration or exact computation of Z infeasible.
Conventional sampling techniques, such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Metropolis et al.,
1953) have been widely employed with great success. Nevertheless, MCMC often suffers from poor
mixing and slow convergence due to the issues of Markov chains getting trapped in local minima and
large autocorrelation (Neal et al., 2011). These limitations have motivated the development of neural
samplers (Wu et al., 2020; Vargas et al., 2024; Máté & Fleuret, 2023), which leverage deep neural
networks to improve sampling efficiency and convergence rates. In discrete settings, autoregressive
models (Box et al., 2015) have been successfully applied to approximate Boltzmann distributions of
spin systems in statistical physics (Wu et al., 2019). Inspired by recent advances in discrete diffusion
models (Austin et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023c; Campbell et al., 2022), Sanokowski et al. (2024,
2025) propose diffusion-based samplers with applications to solving combinatorial optimisation
problems. Moreover, Holderrieth et al. (2025) introduces an alternative discrete sampler by learning
a parametrised continuous-time Markov chain (CMCT) (Norris, 1998) to minimise the variance of
importance weights between the CMCT-induced distribution and the target distribution.
Building on these advances, the goal of our paper is to develop a sampling method for discrete
distributions that is both efficient and scalable. To this end, we introduce Discrete Neural Flow
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

