Fixed-Point RNNs:
Interpolating from Diagonal to Dense

Sajad Movahedi∗ 1,2 , Felix Sarnthein∗ 1,2 , Nicola Muça Cirone3 , Antonio Orvieto1,2
1
ELLIS Institute Tuebingen, 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
3
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London
{sajad.movahedi, felix.sarnthein}@tue.ellis.eu

Abstract
Linear recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and state-space models (SSMs) such
as Mamba have become promising alternatives to softmax-attention as sequence
mixing layers in Transformer architectures. Current models, however, do not exhibit
the full state-tracking expressivity of RNNs because they rely on channel-wise (i.e.
diagonal) sequence mixing. In this paper, we investigate parameterizations of a
large class of dense linear RNNs as fixed-points of parallelizable diagonal linear
RNNs. The resulting models can naturally trade expressivity for efficiency at a
fixed number of parameters and achieve state-of-the-art results on the state-tracking
benchmarks A5 and S5 , while matching performance on copying and other tasks.

Introduction

ht = diag(at )ht−1 + Bt xt

Max Iters - max

2

4

8

16

1.0

LSTM

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Transformer

State-space models (SSMs) and other new efficient recurrent token mixers are becoming a popular alternative to softmax attention in language
modeling (Gu & Dao, 2024) as well as in other
applications such as vision (Liu et al., 2024) and
DNA processing (Nguyen et al., 2024). Inspired
by linear input-controlled filtering, these models can be expressed as carefully parametrized
linear recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with
input-dependent, diagonal state transition:

Test Accuracy

1

FP-Mamba-H (r = 1)
FP-Mamba-H (r = 2)
FP-Mamba-H (r = 4)

0.0
0

10

(1)

20

30

Sequence Length

40

50

Compared to classical RNNs such as LSTMs Figure 1: Sequence length generalization at train(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), in Eq. (1) ing length 16 (pink) for state-tracking on A5 ,
the relation between the previous hidden state with Transformer (brown) and LSTM (purple) as
ht−1 and the current ht is linear and its coeffi- lower/upper bounds. Our Fixed-Point RNN (FPcient at does not depend on the hidden states. Mamba-H) is trained at different maximum number
These choices allow SSMs such as Mamba (Gu of fixed-point iterations ℓmax : between 2 (green)
& Dao, 2024) to be computed through efficient and 16 (blue). Increasing the number of fixedparallel methods during training. Furthermore, point iterations allows the linear RNN to interpothey are easier to optimize than classical RNNs, late from diagonal to dense in a few iterations.
thanks to stable and efficient reparametrizations available for diagonal transitions (Orvieto et al.,
2023; Zucchet & Orvieto, 2024) – techniques that are significantly more difficult to apply effectively
in the classical setting (Arjovsky et al., 2016; Helfrich et al., 2018). At test time, they are faster than
classical Transformers on long sequences due to their recurrent nature.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

