A Generalized Label Shift Perspective for
Cross-Domain Gaze Estimation
Hao-Ran Yang∗
Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou, China
yanghr26@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Xiaohui Chen∗
Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou, China
chenxh278@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Chuan-Xian Ren†
Sun Yat-Sen University
Guangzhou, China
rchuanx@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Aiming to generalize the well-trained gaze estimation model to new target domains,
Cross-domain Gaze Estimation (CDGE) is developed for real-world application
scenarios. Existing CDGE methods typically extract the domain-invariant features
to mitigate domain shift in feature space, which is proved insufficient by Generalized Label Shift (GLS) theory. In this paper, we introduce a novel GLS perspective
to CDGE and modelize the cross-domain problem by label and conditional shift
problem. A GLS correction framework is presented and a feasible realization is
proposed, in which an importance reweighting strategy based on truncated Gaussian distribution is introduced to overcome the continuity challenges in label shift
correction. To embed the reweighted source distribution to conditional invariant
learning, we further derive a probability-aware estimation of conditional operator discrepancy. Extensive experiments on standard CDGE tasks with different
backbone models validate the superior generalization capability across domain and
applicability on various models of proposed method.

1

Introduction

Gaze estimation (GE) is crutial for understanding human attention in many areas, such as human-robot
interaction [40], virtual reality [33] and medical analysis [24]. Recently, leveraging the capabilities
of deep models, appearance-based gaze estimation [48, 25, 17] has attracted wide attention due to its
low device requirements and end-to-end workflows. However, the great performance of deep models
relies on the identical assumption of training and testing data distributions, which is hard to fulfill
in real-world applications. When being applied across data domain, models’ performance usually
degrade dramatically due to the domain shift caused by the changes of subjects, environment, etc.
Therefore, dealing with the cross-domain gaze estimation (CDGE) problem is crutial for expanding
application prospects of gaze estimation.
Existing CDGE methods can be divided into two categories: Domain Generalization (DG) [5,
32, 43] and Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [10, 1]. Technically, DG methods mainly
focus on removing gaze-irrelevant factors from samples to obtain domain-invariant features that are
generalizable to unseen target domains. And UDA methods typically align the feature distributions
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

