un2CLIP: Improving CLIP’s Visual Detail Capturing
Ability via Inverting unCLIP

Yinqi Li1,2 , Jiahe Zhao1,2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Ruibing Hou1 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1 State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China
yinqi.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {zhaojiahe22s, changhong, houruibing, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has become a foundation model
and has been applied to various vision and multimodal tasks. However, recent works
indicate that CLIP falls short in distinguishing detailed differences in images and
shows suboptimal performance on dense-prediction and vision-centric multimodal
tasks. Therefore, this work focuses on improving existing CLIP models, aiming
to capture as many visual details in images as possible. We find that a specific
type of generative models, unCLIP, provides a suitable framework for achieving
our goal. Specifically, unCLIP trains an image generator conditioned on the CLIP
image embedding. In other words, it inverts the CLIP image encoder. Compared
to discriminative models like CLIP, generative models are better at capturing
image details because they are trained to learn the data distribution of images.
Additionally, the conditional input space of unCLIP aligns with CLIP’s original
image-text embedding space. Therefore, we propose to invert unCLIP (dubbed
un2 CLIP) to improve the CLIP model. In this way, the improved image encoder
can gain unCLIP’s visual detail capturing ability while preserving its alignment
with the original text encoder simultaneously. We evaluate our improved CLIP
across various tasks to which CLIP has been applied, including the challenging
MMVP-VLM benchmark, the dense-prediction open-vocabulary segmentation task,
and multimodal large language model tasks. Experiments show that un2 CLIP
significantly improves the original CLIP and previous CLIP improvement methods.
Code and models are available at https://github.com/LiYinqi/un2CLIP.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) models trained on web-scale datasets have shown
great success in learning transferable representations for image classification [1]. Since their release,
they have been widely adopted for many vision and multimodal tasks, such as open-vocabulary
segmentation [2, 3, 4] and multimodal large language model (MLLM) tasks [5, 6, 7]. These extensions
can be attributed to the learned web-scale knowledge and the vision-language alignment property
of CLIP models. However, CLIP cannot always perform well on these extended, finer-grained
tasks that require more detailed image understanding, as observed in dense vision tasks [2, 8] and
MLLM literature [9]. This phenomenon may be due to CLIP’s training data and objective, where the
global-level image-text contrastive learning makes the image encoder poor at capturing visual details.
To address this problem, some works modify the network architecture at inference time to make
the encoder gather less global information [2, 3, 4], some other works deploy additional visual selfsupervised encoders in dense-vision tasks [10, 11] and MLLM frameworks [9, 12, 13, 14]. Although
effective, these methods do not fundamentally address the problem that CLIP falls short of capturing
visual details. To build finer-grained CLIP models, existing works mainly focus on training new
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

