Sketched Gaussian Mechanism for
Private Federated Learning

Qiaobo Li
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
qiaobol2@illinois.edu

Zhijie Chen
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
lucmon@illinois.edu

Arindam Banerjee
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
arindamb@illinois.edu

Abstract
Communication cost and privacy are two major considerations in federated learning
(FL). For communication cost, gradient compression by sketching the clients’
transmitted model updates is often used for reducing per-round communication.
For privacy, the Gaussian mechanism (GM), which consists of clipping updates
and adding Gaussian noise, is commonly used to guarantee client-level differential
privacy. Existing literature on private FL analyzes privacy of sketching and GM in
an isolated manner, illustrating that sketching provides privacy determined by the
sketching dimension and that GM has to supply any additional desired privacy.
In this paper, we introduce the Sketched Gaussian Mechanism (SGM), which
directly combines sketching and the Gaussian mechanism for privacy. Using RényiDP tools, we present a joint analysis of SGM’s overall privacy guarantee, which is
significantly more flexible and sharper compared to isolated analysis of sketching
and GM privacy. In particular, we prove
√ that the privacy level of SGM for a fixed
noise magnitude is proportional to 1/ b, where b is the sketching dimension, indicating that (for moderate b) SGM can provide much stronger privacy guarantees
than the original GM under the same noise budget. We demonstrate the application
of SGM to FL with either gradient descent or adaptive server optimizers, and
establish theoretical results on optimization convergence, which exhibits only a
logarithmic dependence on the number of parameters d. Experimental results
confirm that at the same privacy level, SGM based FL is at least competitive with
non-sketching private FL variants and outperforms them in some settings. Moreover, using adaptive optimization at the server improves empirical performance
while maintaining the privacy guarantees.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [44] is a widely used machine learning framework where a shared global
model is trained under the coordination of a central server using data distributed across various clients.
In FL, each client carries out training steps on its local data and sends only the model updates back to
the server, which then refines the global model by suitably aggregating these local updates. Because
the data remains on the clients, FL can offer enhanced privacy protection compared to traditional
centralized learning. Nonetheless, FL faces two significant challenges: (1) it lacks a rigorous privacy
guarantee (e.g., differential privacy (DP)) [17] and has been shown to be susceptible to various
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

