ShorterBetter: Guiding Reasoning Models to Find
Optimal Inference Length for Efficient Reasoning

Jingyang Yi∗ Jiazheng Wang∗ Sida Li
Data Science Institute, The University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
{jingyang22, jiazhengw, listar2000}@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Recent models such as OpenAI o1 and DeepSeek-R1 have demonstrated strong performance on reasoning-intensive tasks by generating extended Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) traces. While longer reasoning helps with thorough exploration of solution paths for complex problems, it also often leads to inefficient and redundant
outputs—a phenomenon commonly described as overthinking. In this paper, we
propose ShorterBetter, a simple yet effective reinforcement learning method
that enables reasoning models to learn their own optimal CoT lengths without
manual supervision. We define the Sample Optimal Length (SOL) as the length
of the shortest correct response among multiple generations, which serves as a
dynamic reward signal to guide the model toward efficient reasoning. Applied
to DeepSeek-Distill-Qwen-1.5B/7B as base models, ShorterBetter achieves
50%-80% reduction in output lengths in both in-domain and out-of-domain reasoning tasks while maintaining accuracy. Our reasoning trace analysis shows that
ShorterBetter refines the structure of the reasoning traces by reducing unnecessary repetition, excessive self-verification, and over-exploration of alternatives.1

1

Introduction

Improving the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) has recently led to substantial performance gains in highly structured and complex tasks, such as mathematical problemsolving (Shao et al., 2024) and competitive programming (Jiang et al., 2025). Exemplified by OpenAI
o1 (OpenAI, 2024) and DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025), these reasoning models are incentivized
to generate extended Chain-of-Thought (CoT) steps during inference. Such extended reasoning
often includes detailed intermediate steps, reflective self-verifications, and exploration of alternative
problem-solving strategies. These advancements are widely believed to enable LLMs to exhibit
human-like System-2 slow thinking (Evans, 2003; Qu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025), wherein significant
test-time computational resources are deliberately allocated in exchange for improved accuracy and
robustness on challenging reasoning benchmarks (Jain et al., 2025; Rein et al., 2024).
However, recent studies have shown that excessively long reasoning processes can be counterproductive, leading not only to computational inefficiencies but also to the so-called overthinking
phenomenon (Chen et al., 2025; Luo et al., 2025a), where additional reasoning steps yield diminishing
returns or even negatively impact model performance (Su et al., 2025).2 For example, we identify
*

Equal contribution
The source code, model weights, and analysis pipelines are available at: https://jiazheng-wangyes.github.io/ShorterBetter_ProjectPage/
2
We provide an experiment in Appendix B.3 demonstrating that incorrect reasoning traces often have longer
output lengths.
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

