SRSR: Enhancing Semantic Accuracy in Real-World
Image Super-Resolution with Spatially Re-Focused
Text-Conditioning

Chen Chen1,2∗
Majid Abdolshah1
Violetta Shevchenko1
1,3
2
Hongdong Li
Chang Xu
Pulak Purkait1
1
Amazon 2 The University of Sydney 3 Australian National University

Abstract
Existing diffusion-based super-resolution approaches often exhibit semantic ambiguities due to inaccuracies and incompleteness in their text conditioning, coupled
with the inherent tendency for cross-attention to divert towards irrelevant pixels.
These limitations can lead to semantic misalignment and hallucinated details in
the generated high-resolution outputs. To address these, we propose a novel, plugand-play spatially re-focused super-resolution (SRSR) framework that consists of
two core components: first, we introduce Spatially Re-focused Cross-Attention
(SRCA), which refines text conditioning at inference time by applying visuallygrounded segmentation masks to guide cross-attention. Second, we introduce a
Spatially Targeted Classifier-Free Guidance (STCFG) mechanism that selectively
bypasses text influences on ungrounded pixels to prevent hallucinations. Extensive
experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that SRSR
consistently outperforms seven state-of-the-art baselines in standard fidelity metrics (PSNR and SSIM) across all datasets, and in perceptual quality measures
(LPIPS and DISTS) on two real-world benchmarks, underscoring its effectiveness
in achieving both high semantic fidelity and perceptual quality in super-resolution.

1

Introduction

Image super-resolution (SR) aims to restore a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution
(LR) counterpart degraded by blur, noise, and compression artifacts or other distortions. This classic
problem has broad real-world applications, ranging from photography [18] and digital surveillance [63,
32] to medical imaging [12, 41, 17] and remote sensing [45]. However, restoring both photorealistic
details and semantically coherent content under severe degradations remains an open challenge. Early
deep-learning-based approaches often assume simple, known degradations (e.g., bicubic or Gaussian
downsampling) and investigate new architectural designs [3, 4, 8, 9, 24, 28, 38, 67]. Subsequently,
super-resolution methods based on generative models like GANs [11] and diffusion models [16, 29]
can produce realistic details [62, 46, 19, 49], yet they frequently struggle on real-world LR image
inputs that deviate from the above assumptions, resulting in clear artifacts in the super-resolved
outputs. Consequently, recent research adopts more complex and realistic degradation pipelines (e.g.,
Real-ESRGAN [46]) and exploits the powerful Stable Diffusion (SD) prior [36], as in StableSR [44]
and DiffBIR [25], to improve generalization in real-world ISR. However, these methods overlook
textual guidance, thus risking semantic misalignment.
A recent trend is to incorporate text priors to guide super-resolution via a text-to-image Stable
Diffusion pipeline, leading to better semantic fidelity [58, 59, 31, 54, 53]. Among these methods,
the degradation-aware prompt extractor (DAPE) proposed by SeeSR [54] demonstrates superior
∗

Work done during internship at Amazon.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

