Spectral Graph Neural Networks are Incomplete on
Graphs with a Simple Spectrum

Snir Hordan
Faculty of Mathematics
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Gur Lifshitz
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University

Maya Bechler-Speicher
Meta

Nadav Dym
Faculty of Mathematics
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
Spectral features are widely incorporated within Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
to improve their expressive power, or their ability to distinguish among nonisomorphic graphs. One popular example is the usage of graph Laplacian eigenvectors for positional encoding in MPNNs and Graph Transformers. The expressive
power of such Spectrally-enhanced GNNs (SGNNs) is usually evaluated via the
k-WL graph isomorphism test hierarchy and homomorphism counting. Yet, these
frameworks align poorly with the graph spectra, yielding limited insight into
SGNNs’ expressive power. In this paper, we leverage a well-studied paradigm of
classifying graphs by their largest eigenvalue multiplicity to introduce an expressivity hierarchy for SGNNs. We then prove that many SGNNs are incomplete even
on graphs with distinct eigenvalues. To mitigate this deficiency, we adapt rotation
equivariant neural networks to the graph spectra setting, yielding equiEPNN, a
novel SGNN that provably improves upon contemporary SGNNs’ expressivity on
simple spectrum graphs. We then demonstrate that equiEPNN achieves perfect
eigenvector canonicalization on ZINC, and performs favorably on image classification on MNIST-Superpixel and graph property regression on ZINC, compared to
leading spectral methods.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become a ubiquitous paradigm for learning on graph-structured
data. The core principle of GNNs is to maintain a representation of each graph vertex and leverage the
graph structure to iteratively refine each representation by its vertex’s graph neighborhood [41]. To
enhance the purview of the vertex’s neighborhood, it is common to incorporate spectral features, such
as Random Walk matrices, positional encoding, and graph distances, into the refinement operation
of GNNs [9, 1, 45, 51]. Such GNNs, which systematically incorporate spectral features within
their representation refinement procedure, or Spectrally-enhanced GNNs (SGNNs)[52], have gained
significant traction in the graph learning community, due to their reasonable complexity and empirical
benefits [18, 53, 52, 13].
Understanding the expressive power of GNNs provides researchers with a framework for comparing
different models and identifying their deficiencies, often leading to improvements [15, 32, 35, 16, 49].
These frameworks ought to characterize which graphs the GNN can distinguish among, based on
the GNNs’ inner workings. For instance, the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test, which maintains and
refines vertex representations similarly to Message Passing Neural Networks, a subclass of GNNs,
completely determines which graphs these models can distinguish among [49].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

