Meta CLIP 2: A Worldwide Scaling Recipe

Yung-Sung Chuang1,2†, Yang Li1 , Dong Wang1 , Ching-Feng Yeh1 , Kehan Lyu1 ,
Ramya Raghavendra1 , James Glass2 , Lifei Huang1 , Jason Weston1 , Luke Zettlemoyer1 ,
Xinlei Chen1‡, Zhuang Liu3 , Saining Xie4 , Wen-tau Yih1 , Shang-Wen Li1§, Hu Xu1§
1

FAIR, Meta

2

MIT

3

Princeton University

4

New York University

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) is a popular foundation model,
supporting from zero-shot classification, retrieval to encoders for multimodal large
language models (MLLMs). Although CLIP is successfully trained on billion-scale
image-text pairs from the English world, scaling CLIP’s training further to learning
from the worldwide web data is still challenging: (1) no curation method is available
to handle data points from non-English world; (2) the English performance from
existing multilingual CLIP is worse than its English-only counterpart, i.e., “curse
of multilinguality” that is common in LLMs. Here, we present Meta CLIP 2, the
first recipe training CLIP from scratch on worldwide web-scale image-text pairs.
To generalize our findings, we conduct rigorous ablations with minimal changes
that are necessary to address the above challenges and present a recipe enabling
mutual benefits from English and non-English world data. In zero-shot ImageNet
classification, Meta CLIP 2 ViT-H/14 surpasses its English-only counterpart by
0.8% and mSigLIP by 0.7%, and surprisingly sets new state-of-the-art without
system-level confounding factors (e.g., translation, bespoke architecture changes)
on multilingual benchmarks, such as CVQA with 57.4%, Babel-ImageNet with
50.2% and XM3600 with 64.3% on image-to-text retrieval. Code and model are
available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/MetaCLIP.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [1] has become an essential building block of
modern vision and multimodal models, from zero-shot image classification and retrieval to serving as
vision encoders in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [2, 3, 4, 5]. CLIP and its majority
variants [6, 7] adopt an English-only setting, and Meta CLIP [7] introduces a scalable data curation
algorithm to meticulously extract a billion-scale English dataset that exhausts long-tailed concepts
in Common Crawl. The algorithm transforms the distribution of the raw Internet into controllable
and balanced training distribution defined by metadata (e.g., visual concepts composed by human
experts) and training distribution is known as one key contributor to performance. In contrast, popular
CLIP reproductions outsource such key contributor to external resources, e.g., OpenCLIP [6] trained
on LAION [8, 9] and DFN [10] rely on pretrained CLIP models for black-box filtering to keep only
high-confidence data. Such approaches resemble distillation of an existing CLIP teacher model and
produce intractable distributions owned by an outsourcing party.
†

Work done during an internship at Meta.
Work done when working at Meta.
§
Project leads.
‡

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

