Collapsing Taylor Mode Automatic Differentiation

Tim Siebert∗
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and
Zuse Institute Berlin
Berlin, Germany
tim.siebert@hu-berlin.de

Felix Dangel∗
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada
fdangel@vectorinstitute.ai

Marius Zeinhofer
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland,
marius.zeinhofer@sam.math.ethz.ch

Andrea Walther
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and
Zuse Institute Berlin
Berlin, Germany
andrea.walther@math.hu-berlin.de

Abstract
Computing partial differential equation (PDE) operators via nested backpropagation
is expensive, yet popular, and severely restricts their utility for scientific machine
learning. Recent advances, like the forward Laplacian and randomizing Taylor
mode automatic differentiation (AD), propose forward schemes to address this. We
introduce an optimization technique for Taylor mode that “collapses” derivatives
by rewriting the computational graph, and demonstrate how to apply it to general
linear PDE operators, and randomized Taylor mode. The modifications simply
require propagating a sum up the computational graph, which could—or should—
be done by a machine learning compiler, without exposing complexity to users.
We implement our collapsing procedure and evaluate it on popular PDE operators,
confirming it accelerates Taylor mode and outperforms nested backpropagation.

1

Introduction

Using neural networks to learn functions constrained by physical laws is a popular trend in scientific
machine learning [4, 16, 17, 19, 24, 25, 29]. Typically, the Physics is encoded through partial
differential equations (PDEs) that the neural net must satisfy. The associated loss functions require
evaluating differential operators w.r.t. the net’s input, rather than weights. Evaluating these differential
operators remains a computational challenge, especially if they contain high-order derivatives.
Computing PDE operators. Two important fields that build on PDE operators are variational
Monte-Carlo (VMC) simulations and Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs). VMC employs
neural networks as ansatz for the Schrödinger equation [4, 16, 24] and demands computing the net’s
Laplacian (the Hessian trace) for the Hamiltonian’s kinetic term. PINNs represent PDE solutions as a
neural net and train it by minimizing the residuals of the governing equations [19, 25]. For instance,
Kolmogorov-type equations like the Fokker-Planck and Black-Scholes equation require weighted
second-order derivatives on high-dimensional spatial domains [17, 28]. Other PINNs for elasticity
problems use the biharmonic operator [7, 17, 27, 31], which contains fourth-order derivatives.
Is backpropagation all we need? Although nesting first-order automatic differentiation (AD) to
compute high-order derivatives scales exponentially w.r.t. the degree in time and memory [27, §3.2],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
∗

Equal contribution

