Incremental Sequence Classification
with Temporal Consistency

Lucas Maystre∗
UiPath
London, UK

Gabriel Barello
UiPath
Bellevue, WA, USA

Rares Dolga
UiPath & UCL
London, UK

Alvaro Ortega Gonzalez
UiPath
London, UK

Tudor Berariu
UiPath
London, UK

Aleix Cambray
UiPath
London, UK

Andrei Nica
UiPath
London, UK

David Barber
UiPath & UCL
London, UK

Abstract
We address the problem of incremental sequence classification, where predictions
are updated as new elements in the sequence are revealed. Drawing on temporaldifference learning from reinforcement learning, we identify a temporal-consistency
condition that successive predictions should satisfy. We leverage this condition to
develop a novel loss function for training incremental sequence classifiers. Through
a concrete example, we demonstrate that optimizing this loss can offer substantial
gains in data efficiency. We apply our method to text classification tasks and
show that it improves predictive accuracy over competing approaches on several
benchmark datasets. We further evaluate our approach on the task of verifying
large language model generations for correctness in grade-school math problems.
Our results show that models trained with our method are better able to distinguish
promising generations from unpromising ones after observing only a few tokens.

1

Introduction

Learning to classify a sequence x = (x1 , . . . , xT ) into one of K classes is a fundamental problem in
machine learning [44, 16]. In this work, we focus on an incremental variant in which the sequence is
revealed element by element, and a predictive model must provide predictions at every timestep. As a
concrete example, consider a movie review, represented as a sequence of tokens.
A touching movie . It is full of emotions and wonderful acting .
x1

x2

x3

x4 x5

x6

x7

x8

x9

x10

x11

x12

x13

We ask the question: Can we predict the sentiment of this review using only the first two or three
tokens? More generally, can we learn a predictive model that accurately classifies any prefix x≤t ,
consisting of the first t ≤ T elements of a sequence? This problem naturally arises in domains where
there is a cost associated to waiting for the full sequence; In healthcare or finance, for example, the
cost might be time or opportunity [45, 34]. Recently, sequence classifiers have also been deployed as
verifiers to improve applications of large language models (LLMs), where generating full sequences
incurs a non-trivial computational cost [8, 39, 31].
A key property of the incremental classification problem is that any calibrated predictive model should
be temporally-consistent. That is, the predictive class distribution given a prefix x≤t should equal the
expected class distribution given the extended prefix x≤t+1 , where the expectation is taken over xt+1 .
We take advantage of this temporal-consistency property to develop a novel loss function for training
∗

Corresponding author, e-mail: lucas@maystre.ch.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

