Scalable Feature Learning on Huge Knowledge
Graphs for Downstream Machine Learning

Félix Lefebvre
SODA Team, Inria Saclay
felix.lefebvre@inria.fr

Gaël Varoquaux
SODA Team, Inria Saclay
Probabl

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks can benefit from external knowledge. Large knowledge graphs store such knowledge, and embedding methods can be used to distill
it into ready-to-use vector representations for downstream applications. For this
purpose, current models have however two limitations: they are primarily optimized for link prediction, via local contrastive learning, and their application to the
largest graphs requires significant engineering effort due to GPU memory limits.
To address these, we introduce SEPAL: a Scalable Embedding Propagation ALgorithm for large knowledge graphs designed to produce high-quality embeddings for
downstream tasks at scale. The key idea of SEPAL is to ensure global embedding
consistency by optimizing embeddings only on a small core of entities, and then
propagating them to the rest of the graph with message passing. We evaluate
SEPAL on 7 large-scale knowledge graphs and 46 downstream machine learning
tasks. Our results show that SEPAL significantly outperforms previous methods
on downstream tasks. In addition, SEPAL scales up its base embedding model,
enabling fitting huge knowledge graphs on commodity hardware. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/soda-inria/sepal.

1

Introduction: embedding knowledge for downstream tasks

External knowledge for machine learning Bringing general knowledge to a machine-learning
task revives an old promise of making it easier via this knowledge [Lenat and Feigenbaum, 2000].
Indeed, data science is often about entities of the world –persons, places, organizations– that are well
characterized in general-purpose knowledge graphs. These graphs carry rich information, including
numerical attributes and relationships between entities, and can be connected to string values in
tabular data through entity linking techniques [Mendes et al., 2011, Foppiano and Romary, 2020,
Delpeuch, 2019]. A thorny challenge, however, is to transform this relational information into features
for downstream tabular machine learning [Kanter and Veeramachaneni, 2015, Cappuzzo et al., 2025,
Robinson et al., 2024]. To that end, a scalable solution is offered by graph embedding methods that
distill the graph information into node features readily usable by any downstream tabular learner
[Grover and Leskovec, 2016, Cvetkov-Iliev et al., 2023, Ruiz et al., 2024].
Knowledge graphs as general knowledge sources The rapid growth of general-purpose knowledge
graphs brings the exciting prospect of a very general feature enrichment. Indeed, a richer knowledge
graph provides more comprehensive coverage and context, thereby bringing greater value to the
downstream analysis [Ruiz et al., 2024]. ConceptNet pioneered the distribution of general-knowledge
embeddings, building on a graph of 8 million entities [Speer et al., 2017]. Since then, knowledge
graphs have continued to expand rapidly. For instance, as of 2025, Wikidata [Vrandečić and
Krötzsch, 2014] describes 115M entities and gains around 15M yearly [Wikimedia], and YAGO4
[Pellissier Tanon et al., 2020] gives a curated view on 67M entities.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

