Attention Mechanism, Max-Affine Partition,
and Universal Approximation

Hude Liu∗ Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu∗†

Zhao Song‡

Han Liu†§

†

Center for Foundation Models and Generative AI & Department of Computer Science,
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
§
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
‡

hudeliu0208@gmail.com, jhu@u.northwestern.edu,
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com, hanliu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We establish the universal approximation capability of single-layer, single-head
self- and cross-attention mechanisms with minimal attached structures. Our key
insight is to interpret single-head attention as an input domain-partition mechanism
that assigns distinct values to subregions. This allows us to engineer the attention
weights such that this assignment imitates the target function. Building on this, we
prove that a single self-attention layer, preceded by sum-of-linear transformations,
is capable of approximating any continuous function on a compact domain under
the L∞ -norm. Furthermore, we extend this construction to approximate any
Lebesgue integrable function under Lp -norm for 1 ≤ p < ∞. Lastly, we also
extend our techniques and show that, for the first time, single-head cross-attention
achieves the same universal approximation guarantees.

1

Introduction

We establish the universal approximation capability of single-layer, single-head self- and crossattention mechanisms. Departed from prior studies, our results demonstrate that the expressive
power of transformers arises from only the (softmax) attention module and an attached linear layer,
without additional components such as positional encodings or feed-forward networks (FFNs). More
importantly, our proofs show that sequence-to-sequence universal approximation requires only a
minimalist configuration: single-layer, single-head attention with linear transformations.
In this era, the power of transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] is undeniable, given their dominance in
modern machine learning. They drive models such as BERT [Devlin, 2018], ChatGPT [Brown et al.,
2020, Achiam et al., 2023], and LLaMA [Touvron et al., 2023a,b, Dubey et al., 2024] for language;
ViT [Dosovitskiy et al., 2021] and DiT [Peebles and Xie, 2023] for image and video; DNABERT
[Ji et al., 2021, Zhou et al., 2023] for genomics; and Moirai [Woo et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2024]
for time series, among many others. Central to these successes is the attention mechanism. While
numerous variants and implementations exist [Tay et al., 2022], the softmax-based vanilla attention
∗
Equal contribution. Version: December 15, 2025. Future updates are on https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
19901.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

