UFT: Unifying Supervised and Reinforcement
Fine-Tuning

Mingyang Liu, Gabriele Farina & Asuman Ozdaglar
LIDS, EECS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{liumy19,gfarina,asuman}@mit.edu

Abstract
Post-training has demonstrated its importance in enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). The primary post-training methods can be
categorized into supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT).
SFT is efficient and well-suited for small language models, but it may lead to overfitting and limit the reasoning abilities of larger models. In contrast, RFT generally
yields better generalization but depends heavily on the strength of the base model.
To address the limitations of SFT and RFT, we propose Unified Fine-Tuning (UFT),
a novel post-training paradigm that unifies SFT and RFT into a single, integrated
process. UFT enables the model to effectively explore solutions while incorporating informative supervision signals, bridging the gap between memorizing and
thinking underlying existing methods. Notably, UFT outperforms both SFT and
RFT in general, regardless of model sizes. Furthermore, we theoretically prove that
UFT breaks RFT’s inherent exponential sample complexity bottleneck, showing
for the first time that unified training can exponentially accelerate convergence on
long-horizon reasoning tasks.

1

Introduction

When humans learn a new subject, we typically practice with problem sets (thinking) and try to
understand the solutions when we encounter difficulties (memorizing). There are also counterparts in
fine-tuning LLMs, which is
• Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT). Memorizing the collected reasoning trace (solution) by maximizing the log-likelihood of it.
• Reinforcement Fine-Tuning (RFT). Exploring the reasoning space of LLM and improving the
performance according to the signal from a verifier of the final answer (thinking).
However, unlike humans, learning and thinking are disentangled during the training of language
models. Specifically, prior work [DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025, Zhou et al., 2023, Muennighoff et al.,
2025, Liu et al., 2025, Zeng et al., 2025] typically applies either SFT or RFT throughout the finetuning phase, or applies RFT only after SFT completes (cf. Figure 1). The choice of the proper
fine-tuning algorithm depends on the LLM’s capacity and the task’s complexity. Specifically, when
the LLM is weak, SFT typically works better since the LLM cannot explore the correct answer during
reinforcement learning [Pan et al., 2025], due to the sparse reward caused by the verifier-based reward
model. On the other hand, when the LLM is strong, RFT generalizes better [Xie et al., 2025, Chu
et al., 2025].
1

The source code is available at https://github.com/liumy2010/UFT.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

