Dynam3D: Dynamic Layered 3D Tokens Empower
VLM for Vision-and-Language Navigation

Zihan Wang Seungjun Lee Gim Hee Lee
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
zihan.wang@u.nus.edu, gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) is a core task where embodied agents
leverage their spatial mobility to navigate in 3D environments toward designated
destinations based on natural language instructions. Recently, video-language
large models (Video-VLMs) with strong generalization capabilities and rich commonsense knowledge have shown remarkable performance when applied to VLN
tasks. However, these models still encounter the following challenges when applied
to real-world 3D navigation: 1) Insufficient understanding of 3D geometry and
spatial semantics; 2) Limited capacity for large-scale exploration and long-term
environmental memory; 3) Poor adaptability to dynamic and changing environments. To address these limitations, we propose Dynam3D, a dynamic layered 3D
representation model that leverages language-aligned, generalizable, and hierarchical 3D representations as visual input to train 3D-VLM in navigation action
prediction. Given posed RGB-D images, our Dynam3D projects 2D CLIP features
into 3D space and constructs multi-level 3D patch-instance-zone representations
for 3D geometric and semantic understanding with a dynamic and layer-wise
update strategy. Our Dynam3D is capable of online encoding and localization
of 3D instances, and dynamically updates them in changing environments to
provide large-scale exploration and long-term memory capabilities for navigation. By leveraging large-scale 3D-language pretraining and task-specific adaptation, our Dynam3D sets new state-of-the-art performance on VLN benchmarks
including R2R-CE, REVERIE-CE and NavRAG-CE under monocular settings.
Furthermore, experiments for pre-exploration, lifelong memory, and real-world
robot validate the effectiveness of practical deployment. The code is available at
https://github.com/MrZihan/Dynam3D.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) tasks [1–4] require agents to integrate three core capabilities:
1) understanding natural language instructions, 2) exploring environments and localizing targets
or destinations, and 3) planning and executing navigation actions. As illustrated in Figure 1(a),
recent works [5–7] have predominantly focused on using video-based large models [8–10] to develop
monocular VLN systems. This is due to the practical constraint that most robots are equipped with
monocular cameras instead of panoramic cameras. These models pre-trained on large-scale internet
data demonstrate strong language understanding and multimodal reasoning abilities, which enable
effective instruction following and continuous prediction of navigation actions toward the destination.
Despite these recent advances, several limitations still remain: 1) Video-based models struggle to
capture spatial geometry and semantics in large-scale 3D environments. Our experiments reveal
that this significantly hinders the ability of these models to explore extensively and correct errors
effectively. 2) These models lack mechanisms for structured scene memory. This prevents the use of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

