Too Late to Recall: Explaining the Two-Hop Problem
in Multimodal Knowledge Retrieval

Constantin Venhoff1,4
1

Ashkan Khakzar1,4

University of Oxford

2

Sonia Joseph2,3

McGill University

3

Philip Torr1

Meta

4

Neel Nanda

MATS

§ cvenhoff/vlm-two-hop

Abstract
Training vision language models (VLMs) aims to align visual representations from
a vision encoder with the textual representations of a pretrained large language
model (LLM). However, many VLMs exhibit reduced factual recall performance
compared to their LLM backbones, raising the question of how effective multimodal fine-tuning is at extending existing mechanisms within the LLM to visual
inputs. We argue that factual recall based on visual inputs requires VLMs to solve
a two-hop problem: (1) forming entity representations from visual inputs, and
(2) recalling associated factual knowledge based on these entity representations.
By benchmarking 14 VLMs with various architectures (LLaVA, Native, CrossAttention), sizes (7B-124B parameters), and training setups on factual recall tasks
against their original LLM backbone models, we find that 11 of 14 models exhibit
factual recall degradation. We select three models exhibiting high- and two models
with low performance degradation, and use attribution patching, activation patching,
and probing to show that degraded VLMs struggle to use the existing factual recall
circuit of their LLM backbone, because they resolve the first hop too late in the
computation. In contrast, high-performing VLMs resolve entity representations
early enough to reuse the existing factual recall mechanism. Finally, we demonstrate two methods to recover performance: patching entity representations from
the LLM backbone into the VLM, and prompting with chain-of-thought reasoning.
Our results highlight that the speed of early entity resolution critically determines
how effective VLMs are in using preexisting LLM mechanisms. More broadly,
our work illustrates how mechanistic analysis can explain and unveil systematic
failures in multimodal alignment.

1

Introduction

Vision–Language Models (VLMs) achieve strong multimodal task performance by integrating vision
transformers (ViTs) with large language models (LLMs) via adapter mechanisms Liu et al. [2023],
Lin et al. [2024], Steiner et al. [2024], Liu et al. [2024a], Cocchi et al. [2025], Touvron et al. [2023].
These adapters project visual representations from the ViT into the representation space of the
backbone LLM, enabling text-based reasoning over visual inputs. However, how exactly preexisting
mechanisms in the backbone LLM adapt to visual inputs, and the resulting implications or failure
modes, remain severely understudied.
For example, previous studies have found that LLaVA-1.5-7B performs worse on factual recall tasks
than its LLM backbone Cohen et al. [2024]. Explaining this requires understanding how visual
information flows through VLMs and how factual recall mechanisms function in their LLM backbones.
Prior work on factual recall mechanisms identified early-layer MLPs as a crucial component that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

