Learning Stochastic Multiscale Models

Andrew F. Ilersich
Institute for Aerospace Studies
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M3H 5T6
andrew.ilersich@mail.utoronto.ca

Prasanth B. Nair
Institute for Aerospace Studies
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M3H 5T6
prasanth.nair@utoronto.ca

Abstract
The physical sciences are replete with dynamical systems that require the resolution
of a wide range of length and time scales. This presents significant computational
challenges since direct numerical simulation requires discretization at the finest
relevant scales, leading to a high-dimensional state space. In this work, we propose an approach to learn stochastic multiscale models in the form of stochastic
differential equations directly from observational data. Drawing inspiration from
physics-based multiscale modeling approaches, we resolve the macroscale state
on a coarse mesh while introducing a microscale latent state to explicitly model
unresolved dynamics. We learn the parameters of the multiscale model using a
simulator-free amortized variational inference method with a Product of Experts
likelihood that enforces scale separation. We present detailed numerical studies
to demonstrate that our learned multiscale models achieve superior predictive accuracy compared to under-resolved direct numerical simulation and closure-type
models at equivalent resolution, as well as reduced-order modeling approaches.

1

Introduction

Multiscale phenomena are ubiquitous in nature, and broadly fall under two categories. The first
are systems with large-scale and small-scale regimes, each of which may follow different laws but
interact with each other at some interface, so simulation requires one to model both regimes. Such
systems are common in materials science [1] and biology [2]. The second, which we focus on in
this work, are systems governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) that require one to resolve a
wide range of length and time scales to make accurate predictions. A canonical example is weather
prediction. Modeling the atmosphere requires resolving phenomena from cloud microphysics (< 1m)
up to planetary waves (5000 km) [3]. In such scenarios, direct numerical simulation (DNS) of the
governing equations on a grid that resolves the smallest scale of interest is computationally infeasible.
The computational intractability of fully-resolved simulations necessitates working with coarsened
representations. This introduces a fundamental multiscale separation between resolved and subgrid-scale dynamics. To “close” the system, the effect of the sub-grid-scale dynamics on the
resolved dynamics must be modeled. This approach, known as closure modeling [4, 5], has emerged
independently across multiple fields. Large-eddy simulation (LES) in fluid dynamics filters out
small-scale phenomena and closes the Navier-Stokes equations with a sub-grid-scale model [6].
Similarly, in coarse-grained molecular dynamics, atoms are grouped into larger "beads" to reduce
degrees of freedom [7]. Recently, machine learning techniques have been used to infer closure models
for climate models [8], coarse-grained molecular dynamics [9], and turbulence [10, 11].
We propose a novel framework for learning stochastic multiscale dynamics directly from observational
data. Our approach introduces a latent variable model that explicitly decomposes the system state into
macroscale (ζ) and microscale (η) components, whose dynamics are governed by a learned coupled
system of stochastic differential equations (SDEs). This structure captures complex inter-scale
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

