MDNS: Masked Diffusion Neural Sampler via
Stochastic Optimal Control

Yuchen Zhu1,∗ , Wei Guo1,∗ , Jaemoo Choi1 , Guan-Horng Liu2 , Yongxin Chen1 , Molei Tao1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology
2
FAIR at Meta
{yzhu738, wei.guo, jchoi843, yongchen, mtao}@gatech.edu, ghliu@meta.com

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a neural sampler to generate samples from
discrete state spaces where the target probability mass function π ∝ e−U is
known up to a normalizing constant, which is an important task in fields such as
statistical physics, machine learning, combinatorial optimization, etc. To better
address this challenging task when the state space has a large cardinality and
the distribution is multi-modal, we propose Masked Diffusion Neural Sampler
(MDNS), a novel framework for training discrete neural samplers by aligning
two path measures through a family of learning objectives, theoretically grounded
in the stochastic optimal control of the continuous-time Markov chains. We
validate the efficiency and scalability of MDNS through extensive experiments
on various distributions with distinct statistical properties, where MDNS learns to
accurately sample from the target distributions despite the extremely high problem
dimensions and outperforms other learning-based baselines by a large margin. A
comprehensive study of ablations and extensions is also provided to demonstrate
the efficacy and potential of the proposed framework. Our code is available at
https://github.com/yuchen-zhu-zyc/MDNS.

1

Introduction

Drawing samples from an unnormalized target distribution π ∝ e−U on some state space X0 is a
fundamental problem with wide-ranging applications across fields such as statistical physics [LB14],
Bayesian inference [Gel+13], machine learning [And+03; WJ08], etc. For decades, Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, such as the Langevin Monte Carlo, the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, and the Glauber dynamics, have been a cornerstone. These methods simulate a Markov
chain whose stationary distribution is the target distribution, and converge provably fast under certain
circumstances [Che22]. Despite their widespread adoption, MCMC algorithms face significant challenges, especially when the state space is high-dimensional and the target distribution is multimodal,
which hinders efficient exploration and convergence (see, e.g., the lower-bound results in [Ran06;
GT06; GLR18; HZ25]).
Recently, inspired by the success of diffusion models in generative modeling for continuous data
[HJA20; SME21; Son+21], significant progress has been made in leveraging neural networks to learn
a stochastic differential equation (SDE) to generate samples from π, which we collectively refer to as
neural samplers (e.g., [ZC22; VGD23; AVE25; Hav+25]). Concurrently, the diffusion paradigm has
been effectively extended to discrete state spaces [Aus+21; Cam+22; Sun+23b; LME24], finding
broad applications in domains involving sequences of categorical data. However, while neural
samplers have been extensively developed for distributions on Rd and discrete diffusion models
*

Equal contribution, random order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

