Dual-Comb Ghost Imaging with Transformer-Based
Reconstruction for Optical Fiber Endomicroscopy

David Dang1,3 Myoung-Gyun Suh2 Maodong Gao2 Byoung Jun Park2
Beyonce Hu1 Yucheng Jin1 Wilton J.M. Kort-Kamp3 Ho Wai (Howard) Lee1
1
University of California, Irvine 2 NTT Physics and Informatics Laboratories
3
Los Alamos National Laboratory
{dangd5,beyonceh,yuchej9,Howardhw.lee}@uci.edu
{myoung-gyun.suh,byoungjun.park}@ntt-research.com, mgao@caltech.edu
kortkamp@lanl.gov

Abstract
Endoscopic imaging is indispensable for visualizing internal organs, yet conventional systems remain bulky and costly because they rely on large, multi-element
optics, which limits their ability to access and image certain areas of the body.
Achieving high-quality endomicroscopy with hundred micron-scale and inexpensive hardware remains a grand challenge. Optical fibers offer a sub-millimeter-scale
imaging conduit that could meet this need, but existing fiber-based approaches typically require either raster scanning or multicore bundles, which limit resolution and
speed of imaging. In this work, we overcome these limitations by combining dualcomb interferometry with optical ghost imaging and advanced algorithm. Optical
frequency combs enable precise and parallel speckle illumination via wavelengthdivision multiplexing through a single-core fiber, while our dual-comb compressive
ghost imaging approach enables snapshot detection of bucket-sum signals using a
single-pixel detector, eliminating the need for both spatial and spectral scanning.
To reconstruct images from these highly compressed measurements, we introduce
Optical Ghost-GPT, a transformer-based image reconstruction model that enables
fast, high-fidelity recovery at low sampling ratios. Our dual-comb ghost imaging
approach, combined with the novel algorithm, outperforms classical ghost imaging
techniques in both speed and accuracy, enabling real-time, high-resolution endoscopic imaging with a significantly reduced device footprint. This advancement
paves the way for non-invasive, high-resolution, low-cost endomicroscopy and
other sensing applications constrained by hardware size and complexity.

1

Introduction

Endoscopes are an important tool in modern medical diagnostics, enabling direct visualization of
internal organs and tissues. From gastrointestinal investigations to bronchoscopies and laparoscopies,
endoscopic techniques are widely used for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Traditional
endoscopes typically consist of a long, flexible or rigid tube equipped with a light source and a
camera system to capture real-time images [1]. Despite their essential role in clinical practice,
conventional endoscopes face several critical challenges: (a) The complex electronics and imaging
systems increases an endoscope’s size to the order of millimeters to centimeters— resulting in
invasive and uncomfortable procedures on a patient; (b) Moreover, the imaging capabilities are
typically limited by the size of the optics and cameras and prevent the imaging of small body parts;
(c) Additionally, these imaging systems play a role in the large cost of endoscopes, with average
prices in the range of several tens of thousands of dollars [2].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

