Scalable Fingerprinting of Large Language Models

Anshul Nasery† ∗

Jonathan Hayase†

Himanshu Tyagi⋄

†

Creston Brooks⋄

Pramod Viswanath⋄

University of Washington

⋄

Peiyao Sheng⋄
Sewoong Oh†⋄

Sentient

Abstract
Model fingerprinting has emerged as a powerful tool for model owners to identify
their shared model given API access. In order to lower false discovery rate, fight
fingerprint leakage, and defend against coalitions of model users attempting to
bypass detection, we argue that scaling up the number of fingerprints one can
embed into a model, i.e. Scalability of fingerprints, is critical. Hence, we pose
scalability as a crucial requirement for fingerprinting schemes. We experiment
with fingerprint design at a scale significantly larger than previously considered,
and introduce a new method, dubbed Perinucleus sampling, to generate scalable,
persistent, and harmless fingerprints. We demonstrate that this scheme can add
24,576 fingerprints to a Llama-3.1-8B model—two orders of magnitude more than
existing schemes—without degrading the model’s utility. Our inserted fingerprints
persist even after supervised fine-tuning on standard post-training data. We further
address security risks for fingerprinting, and theoretically and empirically show
how a scalable fingerprinting scheme like ours can mitigate these risks. Our code
is available here.

1

Introduction

Model fingerprinting has emerged as a promising solution to maintain ownership of a model [1, 2, 3],
while openly or semi-openly sharing model weights with a larger community. Before sharing, the
large language model is fine-tuned with fingerprint pairs, each consisting of a key and a response, such
that when the fingerprinted model is prompted with a key, it responds with the fingerprint response as
illustrated in Fig. 1. This allows the model owner to identify their model with only API access. This
can be a powerful tool for complex systems that allows the model owner to ensure compliance with
signed agreements, track the usage of the model, and defend against collusion attacks [4].
In typical use-cases, existing methods focus on Harmlessness and Persistence [1, 5] of fingerprints.
Fingerprinting is Harmless if the utility of the fingerprinted model does not degrade from the
base model, and it is Persistent if performing supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or post-training on the
fingerprinted model does not make the model forget the fingerprints [6, 7]. While these properties are
important, we argue that there is another important criterion for a good fingerprinting scheme not
captured by prior work: Scalability. We call a fingerprinting scheme Scalable if many fingerprints
can be added without hurting the performance of the model.
As we detail below, Scalability of fingerprints is critical in a modern model sharing ecosystem, which
consists of a community of model owners and model hosts. A model owner possesses model weights
∗

Correspondence to anasery@cs.washington.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

