Conformal Linguistic Calibration:
Trading-off between Factuality and Specificity

Zhengping Jiang
Johns Hopkins University
zjiang31@jhu.edu

Anqi Liu
Johns Hopkins University
aliu.cs@jhu.edu

Benjamin Van Durme
Johns Hopkins University
vandurme@jhu.edu

Abstract
Language model outputs are not always reliable, thus prompting research into
how to adapt model responses based on uncertainty. Common approaches include:
abstention, where models refrain from generating responses when uncertain; and
linguistic calibration, where models hedge their statements using uncertainty quantifiers. However, abstention can withhold valuable information, while linguistically
calibrated responses are often challenging to leverage in downstream tasks. We
propose a unified view, Conformal Linguistic Calibration (CLC), which reinterprets linguistic calibration as answer set prediction. First we present a framework
connecting abstention and linguistic calibration through the lens of linguistic pragmatics. We then describe an implementation of CLC that allows for controlling the
level of imprecision in model responses. Results demonstrate our method produces
calibrated outputs with conformal guarantees on factual accuracy. Further, our
approach enables fine-tuning models to perform uncertainty-aware adaptive claim
rewriting, offering a controllable balance between factuality and specificity.1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) can provide knowledge responses based on their comprehensive
training sets [48, 59, 78], but these responses may not be trustworthy [41, 26], and can be stated in
an over-confident tone [42]. One solution is to communicate a calibrated uncertainty measure to
the user, so as to enable more informed decision-making [80]. This uncertainty information can be
expressed in different ways, which we hereby classify into two groups. The first set of approaches
marks a response explicitly with the model’s level of confidence [66, 12, 65]. When such uncertainty
expressions are conveyed through text generation and are adjusted to faithfully represent accuracy
of the response, this is called linguistic calibration [42, 3, 6, 69]. For example, a model uncertain
in its response may state: “Possibly the largest city in the US is Los Angeles” (Fig 1).2 However,
how to interpret linguistic uncertainty can be unclear and subjective. Also, the outer structure
introduced by linguistic calibration hampers the downstream task / evaluation [34], as it is unclear
what special treatment should be given to these uncertain assertions. Another set of approaches have
the model generate prediction sets instead of a single response, such that with high probability some
are acceptable [50, 32, 55]. A special case of this is when a model abstains from responding when it
is not confident [58, 28, 39, 45, 9, 18]. E.g., “I don’t know” is trivially equivalent to predicting the
1
2

Code available at: https://github.com/zipJiang/CLC.
Answer by population is New York City, by area is Sitka.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

