Conditional Panoramic Image Generation via Masked
Autoregressive Modeling

Chaoyang Wang1 Xiangtai Li1 Lu Qi2∗ Xiaofan Lin2
Jinbin Bai3 Qianyu Zhou4 Yunhai Tong1
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Insta360 Research 3 National University of Singapore 4 The University of Tokyo
cywang@stu.pku.edu.cn, qqlu1992@gmail.com

Text to Panorama (Indoor)
The photo depicts a spacious, elegantly designed bedroom with a
large bed, wooden beams on the ceiling, and a view of a balcony
through arched windows.

Text to Panorama (Outdoor)
The image depicts a grand entrance to a luxurious, white-walled
building with arched doorways, a staircase, and a well-maintained
garden area.

Panorama Outpainting

Panoramic Image Editing

A park with a pond and buildings.

A yellow tree in the yard.

Figure 1: Generated samples from Panoramic AutoRegressive (PAR) Model. PAR unifies several
conditional panoramic image generation tasks, including text-to-panorama, panorama outpainting,
and panoramic image editing.

Abstract
Recent progress in panoramic image generation has underscored two critical limitations in existing approaches. First, most methods are built upon diffusion
models, which are inherently ill-suited for equirectangular projection (ERP) panoramas due to the violation of the identically and independently distributed (i.i.d.)
Gaussian noise assumption caused by their spherical mapping. Second, these
methods often treat text-conditioned generation (text-to-panorama) and imageconditioned generation (panorama outpainting) as separate tasks, relying on distinct architectures and task-specific data. In this work, we propose a unified
framework, Panoramic AutoRegressive model (PAR), which leverages masked
autoregressive modeling to address these challenges. PAR avoids the i.i.d. assumption constraint and integrates text and image conditioning into a cohesive
architecture, enabling seamless generation across tasks. To address the inherent discontinuity in existing generative models, we introduce circular padding
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

