Creativity or Brute Force?
Using Brainteasers as a Window into the
Problem-Solving Abilities of Large Language Models

Simeng Han1♡ Howard Dai1♡ Stephen Xia1♡ Grant Zhang1♡
Chen Liu1♡ Lichang Chen2 Hoang Huy Nguyen3
Hongyuan Mei4 Jiayuan Mao5 R. Thomas McCoy1
1

3

Yale University 2 Meta Superintelligence Labs
Georgia Institute of Technology 4 TTIC 5 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
♡
Lead contributors.
Please direct correspondence to sophiahsm6@gmail.com.

Abstract
Accuracy remains a standard metric for evaluating AI systems, but it offers limited
insight into how models arrive at their solutions. In this work, we introduce a
benchmark based on brainteasers written in long narrative form to probe more
deeply into the types of reasoning strategies that models employ. Brainteasers are
well-suited for this goal because they can be solved with multiple approaches, such
as a few-step solution that uses a creative insight or a longer solution that uses more
brute force. We investigate large language models (LLMs) across multiple layers of
reasoning, focusing not only on correctness but also on the quality and creativity of
their solutions. We investigate many aspects of the reasoning process: (1) semantic
parsing of the brainteasers into precise mathematical competition-style formats; (2)
self-correcting solutions based on ground-truth solutions; (3) producing step-bystep sketches of solutions; and (4) making use of hints. We find that LLMs are in
many cases able to find creative, insightful solutions to brainteasers, suggesting
that they capture some of the capacities needed to solve novel problems in creative
ways. Nonetheless, there also remain situations where they rely on brute force,
despite the availability of more efficient, creative solutions, highlighting a potential
direction for improving LLM reasoning.

1

Introduction

Recent techniques for improving large language models (LLMs) have highlighted an important fact:
In order to improve AI systems, we should think carefully about how they arrive at their solutions.
For instance, many of the most popular recent enhancements to LLMs are approaches for guiding
the models to solve problems in certain ways, such as decomposing tasks hierarchically into simpler
sub-tasks, leveraging an internal monologue (commonly known as a chain of thought) to perform selfreflection and verify generated solutions [1, 2, 3], or translating problems from a verbal description
into formal representations before attempting solutions [4, 5]. One reason why the solution strategy is
so important is that some strategies may be more generalizable than others. For instance, brute-force
strategies might generalize less well to complex, novel problems than the ability to form creative
insights. Therefore, understanding how a model arrives at its solutions is helpful for understanding
the generality of the model’s abilities.
The code is available at https://github.com/stephenxia1/brainteasers.
The dataset is available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/ChenLiu1996/Brainteaser.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

