ChatbotID: Identifying Chatbots with Granger
Causality Test

Xiaoquan Yi1 , Haozhao Wang1∗, Yining Qi1 Wenchao Xu2 ,
Rui Zhang1†, Yuhua Li1 , Ruixuan Li1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
School of Division of Integrative Systems and Design
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
{yixiaoquan,hz_wang}@hust.edu.cn, rayteam@yeah.net

Abstract
With the increasing sophistication of Large Language Models (LLMs), it is crucial
to develop reliable methods to accurately identify whether an interlocutor in realtime dialogue is human or chatbot. However, existing detection methods are
primarily designed for analyzing full documents, not the unique dynamics and
characteristics of dialogue. These approaches frequently overlook the nuances of
interaction that are essential in conversational contexts. This work identifies two
key patterns in dialogues: (1) Human-Human (H-H) interactions exhibit significant
bidirectional sentiment influence, while (2) Human-Chatbot (H-C) interactions
display a clear asymmetric pattern. We propose an innovative approach named
ChatbotID, which applies the Granger Causality Test (GCT) to extract a novel set
of interactional features that capture the evolving, predictive relationships between
conversational attributes. By synergistically fusing these GCT-based interactional
features with contextual embeddings and optimizing the model via a structured
loss function, we significantly enhance the model’s ability to capture asymmetric
influence in H-C dialogues. Experimental results across multiple datasets and
detection models demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, with 15.92%
improvements in accuracy for distinguishing between H-H and H-C dialogues.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement and proliferation of Large Language Models (LLMs) have led to increasingly
sophisticated conversational agents capable of generating remarkably human-like text [1, 2, 3]. By
exploiting the sophisticated conversational abilities of LLMs, malicious actors can convincingly
simulate human interactions [4, 5, 6], tricking unsuspecting individuals into believing they are
communicating with a real person, thereby facilitating fraudulent activities such as scams and identity
theft [7, 4, 8]. Considering this, it has become critically important to devise reliable methods for
distinguishing between human and LLM-driven interactions.
Many state-of-the-art methods typically rely on identifying statistical anomalies in linguistic [9, 10,
11] or stylometric features [12, 13] for detecting LLMs-generated text. These approaches often
require extensive manual feature engineering and may exhibit limited effectiveness against more
advanced LLMs that are explicitly optimized to bypass such detection mechanisms. More recently,
supervised learning approaches [14, 15, 16] have been developed to distinguish between humanwritten and LLM-generated text by analyzing both semantic content [17, 18] and high-level textual
∗
†

Haozhao Wang is corresponding authors.
Homepage: https://www.ruizhang.info/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

