Modeling Dynamic Neural Activity by Combining
Naturalistic Video Stimuli and Stimulus-Independent
Latent Factors
Finn Schmidt1
finn.schmidt@uni-goettingen.de

Polina Turishcheva1
turishcheva@cs.uni-goettingen.de

Suhas Shrinivasan1
shrinivasan@cs.uni-goettingen.de

1

Fabian H. Sinz1,2
sinz@uni-goettingen.de

Institute of Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University of Göttingen,
Germany
2
Lower Saxony Center for AI & Causal Methods in Medicine, Germany

Abstract
The neural activity in the visual processing is influenced by both external stimuli
and internal brain states. Ideally, a neural predictive model should account for both
of them. Currently, there are no dynamic encoding models that explicitly model
a latent state and the entire neuronal response distribution. We address this gap
by proposing a probabilistic model that predicts the joint distribution of the neuronal responses from video stimuli and stimulus-independent latent factors. After
training and testing our model on mouse V1 neuronal responses, we find that it outperforms video-only models in terms of log-likelihood and achieves improvements
in likelihood and correlation when conditioned on responses from other neurons.
Furthermore, we find that the learned latent factors strongly correlate with mouse
behavior and that they exhibit patterns related to the neurons’ position on the visual
cortex, although the model was trained without behavior and cortical coordinates.
Our findings demonstrate that unsupervised learning of latent factors from population responses can reveal biologically meaningful structure that bridges sensory
processing and behavior, without requiring explicit behavioral annotations during
training. Code: github.com/sinzlab/SchmidtEtAl2025 Dynamic Latent State

1

Introduction

Predicting the activity of sensory neurons is a major goal of computational neuroscience towards
understanding the mechanisms of information encoding in the brain. In particular, accurately
predicting neural responses in the primary visual cortex (V1) in response to a given stimulus could
provide deeper insights into how the brain processes visual information. However, this task remains
challenging because neural activity in the visual cortex exhibits variability not only across different
visual stimuli but also across repeated presentations of the same stimulus [38, 42]. This variability
arises from the influence of numerous unobservable factors that the visual cortex integrates into its
processing. For example, the activity in the visual cortex is influenced by factors such as behavioral
tasks [13, 22], attention [8, 12, 31], and general brain states correlated with behavior [15, 32, 35, 40].
Recording all of these additional variables is not feasible, especially because most of them are
unknown [40]. Thus, understanding the sensory processing of the visual cortex requires models that
capture both stimulus-dependent and shared stimulus-conditioned variability [5]. One way to do
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

