When Models Don’t Collapse:
On the Consistency of Iterative MLE

Daniel Barzilai
Weizmann Institute of Science
daniel.barzilai@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
The widespread use of generative models has created a feedback loop, in which
each version of a model is trained on data partially produced by its predecessors.
This process has raised concerns about model collapse: A critical degradation in
performance caused by repeated training on synthetic data. However, different
analyses in the literature have reached different conclusions as to the severity of
model collapse. As such, it remains unclear how concerning this phenomenon is,
and under which assumptions it can be avoided. To address this, we theoretically
study model collapse for maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), in a natural setting
where synthetic data is gradually added to the original data set. Under standard
assumptions (similar to those long used for proving asymptotic consistency and
normality of MLE), we establish non-asymptotic bounds showing that collapse can
be avoided even as the fraction of real data vanishes. On the other hand, we prove
that some assumptions (beyond MLE consistency) are indeed necessary: Without
them, model collapse can occur arbitrarily quickly, even when the original data is
still present in the training set. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first
rigorous examples of iterative generative modeling with accumulating data that
rapidly leads to model collapse.

1

Introduction

Generative models such as large language models (LLMs) and diffusion models are increasingly
filling the internet with synthetic data. At the same time, web-scraped content remains a common
source for training newer models. This creates a feedback loop in which each version of a model is
trained partly on outputs of all past models, and synthetic data gradually dominates future training
sets. Because identifying and filtering artificially generated content at scale is not always feasible,
existing biases and artifacts in the models can become increasingly embedded in the training data
and amplified from model to model. This phenomenon has recently been termed Model Collapse: A
critical degradation in performance caused by repeated training on synthetic data [Shumailov et al.,
2024, Bertrand et al., 2024, Dohmatob et al., 2024a, Gerstgrasser et al., 2025].
The effects of training on synthetic data appear to vary widely across settings. In some cases, even
a small amount of synthetic data has been shown to significantly degrade performance [Dohmatob
et al., 2025]; in others, model collapse can be avoided altogether [Gerstgrasser et al., 2025, Dohmatob
et al., 2024a] or synthetic data may even be beneficial [Jain et al., 2024, Dohmatob et al., 2024b].
To help clarify this picture, we theoretically study the behavior of maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE) under iterative training with synthetic data. We focus on a natural and practically motivated
setting (also studied by Alemohammad et al. [2024], Gerstgrasser et al. [2025], Dey and Donoho
[2024]), where we initially have n samples from some ground-truth distribution, and at each iteration
T , the latest model generates n new samples that are then accumulated with all previous data and
used to train the next model.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

