ELDET: Early-Learning Distillation with Noisy Labels
for Object Detection

Dongmin Choi1*

Sangbin Lee1,2*
1

SAIGE

2

EungGu Yun1

Jonghyuk Baek3†

Seoul National University

3

Frank C. Park1,2

Flitto

{dm.choi, sb.lee, eg.yun}@saige.ai, jonghyuk.baek@flitto.com, fcp@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The performance of learning-based object detection algorithms, which attempt
to both classify and locate objects within images, is determined largely by the
quality of the annotated dataset used for training. Two types of labelling errors
are prevalent: objects that are incorrectly classified (categorization noise) and
inaccurate bounding boxes (localization noise); both errors typically occur together
in large-scale datasets. In this paper, we propose a distillation-based method to train
object detectors that takes into account both categorization and localization noise.
The key insight underpinning our method is that the early-learning phenomenon –
in which models trained on noisy data with mixed clean and noisy labels tend to
first fit to the clean data, and memorize the noisy labels later – manifests earlier
for localization noise than for categorization noise. We propose a method that uses
models from the early-learning phase (before overfitting to noisy data occurs) as
a teacher network. A plug-in module implementation compatible with general
object detection architectures is developed, and its performance is validated against
the state-of-the-art using PASCAL VOC, MS COCO and VinDr-CXR medical
detection datasets.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental task in computer
vision that requires both accurate classification
and precise localization of objects within images.
Object detection is essential for autonomous driving [12, 54, 53], medical imaging [20, 58, 37] and
many other applications that rely on knowing both
the type and location of objects in images.

person

person

person

dog

cat

cat

With few exceptions, methods for object detection
are now almost entirely based on neural network (a) Localization noise (b) Categorization noise (c) Combined noise
models, e.g., [43, 46, 35, 6, 44, 26] trained on Figure 1: Comparison of label noise types in object
large image datasets such as PASCAL VOC [11] detection: (a) Localization only. (b) Categorization
and MS COCO [30]. While network architectures only. (c) Combined localization and categorization
noise.
and algorithms for data processing and training
may still affect object detection performance, by and large the performance of object detectors is
determined mostly by the size and quality of the datasets [38].
*
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
This work was primarily conducted while the author was at SAIGE.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

