On the Mechanisms of Weak-to-Strong Generalization:
A Theoretical Perspective

Behrad Moniri
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
bemoniri@seas.upenn.edu

Hamed Hassani
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Weak-to-strong generalization—where a student model trained on imperfect labels generated by a weaker teacher nonetheless surpasses that teacher—has been
widely observed, but the mechanisms that enable it have remained poorly understood. In this paper, through a theoretical analysis of simple models, we uncover
three core mechanisms that can drive this phenomenon. First, by analyzing ridge
linear regression, we study the interplay between the teacher and student regularization parameters and prove that a student can compensate for a teacher’s
under-regularization and achieve lower test error. We also analyze the role of
the parameterization regime of the models and show that qualitatively different
phenomena can happen in different regimes. Second, by analyzing weighted ridge
linear regression, we show that a student model with a regularization structure
better aligned to the target function, can outperform its teacher. Third, in a nonlinear multi-index learning setting, we demonstrate that a student can learn easy,
task-specific features from the teacher while leveraging its own broader pre-training
to learn hard-to-learn features that the teacher cannot capture.

1

Introduction

Weak-to-strong generalization refers to the phenomenon where a strong (student) model trained
on data produced by a weak (teacher) model can sometimes significantly surpass the teacher’s
performance. This concept was first introduced by Burns et al. [2024], where the authors fine-tuned
the GPT-2 model [Radford et al., 2019] (the teacher) for a specific task using ground-truth labels,
subsequently employing the fine-tuned model to generate synthetic samples for the same task. These
synthetic samples were then used to fine-tune GPT-4 [Achiam et al., 2023] (the student). Remarkably,
the fine-tuned student model outperformed its teacher in certain settings despite having access only
to the imperfect synthetic data generated by the teacher.
Weak-to-strong generalization is an especially important phenomenon from a practical perspective
because of its implications for the emerging question of superalignment [OpenAI, 2023]; i.e., can
humans steer models with potentially superhuman capabilities to become aligned to human norms
and values [Burns et al., 2024]? Considering the weak model as a proxy for humans, the possibility
of the weak-to-strong generalization phenomenon suggests that the answer can be affirmative.
Despite its practical importance, the mechanisms that enable weak-to-strong generalization are still
not fully understood. Regularization has empirically been shown to play a critical role in enabling
weak-to-strong generalization. However, despite recent theoretical progress demonstrating that
regularizing the student is necessary in some settings [Medvedev et al., 2025], the full picture of the
effects and the interplay of the regularization of both the student and teacher models in weak-to-strong
generalization is still unclear. For example, prior work on weak-to-strong generalization mainly focus
on ridgeless regression (see e.g., Dong et al. [2025], Xue et al. [2025], Ildiz et al. [2025], etc.).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

