V-CECE: Visual Counterfactual Explanations via
Conceptual Edits

Nikolaos Spanos Maria Lymperaiou Giorgos Filandrianos
Konstantinos Thomas Athanasios Voulodimos Giorgos Stamou
National Technical University of Athens
{nspanos,marialymp,geofila,kthomas}@ails.ece.ntua.gr
thanosv@mail.ntua.gr, gstam@cs.ntua.gr

Abstract
Recent black-box counterfactual generation frameworks fail to take into account
the semantic content of the proposed edits, while relying heavily on training
to guide the generation process. We propose a novel, plug-and-play black-box
counterfactual generation framework, which suggests step-by-step edits based
on theoretical guarantees of optimal edits to produce human-level counterfactual
explanations with zero training. Our framework utilizes a pre-trained image editing
diffusion model, and operates without access to the internals of the classifier,
leading to an explainable counterfactual generation process. Throughout our
experimentation, we showcase the explanatory gap between human reasoning and
neural model behavior by utilizing both Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
Vision Transformer (ViT) and Large Vision Language Model (LVLM) classifiers,
substantiated through a comprehensive human evaluation. Project page and code
are available at https://nickspanos55.github.io/vcece

1

Introduction

Ensuring fairness and trust in artificial intelligence (AI) applications has been of paramount importance, especially since the vast adoption of large and uninterpretable models, such as Large Language
Models (LLMs) [33] and Diffusion Models [17]. For this reason, explainable AI (XAI) has become
an essential research field, fostering understanding and accountability of black-box models, while
rendering them ethically deployable in practical high-stakes circumstances [35]. Among the various
XAI techniques, counterfactual explanations (CEs) stand out as a powerful tool for providing actionable and human-centric insights [14]. The what-if nature of CEs underpins cause-effect relationships
in human reasoning [18], aligning with the concept of performing minimal input perturbations to
simulate those what-if scenarios. Observable outcome changes indicate that the corresponding input
perturbation, though subtle, was sufficiently influential, uncovering a reasoning path inside the model.
By aggregating these reasoning paths within a well-structured CE framework, general patterns of the
model’s decision-making are revealed, highlighting potentially flawed reasoning directions.
The parallel venture of counterfactual generation considers a generated image x∗ as an imaginary
counterpart of an existing image x which succeeds in altering the prediction of a classifier C. To this
end, an appropriate CE framework should be able to answer why x∗ was classified in a class L∗ rather
than L ̸= L∗ in human-interpretable terms. The real value of CEs in comparison to any possible
perturbation that achieves flipping from L to L∗ lies in the semantics [5] considered for classification,
as well as for the generation of x∗ : high-level concepts succeed in explaining why L∗ instead of L,
while superficial changes –such as altering a pixel in an image– may flip the classification label but
fail to provide a meaningful or tractable explanation for the reason behind the change.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

