Adaptive Time Encoding for Irregular Multivariate
Time-Series Classification
Sangho Lee1 , Kyeongseo Min2 , Youngdoo Son2∗, Hyungrok Do3
1 School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Gyeongsang National University
2 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Dongguk University-Seoul
3 Department of Population Health, NYU Grossman School of Medicine

Abstract
Time series are often irregularly sampled with uneven time intervals. In multivariate cases, such irregularities may lead to misaligned observations across variables
and varying observation counts, making it difficult to extract intrinsic patterns
and degrading the classification performance of deep learning models. In this
study, we propose an adaptive time encoding approach to address the challenge of
irregular sampling in multivariate time-series classification. Our approach generates latent representations at learnable reference points that capture missingness
patterns in irregular sequences, enhancing classification performance. We also
introduce consistency regularization techniques to incorporate intricate temporal
and intervariable information into the learned representations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance with high
computational efficiency in irregular multivariate time-series classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series, which consist of multiple variables over time,
are prevalent in diverse domains such
as healthcare and finance [10, 14]. In
practice, time series are often irregularly sampled with uneven time intervals between consecutive observations
Figure 1: Example of irregular multivariate time series
due to cost-saving measures, sensor
failures, or medical interventions [4]. As shown in Figure 1, in multivariate cases, observations across
different variables may not be aligned, and the number of observations in each variable can differ
because different subsets of variables are recorded at each time point. These irregularities hinder
the capture of intrinsic patterns, causing standard deep learning models, which assume that input
sequences are regularly sampled, to perform poorly in classification tasks [16].
To address irregularities, previous work has developed deep learning models that directly learn from
irregular time series to improve classification performance [2, 30]. In particular, recent studies have
exploited attention mechanisms to focus on partial observations in irregular time series, successfully
capturing complicated temporal patterns and achieving superior classification performance [3].
Despite their superiority, these methods encounter two notable limitations. First, they struggle to fully
exploit missingness patterns inherent in uneven time intervals, which reflect the underlying processes
that generate irregular time series [32]. For example, patients’ examination schedules, which vary
with changing health conditions or treatment needs, tend to reveal their health status. Second, they
∗ Corresponding author (youngdoo@dongguk.edu)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

