Learning Counterfactual Outcomes
Under Rank Preservation
Peng Wu1 , Haoxuan Li2,3 , Chunyuan Zheng2 , Yan Zeng1 ,
Jiawei Chen4 , Yang Liu5 , Ruocheng Guo6∗, Kun Zhang3,7
1

Beijing Technology and Business University 2 Peking University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Zhejiang University 5 University of California, Santa Cruz 6 Intuit AI Research
7
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Counterfactual inference aims to estimate the counterfactual outcome at the individual level given knowledge of an observed treatment and the factual outcome,
with broad applications in fields such as epidemiology, econometrics, and management science. Previous methods rely on a known structural causal model (SCM)
or assume the homogeneity of the exogenous variable and strict monotonicity
between the outcome and exogenous variable. In this paper, we propose a principled approach for identifying and estimating the counterfactual outcome. We
first introduce a simple and intuitive rank preservation assumption to identify the
counterfactual outcome without relying on a known structural causal model. Building on this, we propose a novel ideal loss for theoretically unbiased learning of
the counterfactual outcome and further develop a kernel-based estimator for its
empirical estimation. Our theoretical analysis shows that the rank preservation
assumption is not stronger than the homogeneity and strict monotonicity assumptions, and shows that the proposed ideal loss is convex, and the proposed estimator
is unbiased. Extensive semi-synthetic and real-world experiments are conducted to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Understanding causal relationships is a fundamental goal across various domains, such as epidemiology [1], econometrics [2], and management science [3]. Pearl and Mackenzie [4] define the
three-layer causal hierarchy—association, intervention, and counterfactuals—to distinguish three
types of queries with increasing complexity and difficulty [5]. Counterfactual inference, the most
challenging level, aims to explore the impact of a treatment on an outcome given knowledge about a
different observed treatment and the factual outcome. For example, given a patient who has not taken
medication before and now suffers from a headache, we want to know whether the headache would
have occurred if the patient had taken the medication initially. Answering such counterfactual queries
can provide valuable instructions in scenarios such as credit assignment [6], root-causal analysis [7],
attribution [8, 9, 10, 11], as well as fair and safe decision-making [12, 13, 14, 15, 16].
Different from interventional queries, which are prospective and estimate the counterfactual outcome in a hypothetical world via only the observations obtained before treatment (as pre-treatment
variables), counterfactual inference is retrospective and further incorporates the factual outcome (as
a post-treatment variable) in the observed world. This inherent conflict between the hypothetical
∗

Work done while at ByteDance Research, rguo.asu@gmail.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

