Estimation of Treatment Effects in Extreme and
Unobserved Data
Jiyuan Tan∗
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
jiyuantan@stanford.edu
Jose Blanchet †
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu
Vasilis Syrgkanis‡
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
vsyrgk@stanford.edu

Abstract
Causal effect estimation seeks to determine the impact of an intervention from
observational data. However, the existing causal inference literature primarily
addresses treatment effects on frequently occurring events. But what if we are
interested in estimating the effects of a policy intervention whose benefits, while
potentially important, can only be observed and measured in rare yet impactful
events, such as extreme climate events? The standard causal inference methodology
is not designed for this type of inference since the events of interest may be scarce
in the observed data and some degree of extrapolation is necessary. Extreme Value
Theory (EVT) provides methodologies for analyzing statistical phenomena in such
extreme regimes. We introduce a novel framework for assessing treatment effects
in extreme data to capture the causal effect at the occurrence of rare events of
interest. In particular, we employ the theory of multivariate regular variation to
model extremities. We develop a consistent estimator for extreme treatment effects
and present a rigorous non-asymptotic analysis of its performance. We illustrate
the performance of our estimator using both synthetic and semi-synthetic data.

1

Introduction

We are interested in studying the effect of treatment e.g., different policies and drugs, on rare yet
impactful events such as large wildfires, hurricanes, tsunamis and climate change. These kinds of
events happen at an extremely low frequency, but they can cause considerable damage to properties
and pose serious threats to people’s lives. For instance, we may want to know the effect of more
∗

Jiyuan Tan was partially supported by NSF Award IIS-2337916.
Jose Blanchet gratefully acknowledges support from DoD through the grants Air Force Office of Scientific
Research under award number FA9550-20-1-0397 and ONR 1398311, also support from NSF via grants 2229012,
2312204, 2403007 is gratefully acknowledged.
‡
Vasilis Syrgkanis was supported by NSF Award IIS-2337916.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

