Self-alignment of Large Video Language Models with
Refined Regularized Preference Optimization

Pritam Sarkar
Queen’s University, Canada and Vector Institute
pritam.sarkar@queensu.ca

Website

Code

Ali Etemad
Queen’s University, Canada
ali.etemad@queensu.ca

Models

Abstract
Despite recent advances in Large Video Language Models (LVLMs), they still
struggle with fine-grained temporal understanding, hallucinate, and often make
simple mistakes on even simple video question-answering tasks, all of which pose
significant challenges to their safe and reliable deployment in real-world applications. To address these limitations, we propose a self-alignment framework
that enables LVLMs to learn from their own errors. Our proposed framework
first obtains a training set of preferred and non-preferred response pairs, where
non-preferred responses are generated by incorporating common error patterns that
often occur due to inadequate spatio-temporal understanding, spurious correlations
between co-occurring concepts, and over-reliance on linguistic cues while neglecting the vision modality, among others. To facilitate self-alignment of LVLMs with
the constructed preferred and non-preferred response pairs, we introduce Refined
Regularized Preference Optimization (RRPO), a novel preference optimization
method that utilizes sub-sequence-level refined rewards and token-wise KL regularization to address the limitations of Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). We
demonstrate that RRPO achieves more precise alignment and more stable training
compared to DPO. Our experiments and analysis validate the effectiveness of our
approach across diverse video tasks, including video hallucination, short- and
long-video understanding, and fine-grained temporal reasoning.

1

Introduction
A

B

Despite recent progress in Large Video
Language Models (LVLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], these
models continue to face limitations in finegrained temporal understanding [16, 17,
18], demonstrate a propensity for hallucination [19, 20], struggle with long-video
understanding [21, 22, 23, 24, 25], and
frequently make naive mistakes in shortvideo question-answering tasks [16, 17,
18]. Please see Figure 1 for a number of examples. These shortcomings severely limit Figure 1: Examples of failure cases in simple video
their safe and reliable deployment in real- understanding tasks by state-of-the-art LVLMs, and imworld applications. The underlying causes provements observed after self-alignment with RRPO.
Question: What's the right option for how the scenes in the video change? Options: ...
LongVU: (A) From the elevator to the secretary's office

Question: Is the adult ahead of the aircraft in the video?
LLaVA-Video: Yes

LongVU+RRPO: (B) From the secretary's office to the elevator

LLaVA-Video+RRPO: No

C

D

Question: Is there a person in black suit in the video?
VideoChat2: No

Question: Write a one-sentence video caption.
LongVU: A man putting on his jacket and then jumping up to grab the bar.

VideoChat2+RRPO: Yes

LongVU+RRPO: A man taking off his jacket and then jumping up to grab the bar.

E

Question: Why did the cartoon cat's body become flat like a pancake? Options: ...
LongVU: (D) It was flattened by a stick
LongVU+RRPO: (C) It hit the wall

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

