DynaPhArM: Adaptive and Physics-Constrained
Modeling for Target-Drug Complexes with
Drug-Specific Adaptations
Diya Zhang1 , Mengwei Sun1 , Xingdan Wang1 , Cheng Liang2∗
Qiaozhen Meng3∗, Shiqiang Ma4∗, Fei Guo1∗
1

3

Central South University 2 Shandong Normal University
Xiangtan University 4 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{diya.zhang, 234711070, 244711083, guofei}@csu.edu.cn
ALCS417@sdnu.edu.cn
qiaozhenm@xtu.edu.cn
sq.ma@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Accurately modeling the target-drug complex at atom level presents a significant
challenge in the computer-aided drug design. Traditional methods that rely solely
on rigid transformations often fail to capture the adaptive interactions between
targets and drugs, particularly during substantial conformational changes in targets
upon ligand binding, which becomes especially critical when learning target-drug
interactions in drug design. Accurately modeling these changes is crucial for
understanding target-drug interactions and improving drug efficacy. To address
these challenges, we introduce DynaPhArM, an SE(3)-Equivariant Transformer
model specifically designed to capture adaptive alterations occurring within targetdrug interactions. DynaPhArM utilizes the cooperative scalar-vector representation,
drug-specific embeddings, and a diffusion process to effectively model the evolving
dynamics of interactions between targets and drugs. Furthermore, we integrate
physical information and energetic principles that maintain essential geometric
constraints, such as bond lengths, bond angles, van der Waals forces (vdW), within
a multi-task learning (MTL) framework to enhance accuracy. Experimental results
demonstrate that DynaPhArM achieves state-of-the-art performance with an overall
root mean square deviation (RMSD) of 2.01 Å and a sc-RMSD of 0.29 Å while
exhibiting higher success rates compared to existing methodologies. Additionally,
DynaPhArM shows promise in enhancing drug specificity, thereby simulating how
targets adapt to various drugs through precise modeling of atomic-level interactions
and conformational flexibility.

1

Introduction

Accurate modeling of the 3D structures of target-drug complexes provides essential insights into the
molecular binding modes and interaction mechanisms between drugs and their target proteins [1, 2].
Furthermore, it enhances our understanding of inter-individual variability in drug metabolism and
pharmacodynamic responses. The insights gained from simulating target-drug interactions establish
a robust theoretical foundation for the development of personalized therapeutic strategies, thereby
improving drug selectivity and specificity while minimizing adverse effects [3].
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

