On the Robustness of Verbal Confidence of LLMs in
Adversarial Attacks
Stephen Obadinma, Xiaodan Zhu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Ingenuity Labs Research Institute, Queen’s University
{16sco, xiaodan.zhu}@queensu.ca

Abstract
Robust verbal confidence generated by large language models (LLMs) is crucial
for the deployment of LLMs to help ensure transparency, trust, and safety in many
applications, including those involving human-AI interactions. In this paper, we
present the first comprehensive study on the robustness of verbal confidence under
adversarial attacks. We introduce attack frameworks targeting verbal confidence
scores through both perturbation and jailbreak-based methods, and demonstrate that
these attacks can significantly impair verbal confidence estimates and lead to frequent answer changes. We examine a variety of prompting strategies, model sizes,
and application domains, revealing that current verbal confidence is vulnerable and
that commonly used defence techniques are largely ineffective or counterproductive. Our findings underscore the need to design robust mechanisms for confidence
expression in LLMs, as even subtle semantic-preserving modifications can lead to
misleading confidence in responses.

1

Introduction

With the unprecedented advancement of large language models (LLMs) [1, 45, 49] and their
widespread deployment in real-world systems, the robustness in acquiring LLMs’ confidence is
crucial for a wide range of applications [8, 16, 70, 75] including high-stakes tasks [48, 71]. For
human beings, the expression of epistemic uncertainty using natural language is an inherent ability.
As the intelligence of AI systems advances rapidly, we envision in the future it will be important for
AI systems to express their confidence verbally and accurately to produce seamless interactions in
human-AI collaborations.
The ability of LLMs to verbally convey their confidence [17], referred to as verbal confidence in
this paper, is not only important for applications, but also an indicator of the intelligence of LLMs.
Ensuring accurate and robust verbal confidence also underlies the objective of aligning AI models’
core values with those of humans, such as honesty [37, 73], which could be critical to avoiding
mistrust [11, 57, 76] and maintaining future AI to be safe.
Many state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLMs do not allow direct access to model information which remains
an essential limitation for confidence estimation [71, 75]. Even if they are available, logit-based
confidences centered on attaining tokens probabilities and the aggregation of such scores may not
reflect the true model confidence on the overall answer. Verbal confidence encourages AI systems to
express their estimation of uncertainty and has attracted a considerable amount of recent research,
which examine the mechanism and impact of LLMs’ verbal confidence [16, 23, 33, 38, 44, 55, 62, 63,
70, 77], including the influence and implications on trustworthiness and transparency [27]. Numerous
real-world industry systems have started to utilize verbal confidence [8, 42, 75], motivating the
analysis of LLMs’ behaviour on this front as it is key for their successful operation.
Our work presents the first comprehensive study on the robustness of verbal confidence under
adversarial attacks and addresses the basic question: how robust is the verbal confidence of existing
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

