The Indra Representation Hypothesis for
Multimodal Alignment

Jianglin Lu1∗ Hailing Wang1∗ Kuo Yang1 Yitian Zhang1 Simon Jenni3 Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University
3
Adobe Research

Abstract
Recent studies have uncovered an interesting phenomenon: unimodal foundation
models tend to learn convergent representations, regardless of differences in architecture, training objectives, or data modalities. However, these representations are
essentially internal abstractions of samples that characterize samples independently,
leading to limited expressiveness. In this paper, we propose The Indra Representation Hypothesis, inspired by the philosophical metaphor of Indra’s Net. We argue
that representations from unimodal foundation models are converging to implicitly
reflect a shared relational structure underlying reality, akin to the relational ontology of Indra’s Net. We formalize this hypothesis using the V-enriched Yoneda
embedding from category theory, defining the Indra representation as a relational
profile of each sample with respect to others. This formulation is shown to be
unique, complete, and structure-preserving under a given cost function. We instantiate the Indra representation using angular distance and evaluate it in cross-model
and cross-modal scenarios involving vision, language, and audio. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Indra representations consistently enhance robustness and
alignment across architectures and modalities, providing a theoretically grounded
and practical framework for training-free alignment of unimodal foundation models.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Jianglin954/Indra.

1

Introduction

Through large-scale pretraining, foundation models have emerged as a transformative paradigm in
artificial general intelligence, demonstrating impressive progress across diverse domains, such as
natural language processing [11, 25, 46], computer vision [47, 77, 61, 12], and speech processing
[66, 2]. These unimodal models are typically trained on web-scale datasets and acquire generalized
representations that can be adapted to a broad range of downstream tasks. The representative models,
such as BERT [11] for language, ViT [12] for vision, and Wav2Vec [66] for audio, have demonstrated
promising performance within their respective domains.
Since real-world information is inherently multimodal (text, images, and audio frequently co-occur
and complement each other), relying on a single modality for understanding is typically insufficient.
To extend unimodal foundation models for cross-modal tasks, a growing body of research has
exploited strong unimodal encoders as the core components to build multimodal systems [62, 42, 63].
They assume that unimodal models are able to provide specialized, high-quality, and high-level
representations for each individual modality, which can then be aligned, fused, or bridged to enable
multimodal interactions [41, 45]. A common strategy to achieve multimodal understanding is to align
unimodal outputs in a shared representation space through cross-modal objectives [62, 41, 45, 55].
∗

Equal Contribution. Corresponding author: JianglinLu@outlook.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

