Selftok-Zero: Reinforcement Learning for Visual
Generation via Discrete and Autoregressive Visual
Tokens
Bohan Wang2*
1

Mingze Zhou1,2*‡ Zhongqi Yue3* Wang Lin1 Kaihang Pan1
Wentao Hu3 Wei Zhao2 Hanwang Zhang2†

Liyu Jia3

Huawei Central Media Technology Institute 3 Nanyang Technological University
{mingze, linwanglw, kaihangpan}@zju.edu.cn
{liyu002, wentao002}@e.ntu.edu.sg bohan.wang97@gmail.com
{zhaowei82, zhanghanwang}@huawei.com

Zhejiang University

2

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become an indispensable post-training step for
unlocking the full potential of Large Language Models (LLMs). Its core motivation
is to incentivize the model’s inference trajectory via a reward model, effectively
balancing the exploration–exploitation trade-off in scenarios where collecting exhaustive input–output ground-truth pairs is infeasible. This motivation naturally
extends to visual generation, where perfect alignment between an image and a
textual prompt is inherently ambiguous and often unattainable. However, existing visual generative models are not yet ready for RL due to the following two
fundamental drawbacks that undermine the foundations of RL:
• For diffusion-based models, the actual generation trajectories of sampled images
cannot be reliably rewarded, as diffusion inversion is notoriously difficult.
• For autoregressive (AR) models, we show that the widely used spatial visual
tokens do not satisfy the Bellman equation and thus violate the policy improvement
theorem of RL.
To this end, we propose to use Selftok (Self-consistency Tokenizer), which represents each image as a sequential 1D stream of discrete, autoregressive tokens.
Together with language, we train a pure AR vision-language model (VLM) for visual generation. Impressively, without using any text-image training pairs, a simple
policy gradient algorithm applied to Selftok tokens significantly boosts visual generation performance, surpassing existing models by a large margin. Implementation
details are provided in the Appendix.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in visual generative models have been driven by large-scale training on paired
text-image datasets [57, 13]. To produce high-fidelity image x given textual prompt y, these models
decompose the complex image generation process into a sequence of simpler steps. In diffusionbased models [36, 15], this decomposition unfolds over continuous time-steps t ∈ [0, 1] by the
reverse diffusion process: starting from Gaussian noise x0 ∈ N (0, 1) with t = 0, the model
iteratively denoises each xt to form the trajectory x0 ⇝ x1 , where x1 = x. In autoregressive
(AR) models [65, 74], x is represented as a sequence of discrete visual tokens VK = [v1 , . . . , vK ]
(reasons not considering continuous visual tokens in this work included in Appendix A.1), and image
generation proceeds by sequentially predicting each token given previous ones. In both cases, models
*

Equal Contribution.

†

Corresponding Author.

‡

Research done during internship at Huawei.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

