Signal and Noise: A Framework for Reducing
Uncertainty in Language Model Evaluation

David Heinemanµ Valentin Hofmannµσ Ian Magnussonµσ Yuling Guµ
Noah A. Smithµσ Hannaneh Hajishirziµσ Kyle Loµ Jesse Dodgeµ
σ

µ
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
contact: davidh@allenai.org

Abstract
Developing large language models is expensive and involves making decisions with
small experiments, typically by evaluating on large, multi-task evaluation suites. In
this work, we analyze specific properties which make a benchmark more reliable
for such decisions, and interventions to design higher-quality evaluation benchmarks. We introduce two key metrics that show differences in current benchmarks:
signal, a benchmark’s ability to separate better models from worse models, and
noise, a benchmark’s sensitivity to random variability between training steps. We
demonstrate that benchmarks with a better signal-to-noise ratio are more reliable
when making decisions at small scale, and those with less noise have lower scaling
law prediction error. These results suggest that improving signal or noise will
lead to more useful benchmarks, so we introduce three interventions designed
to directly affect signal or noise. For example, we propose that switching to
a metric that has better signal and noise (e.g., perplexity rather than accuracy)
leads to better reliability and improved scaling law error. We also find that filtering
noisy subtasks, to improve an aggregate signal-to-noise ratio, leads to more
reliable multi-task evaluations. We also find that averaging the output of a model’s
intermediate checkpoints to reduce noise leads to consistent improvements. We
conclude by recommending that those creating new benchmarks, or selecting which
existing benchmarks to use, aim for high signal and low noise. We use 30 benchmarks for these experiments, and 375 open-weight language models from 60M to
32B parameters, resulting in a new, publicly available dataset of 900K evaluation
benchmark results, totaling 200M instances.
allenai/signal-and-noise

1

datasets/allenai/signal-and-noise

Introduction

Language model development is expensive. During the development process, researchers need to
make decisions such as what architecture to use, what training methods to employ, and what data to
train on. These decisions rely on measuring phenomena at smaller, more economical scales, then
hoping the trends measured hold for large scale models. This paradigm exists across the research
community; many papers experiment with small baselines then scale up the best-performing model
[31, 17, 38, inter alia], and there has been extensive research on using scaling laws to predict the
performance of larger models [9, 19, inter alia]. While there is a large and ever-growing number
of benchmarks, prior work has shown these scaling procedures only works for some benchmarks
and not others [66, 56, 15, 50]. This poses a significant challenge because, as we develop more
general-purpose language models, developers need to be evaluating on even more diverse benchmarks,
some of which may not be well-suited for this critical approach. We need a deeper understanding
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

