VimoRAG: Video-based Retrieval-augmented
3D Motion Generation for Motion Language Models

Haidong Xu1 , Guangwei Xu, Zhedong Zheng2 , Xiatian Zhu3 ,
Wei Ji , Xiangtai Li5 , Ruijie Guo, Meishan Zhang1 , Min Zhang1 , Hao Fei6∗
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 University of Macau 3 University of Surrey
4
Nanjing University 5 Nanyang Technological University 6 National University of Singapore
182haidong@gmail.com, haofei7419@gmail.com
4

Abstract
This paper introduces VimoRAG, a novel video-based retrieval-augmented motion
generation framework for motion large language models (LLMs). As motion LLMs
face severe out-of-domain/out-of-vocabulary issues due to limited annotated data,
VimoRAG leverages large-scale in-the-wild video databases to enhance 3D motion
generation by retrieving relevant 2D human motion signals. While video-based
motion RAG is nontrivial, we address two key bottlenecks: (1) developing an
effective motion-centered video retrieval model that distinguishes human poses
and actions, and (2) mitigating the issue of error propagation caused by suboptimal
retrieval results. We design the Gemini Motion Video Retriever mechanism and
the Motion-centric Dual-alignment DPO Trainer, enabling effective retrieval and
generation processes. Experimental results show that VimoRAG significantly boosts
the performance of motion LLMs constrained to text-only input. All the resources
(https://walkermitty.github.io/VimoRAG/) are available.

1

Introduction

Generating diverse and realistic human motions from free-form text prompts has significant practical
applications, including video gaming, robotic assistance, and virtual reality. Previous advancements,
ranging from transformer-based VAEs [1] to recent diffusion-based generative models [2], have
led to an increasingly promising generative performance. With the emergence of LLMs, motionlanguage models (aka. motion LLMs) have been proposed [3, 4]. These unified architectures
not only understand various motions but also support motion generation. To achieve competitive
capabilities, motion LLMs require training on extremely large-scale datasets to ensure sufficient
capacity. Particularly for motion generation, a substantial amount of labeled data (i.e., text-motion
pairs) is essential, without which, models face severe out-of-domain (OOD) and out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) issues, making it difficult to generalize to the vast variety of dynamic human motions.
However, existing datasets of text-motion pairs are severely limited in scale, comprising only approximately 14k samples [5], while the cost of large-scale annotation is prohibitively high. To address this
issue, Zhang et al. introduce ReMoDiffuse [6], a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) method that
retrieves relevant supplementary supervision signals from 3D motion databases. While this method
provides a promising direction to address the scarcity of labeled data, their effectiveness might still
remain constrained by the size of existing 3D motion databases, i.e., totaling only 14k samples from
datasets such as HumanML3D [5].
To address this, this paper explores an innovative RAG paradigm: retrieving information from largerscale in-the-wild videos to supplement abundant motion signals that can enhance motion generation.
Although videos represent a 2D visual modality, intuitively, the 2D human motions depicted in videos
∗

Corresponding Author: Hao Fei

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

