Towards Fully FP8 GEMM LLM Training at Scale

Alejandro Hernández-Cano∗
EPFL
alejandro.hernandezcano@epfl.ch

Dhia Garbaya∗
EPFL
dhia.garbaya@epfl.ch

Imanol Schlag
ETHZ
ischlag@ethz.ch

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Despite the significant potential of FP8 data formats for large language model
(LLM) pre-training, their adoption has been limited due to challenges in maintaining stability at scale. Existing approaches often rely on suboptimal fine-grained
FP8 kernels or fall back to higher-precision matrix multiplications (GEMMs)
in sensitive components, such as attention projections, compromising potential
throughput gains. We introduce a new class of LLM architectures that, for the first
time, support FP8 computation for all GEMMs within transformer blocks during
both forward and backward passes. This enables unprecedented throughput gains,
particularly at scale, while matching the downstream performance of standard
BF16 training. Our architecture design reduces large outlier activations, promoting
stable long-term FP8 training. In addition, we identify key metrics to monitor
low-precision training and predict potential future divergences.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in the training of transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly
advanced the field of language modelling. Scaling up both model size and training data remains
a reliable strategy to enhance their performance [15]. Consequently, state-of-the-art models are
typically trained at scale using extensive datasets [1, 7, 25], requiring substantial computational
resources—often in the order of millions of GPU hours.
Thus, the development of efficient training techniques has become increasingly essential. One of
the main research avenues for efficiency is the use of lower-precision number formats to accelerate
training on appropriate hardware accelerators. Recently, the use of 8-bit floating-point (FP8) formats
has shown promising results [3, 6, 24]. However, the widespread adoption of current approaches
is still limited due to suboptimal throughput benefits. One cause of slowdowns is the use of higher
precision in those General Matrix Multiplications (GEMMs) which are most sensitive, such as
attention score computation, while another issue is the overhead caused by more granular FP8
scaling strategies. One of the key challenges in 8-bit LLM training originates from the relatively
narrow dynamic range offered by FP8 formats and thus higher risk of underflows and overflows,
especially with the prevalence of large outlier features observed in the LLM’s neural activations
during training [4, 30, 9]. We formalize the effect of outliers on quantization later in Appendix C.
To mitigate this issue, modern FP8 training recipes utilise various scaling techniques before casting
from higher-precision formats—typically BF16 [14] for activations—to FP8 formats used in matrix
multiplications. These scaling approaches help maximize the effective use of FP8’s limited dynamic
range, reducing the risk of underflows and overflows.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

