Non-Stationary Lipschitz Bandits

Nicolas Nguyen
University of Tübingen
nicolas.nguyen@uni-tuebingen.de

Solenne Gaucher
École Polytechnique, CMAP
solenne.gaucher@polytechnique.edu

Claire Vernade
University of Tübingen
claire.vernade@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
We study the problem of non-stationary Lipschitz bandits, where the number of
actions is infinite and the reward function, satisfying a Lipschitz assumption, can
change arbitrarily over time. We design an algorithm that adaptively tracks the
recently introduced notion of significant shifts, defined by large deviations of
the cumulative reward function. To detect such reward changes, our algorithm
leverages a hierarchical discretization of the action space. Without requiring any
prior knowledge of the non-stationarity, our algorithm achieves a minimax-optimal
dynamic regret bound of e
O(L̃1/3 T 2/3 ), where L̃ is the number of significant shifts
and T the horizon. This result provides the first optimal guarantee in this setting.

1

Introduction

Many practical applications involve decision-making over a continuous space of actions (or arms)
where the environment evolves over time. For example, in dynamic pricing, the space of possible
prices is inherently continuous, and market dynamics may shift abruptly. In such a setting, it is both
natural and crucial to leverage smoothness in the reward function to generalize across similar actions,
while also remaining adaptive to temporal changes. However, most existing works on non-stationary
bandits focus on discrete action spaces and overlook the structure present in continuous domains.
The non-stationary bandit problem extends the classical stochastic multi-armed bandit setting [Slivkins
et al., 2019, Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020] by allowing the mean reward functions to change over
time. Over the past two decades, several frameworks have been proposed to quantify non-stationarity.
Common approaches quantify the number of changes LT of any arm’s mean reward over T rounds
[Auer et al., 2002b, Garivier and Moulines, 2011], or their total variation VT in the reward functions
[Besbes et al., 2014, Cheung et al., 2019]. Algorithms that are built upon these approaches achieve
√
1/3
dynamic regret bounds of order LT T or VT T 2/3 respectively. Importantly, they all assume prior
knowledge of the degree of non-stationarity LT or VT . It remained an open question whether such
rates could be achieved without knowing LT or VT , until a line of work answered this affirmatively
[Auer et al., 2019a,b, Chen et al., 2019, Wei and Luo, 2021].
Recent works have introduced more refined measures of non-stationarity. In fact, the standard metrics
LT and VT can be overly pessimistic: both of them may be arbitrarily large even when the best arm
remains unchanged. To address this, Abbasi-Yadkori et al. [2023] designed an algorithm √
that tracks
the number of times the best arm changes over T rounds, ST , and showed that it achieves ST T for
the dynamic regret, adaptively1 . The important work of Suk and Kpotufe [2022] proposed a finer
notion of non-stationarity called significant shifts, which identifies only changes that meaningfully
1

In all our work, "adaptively" should be understood the same as "without knowledge of the non-stationarity".

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

