H ETEROGENEOUS S WARMS: Jointly Optimizing Model
Roles and Weights for Multi-LLM Systems

Shangbin Feng1∗ Zifeng Wang2 Palash Goyal2 Yike Wang1 Weijia Shi1
Huang Xia Hamid Palangi2 Luke Zettlemoyer1 Yulia Tsvetkov1 Chen-Yu Lee2 Tomas Pfister2
1
University of Washington 2 Google Cloud AI Research 3 Google
shangbin@cs.washington.edu {zifengw,chenyulee}@google.com
3

Abstract
We propose H ETEROGENEOUS S WARMS, an algorithm to design multi-LLM systems by jointly optimizing model roles and weights. We represent multi-LLM
systems as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) of LLMs with topological message
passing for collaborative generation. Given a pool of LLM experts and a utility
function, H ETEROGENEOUS S WARMS employs two iterative steps: role-step and
weight-step. For role-step, we interpret model roles as learning a DAG that specifies
the flow of inputs and outputs between LLMs. Starting from a swarm of random
continuous adjacency matrices, we decode them into discrete DAGs, call the LLMs
in topological order, evaluate on the utility function (e.g. accuracy on a task), and
optimize the adjacency matrices with particle swarm optimization based on the
utility score. For weight-step, we assess the contribution of individual LLMs in
the multi-LLM systems and optimize model weights with swarm intelligence. We
propose JFK-score to quantify the individual contribution of each LLM in the
best-found DAG of the role-step, then optimize model weights with particle swarm
optimization based on the JFK-score. Experiments demonstrate that H ETEROGE NEOUS S WARMS outperforms 17 role- and/or weight-based baselines by 18.5% on
average across 12 tasks. Further analysis reveals that H ETEROGENEOUS S WARMS
discovers multi-LLM systems with heterogeneous model roles and substantial
collaborative gains, and benefits from the diversity of language models.2

1

Introduction

Advancing beyond training a single general-purpose LLM
[6, 87], recent research recognizes the importance of
multi-LLM collaboration and advances multi-LLM systems, where diverse models serve in a collaborative system
to complement each other and expand model capabilities
[58, 79]. Models often have different roles in multi-LLM
collaboration, governing the subtask and functionality of
individual LLMs; adapting the model weights of these
LLMs are also identified as important for models to complement each other. Existing methods to develop multiLLM systems are often fixed-weight and/or fixed-role and
could not flexibly adapt to diverse tasks and contexts.

utility f
LLMs

optimize

optimize

role

weight

input

output

Figure 1: Our objective: given a pool of
LLMs and a task utility function f , discover a multi-LLM system with graphbased model roles and adapted model
weights
tailored to f .
Fixed-weight systems employ static and often black-box
LLMs and contextualize their roles through textual inter∗
2

Work done as a student researcher at Google Cloud AI Research.
Resources available at https://github.com/BunsenFeng/heterogeneous_swarm.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

