M AGNET: A Multi-agent Framework for Finding
Audio-Visual Needles by Reasoning over Multi-Video
Haystacks

Sanjoy Chowdhury1 , Mohamed Elmoghany2 , Yohan Abeysinghe3 , Junjie Fei2 , Sayan Nag4 ,
Salman Khan3 , Mohamed Elhoseiny2 , Dinesh Manocha1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 KAUST 3 MBZUAI 4 University of Toronto
{sanjoyc, dmanocha}@umd.edu
sayan.nag@mail.utoronto.ca
mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa
{yohan.abeysinghe, salman.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae
m.osama.elmoghany@gmail.com

m https://schowdhury671.github.io/magnet_project/

Abstract
Large multimodal models (LMMs) have shown remarkable progress in audiovisual understanding, yet they struggle with real-world scenarios that require
complex reasoning across extensive video collections. Existing benchmarks for
video question answering remain limited in scope, typically involving one clip
per query, which falls short of representing the challenges of large-scale, audiovisual retrieval and reasoning encountered in practical applications. To bridge
this gap, we introduce a novel task named AVHaystacksQA, where the goal is
to identify salient segments across different videos in response to a query and
link them together to generate the most informative answer. To this end, we
present AVHaystacks, an audio-visual benchmark comprising 3100 annotated QA
pairs designed to assess the capabilities of LMMs in multi-video retrieval and
temporal grounding task. Additionally, we propose a model-agnostic, multi-agent
framework M AGNET to address this challenge, achieving up to 89% and 65%
relative improvements over baseline methods on BLEU@4 and GPT evaluation
scores in QA task on our proposed AVHaystacks. To enable robust evaluation of
multi-video retrieval and temporal grounding for optimal response generation, we
introduce two new metrics, S T EM, which captures alignment errors between a
ground truth and a predicted step sequence and MTGS, to facilitate balanced and
interpretable evaluation of segment-level grounding performance.

1

Introduction

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [1–6] have achieved remarkable progress in audio-visual understanding. However, they continue to face significant challenges [7] when it comes to retrieving
and reasoning over large-scale multimedia collections particularly in tasks such as audio-visual
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and multi-video temporal grounding. These limitations hinder
their effectiveness in real-world applications, such as querying personal video archives, how-to
repositories, or educational video libraries, where complex queries often require joint processing of
both audio and visual modalities across multiple video segments.
Despite their growing capabilities, to the best of our knowledge, no existing task or benchmark
systematically evaluates LMMs’ ability to identify and integrate salient segments from multiple
videos to construct informative, grounded responses. As a result, there remains a gap in properly
assessing their performance on large-scale audio-visual retrieval and reasoning tasks. Existing
benchmarks [8–11] are generally limited in scope typically associating each question with only a
single short clip, as shown in Tab. 1. However, real-world information-seeking scenarios often
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

