STree: Speculative Tree Decoding
for Hybrid State-Space Models

Yangchao Wu1∗

Zongyue Qin1
1

Alex Wong2
2

UCLA

Stefano Soatto1

Yale University

Abstract
Speculative decoding is a technique to leverage hardware concurrency in order to
enable multiple steps of token generation in a single forward pass, thus improving
the efficiency of large-scale autoregressive (AR) Transformer models. State-space
models (SSMs) are already more efficient than AR Transformers, since their state
summarizes all past data with no need to cache or re-process tokens in the sliding
window context. However, their state can also comprise thousands of tokens; so,
speculative decoding has recently been extended to SSMs. Existing approaches,
however, do not leverage the tree-based verification methods, since current SSMs
lack the means to compute a token tree efficiently. We propose the first scalable
algorithm to perform tree-based speculative decoding in state-space models (SSMs)
and hybrid architectures of SSMs and Transformer layers. We exploit the structure
of accumulated state transition matrices to facilitate tree-based speculative decoding
with minimal overhead relative to current SSM implementations. Along with the
algorithm, we describe a hardware-aware implementation that improves naive
application of AR Transformer tree-based speculative decoding methods to SSMs.
Furthermore, we outperform vanilla speculative decoding with SSMs even with a
baseline drafting model and tree structure on three different benchmarks, opening
up opportunities for further speed up with SSM and hybrid model inference. Code
can be find at: https://github.com/wyc1997/stree.

1

Introduction

Recursive sequence models, such as autoregressive (AR) Transformers, produce a single token with
each forward pass. Speculative decoding is a technique to make this process more efficient by
leveraging a smaller ‘draft model’ to generate multiple tokens, and a separate ‘verifier model’ to
validate the proposed drafts [13]. The efficiency stems from exploiting the concurrency of parallel
computer hardware to verify multiple tokens in a single model call, while ensuring that the accepted
drafts are identical to those that would have been generated by repeated calls to the original model.
AR Transformers leverage a sliding window of input tokens (context) as their ‘state’, which is ideal
for speculative decoding since their context can be easily edited to remove unverified tokens.
On the other hand, State-Space Models (SSMs) maintain an explicit Markov state that is designed
and trained to be a sufficient statistic of the past for the purpose of predicting one-step ahead [17].
They are not naturally suited for speculative decoding, since the past states are discarded and the
verifier would need to backtrack each speculated state, hampering the efficiency of the whole process.
Recently, hardware-aware efficient methods for speculative decoding in SSMs have been proposed
[24, 25], but they do not leverage tree-based verification that drives the most efficient methods for
∗

Correspondence to wuyangchao1997@g.ucla.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

