A Difference-of-Convex Functions Approach to
Energy-Based Iterative Reasoning

Daniel Tschernutter
Infermedica
Graz, Austria
daniel.tschernutter@infermedica.com

David Diego-Castro
Infermedica
Gothenburg, Sweden
david.diego-castro@infermedica.com

Maciej Kasiński
Infermedica
Wrocław, Poland
maciej.kasinski@infermedica.com

Abstract
While energy-based models have recently proven to be a powerful framework for
learning to reason with neural networks, their practical application is still limited by computational cost. That is, existing methods for energy-based iterative
reasoning suffer from computational bottlenecks by relying on expensive optimization routines during training and especially during inference. Furthermore, these
routines may not always converge to minimal energy states, potentially leading
to suboptimal reasoning. To address these limitations, we propose a novel and
efficient algorithm for energy-based iterative reasoning based on a difference-ofconvex (DC) functions approach. Our algorithm achieves a significant speedup
compared to prior methods while offering theoretical convergence guarantees ensuring locally minimal energy states. In addition, we achieve state-of-the-art or
superior performance on continuous reasoning tasks, as demonstrated by our experiments on multiple benchmark datasets from continuous algorithmic reasoning. As
such, our method offers a leap in computational efficiency, enabling faster inference
with theoretical guarantees, and hence unlocking the potential of energy-based
models for iterative reasoning applications.

1

Introduction

The human thinking process is described as operating through two distinct modes [31]: the rapid,
automatic associations of System 1, and the slower, more controlled symbolic reasoning of System
2. Neural networks have demonstrated remarkable ability to perform System-1-like tasks within
well-defined and specific environments. However, when faced with slightly different or harder tasks,
neural networks often fail while humans engage in System 2 processes. The latter allows for iterative
reasoning about new observations drawing upon prior experience and shared abstractions which
remains difficult even for extremely large neural network architectures such as LLMs [35, 51].
There is a variety of recent work that tries to formalize reasoning within a neural network approach,
see next section. In this work, we build upon the state-of-the-art in [20, 21] formalizing iterative
reasoning as an energy minimization problem, i.e.,
argmin Eθ (x, y)
x

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

(1)

