Scalable Evaluation and Neural Models
for Compositional Generalization

Giacomo Camposampiero
IBM Research – Zurich, ETH Zurich

Pietro Barbiero
IBM Research – Zurich

giacomo.camposampiero1@ibm.com

pietro.barbiero@ibm.com

Michael Hersche
IBM Research – Zurich

Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zurich

Abbas Rahimi
IBM Research – Zurich

michael.hersche@ibm.com

wattenhofer@ethz.ch

abr@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract
Compositional generalization—a key open challenge in modern machine learning—
requires models to predict unknown combinations of known concepts. However,
assessing compositional generalization remains a fundamental challenge due to the
lack of standardized evaluation protocols and the limitations of current benchmarks,
which often favor efficiency over rigor. At the same time, general-purpose vision
architectures lack the necessary inductive biases, and existing approaches to endow
them compromise scalability. As a remedy, this paper introduces: 1) a rigorous
evaluation framework that unifies and extends previous approaches while reducing
computational requirements from combinatorial to constant; 2) an extensive and
modern evaluation on the status of compositional generalization in supervised
vision backbones, training more than 5000 models; 3) Attribute Invariant Networks,
a class of models establishing a new Pareto frontier in compositional generalization,
achieving a 23.43% accuracy improvement over baselines while reducing parameter
overhead from 600% to 16% compared to fully disentangled counterparts. Our
code is available at github.com/IBM/scalable-compositional-generalization.

1

Introduction

Robustness to distributional shifts is a long-standing research topic in machine learning, spanning
areas such as domain adaptation [1, 2], transfer learning [3], and out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization [4]. In this work, we focus on a specific type of OOD generalization, that is, compositional
generalization. Informally, this type of generalization requires the model to generalize to unknown
combinations of known concepts. For instance, given a dataset of pairs (input, {concepts labels}),
a model trained on the samples {( , {apple, yellow}), ( , {banana, green})} should be able to
correctly predict {apple, green} for the test input image . Achieving and even assessing this type
of generalization remains, however, challenging. To date, a standardized evaluation methodology for
assessing compositional generalization has not been established. This renders the evaluation of existing results hard and prevents a consistent quantification of progress in the field. Furthermore, current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) evaluation frameworks often trade off efficiency with shallowness, usually
testing compositional generalization under weaker constraints to avoid a combinatorial complexity
explosion in the number of target attributes [5, 6]. On the other hand, general-purpose SOTA vision
architectures typically lack inductive biases for compositionality and disentanglement, resulting in
limited generalization in both supervised and unsupervised settings [5, 7, 8]. Existing methods for
incorporating such biases often rely on factorizing the prediction task across multiple specialized
models [9], which significantly reduces scalability and limits practicality even in simple domains.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

