Enhancing Privacy in Multimodal Federated Learning
with Information Theory

Tianzhe Xiao1 , Yichen Li1 , Yining Qi1 , Yi Liu2 , Wei Wang2 ,
Haozhao Wang1∗ , Yi Wang2 , Ruixuan Li1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China 2 Chongqing Ant Consumer Finance Co., Ltd, Ant Group, Chongqing, China
{d202381469, ycli0204, qiyining, hz_wang, rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal federated learning (MMFL) has gained increasing popularity due
to its ability to leverage the correlation between various modalities, meanwhile
preserving data privacy for different clients. However, recent studies show that
correlation between modalities increase the vulnerability of federated learning
against Gradient Inversion Attack (GIA). The complicated situation of MMFL
privacy preserving can be summarized as follows: 1) different modality transmits
different amounts of information, thus requires various protection strength; 2)
correlation between modalities should be taken into account. This paper introduces
an information theory perspective to analyze the leaked privacy in process of
MMFL, and tries to propose a more reasonable protection method Sec-MMFL
based on assessing different information leakage possibilities of each modality by
conditional mutual information and adjust the corresponding protection strength.
Moreover, we use mutual information to reduce the cross-modality information
leakage in MMFL. Experiments have proven that our method can bring more
balanced and comprehensive protection at an acceptable cost.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a fundamental paradigm that enables collaborative model
training among multiple parties via parameter aggregation without sharing private datasets [31,
27, 14]. Owing to its privacy-preserving and communication-efficient nature, FL has been widely
deployed in diverse applications, including smart healthcare [1, 38] , financial analysis [50, 30, 5]
and recommendation system[22]. Some of the major research directions in FL also include efficient
aggregation[45], communication compression[20, 19, 18], continual learning[24, 25, 21, 23], and
knowledge distillation[44].
However, FL is not immune to security threats. A notable attack, Gradient Inversion Attack (GIA),
aims to infer sensitive information from the shared model updates (gradients) [26]. Malicious
participants can exploit this to reconstruct private data or infer its properties, thereby breaching local
privacy [59, 13, 56].
To counter this risk, several defense methods have been proposed in FL [46, 15]. LDP-Fed [43]
optimizes local differential privacy (LDP) for FL, ensuring a lightweight and quantifiable privacy
measure. In [7], regularization and sparsification techniques are employed to alleviate performance
degradation with user-level DP. FedDPA [51] explores differential privacy in personalized FL through
dynamic Fisher personalization and adaptive constraints, while PrivateRec [28] focuses on federated
recommendation, aiming to improve model utility under DP guarantees.
Previous FL approaches are mainly trained using uni-modal data, yet real-world data is often multimodal. For example, videos typically come with audio tracks and text subtitles, and internet content
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

