A TRIANGLE Enables Multimodal Alignment
Beyond Cosine Similarity

Giordano Cicchetti, Eleonora Grassucci, Danilo Comminiello
Department of Information Engineering, Electronics, and Telecommunications
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
{name.surname}@uniroma1.it

Abstract
Multimodal learning plays a pivotal role in advancing artificial intelligence systems
by incorporating information from multiple modalities to build a more comprehensive representation. Despite its importance, current state-of-the-art models
still suffer from severe limitations that prevent the successful development of a
fully multimodal model. Such methods may not provide indicators that all the
involved modalities are effectively aligned. As a result, some modalities may not
be aligned, undermining the effectiveness of the model in downstream tasks where
multiple modalities should provide additional information that the model fails to
exploit. In this paper, we present TRIANGLE: TRI-modAl Neural Geometric
LEarning, the novel proposed similarity measure that is directly computed in the
higher-dimensional space spanned by the modality embeddings. TRIANGLE
improves the joint alignment of three modalities via a triangle-area similarity,
avoiding additional fusion layers or pairwise similarities. When incorporated in
contrastive losses replacing cosine similarity, TRIANGLE significantly boosts the
performance of multimodal modeling, while yielding interpretable alignment rationales. Extensive evaluation in three-modal tasks such as video-text and audio-text
retrieval or audio-video classification, demonstrates that TRIANGLE achieves
state-of-the-art results across different datasets improving the performance of
cosine-based methods up to 9 points of Recall@1. Code and checkpoints available
at https://github.com/ispamm/TRIANGLE/.

1

Introduction

Humans perceive reality as a mixture of signals coming from different modalities registered through
diverse senses, such as sounds perceived by the ears or vision by the eyes, and process these
multimodal inputs to understand the scene. In the last few years, foundational models have attempted
to emulate this understanding system by aligning pairs of modalities using contrastive learning
approaches. The first valuable contribution in this sense, CLIP Radford et al. (2021), aligns image
and textual latent representation with a contrastive loss based on the cosine similarity between the
two vectors. CLIP established the de-facto receipt for aligning multimodal latent features and the
subsequent methods, such as CLAP for audio-text alignment Elizalde et al. (2023), have followed the
same scheme.
Later, several works focused on extending the CLIP approach to more than two modalities, incorporating audio, depth, or other modalities to build a more representative embedding space Girdhar et al.
(2023); Zhu et al. (2024); Ruan et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2024). All these methods still rely on the
pairwise cosine similarity between modalities. Specifically, they select an anchor modality, which
may be image Girdhar et al. (2023), audio Ruan et al. (2023), or language Zhu et al. (2024), and
then align the embeddings of all the other modalities one-by-one to the anchor embedding. However,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

