Towards Robust Pseudo-Label Learning in
Semantic Segmentation: An Encoding Perspective

Wangkai Li1 , Rui Sun1 , Zhaoyang Li1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
{lwklwk, issunrui, lizhaoyang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pseudo-label learning is widely used in semantic segmentation, particularly in
label-scarce scenarios such as unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) and semisupervised learning (SSL). Despite its success, this paradigm can generate erroneous pseudo-labels, which are further amplified during training due to utilization
of one-hot encoding. To address this issue, we propose ECOCSeg, a novel perspective for segmentation models that utilizes error-correcting output codes (ECOC)
to create a fine-grained encoding for each class. ECOCSeg offers several advantages. First, an ECOC-based classifier is introduced, enabling model to disentangle
classes into attributes and handle partial inaccurate bits, improving stability and
generalization in pseudo-label learning. Second, a bit-level label denoising mechanism is developed to generate higher-quality pseudo-labels, providing adequate
and robust supervision for unlabeled images. ECOCSeg can be easily integrated
with existing methods and consistently demonstrates significant improvements on
multiple UDA and SSL benchmarks across different segmentation architectures.
Code is available at https://github.com/Woof6/ECOCSeg.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation has seen significant improvements with recent advances in deep neural
networks[55, 9, 17, 16]. However, a major challenge in semantic segmentation is the requirement of
a large volume of fine-grained pixel-level labels, which can be time-consuming and labor-intensive to
obtain [19]. Due to the readily available nature of image data, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
and semi-supervised learning (SSL) have been introduced in semantic segmentation to handle the
label-scarce scenarios. UDA involves learning from synthetic labeled data and transferring knowledge
to real unlabeled target domains, while SSL utilizes a tiny portion of annotated data to generalize on
unseen data. As a result, UDA and SSL are gaining significant attention as promising approaches to
reduce the reliance on extensive annotations in semantic segmentation.
In both UDA and SSL settings, models are trained using annotated and unlabeled data simultaneously.
Existing mainstream methods introduce common paradigms, which can be grouped into the selftraining pipeline and the consistency regularization framework. Specifically, self-training methods
[79, 41] leverage a temporally smoothed exponential moving average (EMA) model as a teacher to
generate stable pseudo labels for unlabeled data. On the other hand, the consistency regularization
methods [72, 3] encourage the model to produce consistent predictions for the same sample across
different perturbation views. These paradigms can be summarized as pseudo-label learning, where
the network’s predictions are used as supervision for unlabeled data.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

