Shortcut Features as Top Eigenfunctions of NTK:
A Linear Neural Network Case and More
Jinwoo Lim
Seoul National University
jinwoolim8180@snu.ac.kr

Suhyun Kim∗
Kyung Hee University
dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com

Soo-Mook Moon∗
Seoul National University
smoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
One of the chronic problems of deep-learning models is shortcut learning. In a
case where the majority of training data are dominated by a certain feature, neural
networks prefer to learn such a feature even if the feature is not generalizable
outside the training set. Based on the framework of Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK),
we analyzed the case of linear neural networks to derive some important properties
of shortcut learning. We defined a “feature” of a neural network as an eigenfunction
of NTK. Then, we found that shortcut features correspond to features with larger
eigenvalues when the shortcuts stem from the imbalanced number of samples in
the clustered distribution. We also showed that the features with larger eigenvalues
still have a large influence on the neural network output even after training, due
to data variances in the clusters. Such a preference for certain features remains
even when a margin of a neural network output is controlled, which shows that
the max-margin bias is not the only major reason for shortcut learning. These
properties of linear neural networks are empirically extended for more complex
neural networks as a two-layer fully-connected ReLU network and a ResNet-18.

1

Introduction

Based on various optimization algorithms, deep neural networks can learn rich features from data
samples. Due to a success in advance of neural network architectures, neural networks can perform
complex tasks as natural language processing. However, when neural networks are optimized with
gradient-descent-based methods, there often exists a gap between a feature that is desired to learn
and a feature that neural networks rely on. Rather than core features which can predict labels with
a high accuracy, neural networks often rely on certain features called shortcut features. Shortcut
features or biased attributes are features that show a strong but non-generalizable correlation to the
ground-truth labels [8, 17]. Neural networks that learned shortcut features show minimum loss for
the training set, but fail for data outside the training set. Such a phenomenon frequently occurs when
neural networks are trained on a biased dataset, of which the majority of training data samples are
influenced by the biased attributes [28]. This problem of shortcut learning is one of the most chronic
problems of deep-learning models.
In this paper, we study the case where shortcut learning occurs due to the dominance of biased
attributes on the majority of samples. We analyze the cause and effect of shortcut learning upon the
framework of Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory. We decompose the neural network outputs into
eigenfunctions of NTK and measure the influence of each eigenfunction on neural network outputs.
We study a simple case: training a linear neural network on a dataset of an almost-separable Gaussian
mixture model, of which the majority of the samples are clustered by a certain feature. Under this
assumption, we find interesting properties of shortcut learning.
∗

co-corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

