Visual Anagrams Reveal Hidden Differences in
Holistic Shape Processing Across Vision Models

Fenil R. Doshi
Dept. of Psychology
& Kempner Institute
Harvard University
fenil_doshi@fas.harvard.edu
Talia Konkle
Dept. of Psychology
& Kempner Institute
Harvard University
talia_konkle@harvard.edu

Thomas Fel
Kempner Institute
Harvard University
tfel@g.harvard.edu

George A. Alvarez
Dept. of Psychology
& Kempner Institute
Harvard University
alvarez@wjh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Humans are able to recognize objects based on both local texture cues and the
configuration of object parts, yet contemporary vision models primarily harvest
local texture cues, yielding brittle, non-compositional features. Work on shape-vstexture bias has pitted shape and texture representations in opposition, measuring
shape relative to texture, ignoring the possibility that models (and humans) can
simultaneously rely on both types of cues, and obscuring the absolute quality of
both types of representation. We therefore recast shape evaluation as a matter of
absolute configural competence, operationalized by the Configural Shape Score
(CSS), which (i) measures the ability to recognize both images in Object-Anagram
pairs that preserve local texture while permuting global part arrangement to depict
different object categories. Across 86 convolutional, transformer, and hybrid
models, CSS (ii) uncovers a broad spectrum of configural sensitivity with fully selfsupervised and language-aligned transformers – exemplified by DINOv2, SigLIP2
and EVA-CLIP – occupying the top end of the CSS spectrum. Mechanistic probes
reveal that (iii) high-CSS networks depend on long-range interactions: radiuscontrolled attention masks abolish performance showing a distinctive U-shaped
integration profile, and representational-similarity analyses expose a mid-depth
transition from local to global coding. A BagNet control, whose receptive fields
straddle patch seams, remains at chance (iv), ruling out any “border-hacking”
strategies. Finally, (v) we show that configural shape score also predicts other shapedependent evals (e.g.,foreground bias, spectral and noise robustness). Overall, we
propose that the path toward truly robust, generalizable, and human-like vision
systems may not lie in forcing an artificial choice between shape and texture,
but rather in architectural and learning frameworks that seamlessly integrate both
local-texture and global configural shape. 1

1

Introduction

Human object recognition is remarkably robust: we can effortlessly identify objects across dramatic
variations in texture, scale, viewpoint, and context because we can focus on aspects of global
1

Project Page: https://www.fenildoshi.com/configural-shape/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

