Natural Gradient VI: Guarantees
for Non-Conjugate Models

Fangyuan Sun1,∗
Ilyas Fatkhullin1,2,3∗
Niao He1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
2
ETH AI Center
3
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
fansun@student.ethz.ch, ilyas.fatkhullin@ai.ethz.ch, niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Stochastic Natural Gradient Variational Inference (NGVI) is a widely used method
for approximating posterior distribution in probabilistic models. Despite its empirical success and foundational role in variational inference, its theoretical underpinnings remain limited, particularly in the case of non-conjugate likelihoods.
While NGVI has been shown to be a special instance of Stochastic Mirror Descent,
and recent work has provided convergence guarantees using relative smoothness
and strong convexity for conjugate models, these results do not extend to the nonconjugate setting, where the variational loss becomes non-convex and harder to
analyze. In this work, we focus on mean-field parameterization and advance the
theoretical understanding of NGVI in three key directions. First, we derive sufficient conditions under which the variational loss satisfies relative smoothness with
respect to a suitable mirror map. Second, leveraging this structure, we propose a
modified NGVI algorithm incorporating non-Euclidean projections and prove its
global non-asymptotic convergence to a stationary point. Finally, under additional
structural assumptions about the likelihood, we uncover hidden convexity properties of the variational loss and establish fast global convergence of NGVI to a
global optimum. These results provide new insights into the geometry and convergence behavior of NGVI in challenging inference settings.

1

Introduction

Variational Inference (VI) is a powerful framework for approximating Bayesian posteriors by casting
inference as an optimization problem [JGJS99, BKM17]. Unlike sampling-based approaches such
as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC; [MRR+ 53]) VI enables scalable posterior approximation
through stochastic optimization, often with significant computational advantages. In practice, however, the exact gradient of the variational objective—such as the evidence lower bound (ELBO)—is
rarely available in closed form, especially for complex or non-conjugate models. Consequently,
gradients must be estimated from data using Monte Carlo sampling. Since the advent of BlackBox VI [WW13, TLG14, RGB14], this form of gradient-based stochastic optimization in Euclidean
parameter spaces has become the de facto standard in practical applications.
While gradient descent in the Euclidean space of parameters has become the standard tool in modern
VI, it ignores the intrinsic geometry of the space of probability distributions. This has motivated the
development of Natural Gradient Variational Inference (NGVI) [HTRK07], which replaces standard gradients with natural gradients [Ama98] that account for the underlying information geometry of the variational family. NGVI follows the steepest descent direction (on average) with respect to the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, rather than the Euclidean norm. Empirical evidence
∗

F.S. is supported by ETH AI Center, I.F. is funded by ETH AI Center Doctoral Fellowship.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

