Fast exact recovery of noisy matrix from few entries:
the infinity norm approach

BaoLinh Tran and Van Vu
Department of Mathematics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
l.tran@yale.edu and van.vu@yale.edu

Abstract
The matrix recovery (completion) problem, a central problem in data science,
involves recovering a matrix A from a relatively small random set of entries. While
such a task is generally impossible, it has been shown that one can recover A
exactly in polynomial time, with high probability, under three basic and necessary
assumptions: (1) the rank of A is very small compared to its dimensions (low
rank), (2) A has delocalized singular vectors (incoherence), and (3) the sample
size is sufficiently large. Various algorithms address this task, including convex
optimization by Candes, Recht, and Tao (2009), alternating projection by Hardt and
Wooters (2014), and low-rank approximation with gradient descent by Keshavan,
Montanari, and Oh (2009, 2010). In applications, Candes and Plan (2009) noted
that it is more realistic to assume noisy observations. In such cases, the above
approaches provide approximate recovery with small root mean square error, which
is difficult to convert into exact recovery. Recently, results by Abbe et al. (2017)
and Bhardwaj et al. (2023) on approximation in the infinity norm showed that
one can recover A even in the noisy case, provided A has bounded precision.
However, beyond the three basic assumptions, they either required that the condition
number of A be small (Abbe and Fan, 2017) or that the gaps between consecutive
singular values be large (Bhardwaj et al., 2023). These additional assumptions
conflict, with one requiring singular values to be close together and the other
suggesting they should be far apart. It is thus natural to conjecture that neither is
necessary. In this paper, we demonstrate that this is indeed the case. We propose
a simple algorithm for exact recovery of noisy data, relying solely on the three
basic assumptions. The core step of the algorithm is a straightforward truncated
singular value decomposition, which is highly efficient. To analyze the algorithm,
we prove a new infinity norm version of the classical Davis-Kahan perturbation
theorem, improving an earlier result in (Bhardwaj et al., 2023). Our proof employs
a combinatorial contour integration argument and is entirely distinct from all
previous approaches.

1

Introduction

1.1

Problem description

A large matrix A ∈ Rm×n is hidden, except for a few revealed entries in a set Ω ⊂ [m] × [n]. We
call Ω the set of observations or samples. The matrix AΩ , defined by
(AΩ )ij = Aij for (i, j) ∈ Ω, and 0 otherwise,
(1)
is called the observed or sample matrix. The task is to recover A, given AΩ . This is the matrix
recovery (or matrix completion) problem, a central problem in data science that has received significant
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

