Truthful Aggregation of LLMs
with an Application to Online Advertising

Ermis Soumalias
University of Zurich
ETH AI Center
ermis@ifi.uzh.ch

Michael J. Curry
University of Illinois Chicago
mjc@uic.edu

Sven Seuken
University of Zurich
ETH AI Center
seuken@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract
The next frontier of online advertising is revenue generation from LLM-generated
content. We consider a setting where advertisers aim to influence the responses
of an LLM, while platforms seek to maximize advertiser value and ensure user
satisfaction. The challenge is that advertisers’ preferences generally conflict with
those of the user, and advertisers may misreport their preferences. To address this,
we introduce MOSAIC, an auction mechanism that ensures that truthful reporting is
a dominant strategy for advertisers and that aligns the utility of each advertiser with
their contribution to social welfare. Importantly, the mechanism operates without
LLM fine-tuning or access to model weights and provably converges to the output
of the optimally fine-tuned LLM as computational resources increase. Additionally,
it can incorporate contextual information about advertisers, which significantly
improves social welfare. Via experiments with publicly available LLMs, we
show that MOSAIC leads to high advertiser value and platform revenue with
low computational costs. While our motivating application is online advertising,
our mechanism can be applied in any setting with monetary transfers, making
it a general-purpose solution for truthfully aggregating the preferences of selfinterested agents over LLM-generated replies.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are becoming ubiquitous: as coding assistants, chat interfaces, and
even alternatives to search engines [Bommasani et al., 2022]. To ensure their usefulness, it is essential
to closely align LLM outputs with user preferences. However, in general, there may be multiple
interested parties who disagree on the desired behavior of the same LLM. This leads to the question
of how to generate LLM replies given multiple conflicting preferences.
The motivating application for our work is online advertising, the main source of revenue for large
tech companies such as Google, Meta, and X. For example, in 2023, Meta’s advertising revenue of
132 billion USD constituted more than 97% of its total revenue [Meta, 2024]. Ad auctions are the
workhorse mechanism to determine the placement and prices of commercial content [Varian, 2007,
Edelman et al., 2007]. LLM providers have begun integrating instant checkout capabilities into their
services [OpenAI, 2025], and they are also exploring how to incorporate ads into LLM-generated
content [Criddle, 2024]. Thus, new auction mechanisms are needed for this emerging setting.
We present a new auction mechanism for this problem, which we call MOSAIC (Mechanism for
Optimally Sampling and Aggregating LLM Outputs with Incentive Compatibility). The advertisers
are paying, not for some particular item or bundle, but rather to influence the output generated by an
LLM in a direction closer to their own preferences. Although MOSAIC could be of interest whenever
one has to aggregate the preferences of multiple self-interested agents over LLM behavior (as long as
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

