Learning Interactive World Model for Object-Centric
Reinforcement Learning

1

Fan Feng1,2 Phillip Lippe3∗ Sara Magliacane3
University of California San Diego 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
University of Amsterdam
{ffeng1017,phillip.lippe,sara.magliacane}@gmail.com

Abstract
Agents that understand objects and their interactions can learn policies that are
more robust and transferable. However, most object-centric RL methods factor state
by individual objects while leaving interactions implicit. We introduce the Factored
Interactive Object-Centric World Model (FIOC-WM), a unified framework that
learns structured representations of both objects and their interactions within a
world model. FIOC-WM captures environment dynamics with disentangled and
modular representations of object interactions, improving sample efficiency and
generalization for policy learning. Concretely, FIOC-WM first learns object-centric
latents and an interaction structure directly from pixels, leveraging pre-trained
vision encoders. The learned world model then decomposes tasks into composable
interaction primitives, and a hierarchical policy is trained on top: a high level selects
the type and order of interactions, while a low level executes them. On simulated
robotic and embodied-AI benchmarks, FIOC-WM improves policy-learning sample
efficiency and generalization over world-model baselines, indicating that explicit,
modular interaction learning is crucial for robust control2 .

1

Introduction

World models aim to learn state abstractions and action-conditioned dynamics that capture the
evolution of high-dimensional observations, along with auxiliary information (e.g., rewards, skills), for
decision-making tasks [1–5]. Recent advances have demonstrated their effectiveness in downstream
applications, such as robotics [2, 6–10] and autonomous driving [11–14].
One of the central challenges in world model is to extract low-dimensional, structured latent representations from high-dimensional observations, which often display high complexity and variability
across both semantic and dynamic aspects. On the dynamics side, latent spaces often contain underlying structures [15, 16]. Prior work imposes structural priors to learn compact latents that encourage
disentanglement and capture relational or compositional patterns [17–23]. On the semantics side,
pre-trained visual features are leveraged to better encode rich content and improve fidelity [9, 24–31].
Collectively, these approaches learn compressed, structured representations of high-dimensional
perceptual data to support downstream decision making. However, it remains unclear to what extent
such compression and structure are necessary and sufficient for down-streaming policy learning.
In this work, we study which types and degrees of decomposition structure make latent representations
effective for efficient and generalizable policy learning. Real-world settings exhibit substantial
variability in both visual appearance and dynamic interactions, often involving multiple objects
with diverse attributes. It is therefore natural to reason in terms of objects, their interactions, and
∗
2

Now at Google Deepmind
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/fioc-wm.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

