The Lighthouse of Language: Enhancing LLM Agents
via Critique-Guided Improvement

Ruihan Yang1,♡∗, Fanghua Ye♠†, Jian Li♠†, Siyu Yuan1,♡ , Yikai Zhang2,♡ ,
Zhaopeng Tu♠ , Xiaolong Li♠ , Deqing Yang1,♡†
1,♡
School of Data Science,Fudan University ♠ Tencent Hunyuan
2,♡
College of Computer Science and Artifcial Intelligence, Fudan University
♡

{rhyang17, yangdeqing}@fudan.edu.cn ♡ {syyuan21, ykzhang22}@m.fudan.edu.cn
♠
{fanghua.ye.21, lijianjack, tuzhaopeng}@gmail.com

Project Page: https://github.com/rhyang2021/CGI

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have recently transformed from text-based assistants to autonomous agents capable of planning, reasoning, and iteratively
improving their actions. While numerical reward signals and verifiers can effectively rank candidate actions, they often provide limited contextual guidance. In
contrast, natural language feedback better aligns with the generative capabilities
of LLMs, providing richer and more actionable suggestions. However, parsing
and implementing this feedback effectively can be challenging for LLM-based
agents. In this work, we introduce Critique-Guided Improvement (CGI), a novel
two-player framework, comprising an actor model that explores an environment
and a critic model that generates detailed nature language feedback. By training
the critic to produce fine-grained assessments and actionable revisions, and the
actor to utilize these critiques, our approach promotes more robust exploration of
alternative strategies. Experiments in three interactive environments show that CGI
outperforms existing baselines by a substantial margin. Notably, even a small critic
model surpasses GPT-4 in feedback quality. The resulting actor achieves stateof-the-art performance, demonstrating the power of explicit guidance to enhance
decision-making in LLM-based agents.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) [1; 2; 3] have broadened their applicability from
conventional chat and text-based interactions to more dynamic, agentic roles. In these roles, LLMbased agents [4; 5; 6] harness the reasoning and planning capabilities of LLMs to automate complex
tasks across diverse domains, including code generation [7; 8], software engineering [9; 10], and web
applications [11; 12]. A key requirement in these agentic tasks is the ability to iteratively acquire,
store, and use new information to improve performance. Thus, a central challenge emerges: How can
high-quality feedback be obtained and utilized efficiently?
A common approach for providing feedback is to rely on numerical signals, such as verifiers [13; 14]
or reward models [15; 16]. In this paradigm, LLMs are typically trained as discriminators to
evaluate and select the best action from a set of candidates. One widely used method is Best-of-N
(BoN) [17; 18], where the agent generates N possible actions and a trained reward model picks the
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Tencent Hunyuan.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

