Preference-driven Knowledge Distillation for Few-shot
Node Classification
Xing Wei1 Chunchun Chen2 Rui Fan1,2,3 Xiaofeng Cao4 Sourav Medya5 Wei Ye1,2∗
1
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, China
2
Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji University, China
3
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago, USA
{xing627, c2chen, yew}@tongji.edu.cn, rui.fan@ieee.org,
xiaofeng.cao.uts@gmail.com, medya@uic.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) can efficiently process text-attributed graphs
(TAGs) due to their message-passing mechanisms, but their training heavily relies on the human-annotated labels. Moreover, the complex and diverse local
topologies of nodes of real-world TAGs make it challenging for a single mechanism to handle. Large language models (LLMs) perform well in zero-/few-shot
learning on TAGs but suffer from a scalability challenge. Therefore, we propose
a preference-driven knowledge distillation (PKD) framework to synergize the
complementary strengths of LLMs and various GNNs for few-shot node classification. Specifically, we develop a GNN-preference-driven node selector that
effectively promotes prediction distillation from LLMs to teacher GNNs. To
further tackle nodes’ intricate local topologies, we develop a node-preferencedriven GNN selector that identifies the most suitable teacher GNN for each node,
thereby facilitating tailored knowledge distillation from teacher GNNs to the student GNN. Extensive experiments validate the efficacy of our proposed framework
in few-shot node classification on real-world TAGs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/GEEX-Weixing/PKD.

1

Introduction

Text-attributed graphs (TAGs [1]), such as citation, webpage, and product graphs [2, 3], have nodes
associated with text attributes. Graph neural networks (GNNs) [4, 5] have demonstrated excellent
performance and efficiency in node classification on TAGs, which are supported by high-quality labels
and effective message-passing mechanisms [6]. However, the manual labeling of nodes is undoubtedly
a tedious, expensive, and time-consuming task [7, 8]. In many scenarios, only a few node labels are
available. Additionally, nodes often have complex and diverse interaction relationships with each
other—their local topologies are intricate—which challenge traditional GNNs with fixed messagepassing mechanisms. Compared with GNNs, large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive
zero-/few-shot learning capabilities on TAGs [9, 10, 11]. But the large parameter scale considerably
hinders their inference efficiency [12].
A natural idea is to blend their complementary strengths for few-shot node classification on TAGs.
Knowledge distillation (KD) [13] is a feasible solution. However, directly distilling knowledge from
the LLM to GNN is impractical. Firstly, the discrepancy of decoder-only (LLMs) and encoder-only
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

