Boundary-Value PDEs Meet Higher-Order Differential
Topology-aware GNNs

Yunfeng Liao Yangxin Wu Xiucheng Li∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
lixiucheng@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in graph neural network (GNN)-based neural operators have
demonstrated significant progress in solving partial differential equations (PDEs) by
effectively representing computational meshes. However, most existing approaches
overlook the intrinsic physical and topological meaning of higher-order elements
in the mesh, which are closely tied to differential forms. In this paper, we propose a
higher-order GNN framework that incorporates higher-order interactions based on
discrete and finite element exterior calculus. The time-independent boundary value
problems (BVPs) in electromagnetism are instantiated to illustrate the proposed
framework. It can be easily generalized to other PDEs that admit differential
form formulations. Moreover, the novel physics-informed loss terms, integrated
form estimators, and theoretical support are derived correspondingly. Experiments
show that our proposed method outperforms the existing neural operators by large
margins on BVPs in electromagnetism. Our code is available at https://github.
com/Supradax/Higher-Order-Differential-Topology-aware-GNN.

1

Introduction

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) accurately is fundamental in scientific computations.
Traditional numerical solvers [1] and the emerging physics-informed neural networks [2] rely on
iterative computations. This is a significant bottleneck that precludes their application in timesensitive domains where slight inaccuracy is tolerable but speed matters, such as gaming engines
and interactive simulations. To address these limitations, neural operators [3–6] propose to directly
learn the mapping between initial/boundary conditions and complete PDE solutions, eliminating
time-consuming iterations while maintaining the capability to handle the PDEs whose exact analytical
solutions are unattainable.
Convolutional neural network-based solvers are inherently constrained to regular, grid-like domains,
whereas numerical solvers typically employ meshes to represent irregular solving regions—an
approach naturally aligned with graph neural networks (GNNs). This compatibility has spurred
growing interest in GNNs for time-dependent physics simulations, demonstrated through applications
from fabric dynamics in wind [7] and granular particle systems [8] to neural mesh refinement
schemes [9]. However, solving time-independent PDEs, especially boundary value problems (BVPs),
presents greater challenges due to the absence of temporal guidance (initial data) and limited feature
representation. Recent work [10] attempts to apply GNNs to BVPs in electromagnetism and has
shown promising results, but is still limited to relatively simple cases.
Conventional GNN-based BVP solvers primarily utilize vertex adjacency in meshes while neglecting
higher-order topological elements (edges, faces, cells), despite their fundamental physics interpretations from the perspective of differential forms [11]. While vector analysis has long dominated
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

