Corrector Sampling in Language Models

Itai Gat

Neta Shaul

Uriel Singer

Yaron Lipman

FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Autoregressive language models accumulate errors due to their fixed, irrevocable
left-to-right token generation. To address this, we propose a new sampling method
called Resample-Previous-Tokens (RPT). RPT mitigates error accumulation by
iteratively revisiting and potentially replacing tokens in a window of previously
generated text. Fine-tuning a pretrained 8B parameter model with RPT for only
100B resulted in ∼10% relative improvements on reasoning and coding benchmarks
compared to the standard sampling.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive (AR) language models represent a pivotal advancement in sequence generation, delivering state-of-the-art results in translation, code generation, text summarization, question answering,
and many other text tasks. By factoring the probability p(x) of a sequence x with the chain rule,
AR training reduces to learning the next-token-prediction (NTP) conditional probabilities, making
both training and inference highly efficient. At inference time, however, this left-to-right process is
irrevocable: once a token is drawn the model cannot revise it, resulting in error propagating from the
NTP sampling.
Recent progress in LLMs has largely focused on improving training via: (i) better data quality (Meta,
2024; DeepSeek, 2024; Groeneveld et al., 2024; Gemini, 2025; Li et al., 2025; OLMo, 2025; Lambert
et al., 2025); (ii) modifications to the transformer architecture, such as, positional embeddings (Su
et al., 2021; Press et al., 2022), attention mechanism (Ainslie et al., 2023; Beltagy et al., 2020);
and (iii) Reinforcement learning fine-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2024; DeepSeek,
2025; Muennighoff et al., 2025; Kimi, 2025). Nevertheless, the sampling itself remains relatively
underexplored, with most models still relying on the vanilla NTP sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020).
In this work, we introduce Resample-Previous-Tokens (RPT), a novel sampling method that iteratively
revisits a fixed-size window of previously sampled tokens. Unlike NTP sampled tokens, which are
unchangeable once sampled, RPT allows local token replacements during generation, potentially
reducing error accumulation. RPT training is lightweight, allows fine-tuning pretrained AR models,
preserves their NTP sampling quality and speed (i.e., with key-value caching), and integrates seamlessly into existing AR models and code. We fine-tuned a pretrained 8B AR model for 10% of its
final training iterations and compared it to the fully-trained pretrained model to find RPT pretraining
and sampling provides 5%-10% relative improvements in common benchmarks. Our contributions
include: (1) Introducing RPT, a simple yet effective sampling process from LLMs; (2) Developing
a training algorithm that incorporates seamlessly in AR training loop with minimal overhead and
parameter cost; (3) Demonstrating empirically that RPT outperforms standard NTP sampling in both
reasoning and coding tasks, as well as in a controlled error analysis.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

