On the Loss of Context Awareness in General
Instruction Fine-tuning

Yihan Wang∗
UCLA
wangyihan617@gmail.com

Andrew Bai∗
UCLA
andrewbai@ucla.edu

Nanyun Peng
UCLA
violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) require post-training methods such as
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on instruction-response pairs to enable instruction
following. However, this process can cause forgetting in capabilities learned during
pre-training. In this paper, we investigate the loss of context awareness after
SFT, where context awareness is defined as the ability to extract and understand
information from user-provided context. Surprisingly, we discovered that the loss
of context awareness occurs in instruction fine-tuned LLMs when the chat template
is applied to input prompts. We identify that the performance decline is associated
with a bias toward different roles learned during conversational instruction finetuning. The bias can be traced to training samples where the assistant response
minimally relies on the user-provided instruction. Based on these observations, we
propose a metric to identify context-dependent examples from general instruction
fine-tuning datasets. We then apply conditional instruction fine-tuning with a
context-dependency indicator, enabling the model to preserve context awareness
after SFT. Experiments on four context-dependent downstream tasks and three
pre-trained LLMs of different sizes show that our method effectively mitigates
the loss of context awareness without compromising general instruction-following
capabilities.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) pretrained on large-scale datasets acquire diverse language skills during pretraining. To enhance these models’ ability to follow general instructions, further fine-tuning is
typically required. This includes supervised instruction fine-tuning (SFT) [23, 20] and reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) [6]. However, several studies have demonstrated additional
fine-tuning can potentially harm existing capabilities learned during pretraining [17, 3, 10].
Although some studies suggest that performance degradation can be mitigated or even eliminated
through improved instruction fine-tuning methods [19, 3, 11], in this paper, we demonstrate that
instruction fine-tuning specifically leads to the worsening of a model’s context awareness in a series
of open-source models. We define context awareness as a model’s ability to accurately retrieve,
process, and interpret specific information from user-provided context. Context awareness is highly
∗

Equal contribution
Code is available at https://github.com/YihanWang617/context_awareness.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

