Private Zeroth-Order Optimization with Public Data

Xuchen Gong Tian Li
University of Chicago
{xuchengo,litian}@uchicago.edu

Abstract
One of the major bottlenecks for deploying popular first-order differentially private
(DP) machine learning algorithms (e.g., DP-SGD) lies in their high computation
and memory cost, despite the existence of optimized implementations. Zerothorder methods have promise in mitigating the overhead, as they leverage function
evaluations to approximate the gradients, hence significantly easier to privatize.
While recent works have explored zeroth-order approaches in both private and
non-private settings, they still suffer from relatively low utilities compared with
DP-SGD, and have only been evaluated in limited application domains. In this
work, we propose to leverage public information to guide and improve gradient
approximation of private zeroth-order algorithms. We explore a suite of publicdata-assisted zeroth-order optimizers (PAZO) with minimal overhead. We provide
theoretical analyses of the PAZO framework under an assumption of the similarity
between public and private data. Empirically, we demonstrate that PAZO achieves
superior privacy/utility tradeoffs across vision and text tasks in both pre-training and
fine-tuning settings, outperforming the best first-order baselines (with public data)
especially in highly private regimes, while offering up to 16× runtime speedup.

1

Introduction

Differentially private (DP) is a widely-used framework to protect sensitive information so that
adversaries cannot infer if any user or sample participates in the computation. When applied to
machine learning tasks, popular DP algorithms based on privatizing first-order gradients (such as
DP-SGD [1]) fundamentally rely on per-sample gradient clipping, which can be computationally
expensive and impractical in large-scale settings. While there exist optimized implementations of
DP-SGD, they are limited in their generality to handle all model architectures and often incur other
overheads, such as trading extra memory for computation [2, 3].
To tackle this, zeroth-order optimization offers an attractive alternative for DP training, as it leverages
function queries (scalar values) to approximate the gradients and is hence inherently amenable to
privatization [4, 5]. However, randomly searching in a potentially high-dimensional space based
on function query feedback can be rather inefficient [4]. Prior work has demonstrated competitive
performance of (private) zeroth-order methods only in the limited context of language model finetuning with prompts [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] or models with extreme sparsity [11]. In addition, there is still a
utility gap between private zeroth-order and first-order approaches on challenging tasks [8].
In this work, we aim to narrow the gap between zeroth-order and first-order methods in private training
leveraging public data. Zeroth-order outputs are high-variance estimators of the first-order gradients
and suffer from slow convergence in terms of the total number of iterations. However, there usually
exists non-sensitive public data, whose batch gradients provide informative guidance on perturbing
the parameter space. We thus introduce PAZO, a suite of zeroth-order DP algorithms that leverage
a small amount of public data with similar distributions as private data along with their first-order
gradients to guide or augment the zeroth-order outputs. In particular, we explore (1) PAZO-M, a mix
(convex combination) of private zeroth-order estimates and public first-order gradients, (2) PAZO-P,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

