Offline Goal-conditioned Reinforcement Learning with
Quasimetric Representations

Vivek Myers

Bill Chunyuan Zheng
UC Berkeley

†

Benjamin Eysenbach†

Sergey Levine

Princeton University

Abstract
Approaches for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) often use learned
state representations to extract goal-reaching policies. Two frameworks for representation structure have yielded particularly effective GCRL algorithms: (1)
contrastive representations, in which methods learn “successor features” with a
contrastive objective that performs inference over future outcomes, and (2) temporal distances, which link the (quasimetric) distance in representation space to
the transit time from states to goals. We propose an approach that unifies these
two frameworks, using the structure of a quasimetric representation space (triangle
inequality) with the right additional constraints to learn successor representations
that enable optimal goal-reaching. Unlike past work, our approach is able to
exploit a quasimetric distance parameterization to learn optimal goal-reaching
distances, even with suboptimal data and in stochastic environments. This gives
us the best of both worlds: we retain the stability and long-horizon capabilities of
Monte Carlo contrastive RL methods, while getting the free stitching capabilities of
quasimetric network parameterizations. On existing offline GCRL benchmarks, our
representation learning objective improves performance on stitching tasks where
methods based on contrastive learning struggle, and on noisy, high-dimensional
environments where methods based on quasimetric networks struggle.

1

Introduction

Learning temporal distances lies at the heart of many important problems in both control theory and
reinforcement learning. In control theory, such distances form important Lyapunov functions [1] and
control barrier functions [2], and are at the core of reachability analysis [3] and safety filtering [4]
In Reinforcement Learning (RL), such distances are important not just for safe RL [5], but also
for forming value functions in tasks ranging from navigation [6] to combinatorial reasoning [7] to
robotic manipulation [8, 9]. Ideally, these learned distances have two important properties: (i) they
can encode paths that are shorter than those demonstrated in the data (i.e., stitching); and (ii) they can
capture long-horizon distances with low variance.
Current methods for learning temporal distances typically only achieve one of these properties.
Methods based on Q-learning [10, 11, 12] stitch trajectories with Temporal Difference (TD) updates
to find shortest paths, but often produce compounding errors that make it challenging to apply
to long-horizon tasks [13]. Monte Carlo methods [14, 15] can directly learn goal-reaching value
functions, which can be connected to temporal distances [16], but their ability to find shortest paths
remains limited. Methods based on learning a quasimetric geometry [17, 18, 16], which impose
a triangle inequality over distances as an architectural invariance, do find shortest paths and don’t
require dynamic programming with compounding errors, but fail in stochastic settings and/or when
learning from off-policy (suboptimal) data.
Website and code: https://tmd-website.github.io/
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

