KungfuBot: Physics-Based Humanoid Whole-Body
Control for Learning Highly-Dynamic Skills

Weiji Xie* 1,2 Jinrui Han* 1,2 Jiakun Zheng* 1,3 Huanyu Li1,4 Xinzhe Liu1,5
Jiyuan Shi1 Weinan Zhang2 Chenjia Bai† 1 Xuelong Li† 1
1

2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 East China University of Science and Technology
4
Harbin Institute of Technology 5 ShanghaiTech University

Abstract
Humanoid robots are promising to acquire various skills by imitating human
behaviors. However, existing algorithms are only capable of tracking smooth,
low-speed human motions, even with delicate reward and curriculum design. This
paper presents a physics-based humanoid control framework, aiming to master
highly-dynamic human behaviors such as Kungfu and dancing through multisteps motion processing and adaptive motion tracking. For motion processing,
we design a pipeline to extract, filter out, correct, and retarget motions, while
ensuring compliance with physical constraints to the maximum extent. For motion
imitation, we formulate a bi-level optimization problem to dynamically adjust
the tracking accuracy tolerance based on the current tracking error, creating an
adaptive curriculum mechanism. We further construct an asymmetric actor-critic
framework for policy training. In experiments, we train whole-body control policies
to imitate a set of highly-dynamic motions. Our method achieves significantly
lower tracking errors than existing approaches and is successfully deployed on the
Unitree G1 robot, demonstrating stable and expressive behaviors. The project page
is https://kungfu-bot.github.io.

1

Introduction

Humanoid robots, with their human-like morphology, have the potential to mimic various human
behaviors in performing different tasks [1]. The ongoing advancement of motion capture (MoCap) systems and motion generation methods has led to the creation of extensive motion datasets
[2, 3], which encompass a multitude of human activities annotated with textual descriptions [4].
Consequently, it becomes promising for humanoid robots to learn whole-body control to imitate
human behaviors. However, controlling high-dimensional robot actions to achieve ideal human-like
performance presents a substantial challenge. One major difficulty arises from the fact that motion
sequences captured from humans may not comply with the physical constraints of humanoid robots,
including joint limits, dynamics, and kinematics [5, 6]. Hence, directly training policies through
Reinforcement Learning (RL) to maximize rewards (e.g., the negative tracking error) often fails to
yield desirable policies, as it may not exist within the solution space.
Recently, several RL-based whole-body control frameworks have been proposed to track motions
[7, 8], which often take a reference kinematic motion as input and output the control actions for
a humanoid robot to imitate it. To address physical feasibility issues, H2O and OmniH2O [9, 10]
remove the infeasible motions using a trained privileged imitation policy, producing a clean motion
* Equal contributions.
†

Correspondence to: Chenjia Bai (baicj@chinatelecom.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

