CAMO: Convergence-Aware Multi-Fidelity Bayesian
Optimization∗

Wei W. Xing
University of Sheffield

Zhenjie Lu†
SUSTeh & Shenzhen University

Akeel A. Shah ‡
Chongqing University

w.xing@sheffield.ac.uk

12432976@mail.sustech.edu.cn

akeelshah@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing Multi-fidelity Bayesian Optimization (MFBO) methods ignore the convergence behavior of the multi-fidelity surrogate as the fidelity increases, leading
to inefficient exploration and suboptimal performance. We introduce CAMO
(Convergence-Aware Multi-fidelity Optimization), a principled framework based
on Linear Fidelity Differential Equations (LFiDEs) that explicitly encodes convergence of fidelity-indexed outputs and employs a closed-form nonstationary kernel.
We rigorously prove the existence and pointwise/uniform convergence to the high
fidelity surrogate under mild restrictions and provide new convergence results for
general FiDEs using smooth, non-smooth and even non-convex Lyapunov functions, establishing a bridge between MFBO and the theory of subgradient flows
in non-smooth optimization theory. Combined with a fidelity-aware acquisition
function, CAMO outperforms state-of-the-art MFBO methods on a majority of
synthetic and real-world benchmarks, with up to a four-fold improvement in optimization performance and a dramatic speed-up in convergence. CAMO offers a
tractable and theoretically grounded approach to convergence-aware MFBO.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is an efficient method for optimising costly black-box functions, finding
applications in various domains of engineering and science [1]. BO leverages a surrogate model,
typically a Gaussian Process (GP), to approximate the objective function and guide the search
towards promising regions of parameter space using an acquisition function. This approach is
particularly effective when the black-box function evaluations are costly or time-consuming. In many
applications, black-box solutions can be obtained at varying levels of fidelity. Lower-fidelity solutions
are associated with lower accuracy and lower computational costs, the latter of which typically
increase dramatically as fidelity increases. The fidelity can be controlled in a number of ways, by
varying the modelling choices or the solver settings. For example, electronic-structure methods
involve increasing levels of theory, with exponentially increasing costs [2]. Different fidelities can
also be defined via the numerical formulation, e.g., use different mesh sizes, time steps or convergence
thresholds. For the purposes of prediction, and especially for optimization, it is of course desirable and
sometimes essential to predict at the highest fidelity. In practice, however, the number of high-fidelity
results obtainable within a typical computational budget or time frame is often constrained.
Multi-Fidelity Bayesian optimization (MFBO) methods aim to reduce the cost of optimising highfidelity black-box functions by leveraging lower-fidelity approximations [3, 4]. In typical scenarios,
the multi-fidelity objective evolves towards the highest fidelity function as the fidelity parameter
increases. Existing MFBO approaches ignore this evolution and treat the fidelity as an unstructured
input, which can lead to inefficient exploration in high-cost regions and, ultimately, suboptimal
∗

†
Code is available at https://github.com/IceLab-X/CAMO.
The majority of this work was
‡
conducted while Zhenjie Lu was at Shenzhen University.
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

