Approximation and Generalization Abilities of
Score-based Neural Network Generative Models for
Sub-Gaussian Distributions
Guoji Fu
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
guojifu@comp.nus.edu.sg

Wee Sun Lee
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
leews@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper studies the approximation and generalization abilities of score-based
neural network generative models (SGMs) in estimating an unknown distribution P0 from n i.i.d. observations in d dimensions. Assuming merely that
P0 is α-sub-Gaussian, we prove that for any time step t ∈ [t0 , nO(1) ], where
t0 > O(α2 n−2/d log n), there exists a deep ReLU neural network with width
3
≤ O(n d log2 n) and depth ≤ O(log2 n) that can approximate the scores with
−d/2
Õ(n−1 ) mean square error and achieve a nearly optimal rate of Õ(n−1 t0
)
for score estimation, as measured by the score matching loss. Our framework is
universal and can be used to establish convergence rates for SGMs under milder
assumptions than previous work. For example, assuming further that the target
density function p0 lies in Sobolev or Besov classes, with an appropriately early
stopping strategy, we demonstrate that neural network-based SGMs can attain
nearly minimax convergence rates up to logarithmic factors. Our analysis removes
several crucial assumptions, such as Lipschitz continuity of the score function or a
strictly positive lower bound on the target density.

1

Introduction

Score-based generative modeling (SGM) [1–5], also called diffusion modeling, has emerged as
a powerful tool of generative models, demonstrating exceptional performance in a wide range
of applications, such as image and text generation [4, 6], video generation [3]. SGM typically
encompasses two Markov processes: a forward process that gradually adds noise to convert samples
drawn from a data distribution, denoted as P0 , into noise (e.g., Gaussian noise), and a reverse
process that effectively reverses the forward process to recover the samples from noise. Specifically,
SGM uses score functions (i.e., gradients of the log probability density functions) to transform
the Gaussian noise into the target data distribution via solving a stochastic differential equation
(SDE). Implementing the reverse process requires accurately estimating the score functions, which is
typically accomplished through training neural networks on a finite number of samples using a score
matching objective [7, 8].
Despite their remarkable empirical success across a wide range of applications, the theoretical
understanding of SGMs remains in its infancy. In particular, the following fundamental questions
remain inadequately addressed in the literature:
How effectively do diffusion models approximate the true data distribution? What is the optimal
number of diffusion steps required for high-quality generation? How many training samples are
necessary for diffusion models to estimate the true distribution accurately? In which scenarios do
diffusion models excel, and where do they encounter limitations?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

