Parallel Scaling Law for Language Models

Mouxiang Chen1,2∗, Binyuan Hui2,† , Zeyu Cui2 , Jiaxi Yang2 ,
Dayiheng Liu2 , Jianling Sun1 , Junyang Lin2 , Zhongxin Liu1,†
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Qwen Team, Alibaba Group
{chenmx,liu_zx}@zju.edu.cn, binyuan.hby@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
It is commonly believed that scaling language models should commit a significant
space or time cost, by increasing the parameters (parameter scaling) or output
tokens (inference-time scaling). We introduce another and more inference-efficient
scaling paradigm: increasing the model’s parallel computation during both training
and inference time. We apply P diverse and learnable transformations to the input,
execute forward passes of the model in parallel, and dynamically aggregate the
P outputs. This method, namely parallel scaling (PAR S CALE), scales parallel
computation by reusing existing parameters and can be applied to any model
structure, optimization procedure, data, or task. We theoretically propose a new
scaling law and validate it through large-scale pre-training, which shows that a
model with P parallel streams is similar to scaling the parameters by O(log P )
while showing superior inference efficiency. For example, PAR S CALE can use up
to 22× less memory increase and 6× less latency increase compared to parameter
scaling that achieves the same performance improvement. It can also recycle
an off-the-shelf pre-trained model into a parallelly scaled one by post-training
on a small amount of tokens, further reducing the training budget. The new
scaling law we discovered potentially facilitates the deployment of more powerful
models in low-resource scenarios, and provides an alternative perspective for
the role of computation in machine learning. Our code and 67 trained model
checkpoints are publicly available at https://github.com/QwenLM/ParScale
and https://huggingface.co/ParScale.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rapid scaling of large language models (LLMs) [10, 64, 55, 72] to
narrow the gap towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Mainstream efforts focus on parameter
scaling [40], a practice that requires substantial space overhead. For example, DeepSeek-V3 [51]
scales the model size up to 672B parameters, which imposes prohibitive memory requirements for
edge deployment. More recently, researchers have explored inference-time scaling [65] to enhance the
reasoning capability by scaling the number of generated reasoning tokens. However, inference-time
scaling is limited to certain scenarios and necessitates specialized training data [20, 68], and typically
imposes significant time costs. For example, Chen et al. [13] find that the most powerful models can
generate up to 900 reasoning tokens for trivial problems like “2+3=?”. This motivates the question:
Is there a universal and efficient scaling approach that avoids excessive space and time costs?
We draw inspiration from classifier-free guidance (CFG) [34], a widely used trick during the inference
phase of diffusion models [35], with similar concepts also developed in the NLP community [75, 50].
Unlike traditional methods that use a single forward pass, CFG utilizes two forward passes during
inference: it first performs a normal forward pass to obtain the first stream of output, then perturbs
∗

Work is partially done during internship in Qwen Team, Alibaba Group.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

†

Corresponding authors.

