UMA: A Family of Universal Models for Atoms

Brandon M. Wood 1,*,† Misko Dzamba 1,* Xiang Fu 1,* Meng Gao 1,* Muhammed Shuaibi 1,*
Luis Barroso-Luque 1 Kareem Abdelmaqsoud 2 Vahe Gharakhanyan 1 John R. Kitchin 2
Daniel S. Levine 1 Kyle Michel 1 Anuroop Sriram 1 Taco Cohen 1 Abhishek Das 1
Ammar Rizvi 1 Sushree Jagriti Sahoo 1 Zachary W. Ulissi 1 C. Lawrence Zitnick 1,†
1
2
FAIR at Meta
CMU

Abstract
The ability to quickly and accurately compute properties from atomic simulations is
critical for advancing a large number of applications in chemistry and materials science including drug discovery, energy storage, and semiconductor manufacturing.
To address this need, we present a family of Universal Models for Atoms (UMA),
designed to push the frontier of speed, accuracy, and generalization. UMA models
are trained on half a billion unique 3D atomic structures (the largest training runs
to date) by compiling data across multiple chemical domains, e.g. molecules,
materials, and catalysts. We develop empirical scaling laws to help understand how
to increase model capacity alongside dataset size to achieve the best accuracy. The
UMA small and medium models utilize a novel architectural design we refer to as
mixture of linear experts that enables increasing model capacity without sacrificing
speed. For example, UMA-medium has 1.4B parameters but only ∼50M active
parameters per atomic structure. We evaluate UMA models on a diverse set of
applications across multiple domains and find that, remarkably, a single model
without any fine-tuning can perform similarly or better than specialized models.
We are releasing the UMA code, weights, and associated data to accelerate computational workflows and enable the community to build increasingly capable AI
models.

1

Introduction

Density Functional Theory (DFT) models the interaction of atoms from first principles through the
estimation of their electronic structure. It serves as the foundation of modern computational chemistry
and materials science, and has provided insights into many applications including drug discovery [70,
78], energy storage [73, 27, 72], and semiconductors [62, 76]. Despite DFT’s widespread adoption,
its considerable computational expense limits its usage.
Machine learning models offer the potential to accurately approximate DFT while being dramatically
faster (O(n) vs. O(n3 ) for DFT, where n is the number of atoms); reducing computation time from
hours to less than a second. Ideally, these models – referred to as Machine Learning Interatomic
Potentials (MLIPs) – would generalize across the many tasks that utilize DFT. We refer to a “task” as
a chemical domain (e.g. materials, catalysts, molecules) plus the specialized DFT settings required
by domain. For each task, we can explore different applications of DFT, such as molecular dynamics,
relaxations, vibrational analysis, and mechanical response. Training MLIPs that generalize across
such tasks remains an open problem.
* Co-first Author
†

Co-corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

