Dataset Distillation of 3D Point Clouds
via Distribution Matching

Jae-Young Yim† , Dongwook Kim† , and Jae-Young Sim⋆
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
{yimjae0, donguk071, jysim}@unist.ac.kr
†

Equal contribution

⋆

Corresponding author

Abstract
Large-scale datasets are usually required to train deep neural networks; however,
they increase computational complexity, hindering practical applications. Recently,
dataset distillation for images and texts has attracted considerable attention, as it
reduces the original dataset to a small synthetic one to alleviate the computational
burden of training while preserving essential task-relevant information. However,
dataset distillation for 3D point clouds remains largely unexplored, as point clouds
exhibit fundamentally different characteristics from those of images, making this
task more challenging. In this paper, we propose a distribution-matching-based
distillation framework for 3D point clouds that jointly optimizes the geometric structures and orientations of synthetic 3D objects. To address the semantic
misalignment caused by the unordered nature of point clouds, we introduce a
Semantically Aligned Distribution Matching (SADM) loss, which is computed on
the sorted features within each channel. Moreover, to handle rotational variations,
we jointly learn optimal rotation angles while updating the synthetic dataset to
better align with the original feature distribution. Extensive experiments on widely
used benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method consistently outperforms existing dataset distillation approaches, achieving higher accuracy and
strong cross-architecture generalization.

1

Introduction

With the increasing demand for large-scale training datasets, the high cost of retraining models
from scratch has become a major challenge, motivating research on dataset distillation [22]. The
objective of dataset distillation is to produce a significantly smaller synthetic dataset from a large
original dataset, that preserves the essential task-relevant information contained in the original dataset.
Hence the models trained on the reduced synthetic dataset are encouraged to achieve comparable
performance to those trained on the original dataset. Existing dataset distillation methods [3, 6, 8,
11, 30, 29, 31, 18, 27, 5, 9] can be broadly classified into gradient matching, trajectory matching,
and distribution matching approaches. The gradient matching and trajectory matching methods
aim to ensure that the synthetic dataset produces similar optimization dynamics to the original
dataset. To this end, the gradient matching method [30] minimizes the difference between the
gradients computed on the synthetic and original datasets. However, it potentially overlooks longterm dependencies in the training process. Rather than comparing individual gradients, the trajectory
matching methods [3, 6, 8, 11] encourage the models trained on the synthetic dataset follow similar
optimization trajectories to those trained on the original dataset. Note that these methods train
the networks while optimizing the synthetic dataset, and significantly increase the computational
complexity. To alleviate the computational burden in dataset distillation, the distribution matching
techniques [29, 31, 18, 27, 5] have been introduced. The networks are randomly initialized and used
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

