S PRINT: Enabling Interleaved Planning and
Parallelized Execution in Reasoning Models

Emil Biju1,2∗ Shayan Talaei1∗ Zhemin Huang1∗ Mohammadreza Pourreza3
Azalia Mirhoseini1† Amin Saberi1†
1

Stanford University

2

Microsoft

3

Google

{emilbiju, stalaei, zheminh}@stanford.edu
pourreza@google.com, {azalia, saberi}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Large reasoning models (LRMs) excel at complex reasoning tasks but typically
generate lengthy sequential chains-of-thought, resulting in long inference times
before arriving at the final answer. To address this challenge, we introduce S PRINT,
a novel post-training and inference-time framework designed to enable LRMs
to dynamically identify and exploit opportunities for parallelization during their
reasoning process. S PRINT incorporates an innovative data curation pipeline that
reorganizes natural language reasoning trajectories into structured rounds of longhorizon planning and parallel execution. By fine-tuning LRMs on a small amount
of such curated data, the models learn to dynamically identify independent subtasks within extended reasoning processes and effectively execute them in parallel.
Through extensive evaluations, we demonstrate that models fine-tuned with the
S PRINT framework match the performance of reasoning models on complex domains such as mathematics while generating up to 39% fewer sequential tokens on
problems requiring more than 8,000 output tokens. Finally, we observe consistent
results transferred to two out-of-distribution tasks, namely GPQA and Countdown,
with up to 45% and 65% reduction in average sequential tokens respectively for
longer reasoning trajectories, while matching the performance of the fine-tuned
reasoning model.

1

Introduction

Scaling inference-time compute in large language models (LLMs) has consistently been shown to
enhance reasoning accuracy. Existing methods broadly fall into two categories: sequential [1] and
parallel [2]. Sequential approaches, notably large reasoning models (LRMs) such as Deepseek-R1 [3]
and OpenAI o1 [4], have demonstrated remarkable successes in solving complex reasoning tasks, e.g.,
math and coding, but at the cost of generating very lengthy sequences of tokens. On the other hand,
parallel methods, such as repeated sampling with self-consistency [5] or best-of-N [6, 7] leverage
multiple response generations to improve accuracy. However, these methods typically lack effective
coordination and shared information across inference paths, leading to redundant computations and
limited performance gains. Furthermore, structured parallel methods like Tree-of-Thoughts [8] and
Graph-of-Thoughts [9] require predefined, heuristics-driven search structures, inherently restricting
flexibility and scalability across diverse tasks.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Equal senior authorship.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

