Towards Identifiability of Hierarchical Temporal
Causal Representation Learning

Zijian Li1,2∗ Minghao Fu4,2,∗ Junxian Huang3 Yifan Shen2 Ruichu Cai3,†
Yuewen Sun1,2 Guangyi Chen1,2 Kun Zhang1,2,†
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Guangdong University of Technology
4
University of California San Diego

Abstract
Modeling hierarchical latent dynamics behind time series data is critical for capturing temporal dependencies across multiple levels of abstraction in real-world tasks.
However, existing temporal causal representation learning methods fail to capture
such dynamics, as they fail to recover the joint distribution of hierarchical latent
variables from single-timestep observed variables. Interestingly, we find that the
joint distribution of hierarchical latent variables can be uniquely determined using
three conditionally independent observations. Building on this insight, we propose
a Causally Hierarchical Latent Dynamic (CHiLD) identification framework. Our
approach first employs temporal contextual observed variables to identify the joint
distribution of multi-layer latent variables. Sequentially, we exploit the natural
sparsity of the hierarchical structure among latent variables to identify latent variables within each layer. Guided by the theoretical results, we develop a time series
generative model grounded in variational inference. This model incorporates a
contextual encoder to reconstruct multi-layer latent variables and normalize flowbased hierarchical prior networks to impose the independent noise condition of
hierarchical latent dynamics. Empirical evaluations on both synthetic and realworld datasets validate our theoretical claims and demonstrate the effectiveness of
CHiLD in modeling hierarchical latent dynamics. 3

1

Introduction

Hierarchical temporal structures are pervasive in time series data such as weather records and
stock prices. These structures arise from latent processes operating at multi-level abstraction—for
example, seasonal, monthly, and daily variations in climate data. Understanding the hierarchical
latent dynamics underlying time series remains a fundamental challenge [68, 4, 70] and has received
growing attention. The core of this problem is the identification of latent processes evolving across
different levels of abstraction from observed data.
To identify the temporal latent process, several methods have considered Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) [30, 8, 27] to identify latent variables. To extend to nonlinear scenarios, researchers
use various assumptions, such as sufficient changes [37, 72, 47, 77], to ensure the independent variation of latent variables. Specifically, some approaches leverage auxiliary variables [18, 19, 28, 29, 37,
31] to achieve strong identifiability of latent variables. In the context of time-series data, others utilize
historical observations as surrogates for historical latent variables to induce sufficient changes [73, 29].
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.
3
https://github.com/MinghaoFu/CHiLD

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

