Ψ-Sampler: Initial Particle Sampling for SMC-Based
Inference-Time Reward Alignment in Score Models

Taehoon Yoon∗

Yunhong Min∗
Kyeongmin Yeo∗
KAIST

Minhyuk Sung

{taehoon,dbsghd363,aaaaa,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We introduce Ψ-S AMPLER, an SMC-based framework incorporating pCNL-based
initial particle sampling for effective inference-time reward alignment with a
score-based generative model. Inference-time reward alignment with score-based
generative models has recently gained significant traction, following a broader
paradigm shift from pre-training to post-training optimization. At the core of this
trend is the application of Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) to the denoising process.
However, existing methods typically initialize particles from the Gaussian prior,
which inadequately captures reward-relevant regions and results in reduced sampling efficiency. We demonstrate that initializing from the reward-aware posterior
significantly improves alignment performance. To enable posterior sampling in
high-dimensional latent spaces, we introduce the preconditioned Crank–Nicolson
Langevin (pCNL) algorithm, which combines dimension-robust proposals with
gradient-informed dynamics. This approach enables efficient and scalable posterior
sampling and consistently improves performance across various reward alignment tasks, including layout-to-image generation, quantity-aware generation, and
aesthetic-preference generation, as demonstrated in our experiments.
Project Webpage: https://psi-sampler.github.io/

1

Introduction

Recently, a shift in the scaling law paradigm from pre-training to post-training has opened new
possibilities for achieving another leap in AI model performance, as exemplified by the unprecedented
AGI score of GPT-o3 [1] and DeepSeek’s “Aha moment” [2]. Breakthroughs in LLMs have also
extended to score-based generative models [3–7], resulting in significant improvements in user
preference alignment [8]. Similar to the autoregressive generation process in LLMs, the denoising
process in score-based generative models can be interpreted as a Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) [9–
11] process with a single particle at each step. This perspective allows inference-time alignment to
be applied analogously to LLMs by populating multiple particles at each step and selecting those
that score highly under a given reward function [8, 12–17]. A key distinction is that score-based
generative models enable direct estimation of the final output from any noisy intermediate point via
Tweedie’s formula [18], facilitating accurate approximation of the optimal value function [19, 8, 20]
through expected reward estimation.
However, previous SMC-based approaches [12, 15, 14, 21, 22], where each SMC step is coupled
with the denoising process of score-based generative models, are limited in their ability to effectively
explore high-reward regions, as the influence of the reward signal diminishes over time due to
vanishing diffusion coefficient. Thus, rather than relying on particle exploration during later stages,
it is more critical to identify effective initial latents that are well-aligned with the reward model
*

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

