Learning to Watermark: A Selective Watermarking
Framework for Large Language Models via
Multi-Objective Optimization

Chenrui Wang1 Junyi Shu1 Billy Chiu2
Yu Li3 Saleh Alharbi4 Min Zhang1 Jing Li1#
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Lingnan University, China 3 Zhejiang University, China 4 Shaqra University, Saudi Arabia
wangchenray111@gmail.com
jingli.phd@hotmail.com

Abstract
The rapid development of LLMs has raised concerns about their potential misuse,
leading to various watermarking schemes that typically offer high detectability.
However, existing watermarking techniques often face trade-off between watermark detectability and generated text quality. In this paper, we introduce Learning
to Watermark (LTW), a novel selective watermarking framework that leverages
multi-objective optimization to effectively balance these competing goals. LTW
features a lightweight network that adaptively decides when to apply the watermark
by analyzing sentence embeddings, token entropy, and current watermarking ratio.
Training of the network involves two specifically constructed loss functions that
guide the model toward Pareto-optimal solutions, thereby harmonizing watermark
detectability and text quality. By integrating LTW with two baseline watermarking methods, our experimental evaluations demonstrate that LTW significantly
enhances text quality without compromising detectability. Our selective watermarking approach offers a new perspective for designing watermarks for LLMs and a
way to preserve high text quality for watermarks. The code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/fattyray/learning-to-watermark.

1

Introduction

The rapid progress of large language models (LLMs) [26, 40, 45] has brought both remarkable
capabilities [4, 14, 27, 41] and serious risks of misuse, including copyright concerns [11, 31],
academic misuse [36] and other malicious purposes [23, 24]. Consequently, watermarking techniques
have emerged as essential tools for detecting and tracing AI-generated texts.
These watermarking techniques embed signals that are imperceptible to humans yet detectable by
watermark detection algorithms. Among these methods, the KGW watermark [12] partitions the
vocabulary into “green-list” and “red-list” groups, subtly biasing token selection toward the “greenlist”. This allows detection of watermarked content via statistical hypothesis testing. However, despite
their imperceptibility, these watermarks can degrade the text’s semantic coherence, as the systematic
bias influences token selection contrary to natural model preferences. Recent attempts to address
these quality concerns include the TS-watermark [9], which adaptively adjusts watermark strength
and green-list ratios; the NS-watermark [37], which limits the extent of watermarking to improve
text quality; and EXP-edit [16], which proposes a distortion-free watermark integrated during the
sampling process.
# Corresponding author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

