Salient Concept-Aware Generative Data Augmentation

Tianchen Zhao, Xuanbai Chen, Zhihua Li, Jun Fang, Dongsheng An,
Xiang Xu, Zhuowen Tu, Yifan Xing
AWS DS3

Abstract
Recent generative data augmentation methods conditioned on both image and text
prompts struggle to balance between fidelity and diversity, as it is challenging
to preserve essential image details while aligning with varied text prompts. This
challenge arises because representations in the synthesis process often become
entangled with non-essential input image attributes such as environmental contexts, creating conflicts with text prompts intended to modify these elements. To
address this, we propose a personalized image generation framework that uses a
salient concept-aware image embedding model to reduce the influence of irrelevant
visual details during the synthesis process, thereby maintaining intuitive alignment between image and text inputs. By generating images that better preserve
class-discriminative features with additional controlled variations, our framework
effectively enhances the diversity of training datasets and thereby improves the
robustness of downstream models. Our approach demonstrates superior performance across eight fine-grained vision datasets, outperforming state-of-the-art
augmentation methods with averaged classification accuracy improvements by
0.73% and 6.5% under conventional and long-tail settings, respectively.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) models [63, 68] have demonstrated remarkable success in generating high-fidelity
images. One promising application is using synthetic image generation as a form of distillation,
transferring knowledge into classifiers to improve their performance [69, 5, 7, 75, 97, 74]. However,
T2I models often struggle to generate fine-grained categories due to the limitations of textual
descriptions, introducing noise to the training set that can negatively impact the downstream classifier
training. For example, ambiguous terms can lead to incorrect image synthesis, such as jaguar referring
to either an animal or a car. Expert terminology outside the model’s training vocabulary, such as class
names from iNaturalist dataset, may produce unexpected output. Moreover, certain visual attributes,
such as human identities, cannot be fully captured through text alone. Generative data augmentation
(GDA) [99] addresses these limitations by conditioning synthesis on both text and image to better
capture the subject characteristics.
Specifically, GDA leverages personalized image generation methods [96] to augment existing images
of a given subject based on textual descriptions. However, existing approaches [76, 37, 83] rely on
subject-specific optimization, which overly emphasizes instance-level details from the image prompts,
limiting diversity when text prompts call for meaningful modifications. They also inherit issues from
foundational tools such as DreamBooth [65] and Textual inversion [25], which are prone to overfitting
or suffer from imprecise subject representations. On the other hand, approaches such as SuTI [14]
provide more flexible alternatives, which are pre-trained on web-scale data and support zero-shot
synthesis. However, these models often struggle to preserve the key concept in an image that defines
its class, especially when the class definition is abstract or the object corresponding to the target
concept on the image is small. This is caused by the inability of the methods to entail prior knowledge
on what to focus on in the image. We are motivated to learn a specialized synthesis model tailored for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

