Beyond Higher Rank: Token-wise Input-Output
Projections for Efficient Low-Rank Adaptation
∗

Shiwei Li1 2 Xiandi Luo1 Haozhao Wang1 Xing Tang2
∗
∗
Ziqiang Cui3 Dugang Liu4 Yuhua Li1 Xiuqiang He2 Ruixuan Li1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Shenzhen Technology University
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 Shenzhen University
{lishiwei, togawa_sakiko, hz_wang, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn
xing.tang@hotmail.com, ziqiang.cui@my.cityu.edu.hk
dugang.ldg@gmail.com, hexiuqiang@sztu.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) is a parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) method
widely used in large language models (LLMs). LoRA essentially describes the
projection of an input space into a low-dimensional output space, with the dimensionality determined by the LoRA rank. In standard LoRA, all input tokens share
the same weights and undergo an identical input-output projection. This limits
LoRA’s ability to capture token-specific information due to the inherent semantic
differences among tokens. To address this limitation, we propose Token-wise
Projected Low-Rank Adaptation (TopLoRA), which dynamically adjusts LoRA
weights according to the input token, thereby learning token-wise input-output
projections in an end-to-end manner. Formally, the weights of TopLoRA can
be expressed as BΣX A, where A and B are low-rank matrices (as in standard
LoRA), and ΣX is a diagonal matrix generated from each input token X. Notably,
TopLoRA does not increase the rank of LoRA weights but achieves more granular
adaptation by learning token-wise LoRA weights (i.e., token-wise input-output
projections). Extensive experiments across multiple models and datasets demonstrate that TopLoRA consistently outperforms LoRA and its variants. The code is
available at https://github.com/Leopold1423/toplora-neurips25.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in pretrained large language models (LLMs) have led to significant improvements in a variety of natural language processing and vision tasks [3, 47, 40, 2]. Traditionally,
these models require full fine-tuning (FFT) to update all their parameters for specific downstream
tasks. However, due to the large size of pretrained models, FFT can be computationally expensive,
particularly in resource-constrained environments. To address this challenge, parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have been introduced to reduce the number of trainable parameters and
decrease fine-tuning costs [14, 7, 38, 41]. Among these methods, low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [10]
has emerged as one of the most widely used techniques. As shown in Figure 1(a), LoRA freezes the
pretrained weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n and learns two smaller low-rank matrices to approximate the
weight update as ∆W = BA, where A ∈ Rr×n , B ∈ Rm×r , and the LoRA rank r ≪ min{m, n}.
Despite its effectiveness, LoRA typically exhibits a performance gap when compared to FFT, often
attributed to the limited number of trainable parameters [10, 27]. Previous studies have also shown
that increasing the LoRA rank generally improves fine-tuning performance [35, 26]. Recently,
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

