H YP RL: Reinforcement Learning of Control Policies
for Hyperproperties

Tzu-Han Hsu∗ Arshia Rafieioskouei∗ Borzoo Bonakdarpour
Michigan State University
{tzuhan, rafieios, borzoo}@msu.edu

Abstract
Reward shaping in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) for complex tasks
remains a significant challenge. Existing approaches often fail to find optimal solutions or cannot efficiently handle such tasks. We propose H YP RL, a specificationguided reinforcement learning framework that learns control policies w.r.t. hyperproperties expressed in HyperLTL. Hyperproperties constitute a powerful formalism for specifying objectives and constraints over sets of execution traces across
agents. To learn policies that maximize the satisfaction of a HyperLTL formula φ,
we apply Skolemization to manage quantifier alternations and define quantitative
robustness functions to shape rewards over execution traces of a Markov decision
process with unknown transitions. A suitable RL algorithm is then used to learn
policies that collectively maximize the expected reward and, consequently, increase
the probability of satisfying φ. We evaluate H YP RL on a diverse set of benchmarks,
including safety-aware planning, Deep Sea Treasure, and the Post Correspondence
Problem. We also compare with specification-driven baselines to demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of H YP RL.

1

Introduction

Designing reward functions that accurately capture desirable behaviors in multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) remains a notorious stumbling block. Consider a wildfire scenario in a 3 × 3 gridworld with cells labeled {a, b, . . . , i } (see Figure 1). Locations {i , f , c} are on fire, and two victims
are located at {f , g}. Now, two autonomous agents are deployed from {a} with two objectives; O1 :
the firefighter agent (FF) must extinguish all fire zones, and O2 : the medical agent (Med) aims to
rescue all victims. The agents also have to satisfy two constraints; C1 : they must always remain
within a 2-cell communication range, and C2 : Med cannot pass any fire zone before FF extinguished
the fire in that zone. The goal is to learn optimal policies for FF and Med that maximize the probability
of satisfying all above requirements, as shown by the agent paths in Figure 1a.
Now, suppose we use an existing RL approach by assigning the following rewards; extinguish fire:
+50, rescue a victim: +10, agent out of range: −100, and Med in fire zone: −100. These approaches
R
R
U
U
would guide FF to complete O1 optimally by path a −
→b−
→c−
→f−
→ i, but due to C1 , it forces Med to
U
D
U
U
delay the rescue of the victim in {g} with redundant moves: a −
→d−
→a−
→d−
→ g· · · (see Figure 1b).
Furthermore, the victim in {f } is trapped in fire, so satisfying O2 depends on the progress of O1 ,
while respecting C1 (safety) and C2 (dependency). Such complex requirements make reward design in
MARL particularly challenging, as policies must account for both individual objectives and relational
constraints between agents with dependencies. In fact, existing RL approaches often fail to find
optimal policies because agent paths are implicitly universally quantified, which is overly restrictive
and limits the ability of RL to explore more optimal solutions. That is, the set of requirements is of
the form ∀τ.∀τ ′ .ψ, where τ and τ ′ are agents’ paths and ψ specifies constrains and objectives.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

