Streaming Federated Learning with Markovian Data

Tan-Khiem Huynh∗
Inria,
INSA Lyon

Malcolm Egan
Inria,
INSA Lyon

Giovanni Neglia
Inria,
Université Côte d’Azur

Jean-Marie Gorce
Inria,
INSA Lyon

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is now recognized as a key framework for communicationefficient collaborative learning. Most theoretical and empirical studies, however,
rely on the assumption that clients have access to pre-collected data sets, with
limited investigation into scenarios where clients continuously collect data. In
many real-world applications, particularly when data is generated by physical or biological processes, client data streams are often modeled by non-stationary Markov
processes. Unlike standard i.i.d. sampling, the performance of FL with Markovian
data streams remains poorly understood due to the statistical dependencies between
client samples over time. In this paper, we investigate whether FL can still support
collaborative learning with Markovian data streams. Specifically, we analyze the
performance of Minibatch SGD, Local SGD, and a variant of Local SGD with
momentum. We answer affirmatively under standard assumptions and smooth
non-convex client objectives: the sample complexity is proportional to the inverse
of the number of clients, with a communication complexity comparable to the i.i.d.
scenario. However, the sample complexity for Markovian data streams remains
higher than for i.i.d. sampling. Our analysis is validated via experiments with real
pollution monitoring time series data.

1

Introduction

As edge networks grow in scale, clients are increasingly diverse [34]. Many of these clients are
capable of continuously collecting and learning from data, instead of simply storing large quantities
of historical data [28]. This streaming data arises in applications ranging from health [21, 22] and
environmental monitoring [24], to control of robots [29].
Each data stream provides detailed information about individual clients. However, applications such
as environmental resource management [54] or public health monitoring [6] often aim to derive
population-level insights, leveraging data streams from multiple individuals to learn a global model.
As this data may be sensitive or costly to communicate, centralized training solutions are undesirable.
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a key strategy for communication-efficient collaborative
learning [26]. In conventional FL scenarios, clients have access to local datasets used to train
models locally. These models are then transmitted to a central server, where aggregation facilitates
collaborative learning. FL minimizes communication overhead while learning models with high
accuracy and ensuring client data are not shared.
Clients with streaming data must also cope with memory constraints [38, 35]. This means that clients
have limited control over data sampling: local updates can only be computed using the current data
∗

Inria, INSA Lyon, CITI, UR3720, 69621 Villeurbanne, France

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

