AltLoRA: Towards Better Gradient Approximation in
Low-Rank Adaptation with Alternating Projections

Xin Yu †
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16803
xmhy5152@psu.edu

Yujia Wang
College of Information Sciences
and Technology
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16803
yjw5427@psu.edu

Jinghui Chen
College of Information Sciences
and Technology
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16803
jzc5917@psu.edu

Lingzhou Xue‡
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16803
lzxue@psu.edu

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as an effective technique for reducing
memory overhead in fine-tuning large language models. However, it often suffers
from sub-optimal performance compared with full fine-tuning since the update is
constrained in the low-rank space. Recent variants such as LoRA-Pro attempt to
mitigate this by adjusting the gradients of the low-rank matrices to approximate the
full gradient. However, LoRA-Pro’s solution is not unique, and different solutions
can lead to significantly varying performance in ablation studies. Besides, to incorporate momentum or adaptive optimization design, approaches like LoRA-Pro
must first compute the equivalent gradient, causing a higher memory cost close to
full fine-tuning. A key challenge remains in integrating momentum properly into
the low-rank space with lower memory cost. In this work, we propose AltLoRA,
an alternating projection method that avoids the difficulties in gradient approximation brought by the joint update design, meanwhile integrating momentum
without higher memory complexity. Our theoretical analysis provides convergence
guarantees and further shows that AltLoRA enables stable feature learning and
robustness to transformation invariance. Extensive experiments across multiple
tasks demonstrate that AltLoRA outperforms LoRA and its variants, narrowing the
gap toward full fine-tuning while preserving superior memory efficiency.

1

Introduction

Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA [25]) has emerged as a leading approach for parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT)([24, 38, 35]) of large language models ([5, 51, 61, 40]). Building on prior work
investigating the intrinsic dimensionality of neural networks ([2, 36]), LoRA assumes that fine-tuning
updates can be effectively captured in a low-rank subspace. Specifically, for a pre-trained model
with weight matrix W0 ∈ Rk×d , LoRA reparameterizes the weight update ∆W via a low-rank
†
‡

First Author.
Correspondence to: Lingzhou Xue<lzxue@psu.edu>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

