Optimal kernel regression bounds
under energy-bounded noise

Amon Lahr
ETH Zurich
amlahr@ethz.ch

Johannes Köhler∗
ETH Zurich
jkoehle@ethz.ch

Anna Scampicchio∗
ETH Zurich
ascampicc@ethz.ch

Melanie N. Zeilinger
ETH Zurich
mzeilinger@ethz.ch

Abstract
Non-conservative uncertainty bounds are key for both assessing an estimation
algorithm’s accuracy and in view of downstream tasks, such as its deployment in
safety-critical contexts. In this paper, we derive a tight, non-asymptotic uncertainty
bound for kernel-based estimation, which can also handle correlated noise sequences. Its computation relies on a mild norm-boundedness assumption on the
unknown function and the noise, returning the worst-case function realization
within the hypothesis class at an arbitrary query input location. The value of this
function is shown to be given in terms of the posterior mean and covariance of a
Gaussian process for an optimal choice of the measurement noise covariance. By
rigorously analyzing the proposed approach and comparing it with other results
in the literature, we show its effectiveness in returning tight and easy-to-compute
bounds for kernel-based estimates.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning can be phrased in terms of estimating an unknown (continuous)
function from a finite set of noisy data. A popular, non-parametric technique to perform such a
task and return point-wise estimates is given by the class of kernel-based methods [Wahba, 1990;
Schölkopf and Smola, 2001; Suykens et al., 2002; Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini, 2004; Steinwart
and Christmann, 2008]. Complementing such estimates with non-conservative and non-asymptotic
uncertainty bounds enables evaluating their reliability, for example, in view of deploying Bayesian
optimization [Berkenkamp et al., 2023; Sui et al., 2018] or model-based reinforcement learning [Kuss
and Rasmussen, 2003; Chua et al., 2018] to safety-critical systems.
Classical uncertainty bounds for kernel-based methods have been developed in statistical learning
theory [Cucker and Smale, 2002; Cucker and Zhou, 2007; Guo and Zhou, 2013; Lecué and Mendelson,
2017; Ziemann and Tu, 2024]. However, these results are mostly aimed at characterizing the learning
rate of the kernel-based algorithm and they tend to be difficult to apply in practice, being overly
conservative or even depending on the unknown function to be estimated. Another viewpoint is given
by Gaussian process (GP) regression [Rasmussen and Williams, 2006], a kernel-based method that is
naturally endowed with an uncertainty quantification mechanism. However, closed-form uncertainty
bounds are only available when assuming independent and Gaussian-distributed variables [Lederer
et al., 2019], and their computation in other cases is non-trivial [Gilks et al., 1995]. To address
this issue, high-probability and non-asymptotic uncertainty bounds have been derived by Srinivas
et al. [2012]; Abbasi-Yadkori [2013]; Burnaev and Vovk [2014]; Fiedler et al. [2021]; Baggio
et al. [2022]; Molodchyk et al. [2025], phrasing the problem as estimation in Reproducing Kernel
Hilbert Spaces (RKHSs) [Aronszajn, 1950; Berlinet and Thomas-Agnan, 2004]. Yet, these bounds
still heavily rely on the (conditional) independence of the noise sequence, which can be hard to
satisfy in practice. This difficulty can be circumvented by leveraging an assumed bound on the
∗

Both co-authors contributed equally; their ordering is alphabetical.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

