DSAS: A Universal Plug-and-Play Framework for
Attention Optimization in Multi-Document Question
Answering

Jiakai Li1 , Rongzheng Wang1 , Yizhuo Ma1 ,
Shuang Liang1 , Guangchun Luo2 , Ke Qin1∗
1
Institute of Intelligent Computing,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
School of Information and Software Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
ljk@std.uestc.edu.cn, qinke@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
While large language models (LLMs) show considerable promise across various
fields, they have notable limitations in handling multi-document question answering (Multi-doc QA) tasks. The first challenge is long-range dependency modeling,
where LLMs struggle to focus on key information in long texts, which weakens
important semantic connections. Second, most LLMs suffer from the “lost-in-themiddle” issue, where they have difficulty processing information in the middle
of long inputs. Current solutions either truncate global dependencies or demand
costly finetuning, ultimately lacking a universal and simple solution for these
challenges. To resolve these limitations, we propose Dual-Stage Adaptive Sharpening (DSAS) containing two modules. (i) The Contextual Gate Weighting (CGW)
module alleviates “lost-in-the-middle” by assessing paragraph relevance through
layer-wise attention tracking and position-aware weighting. (ii) The Reciprocal
Attention Suppression (RAS) module enhances focus on critical paragraphs by
suppressing information exchange between key and irrelevant texts, thus mitigating
the limitations in long-range dependency modeling. Extensive experiments on
four benchmarks demonstrate DSAS’s efficacy across mainstream LLMs (Llama,
Qwen, Mistral, and Deepseek), with an average F1-score improvement of 4.2% in
Multi-doc QA tasks on Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct. Ablation studies confirm the essential contributions of both the CGW and RAS modules.
In addition, detailed discussions in the Appendix further validate the robustness
and scalability of DSAS.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based [34] large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance,
which have extensively promoted various complex natural language processing applications [9, 25, 30,
21, 37]. Building on the progress, recent advancements have shifted research focus toward enhancing
LLMs’ long-context processing capabilities [23], giving rise to LLMs that significantly expand
context windows from 4K tokens to 128K or even 1M tokens, e.g., Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct [10] and
Gemini-1.5 [31]. These LLMs have unlocked unprecedented potential for complex tasks requiring
cross-document reasoning, such as legal case analysis [8] and multi-source academic synthesis [7].
∗
Corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/TreasureHunter/DSAS

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

