Faster Generic Identification in
Tree-Shaped Structural Causal Models

Yasmine Briefs
Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
ybriefs@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Markus Bläser
Saarland University
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
mblaeser@cs.uni-saarland.de

Abstract
Linear structural causal models (SCMs) are used to analyze the relationships
between random variables. Directed edges represent direct causal effects and
bidirected edges represent hidden confounders. Generically identifying the causal
parameters from observed correlations between the random variables is an open
problem in causality. Gupta and Bläser (AAAI 2024, pp. 20404–20411) solve the
case of SCMs in which the directed edges form a tree by giving a randomized
polynomial time algorithm with running time O(n6 ). We present an improved algorithm with running time O(n3 log2 n) and demonstrate its feasibility by providing
an implementation that outperforms existing state-of-the-art implementations.

1

Introduction

Understanding and predicting causal effects—while distinguishω1,2
ing them from mere statistical correlations—is a key objective in
empirical sciences. For instance, uncovering the causes of dis0
1
2
λ0,1
λ1,2
eases and health outcomes is essential for developing effective
prevention and treatment strategies. A widely accepted method Figure 1: An IV example. 0 is e.g.
for establishing causality is the randomized controlled trial (RCT). the tax rate on tobacco, 1 the number
However, RCTs require direct intervention in the system under of cigarettes smoked, and 2 whether
study, which is not always feasible due to ethical, financial, or one developed lung cancer.
technical constraints. For example, to study the long-term effects
of air pollution on human health, it would be unethical and impractical to expose individuals to
harmful pollutants intentionally. In such cases, researchers turn to alternative methods that infer
causal relationships by leveraging observational data in conjunction with prior knowledge about the
system’s structure. This challenge, known as the problem of identification in causal inference, is a
central concern in many fields, including modern ML.
A central component of the causal inference framework is how the underlying structure captures the
true generative mechanism of the system. This is typically formalized using structural causal models
(SCMs) [Pearl, 2009, Bareinboim et al., 2022]. Here, we focus on the problem of identification within
the class of linear SCMs, also known as linear structural equation models (SEMs) [Bollen, 1989,
Duncan, 1975]. These models represent causal relationships among observed random variables by
assuming that each variable Xj is a linear combination of other variables and an P
unobserved noise term
εj , where the noise terms are jointly normally distributed with zero mean: Xj = i λi,j Xi + εj . The
error terms are characterized by a covariance matrix Ω = (ωi,j ), which models hidden confounding
terms. Linear SCMs can be represented as a graph with nodes {0, . . . , n − 1} corresponding to the n
random variables. There are two types of edges: A directed edge i → j represents a linear influence
λi,j of a parent node i on its child j. A bidirected edge i ↔ j represents a correlation ωi,j between
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

