Non-Convex Tensor Recovery from Tube-Wise Sensing

Tongle Wu
The Pennsylvania State University
tfw5381@psu.edu

Ying Sun∗
The Pennsylvania State University
ybs5190@psu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel tube-wise local tensor compressed sensing (CS)
model under the tensor product framework, where sensing operators are independently applied to each tube of a third-order tensor. To recover the low-rank ground
truth tensor, we minimize a non-convex objective via Burer–Monteiro factorization
and solve it using gradient descent (GD) with spectral initialization. We prove that
this approach achieves exact recovery with a linear convergence rate. Notably, our
method attains provably lower sample complexity than existing TCS methods if
the low tubal rank ground truth tensor satisfies the defined incoherence condition.
Our proof leverages the leave-one-out technique to show that gradient descent
generates iterates implicitly biased towards solutions with bounded incoherence,
which ensures contraction of optimization error in consecutive iterates. Empirical
results validate the effectiveness of GD in solving the proposed local TCS model.

1

Introduction

Tensor compressed sensing (TCS) that recovers a low-rank tensor from limited measurements is a
fundamental problem in signal processing and machine learning. Specifically, the classical TCS
problem aims to recover a ground truth X ⋆ ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 tensor from a few linear measurements
generated as
⊤

⊤

y := [y1 , · · · , ym ] = A(X ⋆ ) := [⟨A1 , X ⋆ ⟩, · · · , ⟨Am , X ⋆ ⟩] ,

(1)

with A : Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 → Rm being a linear sensing map. Without any structure assumption on X ⋆ ,
the problem is ill-posed and it is impossible to recover it from measurements less than its dimension.
In this paper, we consider X ⋆ exhibiting a structure that can be well-approximated by a low-rank
model. However, unlike a matrix that has a unique notion of rank, a tensor has multiple definitions of
rank [19] induced by different tensor decompositions such as Canonical Polyadic (CP) [16], Tucker
[54], tensor singular value decomposition (t-SVD) [17], and others [39, 65, 70]. Algorithms and their
theoretical guarantees to recover X ⋆ under different notions of low-rankness have been studied in a
series of existing works [3, 11, 18, 26, 28, 30, 36, 43, 44].
Despite the long-standing literature, works mentioned above share a common limitation: the TCS
model (1) is a global CS model where the sensing operator A is applied to the entire tensor X ⋆ . In
certain applications, however, fulfilling such a requirement is impossible or inefficient. For example,
when dealing with massive tensor datasets that exceed available memory, one common strategy is
to split the data into smaller sub-tensors and allocate them across a distributed network of storage
nodes [49, 55]. In this case, it is more practical to take measurements of the sub-tensors locally at
each node out of implementation efficiency and privacy considerations. Another example is real-time
applications such as video streaming, where the data is modeled as a tensor whose dimension is
increasing with time. For these applications, algorithms that can process incoming measurements
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

