Learning from Videos for 3D World: Enhancing
MLLMs with 3D Vision Geometry Priors

Duo Zheng∗ , Shijia Huang∗ , Yanyang Li, Liwei Wang♯
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://lavi-lab.github.io/VG-LLM

Abstract
Previous research has investigated the application of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) in understanding 3D scenes by interpreting them as videos.
These approaches generally depend on comprehensive 3D data inputs, such as
point clouds or reconstructed Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) maps. In our research, we
advance this field by enhancing the capability of MLLMs to understand and reason
in 3D spaces directly from video data, without the need for additional 3D input.
We propose a novel and efficient method called the Video-3D Geometry Large
Language Model (VG LLM). Our approach utilizes a 3D visual geometry encoder
to extract 3D prior information from video sequences. This information is then
integrated with visual tokens and input into the MLLM. Extensive experiments
have shown that our method has achieved substantial improvements in various
tasks related to 3D scene understanding and spatial reasoning, all directly learned
from video sources. Impressively, our 4B model, which does not rely on explicit
3D data inputs, achieves competitive results compared to existing state-of-the-art
methods, and even surpasses the Gemini-1.5-Pro in the VSI-Bench evaluations.

1

Introduction

Rapid advancements and impressive performance of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
[2, 24, 26, 29, 32, 39, 40, 43] have driven their applications in various fields, such as 3D scene
understanding [11, 20, 21, 22, 35, 58, 63], vision-language-action models [3, 25, 36, 47], embodied
navigation [55, 59, 61], and learning 3D knowledge from videos [35, 55, 58].
Efforts [35, 41, 58] have been made to improve the 3D spatial understanding capability of MLLMs by
considering scenes as video sequences. For example, Video-3D LLM [41, 58] injects 3D coordinates
into visual features at patch level to improve 3D perception. GPT4Scene [35] leverages BEV
maps [28] rendered from reconstructed 3D point clouds for global awareness. However, a shared
limitation of these approaches is their dependence on dense 3D data input (e.g., depth maps and
point maps), which are often hard to acquire in certain real-world scenarios. Although estimating 3D
attributes directly from images is possible [38, 42], it can introduce estimation errors and therefore
degrade the performance, thus restricting their practical applicability. This naturally leads to the
question: “Can MLLMs understand the 3D world directly from videos without any explicit 3D data
input?”
Recent research [50] has shown that MLLMs face difficulties in understanding 3D geometry from
encoded visual representations. This issue arises because these MLLMs process video frames as
separate tokens through a visual encoder, which fails to capture crucial 3D geometric information,
such as correspondences across frames [30]. Consequently, the MLLM backbone has to infer the
∗
♯

denotes equal contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

