LLM-Explorer: A Plug-in Reinforcement Learning
Policy Exploration Enhancement Driven by Large
Language Models

Qianyue Hao∗, Yiwen Song∗, Qingmin Liao, Jian Yuan, Yong Li†
Department of Electronic Engineering, BNRist, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Abstract
Policy exploration is critical in reinforcement learning (RL), where existing approaches include ϵ-greedy, Gaussian process, etc. However, these approaches
utilize preset stochastic processes and are indiscriminately applied in all kinds of
RL tasks without considering task-specific features that influence policy exploration. Moreover, during RL training, the evolution of such stochastic processes
is rigid, which typically only incorporates a decay in the variance, failing to adjust flexibly according to the agent’s real-time learning status. Inspired by the
analyzing and reasoning capability of large language models (LLMs), we design LLM-Explorer to adaptively generate task-specific exploration strategies
with LLMs, enhancing the policy exploration in RL. In our design, we sample
the learning trajectory of the agent during the RL training in a given task and
prompt the LLM to analyze the agent’s current policy learning status and then
generate a probability distribution for future policy exploration. Updating the
probability distribution periodically, we derive a stochastic process specialized
for the particular task and dynamically adjusted to adapt to the learning process. Our design is a plug-in module compatible with various widely applied RL
algorithms, including the DQN series, DDPG, TD3, and any possible variants developed based on them. Through extensive experiments on the Atari and MuJoCo
benchmarks, we demonstrate LLM-Explorer’s capability to enhance RL policy exploration, achieving an average performance improvement up to 37.27%. Our code
is open-source at https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/LLM-Explorer
for reproducibility.

1

Introduction

In recent decades, reinforcement learning (RL) has been proven to be a powerful tool for training
smart agents in solving sequential decision-making problems [1, 2]. The success of deep RL is
especially noteworthy in tasks with high complexity, such as game playing [3, 4, 5, 6], chip design [7],
smart city governance [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], where deep RL agents now exhibit performance
surpassing human professionals in more and more scenarios. In the training of RL agents, policy
exploration plays an indispensable role, which allows the agents to sample a diverse range of actions
and uncover better strategies that may not be immediately apparent. The explore-exploit trade-off is a
critical aspect of reinforcement learning, where agents must balance exploring new possibilities to
improve long-term rewards and exploiting known strategies to maximize immediate gains.
1
2

Qianyue Hao and Yiwen Song contribute equally to this work.
Yong Li is the corresponding author, email: liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

