rStar-Coder: Scaling Competitive Code Reasoning
with a Large-Scale Verified Dataset

2,3

Bingcheng Dong
1

Yifei Liu1 Li Lyna Zhang2† Yi Zhu2
Xudong Zhou2,4 Ning Shang2 Fan Yang2 Cheng Li1,⋄ Mao Yang2

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Advancing code reasoning in large language models (LLMs) is fundamentally
limited by the scarcity of high-difficulty datasets, especially those with verifiable input-output test cases necessary for rigorous solution validation at scale.
We introduce rStar-Coder, which significantly improves LLM code reasoning
capabilities by constructing a large-scale, verified dataset of 418K competitionlevel code problems, 580K long-reasoning solutions along with rich test cases
of varying difficulty. This is achieved through three core contributions: (1) we
curate competitive programming code problems and solutions to synthesize new,
solvable problems; (2) we introduce a reliable input-output test case synthesis
pipeline that decouples the generation into a three-step input generation method
and a mutual verification mechanism for effective output labeling; (3) we augment problems with high-quality, test-case-verified long-reasoning solutions. Extensive experiments on Qwen models (1.5B-14B) across various code reasoning benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of rStar-Coder dataset, achieving
leading performance comparable to frontier reasoning LLMs with significantly
smaller model sizes. On LiveCodeBench, rStar-Coder improves Qwen2.5-7B
from 17.4% to an impressive 57.3%, and Qwen2.5-14B from 23.3% to 62.5%,
surpassing o3-mini (low) by 3.1%. On the more challenging USA Computing
Olympiad, our 7B model achieves an average pass@1 accuracy of 16.15%, outperforming the frontier-level QWQ-32B. rStar-Coder dataset is publicly available at
https://huggingface.co/datasets/microsoft/rStar-Coder.

Figure 1: Pass@1 accuracy on code reasoning benchmarks.
∗

Yifei Liu, Bingcheng Dong, and Xudong Zhou completed this work during their internships at MSRA.
Project leader: lzhani@microsoft.com
⋄
Corresponding author: chengli7@ustc.edu.cn
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

