Martingale Score: An Unsupervised Metric for
Bayesian Rationality in LLM Reasoning

Zhonghao He∗
University of Cambridge
zh378@cam.ac.uk

Tianyi Qiu∗
Peking University
qiutianyi.qty@gmail.com

Hirokazu Shirado†
Carnegie Mellon University
shirado@cmu.edu

Maarten Sap†
Carnegie Mellon University
maartensap@cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in reasoning techniques have substantially improved the performance of large language models (LLMs), raising expectations for their ability to
provide accurate, truthful, and reliable information. However, emerging evidence
suggests that iterative reasoning may foster belief entrenchment, rather than enhancing truth-seeking behavior. In this study, we propose a systematic evaluation
framework for belief entrenchment in LLM reasoning by leveraging the Martingale
property from Bayesian statistics. This property implies that, under rational belief
updating, the expected value of future beliefs should remain equal to the current
belief, i.e., belief updates cannot be predicted from solely the current belief. We
propose the unsupervised, regression-based Martingale Score to measure violations of this property, signaling a deviation from the Bayesian ability of updating
on new evidence. In open-ended problem domains, including event forecasting,
value-laden questions, and academic paper review, we found such violations to be
widespread across models, reasoning paradigms, problem domains, and system
prompts, where the future beliefs are consistently predictable from the model’s
current belief, a phenomenon which we term belief entrenchment. Through comprehensive experiments, we identify the models (e.g., GPT-4o), reasoning techniques
(e.g., chain of thought), and domains (e.g., forecasting) more prone to belief entrenchment. Finally, we validate the Martingale Score by showing that it predicts
ground-truth accuracy on problem domains where ground truth labels are available.
This indicates that, while designed as an unsupervised metric that operates even in
domains without access to ground truth, the Martingale Score is a useful proxy of
the truth-seeking ability of the LLM reasoning process.

1

Introduction
Should the state of New York (NY) be split into two states?

Consider a stubborn person who refuses to be
Polls show limited enthusiasm.
30% Weak No
shown wrong, or a king surrounded by sycoSplitting causes administrative headache. 20% No
phants. Human beings, in their efforts to seek
true beliefs, often end up entrenching their preCalifornia repeated proposals have failed. 10% Strong No
existing beliefs, whether due to their own confirmation bias [Klayman, 1995] or due to external Figure 1: Example of Belief Entrenchment: LLM
progressively updates beliefs in favor of its prior
∗
Equal contribution.
belief. Its belief update is highly predictable from
†
These authors jointly supervised this work.
the prior, violating the Martingale property.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

