On the Expressive Power of Mixture-of-Experts for
Structured Complex Tasks

Mingze Wang
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
mingzewang@stu.pku.edu.cn
Weinan E
Center for Machine Learning Research and School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
AI for Science Institute, Beijing, China
weinan@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Mixture-of-experts networks (MoEs) have demonstrated remarkable efficiency in
modern deep learning. Despite their empirical success, the theoretical foundations
underlying their ability to model complex tasks remain poorly understood. In this
work, we conduct a systematic study of the expressive power of MoEs in modeling
complex tasks with two common structural priors: low-dimensionality and sparsity.
For shallow MoEs, we prove that they can efficiently approximate functions supported on low-dimensional manifolds, overcoming the curse of dimensionality. For
deep MoEs, we show that O(L)-layer MoEs with E experts per layer can approximate piecewise functions comprising E L pieces with compositional sparsity, i.e.,
they can exhibit an exponential number of structured tasks. Our analysis reveals the
roles of critical architectural components and hyperparameters in MoEs, including
the gating mechanism, expert networks, the number of experts, and the number of
layers, and offers natural suggestions for MoE variants.

1

Introduction

Mixture-of-experts (MoE) models (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan and Jacobs, 1994) have recently
achieved significant success in deep learning, particularly as a core architectural component of
modern large language models (LLMs) (Abdin et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2024; Cai
et al., 2025). These models have demonstrated strong capabilities across a wide range of complex and
diverse tasks, including mathematical reasoning, logical inference, language understanding, and code
generation. Despite their empirical success, the theoretical foundations underlying MoEs remain
poorly understood, especially in their capacity to efficiently model complex tasks.
In both machine learning and applied mathematics, it is widely recognized that although real-world
tasks may appear complex, they often exhibit latent structures. Two prominent structural priors are:
(1) low-dimensional structure: high-dimensional data typically lies on a manifold of much lower
intrinsic dimension; (2) sparse structure: meaningful signals tend to admit sparse representations in
suitable bases or dictionaries. These structural priors have motivated numerous influential algorithms,
including dimensionality reduction (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), sparse regression via Lasso (Tibshirani,
1996), compressed sensing (Donoho, 2006), and neural network pruning and compression techniques.
In this work, we investigate the expressive power of MoE networks for modeling complex tasks that
exhibit either low-dimensional or sparse structure. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

