Continuous Concepts Removal in Text-to-image
Diffusion Models
Tingxu Han
Nanjing University
txhan@smail.nju.edu.cn
Yanrong Hu
Yangzhou University
mx120240574@stu.yzu.edu.cn

Weisong Sun†
Nanyang Technological University
weisong.sun@ntu.edu.sg

Chunrong Fang†
Nanjing University
fangchunrong@nju.edu.cn

Shiqing Ma
University of Massachusetts at Amherst
shiqingma@umass.edu

Tao Zheng
Nanjing University
zt@nju.edu.cn

Yonglong Zhang
Yangzhou University
ylzhang@yzu.edu.cn
Zhenyu Chen
Nanjing University
zychen@nju.edu.cn

Zhenting Wang
Rutgers University
zt.wang1999@gmail.com

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have shown an impressive ability to generate highquality images from input textual descriptions/prompts. However, concerns have
been raised about the potential for these models to create content that infringes on
copyrights or depicts disturbing subject matter. Removing specific concepts from
these models is a promising solution to this issue. However, existing methods for
concept removal do not work well in practical but challenging scenarios where
concepts need to be continuously removed. Specifically, these methods lead to poor
alignment between the text prompts and the generated image after the continuous
removal process. To address this issue, we propose a novel concept removal
approach called CCRT that includes a designed knowledge distillation paradigm.
CCRT constrains the text-image alignment behavior during the continuous concept
removal process by using a set of text prompts. These prompts are generated
through our genetic algorithm, which employs a designed fuzzing strategy. To
evaluate the effectiveness of CCRT, we conduct extensive experiments involving
the removal of various concepts, algorithmic metrics, and human studies. The
results demonstrate that CCRT can effectively remove the targeted concepts from
the model in a continuous manner while maintaining the high image generation
quality (e.g., text-image alignment). The code of CCRT is available at https:
//github.com/wssun/CCRT.

1

Introduction

Advancements in Artificial Intelligence Generated Contents (AIGCs) [53] have revolutionized the
field of image synthesis [34, 43, 55], among which text-to-image diffusion models enable the creation
of high-quality images from textual descriptions [37, 58]. However, this progress has also raised
significant concerns regarding the potential misuse of these models [13, 7, 49, 41]. Such misuse
†

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

