Out-of-Distribution Generalized Graph Anomaly
Detection with Homophily-aware Environment Mixup

Sibo Tian1 , Xin Wang1∗, Zeyang Zhang1 , Haibo Chen1 , Wenwu Zhu1∗
1
Tsinghua University

Abstract
Graph anomaly detection (GAD) is widely prevalent in scenarios such as financial
fraud detection, anti-money laundering and social bot detecion. However, structural
distribution shifts are commonly observed in real-world GAD data due to selection
bias, resulting in reduced homophily. Existing GAD methods tend to rely on homophilic shortcuts when trained on high-homophily structures, limiting their ability
to generalize well to data with low homophily under structural distribution shifts.
In this study, we propose to handle structural distribution shifts by generating novel
environments characterized by diverse homophilic structures and utilizing invariant
patterns, i.e., features and structures with the capability of stable prediction across
structural distribution shifts, which face two challenges: (1) How to discover invariant patterns from entangled features and structures, as structures are sensitive to
varying homophilic distributions. (2) How to systematically construct new environments with diverse homophilic structures. To address these challenges, we propose
Ego-Neighborhood Disentangled Encoder with Homophily-aware Environment
Mixup (HEM), which effectively handles structural distribution shifts in GAD by
discovering invariant patterns. Specifically, we first propose an ego-neighborhood
disentangled encoder to decouple the learning of feature and structural embeddings,
which facilitates subsequent improvements in the invariance of structural embeddings for prediction. Next, we introduce a homophily-aware environment mixup
that dynamically adjusts edge weights through adversarial learning, effectively
generating environments with diverse structural distributions. Finally, we iteratively
train the classifier and environment mixup via adversarial training, simultaneously
improving the diversity of constructed environments and discovering invariant
patterns under structural distribution shifts. Extensive experiments on real-world
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms existing baselines and achieves
state-of-the-art performance under structural distribution shift.

1

Introduction

Graph anomaly detection (GAD) [1] represents a classical task in graph machine learning, with
extensive applications in financial fraud detection[2], anti-money laundering[3], and social bot
detection[4, 5]. Typically, GAD can be formulated as a semi-supervised node classification
problem[6], where the objective is to identify anomalous nodes in the input graph. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated superior predictive capabilities in GAD tasks due to their
ability to handle complex topological relationships and model sophisticated node representations[7].
However, structural distribution shifts[8–11] are prevalent in real-world graph anomaly detection scenarios due to factors such as selection bias[12]. For example, in anti-money laundering contexts[13],
coordinated money laundering accounts are more likely to be identified and labeled compared to
∗

Corresponding authors. {xin_wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

