LiteReality: Graphics-Ready 3D Scene
Reconstruction from RGB-D Scans
Zhening Huang1
Hengshuang Zhao2
1

University of Cambridge

Xiaoyang Wu2
Fangcheng Zhong1
Matthias Nießner3
Joan Lasenby1

2

3
The University of Hong Kong
Technical University of Munich
https://litereality.github.io

Figure 1: From RGB-D Scan to Graphics-Ready 3D Scene. LiteReality reconstructs compact,
realistic 3D environments from real-world RGB-D scans, featuring near-photorealistic appearance,
articulated geometry, and physically based rendering (PBR) materials—providing assets that can be
easily integrated into simulation or rendering pipeline.

Abstract
We propose LiteReality, a novel pipeline that converts RGB-D scans of indoor
environments into compact, realistic, and interactive 3D virtual replicas. LiteReality
not only reconstructs scenes that visually resemble reality but also supports key
features essential for graphics pipelines—such as object individuality, articulation,
high-quality physically based rendering materials. At its core, LiteReality first
performs scene understanding and parses the results into a coherent 3D layout
and objects, with the help of a structured scene graph. It then reconstructs the
scene by retrieving the most visually similar 3D artist-crafted models from a
curated asset database. Later, the Material Painting module enhances the realism
of retrieved objects by recovering high-quality, spatially varying materials. Finally,
the reconstructed scene is integrated into a simulation engine with basic physical
properties applied to enable interactive behavior. The resulting scenes are compact,
editable, and fully compatible with standard graphics pipelines, making them
suitable for applications in AR/VR, gaming, robotics, and digital twins. In addition,
LiteReality introduces a training-free object retrieval module that achieves state-ofthe-art similarity performance, as benchmarked on the Scan2CAD dataset, along
with a robust Material Painting module capable of transferring appearances from
images of any style to 3D assets—even in the presence of severe misalignment,
occlusion, and poor lighting. We demonstrate the effectiveness of LiteReality on
both real-life scans and public datasets.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

