How to build a consistency model:
Learning flow maps via self-distillation

Nicholas M. Boffi
Carnegie Mellon University

Michael S. Albergo
Harvard University

Eric Vanden-Eijnden
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences

Abstract
Flow-based generative models achieve state-of-the-art sample quality, but require
the expensive solution of a differential equation at inference time. Flow map models, commonly known as consistency models, encompass many recent efforts to
improve inference-time efficiency by learning the solution operator of this differential equation. Yet despite their promise, these models lack a unified description
that clearly explains how to learn them efficiently in practice. Here, building on
the methodology proposed in Boffi et al. (2024), we present a systematic algorithmic framework for directly learning the flow map associated with a flow or
diffusion model. By exploiting a relationship between the velocity field underlying
a continuous-time flow and the instantaneous rate of change of the flow map, we
show how to convert any distillation scheme into a direct training algorithm via
self-distillation, eliminating the need for pre-trained teachers. We introduce three
algorithmic families based on different mathematical characterizations of the flow
map: Eulerian, Lagrangian, and Progressive methods, which we show encompass
and extend all known distillation and direct training schemes for consistency models. We find that the novel class of Lagrangian methods, which avoid both spatial
derivatives and bootstrapping from small steps by design, achieve significantly
more stable training and higher performance than more standard Eulerian and Progressive schemes. Our methodology unifies existing training schemes under a single
common framework and reveals new design principles for accelerated generative
modeling. Associated code is available at https://github.com/nmboffi/flow-maps.

1

Introduction

Generative models based on dynamical systems, such as flows and diffusions, have achieved remarkable successes in vision (Song et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2024; Polyak et al., 2025),
language (Lou et al., 2024), protein structure prediction (Abramson et al., 2024), weather forecasting (Price et al., 2024), and materials design (Zeni et al., 2025). While highly expressive, dynamical
models leverage the solution of a differential equation for sample generation, which typically requires
repeated evaluation of the learned model. This computational bottleneck has limited the application
of flows and diffusions in domains where rapid inference is crucial, such as real-time control (Black
et al., 2024; Chi et al., 2024) and image editing, and as a result has led to intense interest in accelerated
inference. One particularly promising approach, which underlies consistency models (Song et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2024), is to estimate the flow map associated with the deterministic probability flow
equation instead of the velocity field governing its instantaneous dynamics. The flow map is defined
by the integrated flow and can be used to generate samples in as few as one model evaluation, leading
to inference that can be 10 − 100× faster than traditional dynamical models. This dramatic speedup
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

