PIPE: Physics-Informed Position Encoding for
Alignment of Satellite Images and Time Series in
Typhoon Forecasting
Haobo Li1 Eunseo Jung1 Zixin Chen1 Zhaowei Wang1
Yueya Wang2 Huamin Qu1 Alexis Kai Hon Lau2
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
2
Division of Environment & Sustainability
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
hliem@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Multimodal time series forecasting is foundational in various fields, such as utilizing satellite imagery and numerical data for predicting typhoons in climate science. However, existing multimodal approaches primarily focus on utilizing text
data to help time series forecasting, leaving the visual data in existing time series datasets underexplored. Furthermore, it is challenging for models to effectively capture the physical information embedded in visual data, such as satellite
imagery’s temporal and geospatial context, which extends beyond images themselves. To address this gap, we propose physics-informed positional encoding
(PIPE), a lightweight method that embeds physical information into vision language models (VLMs). PIPE introduces two key innovations: (1) a physicsinformed positional indexing scheme for mapping physics to positional IDs, and
(2) a variant-frequency positional encoding mechanism for encoding frequency
information of physical variables and sequential order of tokens within the embedding space. By preserving both the physical information and sequential order
information, PIPE significantly improves multimodal alignment and forecasting
accuracy. Through the experiments on the most representative and the largest
open-sourced satellite image dataset, PIPE achieves state-of-the-art performance
in both deep learning forecasting and climate domain methods, demonstrating superiority across benchmarks, including a 12% improvement in typhoon intensity
forecasting over prior works.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays a crucial role in climate modeling [58]. This task involves modeling
temporal dependencies to predict future values of a target variable, a challenge exacerbated by noise,
non-stationarity, and the frequent need to integrate heterogeneous auxiliary data. While traditional
methods like Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) rely on statistical priors [12],
deep learning architectures (e.g., LSTMs [13], Transformers [47]) have recently dominated the field
by learning latent temporal patterns from data. However, these methods still struggle to deliver
precise forecasts amid the complexity and scale of real-world data, leaving high-stakes tasks such as
typhoon-track prediction continue to have a long way to go.
The rise of large language models (LLMs) as a type of sequence modeling has introduced new opportunities for time series forecasting. Although LLMs were originally built for NLP tasks such
as text generation [36] and summarization [7], their core objective naturally aligns with time-series
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

