Think before Recommendation:
Autonomous Reasoning-enhanced Recommender

Xiaoyu Kong1 Junguang Jiang1 Bin Liu1 Ziru Xu1
Han Zhu1 Jian Xu1 Bo Zheng1 Jiancan Wu3,4∗ Xiang Wang2∗
1
Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba, China
2
National University of Singapore
3
Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science
linlin.kxy@alibaba-inc.com
wujcan@gmail.com
xiangwang1223@gmail.com

Abstract
The core task of recommender systems is to learn user preferences from historical
user-item interactions. With the rapid development of large language models
(LLMs), recent research has explored leveraging the reasoning capabilities of LLMs
to enhance rating prediction tasks. However, existing distillation-based methods
suffer from limitations such as the teacher model’s insufficient recommendation
capability, costly and static supervision, and superficial transfer of reasoning ability.
To address these issues, this paper proposes RecZero, a reinforcement learning
(RL)-based recommendation paradigm that abandons the traditional multi-model
and multi-stage distillation approach. Instead, RecZero trains a single LLM through
pure RL to autonomously develop reasoning capabilities for rating prediction.
RecZero consists of two key components: (1) "Think-before-Recommendation"
prompt construction, which employs a structured reasoning template to guide
the model in step-wise analysis of user interests, item features, and user-item
compatibility; and (2) rule-based reward modeling, which adopts group relative
policy optimization (GRPO) to compute rewards for reasoning trajectories and
optimize the LLM. Additionally, the paper explores a hybrid paradigm, RecOne,
which combines supervised fine-tuning with RL, initializing the model with coldstart reasoning samples and further optimizing it with RL. Experimental results
demonstrate that RecZero and RecOne significantly outperform existing baseline
methods on multiple benchmark datasets, validating the superiority of the RL
paradigm in achieving autonomous reasoning-enhanced recommender systems.
Our codes are available at https://github.com/AkaliKong/RecZero.

1

Introduction

Recommender models aim to learn user preferences on items from historical user-item interactions
(e.g., ratings, clicks, purchases) [1–7]. Motivated by the rapid progress of large language models
(LLMs) [8–11], recent research has explored adapting LLMs as recommenders, leveraging their
strengths in world knowledge, semantic understanding, and reasoning. A promising direction is
to leverage LLMs’ reasoning capabilities [12–16] to enhance rating prediction [17–19] — a core
recommendation task that explicitly models user preferences by predicting their ratings on items.
Upon scrutinizing prior studies on such reasoning-enhanced rating predictors [20–25], we can
summarize a common pipeline: (1) Given a user’s rating on a target item, a teacher model — often a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

