Scalable Policy-Based RL Algorithms for POMDPs

Ameya Anjarlekar
UIUC
ameyasa2@illinois.edu

S. Rasoul Etesami
UIUC
etesami1@illinois.edu

R. Srikant
UIUC
rsrikant@illinois.edu

Abstract
The continuous nature of belief states in POMDPs presents significant computational challenges in learning the optimal policy. In this paper, we consider an
approach that solves a Partially Observable Reinforcement Learning (PORL) problem by approximating the corresponding POMDP model into a finite-state Markov
Decision Process (MDP) (called Superstate MDP). We first derive theoretical guarantees that improve upon prior work that relate the optimal value function of the
transformed Superstate MDP to the optimal value function of the original POMDP.
Next, we propose a policy-based learning approach with linear function approximation to learn the optimal policy for the Superstate MDP. Consequently, our approach
shows that a POMDP can be approximately solved using TD-learning followed by
Policy Optimization by treating it as an MDP, where the MDP state corresponds
to a finite history. We show that the approximation error decreases exponentially
with the length of this history. To the best of our knowledge, our finite-time bounds
are the first to explicitly quantify the error introduced when applying standard TD
learning to a setting where the true dynamics are not Markovian.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a robust and systematic framework for solving sequential
decision-making problems by modeling these problems as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
However, many real-world systems such as robotic controllers must operate under uncertainty,
handling incomplete, noisy, or ambiguous data, making traditional RL techniques ineffective for such
problems Cassandra et al. [1996].
To address such challenges, partially observable reinforcement learning (PORL) extends the RL framework by modeling these problems as Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs).
This approach accounts for hidden states, enabling effective decision-making under uncertainty.
Beyond these applications, PORL is widely applied in areas such as autonomous driving Levinson
et al. [2011], personalized content recommendations Li et al. [2010], medical diagnosis Hauskrecht
and Fraser [2000], and games Brown and Sandholm [2019], where decision-making under partial
observability is crucial. As a result, addressing decision-making under uncertainty has become a
critical topic across diverse fields such as operations research and healthcare.
Although POMDPs provide a general framework for modeling decision-making under uncertainty,
solving them presents significant computational challenges even when the exact model of the POMDP
is known. The early works of Smallwood and Sondik [1973], Åström [1965] focused on the planning
problem and effectively converted POMDPs into MDPs via belief states. However, the continuous
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

