SAD Neural Networks: Divergent Gradient Flows and
Asymptotic Optimality via o-minimal Structures

Julian Kranza,b

Davide Gallonc,d

Steffen Dereiche

Arnulf Jentzenf,g

a

Department of Information Systems,
University of Münster, Germany, email: julian.kranz@uni-muenster.de
b
Applied Mathematics: Institute for Analysis and Numerics,
University of Münster, Germany, email: julian.kranz@uni-muenster.de
c
Applied Mathematics: Institute for Analysis and Numerics,
University of Münster, Germany, email: davide.gallon@uni-muenster.de
d
RiskLab Switzerland, ETH Zürich, Switzerland, email: dgallon@ethz.ch
e
Applied Mathematics: Institute for Mathematical Stochastics,
University of Münster, Germany, email: steffen.dereich@uni-muenster.de
f
School of Data Science and School of Artificial Intelligence, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China, email: ajentzen@cuhk.edu.cn
g
Applied Mathematics: Institute for Analysis and Numerics,
University of Münster, Germany, email: ajentzen@uni-muenster.de

Abstract
We study gradient flows for loss landscapes of fully connected feedforward neural
networks with commonly used continuously differentiable activation functions
such as the logistic, hyperbolic tangent, softplus or GELU function. We prove that
the gradient flow either converges to a critical point or diverges to infinity while the
loss converges to an asymptotic critical value. Moreover, we prove the existence
of a threshold ε > 0 such that the loss value of any gradient flow initialized at
most ε above the optimal level converges to it. For polynomial target functions and
sufficiently big architecture and data set, we prove that the optimal loss value is zero
and can only be realized asymptotically. From this setting, we deduce our main
result that any gradient flow with sufficiently good initialization diverges to infinity.
Our proof heavily relies on the geometry of o-minimal structures. We confirm
these theoretical findings with numerical experiments and extend our investigation
to more realistic scenarios, where we observe an analogous behavior.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning in practice has far outpaced our theoretical understanding of neural
network training dynamics. While gradient-based optimization methods – such as (stochastic)
gradient descent and its variants [77, 75, 43, 35, 57] – routinely achieve near-zero training loss on
complex tasks, the theoretical principles governing their convergence remain poorly understood,
particularly in realistic, non-convex settings. Even for the mathematically more tractable gradient
flow, which can be viewed as the continuous time limit of gradient descent, a fundamental question
persists:
Under what conditions does the gradient flow converge to a good local minimum?1
1

Note that one cannot always expect convergence to global minima [50, 29, 30], but rather local minima
with low risk level [46, 40, 41].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

