MetaSlot: Break Through the Fixed Number of Slots
in Object-Centric Learning

1

Hongjia Liu1 Rongzhen Zhao1∗ Haohan Chen2 Joni Pajarinen1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
2
Department of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
{hongjia.liu, rongzhen.zhao, joni.pajarinen}@aalto.fi
sajel@stu.scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning object-level, structured representations is widely regarded as a key to better generalization in vision and underpins the design of next-generation Pre-trained
Vision Models (PVMs). Mainstream Object-Centric Learning (OCL) methods
adopt Slot Attention or its variants to iteratively aggregate objects’ super-pixels
into a fixed set of query feature vectors, termed slots. However, their reliance on
a static slot count leads to an object being represented as multiple parts when the
number of objects varies. We introduce MetaSlot, a plug-and-play Slot Attention
variant that adapts to variable object counts. MetaSlot (i) maintains a codebook that
holds prototypes of objects in a dataset by vector-quantizing the resulting slot representations; (ii) removes duplicate slots from the traditionally aggregated slots by
quantizing them with the codebook; and (iii) injects progressively weaker noise into
the Slot Attention iterations to accelerate and stabilize the aggregation. MetaSlot is
a general Slot Attention variant that can be seamlessly integrated into existing OCL
architectures. Across multiple public datasets and tasks–including object discovery
and recognition–models equipped with MetaSlot achieve significant performance
gains and markedly interpretable slot representations, compared with existing Slot
Attention variants. The code is available at https://github.com/lhj-lhj/MetaSlot.

1

Introduction

Human intelligence is rooted in limited perceptual experience–especially visual information–which
enables it to demonstrate outstanding transfer and generalization abilities in entirely new task scenarios
[1, 2]. In recent years, major breakthroughs in embodied intelligence have further underscored the
inevitable trend of artificial intelligence moving into the physical world [3–5]. However, the key
challenge in achieving high-level cognitive reasoning [6, 7] and compositional generalization [8, 9]
lies in transforming visual inputs into structured, discrete, and independent object-level representations
[10–12], thereby granting agents a deep understanding of physical objects and their dynamic relations
[13, 14].
Object-Centric Learning (OCL) has rapidly developed against this backdrop. Its goal is to extract
object-level structured representations in an unsupervised manner, rather than relying on attributelevel features or global scene features. Among numerous methods [15–20], Slot Attention (SA) [11]
is currently the most influential and widely adopted. Through a competition mechanism among slots,
it iteratively clusters distributed scene representations into several object-oriented feature vectors,
named slots; each slot can then be decoded separately [11, 21], or all slots can be decoded jointly
in an autoregressive fashion [22, 23] to produce semantically consistent segmentation masks. This
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

