NSNQuant: A Double Normalization Approach for
Calibration-Free Low-Bit Vector Quantization of KV
Cache
Donghyun Son
Seoul National University
happydh1@snu.ac.kr

Euntae Choi
Seoul National University
euntae.choi175@gmail.com

Sungjoo Yoo∗
Seoul National University
sungjoo.yoo@gmail.com

Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM) inference is typically memory-intensive, especially
when processing large batch sizes and long sequences, due to the large size of
key-value (KV) cache. Vector Quantization (VQ) is recently adopted to alleviate
this issue, but we find that the existing approach is susceptible to distribution
shift due to its reliance on calibration datasets. To address this limitation, we
introduce NSNQuant, a calibration-free Vector Quantization (VQ) technique
designed for low-bit compression of the KV cache. By applying a three-step
transformation—1) a token-wise normalization (Normalize), 2) a channel-wise
centering (Shift), and 3) a second token-wise normalization (Normalize)—with
Hadamard transform, NSNQuant effectively aligns the token distribution with the
standard normal distribution. This alignment enables robust, calibration-free vector
quantization using a single reusable codebook. Extensive experiments show that
NSNQuant consistently outperforms prior methods in both 1-bit and 2-bit settings,
offering strong generalization and up to 3× throughput gain over full-precision
baselines.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have been widely adopted across various domains due to their strong
generalization capabilities [1]. Recently, with the emerging trend of using LLMs to solve complex
problems, their use has expanded into long-context scenarios such as long-context reasoning [40, 15]
and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [24]. However, when processing long sequences, LLM
inference requires a significant amount of memory and is memory-bound [22, 19].
One of the major causes is the large size of key-value (KV) cache, which linearly increases with
the sequence length. To alleviate this issue, many studies have proposed approaches to compressing
KV cache effectively, such as eviction [44, 25, 4, 32] and low-rank approximation [5, 26]. Among
them, quantization has been one of the most widely adopted approaches. Previous studies [30, 19]
analyze how outliers emerge in the KV cache and propose to quantize key and value along the channel
dimension and token dimension, respectively. Recently, Coupled Quantization (CQ) [43] proposed
to quantize multiple channels together, using centroids obtained from the calibration set. The idea
of CQ is identical to the concept of vector quantization (VQ), where groups of values are jointly
quantized into codebook indices. Utilizing the centroids as codebooks, CQ achieves state-of-the-art
performance in diverse tasks, proving the effectiveness of VQ in KV cache quantization.
In our study, we observe that CQ fails to generalize in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios where
the input distribution is different from that of the calibration set (in-distribution) [42]. For example,
Figure 1a shows that while CQ excels in WikiText-2, it performs much worse in C4, since it is
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

