Virtual Fitting Room: Generating Arbitrarily Long
Videos of Virtual Try-On from a Single Image

Jun-Kun Chen1,2∗
Aayush Bansal1
Minh Phuoc Vo1
Yu-Xiong Wang2
1
2
SpreeAI
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
immortalco.github.io/VirtualFittingRoom

Abstract
We introduce Virtual Fitting Room (VFR), a novel video generative model that
produces arbitrarily long virtual try-on videos. Our VFR models long video
generation tasks as an auto-regressive, segment-by-segment generation process,
eliminating the need for resource-intensive generation and lengthy video data,
while providing the flexibility to generate videos of arbitrary length. The key
challenges of this task are twofold: ensuring local smoothness between adjacent
segments and maintaining global temporal consistency across different segments.
To address these challenges, we propose our VFR framework, which ensures
smoothness through a prefix video condition and enforces consistency with the
anchor video—a 360◦ video that comprehensively captures the human’s wholebody appearance. Our VFR generates minute-scale virtual try-on videos with both
local smoothness and global temporal consistency under various motions, making
it a pioneering work in long virtual try-on video generation.

1

Introduction

Imagine being in a fitting room, trying on a garment, when a hurried knock interrupts you. Would
that allow you to truly experience the garment before buying it? No. To truly understand a garment,
one may want to interact with it in various ways. The computational methods for virtually trying on a
garment enable a user to see themselves, but only in an image [1–6] or a short 5∼10s video [7, 8],
limiting the user’s ability to fully experience a garment. We introduce Virtual Fitting Room (VFR) to
enable a user to study the interaction of garments with their body as long as they like. Unlike existing
image or video try-on methods, VFR allows a user to create arbitrarily long videos (720 × 1152
resolution at 8 FPS and can be further refined to 24 FPS) of themselves, given a single user image, a
desired garment, and a reference video performing the desired try-on motion. Fig. 1 shows a 30s and
a 90s video generated using our method.
Generating a 5s-long video is already a computationally demanding task [7, 8]. Naively extending
these methods requires even more computational resources and a large-scale video dataset containing
long videos for learning. To overcome these limitations, one may generate multiple short segments of
a long video one by one “auto-regressively” in timestamp order, and then merge them to create a long
video, as visualized in Fig. 4-(a). Inspired by common approaches in general long video generation
[9–14], we allow each segment to slightly overlap with the previous segment, and pass the overlapped
“prefix” of the current segment as a condition, ensuring a locally smooth transition between each
adjacent segment pair. However, these generated videos lack global temporal consistency, as shown
in Fig. 2-(a), which is difficult to fix after once they are generated. In this work, we draw inspiration
from the process of writing an essay with an outline as an “anchor.” We posit that creating long
videos is a two-step process that involves: (1) creating an “outline” or an “anchor” to guide the
∗

Work done during an internship at SpreeAI.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

