Counterfactual Identifiability via
Dynamic Optimal Transport

Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro†

Ainkaran Santhirasekaram

Ben Glocker

Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
We address the open question of counterfactual identification for high-dimensional
multivariate outcomes from observational data. Pearl (2000) argues that counterfactuals must be identifiable (i.e., recoverable from the observed data distribution)
to justify causal claims. A recent line of work on counterfactual inference shows
promising results but lacks identification, undermining the causal validity of its
estimates. To address this, we establish a foundation for multivariate counterfactual
identification using continuous-time flows, including non-Markovian settings under
standard criteria. We characterise the conditions under which flow matching yields
a unique, monotone, and rank-preserving counterfactual transport map with tools
from dynamic optimal transport, ensuring consistent inference. Building on this,
we validate the theory in controlled scenarios with counterfactual ground-truth and
demonstrate improvements in axiomatic counterfactual soundness on real images.

1

Introduction

It has been argued that shortcomings in today’s deep models reveal an overreliance on statistical
associations and a lack of causal understanding (Schölkopf et al., 2021; Bareinboim et al., 2022).
This view has sparked interest in causality within machine learning (Peters et al., 2017; Castro et al.,
2020; Schölkopf, 2022). Causal reasoning is the process of drawing conclusions from a causal model,
which represents our assumptions about the data-generating process. Thus, causality and generative
modelling are inextricably linked. Pearl (2009) formalised causal inference using the Structural
Causal Model (SCM) framework, in which variables are generated by functional assignments and
dependencies are represented by a graph. This framework (with do-calculus (Pearl, 1995)) expresses
causal queries and, under stated assumptions, identifies causal effects that can be estimated from data.
Why is identification essential? Without identification it is impossible to make a precise causal claim:
there can exist observationally equivalent models that yield different answers, and providing such
guarantees is what causal methods are designed for (Bareinboim et al., 2022; Hyvärinen et al., 2024).
Indeed, do-calculus (Pearl, 1995) is an identification tool that tells us whether a causal effect can be
determined from observed data and a set of assumptions encoded in a causal graph. Further, Pearl
(2000) insists that any counterfactual query be bound by an identifiability requirement, that is, that
there exists a unique mapping from the observed data distribution to the counterfactual of interest.
This work focuses on the identification of high-dimensional counterfactuals from observational data.
Counterfactuals are hypothetical scenarios given observed evidence, for example, one may query
“What would Y have been, had X been x”. Counterfactuals have broad scientific utility, supporting the
evaluation of interventions (Kusner et al., 2017; Tsirtsis and Rodriguez, 2023), the characterisation
of causal relationships (Karimi et al., 2020; Budhathoki et al., 2022), and the generation of targeted
synthetic data for downstream tasks (Pitis et al., 2022; Roschewitz et al., 2024; Mehta et al., 2025).
†

Email: f.de-sousa-ribeiro@imperial.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

