BrainEC-LLM: Brain Effective Connectivity
Estimation via Multiscale Mixing LLM

Wen Xiong, Junzhong Ji, Jinduo Liu ∗
Beijing University of Technology
xiongwen@emails.bjut.edu.cn, {jinduo, jjz01}@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive advancements
in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) analysis and causal discovery.
Considering the unique nature of the causal discovery field, which focuses on
extracting causal graphs from observed data, research on LLMs in this field is still at
an early exploratory stage. As a subfield of causal discovery, effective connectivity
(EC) has received even less attention, and LLM-based approaches in EC remain
unexplored. Existing LLM-based approaches for causal discovery typically rely
on iterative querying to assess the causal influence between variable pairs, without
any model adaptation or fine-tuning, making them ill-suited for handling the
cross-modal gap and complex causal structures. To this end, we propose BrainECLLM, the first method to fine-tune LLMs for estimating brain EC from fMRI
data. Specifically, multiscale decomposition mixing module decomposes fMRI
time series data into short-term and long-term multiscale trends, then mixing them
in bottom-up (fine to coarse) and top-down (coarse to fine) manner to extract
multiscale temporal variations. And cross attention is applied with pre-trained
word embeddings to ensure consistency between the fMRI input and pre-trained
natural language. The experimental results on simulated and real resting-state
fMRI datasets demonstrate that BrainEC-LLM can achieve superior performance
when compared to state-of-the-art baselines. The code is available at https:
//github.com/XiongWenXww/BrainEC-LLM.

1

Introduction

Brain effective connectivity (EC) estimation has attracted significant scientific attention and has been
widely used in clinical studies involving Alzheimer’s disease [9, 65], schizophrenia [4], depression
[52], and autism spectrum disorders [37, 70]. Based on application needs, the most commonly used
neuroimaging modality is functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
In recent years, traditional machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) have made significant
progress in estimating brain EC using fMRI data [31]. Traditional ML methods are often highly
interpretable, and their relatively simple model structures lead to low computational complexity [61].
However, this simplicity also means that they require extensive feature engineering, have limited
capacity to handle complex relationships, and often necessitate different algorithms for different
problems [44]. In contrast, DL methods, with their more complex model structures, do not require
manual feature extraction [57, 41]. They can automatically extract, process, and make decisions based
on features from raw data [2, 8]. However, DL methods require separate training for specific tasks, a
large amount of labeled data, and costly model training [33].
∗

Corresponding author: Jinduo Liu (jinduo@bjut.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

