Imagined Autocurricula

Ahmet H. Güzel∗
University College London AI Centre
Jarek L. Liesen
University of Oxford

Matthew T. Jackson
University of Oxford

Tim Rocktäschel
University College London AI Centre

Ilija Bogunovic
University College London AI Centre

Jakob N. Foerster
University of Oxford

Jack Parker-Holder
University College London AI Centre

Abstract
Training agents to act in embodied environments typically requires vast training
data or access to accurate simulation, neither of which exists for many cases in
the real world. Instead, world models are emerging as an alternative–leveraging
offline, passively collected data, they make it possible to generate diverse worlds
for training agents in simulation. In this work, we harness world models to generate “imagined” environments to train robust agents capable of generalizing to
novel task variations. One of the challenges in doing this is ensuring the agent
trains on useful generated data. We thus propose a novel approach I M AC (Imagined Autocurricula) leveraging Unsupervised Environment Design (UED), which
induces an automatic curriculum over generated worlds. In a series of challenging, procedurally generated environments, we show it is possible to achieve strong
transfer performance on held-out environments having trained only inside a world
model learned from a narrower dataset. We believe this opens the path to utilizing
larger-scale, foundation world models for generally capable agents.

1

Introduction

Despite significant advancements in AI, we remain far from generally capable agents [1]. In the
2010s, progress towards this goal was driven by breakthroughs in deep reinforcement learning (RL,
[2]) where agents such as AlphaGo [3] showed it was possible to discover new knowledge beyond
human capabilities, like the famous move37. However, scaling RL in simulation to produce a more
general intelligence remains bottlenecked by the lack of sufficiently diverse and real-world simulators [4, 5]. By contrast, more recent years have been dominated by agents trained from vast quantities of Internet data. Here, agents have a broader knowledge of the real world but lack of ability to
discover new, superhuman behaviors since they are largely trained to mimic the training data.
World models are emerging as a promising approach to leverage the best of both. They “stand on the
shoulders of giants” by training on vast Internet data [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], but then enable agents to train
with RL inside their generated (or imagined) environments. Thus, world models make it possible for
agents to imagine potential outcomes without direct environment interaction, allowing them to train
across diverse scenarios with substantially fewer real experiences [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. In
theory, large foundation world models could then be used to generate sufficiently rich environments
for agents to learn superhuman behaviors for a swathe of embodied settings. Progress in world
models research has typically fallen into two categories.
∗

Corresponding author (ahmet.guzel.23@ucl.ac.uk).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

