MoGe-2: Accurate Monocular Geometry with Metric
Scale and Sharp Details

Ruicheng Wang1,2∗ Sicheng Xu2 Yue Dong2 Yu Deng2 Jianfeng Xiang3,2∗ Zelong Lv1,2∗
Guangzhong Sun1 Xin Tong2 Jiaolong Yang2†
1
USTC 2 Microsoft Research 3 Tsinghua University

Abstract
We propose MoGe-2, an advanced open-domain geometry estimation model that
recovers a metric scale 3D point map of a scene from a single image. Our method
builds upon the recent monocular geometry estimation approach, MoGe [61], which
predicts affine-invariant point maps with unknown scales. We explore effective
strategies to extend MoGe for metric geometry prediction without compromising
the relative geometry accuracy provided by the affine-invariant point representation.
Additionally, we discover that noise and errors in real data diminish fine-grained
detail in the predicted geometry. We address this by developing a unified data
refinement approach that filters and completes real data from different sources using
sharp synthetic labels, significantly enhancing the granularity of the reconstructed
geometry while maintaining the overall accuracy. We train our model on a large
corpus of mixed datasets and conducted comprehensive evaluations, demonstrating
its superior performance in achieving accurate relative geometry, precise metric
scale, and fine-grained detail recovery – capabilities that no previous methods have
simultaneously achieved.

1

Introduction

Estimating 3D geometry from a single monocular image is a challenging task with numerous
applications in computer vision and beyond. Recent advancements in Monocular Depth Estimation
(MDE) and Monocular Geometry Estimation (MGE) have been driven by foundation models trained
on large-scale datasets [67, 68, 44, 27, 61, 7]. Compared to depth estimation, MGE approaches often
also predict camera intrinsics, allowing pixels to be lifted into 3D space, thus enabling a broader
range of applications.
Despite the promising results of recent MGE models, they remain far from perfect and broadly
applicable. We expect an ideal MGE method to excel in three key areas: 1) geometry accuracy,
2) metric prediction, and 3) geometry granularity. While accurate global and relative geometry is
essential, metric scale is crucial for real-world applications such as SLAM [54, 36], Autonomous
Driving [56, 77], and Embodied AI [82, 81, 46]. In addition, recovering fine-grained details and sharp
features is also critical for these fields as well as others like image editing and generation [79, 75, 60].
To our knowledge, no existing method addresses all these needs well simultaneously.
In this paper, we introduce a new MGE method towards achieving these goals, while maintaining a
simple, principled, and pragmatic design. Our method is built upon the recent MoGe approach [61],
which predicts affine-invariant point maps from single images and achieves state-of-the-art geometry
accuracy. The cornerstone of MoGe is its optimized training scheme, including a robust and optimal
point cloud alignment solver as well as a multi-scale supervision method which enhances local
∗
†

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

