FADRM: Fast and Accurate Data Residual Matching
for Dataset Distillation
Jiacheng Cui∗1 , Xinyue Bi∗2 , Yaxin Luo1 , Xiaohan Zhao1 , Jiacheng Liu1 , Zhiqiang Shen†1
1

2

VILA Lab, MBZUAI

∗

Equal Contribution

†

University of Ottawa

Corresponding Author

Code: FADRM (GitHub)

Abstract
Residual connection has been extensively studied and widely applied at the model
architecture level. However, its potential in the more challenging data-centric
approaches remains unexplored. In this work, we introduce the concept of Data
Residual Matching for the first time, leveraging data-level skip connections to
facilitate data generation and mitigate data information vanishing. This approach
maintains a balance between newly acquired knowledge through pixel space optimization and existing core local information identification within raw data modalities, specifically for the dataset distillation task. Furthermore, by incorporating
training-time refinements, our method significantly improves computational efficiency, achieving superior performance while reducing training time and peak GPU
memory usage by 50%. Consequently, the proposed method Fast and Accurate
Data Residual Matching for Dataset Distillation (FADRM) establishes a new stateof-the-art, demonstrating substantial improvements over existing methods across
multiple dataset benchmarks in both efficiency and effectiveness. For instance, with
ResNet-18 as the student model and a 0.8% compression ratio on ImageNet-1K, the
method achieves 48.4% test accuracy in single-model dataset distillation and 50.9%
in multi-model dataset distillation, surpassing RDED by +6.4% and outperforming
state-of-the-art multi-model approaches, EDC and CV-DD, by +2.3% and +4.9%.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the computer vision and natural
language processing communities have predominantly focused on model-centric research, driving an unprecedented expansion in the scale of
neural networks. Landmark developments such
as LLMs and MLLMs in ChatGPT [26, 1], Gemini [36], DeepSeek [19] and other large-scale
foundation models have shown the tremendous
potential of deep learning architectures. However, as these models grow in complexity, the
dependency on high-quality, richly informative
datasets has become increasingly apparent, setting the stage for a paradigm shift towards datacentric approaches. Historically, the emphasis
on building bigger and more complex models
has often overshadowed the critical importance
of the data. While model-centric strategies have

FADRM+ (Our s) FADRM (Our s) SRe2L++ EDC G-VBSM

IPC=1 IPC=10

IPC=50

Figure 1: Total training hours on a single RTX4090 vs. test set accuracy, comparing prior stateof-the-art methods with our proposed framework
(+ denotes multi-model distillation).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

