Beyond Modality Collapse: Representations Blending
for Multimodal Dataset Distillation
Xin Zhang1,2
1

2

Ziruo Zhang3

Jiawei Du1,2

Zuozhu Liu4

Joey Tianyi Zhou1,2 !

Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore 4 Zhejiang University, China
{zhangx7, dujw, Joey_Zhou}@a-star.edu.sg
ziruo.z@u.nus.edu zuozhuliu@intl.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal Dataset Distillation (MDD) seeks to condense large-scale image-text
datasets into compact surrogates while retaining their effectiveness for cross-modal
learning. Despite recent progress, existing MDD approaches often suffer from
Modality Collapse, characterized by over-concentrated intra-modal representations and enlarged distributional gap across modalities. In this paper, for the first
time, we identify this issue as stemming from a fundamental conflict between
the over-compression behavior inherent in dataset distillation and the cross-modal
supervision imposed by contrastive objectives. To alleviate modality collapse,
we introduce RepBlend, a novel MDD framework that weakens overdominant
cross-modal supervision via representation blending, thereby significantly enhancing intra-modal diversity. Additionally, we observe that current MDD methods
impose asymmetric supervision across modalities, resulting in biased optimization. To address this, we propose symmetric projection trajectory matching, which
synchronizes the optimization dynamics using modality-specific projection heads,
thereby promoting balanced supervision and enhancing cross-modal alignment.
Experiments on Flickr-30K and MS-COCO show that RepBlend consistently
outperforms prior state-of-the-art MDD methods, achieving significant gains in
retrieval performance (e.g., +9.4 IR@10, +6.3 TR@10 under the 100-pair setting)
and offering up to 6.7→ distillation speedup. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/zhangxin-xd/RepBlend.

1

Introduction

The unprecedented expansion of large-scale datasets has catalyzed recent breakthroughs in deep
learning [6, 2, 1], but has also introduced considerable storage and computational overhead [20, 22].
Thus, reducing dataset size to streamline the development process has emerged as an important
research focus. Among various solutions, Dataset Distillation (DD) [50] has emerged as a compelling strategy, achieving high compression ratios by synthesizing a compact surrogate dataset
that approximates the training efficacy of the original dataset. The effectiveness of DD has been
demonstrated across various modalities, including images [4, 57], text [30, 32], videos [11, 51],
and graphs [29, 58]. These unimodal successes motivate its extension to increasingly prominent
multimodal scenarios [37, 28, 35, 5].
The pioneering effort in multimodal dataset distillation (MDD) is MTT-VL [53], which first validates
the feasibility of extending existing vanilla DD techniques to the image-text setting. Building on
this baseline, LoRS [55] further proposes to mine cross-modal similarity to calibrate the supervision
!

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

