Separating the what and how of compositional
computation to enable reuse and continual learning

Haozhe Shan∗
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
hs3594@columbia.edu

Sun Minni∗
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Department of Neuroscience
Columbia University
ms5724@columbia.edu

Lea Duncker
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Department of Neuroscience
Columbia University
ld3149@columbia.edu

Abstract
The ability to continually learn, retain and deploy skills to accomplish goals is a
key feature of intelligent and efficient behavior. However, the neural mechanisms
facilitating the continual learning and flexible (re-)composition of skills remain
elusive. Here, we study continual learning and the compositional reuse of learned
computations in recurrent neural network (RNN) models using a novel two-system
approach: one system that infers what computation to perform, and one that
implements how to perform it. We focus on a set of compositional cognitive tasks
commonly studied in neuroscience. To construct the what system, we first show that
a large family of tasks can be systematically described by a probabilistic generative
model, where compositionality stems from a shared underlying vocabulary of
discrete task epochs. We develop an unsupervised online learning approach that
can learn this model on a single-trial basis, building its vocabulary incrementally
as it is exposed to new tasks, and inferring the latent epoch structure as a timevarying computational context within a trial. We implement the how system as an
RNN whose low-rank components are composed according to the context inferred
by the what system. Contextual inference facilitates the creation, learning, and
reuse of low-rank RNN components as new tasks are introduced sequentially,
enabling continual learning without catastrophic forgetting. Using an example task
set, we demonstrate the efficacy and competitive performance of this two-system
learning framework, its potential for forward and backward transfer, as well as fast
compositional generalization to unseen tasks.

1

Introduction

Humans and animals exhibit a remarkable ability to learn and retain new skills, and flexibly deploy
them to accomplish goals in an ever-changing environment. A growing literature from neuroscience
and human behavior suggests that mechanisms for contextual inference and task abstraction may play
a crucial role for behavioral flexibility and learning [1–9]. An abstract, task-relevant context could
guide the selection and composition of different skills, while the maintenance of context-specific
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

