A3E: Towards Compositional Model Editing

Hongming Piao
City University of Hong Kong
hpiao6-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Hao Wang
City University of Hong Kong
hao.wang@my.cityu.edu.hk

Dapeng Oliver Wu†
City University of Hong Kong
dapengwu@cityu.edu.hk

Ying Wei†
Zhejiang University
ying.wei@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Model editing has become a de-facto practice to address hallucinations and outdated
knowledge of large language models (LLMs). However, existing methods are
predominantly evaluated in isolation, i.e., one edit at a time, failing to consider
a critical scenario of compositional model editing, where multiple edits must
be integrated and jointly utilized to answer real-world multifaceted questions.
For instance, in medical domains, if one edit informs LLMs that COVID-19
causes “fever” and another that it causes “loss of taste”, a qualified compositional
editor should enable LLMs to answer the question “What are the symptoms of
COVID-19?” with both “fever” and “loss of taste” (and potentially more). In this
work, we define and systematically benchmark this compositional model editing
(CME) task, identifying three key undesirable issues that existing methods struggle
with: knowledge loss, incorrect preceding and knowledge sinking. To overcome
these issues, we propose A3 E, a novel compositional editor that (1) adaptively
combines and adaptively regularizes pre-trained foundation knowledge in LLMs
in the stage of edit training and (2) adaptively merges multiple edits to better
meet compositional needs in the stage of edit composing. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that A3 E improves the composability by at least 22.45% without
sacrificing the performance of non-compositional model editing. The code is
available at https://github.com/piaohongming/A3E.

1

Introduction

LLMs learn extensive knowledge from massive pre-training corpora and utilize the learned knowledge
during inference to meet a wide range of tasks [1, 2, 3, 4]. Despite their impressive capabilities,
especially as the pre-training data and model size scale [5], LLMs remain prone to factual hallucinations [6] and outdated knowledge [7]. These errors often emerge gradually after deployment
and significantly impairs system reliability, which necessitates timely and effective corrections.
Conventional solutions such as re-training are not only time-consuming, but fine-tuning without
access to pre-training data also poses a high risk of interfering with irrelevant knowledge. Therefore,
model editing [8] has emerged as a promising approach that enables targeted updates to LLMs in
a data-efficient manner (minimal reliance on pre-training data), localized scope (limited impact on
irrelevant knowledge), and with high reliability (accurate correction of the targeted knowledge).
Efforts toward model editing center around improving reliability [9, 10], generalization [10, 11], and
locality [8, 12], with further studies exploring editing ripple effects [13], bidirectional generalization
[14], and its impact on downstream tasks [15, 16, 17, 18]. Progress along with these attempts is
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

