Real-Time Execution of Action Chunking Flow Policies

Kevin Black1,2, Manuel Y. Galliker1 Sergey Levine1,2
1
Physical Intelligence 2 UC Berkeley
{kevin,manuel,sergey}@physicalintelligence.company

Abstract
Modern AI systems, especially those interacting with the physical world, increasingly require real-time performance. However, the high latency of state-of-the-art
generalist models, including recent vision-language-action models (VLAs), poses
a significant challenge. While action chunking has enabled temporal consistency
in high-frequency control tasks, it does not fully address the latency problem,
leading to pauses or out-of-distribution jerky movements at chunk boundaries.
This paper presents a novel inference-time algorithm that enables smooth asynchronous execution of action chunking policies. Our method, real-time chunking
(RTC), is applicable to any diffusion- or flow-based VLA out of the box with no
re-training. It generates the next action chunk while executing the current one,
“freezing” actions guaranteed to execute and “inpainting” the rest. To test RTC, we
introduce a new benchmark of 12 highly dynamic tasks in the Kinetix simulator,
as well as evaluate 6 challenging real-world bimanual manipulation tasks. Results
demonstrate that RTC is fast, performant, and uniquely robust to inference delay,
significantly improving task throughput and enabling high success rates in precise
tasks—such as lighting a match—even in the presence of significant latency. See
https://pi.website/research/real_time_chunking for videos.

Acceleration
deg/s²

Velocity
deg/s

deg

Position

Time (s)

Real-time chunking (ours)
Synchronous
Temporal ensembling (Zhao et. al.)

Figure 1: Top: Real-time chunking (RTC) enables the robot to perform highly dexterous and dynamic tasks,
such as lighting a match—even in the presence of inference delays in excess of 300 milliseconds, corresponding
to more than 30% of the model’s prediction horizon. Bottom: RTC performs the same robot motion 20% faster
than synchronous inference [5, 30, 8, 24, 31, 59], and smoother than all competing methods, including temporal
ensembling [68]. The shown positions, velocities, and accelerations correspond to the shoulder joint of one arm,
and are taken from the first 10 seconds of a real autonomous match-lighting rollout.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

