WhAM: Towards A Translative Model of Sperm
Whale Vocalization
Orr Paradise1,2

Pranav Muralikrishnan∗1

Liangyuan Chen∗1

Hugo Flores García3

Roee Diamant4,2

David F. Gruber5,2

Shane Gero6,2

Bryan Pardo3

Shafi Goldwasser1,2
1

UC Berkeley
5

2
Project CETI 3 Northwestern University 4 Haifa University
City University of New York 6 Carleton University
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
Sperm whales communicate in short sequences of clicks known as codas. We
present WhAM (Whale Acoustics Model), the first transformer-based model capable of generating synthetic sperm whale codas from any audio prompt. WhAM is
built by finetuning VampNet, a masked acoustic token model pretrained on musical
audio, using 10k coda recordings collected over the past two decades. Through
iterative masked token prediction, WhAM generates high-fidelity synthetic codas
that preserve key acoustic features of the source recordings. We evaluate WhAM’s
synthetic codas using Fréchet Audio Distance and through perceptual studies with
expert marine biologists. On downstream classification tasks including rhythm,
social unit, and vowel classification, WhAM’s learned representations achieve
strong performance, despite being trained for generation rather than classification.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Project-CETI/wham

1

Introduction

Understanding the communication of sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus) is among the most
fascinating questions in animal behavioral studies.
Sperm whales communicate using codas—short sequences of clicks that vary in number, rhythm,
and tempo [Watkins and Schevill, 1977, Weilgart and Whitehead, 1993, Sharma et al., 2024a]. They
live in stable, female-led social units that form larger vocal clans based on dialect [Rendell and
Whitehead, 2003]. That is, the dialect of a social unit determines its clan, with social units associating
exclusively with other units from their clan [Gero et al., 2016a]. Furthermore, dialects are believed
to be learned socially rather than inherited genetically [Cantor and Whitehead, 2015, Rendell et al.,
2012].
The complexity of these learned vocal patterns has motivated new computational approaches to
understanding codas and their functionality. Leitao et al. [2024] modeled codas as (variable-length)
Markov chains, revealing new patterns of inter-clan social learning. Beguš et al. [2025] study vowellike spectral properties of codas, which were initially suggested by interpreting the codebook of a
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN). Most recently, Sharma et al. [2024b] trained a transformer
on click timings (inter-click intervals), which is able to predict codas in an exchange based on
long-term dependencies, as well as future diving behavior. These studies collectively highlight how
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

