Accelerating data-driven algorithm selection for
combinatorial partitioning problems

Vaggos Chatziafratis
UC Santa Cruz
vaggos@ucsc.edu

Ishani Karmarkar
Stanford University
ishanik@stanford.edu

Yingxi Li
Stanford University
yingxi@stanford.edu

Ellen Vitercik
Stanford University
vitercik@stanford.edu

Abstract
Data-driven algorithm selection is a powerful approach for choosing effective
heuristics for computational problems. It operates by evaluating a set of candidate
algorithms on a collection of representative training instances and selecting the
one with the best empirical performance. However, running each algorithm on
every training instance is computationally expensive, making scalability a central challenge. In practice, a common workaround is to evaluate algorithms on
smaller proxy instances derived from the original inputs. However, this practice
has remained largely ad hoc and lacked theoretical grounding. We provide the first
theoretical foundations for this practice by formalizing the notion of size generalization: predicting an algorithm’s performance on a large instance by evaluating it
on a smaller, representative instance, subsampled from the original instance. We
provide size generalization guarantees for three widely used clustering algorithms
(single-linkage, k-means++, and Gonzalez’s k-centers heuristic) and two canonical max-cut algorithms (Goemans-Williamson and Greedy). We characterize the
subsample size sufficient to ensure that performance on the subsample reflects
performance on the full instance, and our experiments support these findings.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial partitioning problems such as clustering and max-cut are fundamental in machine
learning [21, 22, 39, 40], finance [26] , and biology [38, 74]. These problems are typically NP-hard,
which has prompted the development of many practical approximation algorithms and heuristics.
However, selecting the most effective heuristic in practice remains a key challenge, and there is little
theoretical guidance on the best method to use on a given problem instance or application domain. In
clustering, for example, Ben-David [22] notes that algorithm selection is often performed “in a very
ad hoc, if not completely random, manner,” which is unfortunate “given [its] crucial effect” on the
resulting clustering.
To address this challenge, data-driven algorithm selection has emerged as a powerful approach,
offering systematic methods to identify high-performing algorithms for the given domain [28, 36, 63,
73, 84]. Gupta and Roughgarden [52] provided a formal PAC-learning framework for data-driven
algorithm selection, where we are given candidate algorithms A1 , ..., AK and training problem
instances X1 , ..., XN from the application domain. A value function value evaluates the algorithm’s
output quality—for example, for max-cut, this is the density of the returned cut whereas for clustering,
this is the quality of the resultant clustering. The goal is then to select A⋆ ∈ {A1 , ..., Ak } which
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

