Rooms from Motion: Un-posed Indoor 3D Object
Detection as Localization and Mapping

Justin Lazarow

Kai Kang Afshin Dehghan
Apple
{jlazarow, kai_kang, adehghan}@apple.com
https://github.com/apple/ml-cubifyanything

Rooms from Motion realizes an object-centric framework for metric localization and semantic 3D object-level
mapping from un-posed RGB images without the need for explicit 2D keypoints or point clouds. Given an
unordered collection of images, Rooms from Motion detects every object as a metric 3D box within each image,
uses a learned object matcher to associate objects across frames, estimates relative poses using the 3D boxes of
matched objects, and finally estimates absolute camera poses and forms global, semantic 3D object tracks (akin
to 3D object detection). Above: We visualize the semantics-aware map and camera localization of Rooms from
Motion from un-posed RGB images on two challenging ScanNet++ scenes: a large laboratory and a few rooms
within a residential space. Below: We show class-agnostic results on an open space from the CA-1M dataset.

Abstract
We revisit scene-level 3D object detection as the output of an object-centric framework capable of both localization and mapping using 3D oriented boxes as the
underlying geometric primitive. While existing 3D object detection approaches operate globally and implicitly rely on the a priori existence of metric camera poses,
our method, Rooms from Motion (RfM) operates on a collection of un-posed
images. By replacing the standard 2D keypoint-based matcher of structure-frommotion with an object-centric matcher based on image-derived 3D boxes, we
estimate metric camera poses, object tracks, and finally produce a global, semantic
3D object map. When a priori pose is available, we can significantly improve map
quality through optimization of global 3D boxes against individual observations.
RfM shows strong localization performance and subsequently produces maps of
higher quality than leading point-based and multi-view 3D object detection methods
on CA-1M and ScanNet++, despite these global methods relying on overparameterization through point clouds or dense volumes. Rooms from Motion achieves an
object-centric representation which allows for inherently sparse localization and
parametric mapping proportional to the number of objects in a scene.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

