DiEP: Adaptive Mixture-of-Experts Compression
through Differentiable Expert Pruning

Sikai Bai
HKUST
Hong Kong, China
sbaiae@connect.ust.hk
Jie Zhang ∗
HKUST
Hong Kong, China
csejzhang@ust.hk

Haoxi Li
HKUST
Hong Kong, China
hligb@connect.ust.hk

Zicong Hong
HKUST
Hong Kong, China
congcong@ust.hk

Song Guo ∗
HKUST
Hong Kong, China
songguo@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Despite the significant breakthrough of Mixture-of-Experts (MoE), the increasing
scale of these MoE models presents huge memory and storage challenges. Existing
MoE pruning methods, which involve reducing parameter size with a uniform
sparsity across all layers, often lead to suboptimal outcomes and performance
degradation due to varying expert redundancy in different MoE layers. To address
this, we propose a non-uniform pruning strategy, dubbed Differentiable Expert
Pruning (DiEP), which adaptively adjusts pruning rates at the layer level while
jointly learning inter-layer importance, effectively capturing the varying redundancy
across different MoE layers. By transforming the global discrete search space into
a continuous one, our method handles exponentially growing non-uniform expert
combinations, enabling adaptive gradient-based pruning. Extensive experiments on
five advanced MoE models demonstrate the efficacy of our method across various
NLP tasks. Notably, DiEP retains around 92% of original performance on Mixtral
8×7B with only half the experts, outperforming other pruning methods by up to
7.1% on the challenging MMLU dataset.

1

Intorduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT4 [36] and Llama series [14, 33], have demonstrated
remarkable performance across diverse domains. However, real-world deployment poses significant
challenges due to an ever-growing number of parameters, including high computational demands and
storage costs. To address these issues, the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture [10, 12, 41] has
emerged as a promising solution, activating only a subset of parameters during training and inference.
Notable MoE-based models, such as Mixtral 8×7B [21], and DeepSeek V3 [27], achieve faster
inference while maintaining competitive performance with dense models [14, 3] of comparable scale.
Despite their computational efficiency, MoE models suffer from substantial memory and storage
costs due to larger model sizes, making their deployment in resource-constrained environments
challenging [19, 2]. For example, DeepSeek V3 has 256 experts per layer and 671B parameters.
Recent empirical analyses have shown that the routing policies learned by current MoE LLMs yield
markedly unbalanced expert utilization [7, 28]. To mitigate the attendant waste of parameters, a growing body of work aims to prune experts while preserving the task performance of the full MoE model.
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

