CTSketch: Compositional Tensor Sketching
for Scalable Neurosymbolic Learning

Seewon Choi∗
University of Pennsylvania
seewon@seas.upenn.edu

Alaia Solko-Breslin∗
University of Pennsylvania
alaia@seas.upenn.edu

Rajeev Alur
University of Pennsylvania
alur@seas.upenn.edu

Eric Wong
University of Pennsylvania
exwong@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Many computational tasks benefit from being formulated as the composition of neural networks followed by a discrete symbolic program. The goal of neurosymbolic
learning is to train the neural networks using end-to-end input-output labels of the
composite. We introduce CTSketch, a novel, scalable neurosymbolic learning algorithm. CTSketch uses two techniques to improve the scalability of neurosymbolic
inference: decompose the symbolic program into sub-programs and summarize
each sub-program with a sketched tensor. This strategy allows us to approximate
the output distribution of the program with simple tensor operations over the input
distributions and the sketches. We provide theoretical insight into the maximum
approximation error. Furthermore, we evaluate CTSketch on benchmarks from the
neurosymbolic learning literature, including some designed for evaluating scalability. Our results show that CTSketch pushes neurosymbolic learning to new scales
that were previously unattainable, with neural predictors obtaining high accuracy
on tasks with one thousand inputs, despite supervision only on the final output. 2

1

Introduction

Many computational tasks can be formulated as the composition of neural networks whose outputs are fed into a discrete program. Neurosymbolic learning aims to train the neural network
using only end-to-end labels of the composite. Concretely, given a parameterized neural network
Mθ , a fixed symbolic program c, and training data ((x1 , . . . , xn ), y), the goal is to minimize the
loss L(c(Mθ (x1 , . . . , xn )), y) to optimize θ. The key challenge concerns computing the output
distribution of c with respect to its input distributions while ensuring the loss is fully differentiable.
One solution to this problem is to encode c as a differentiable logic program, as Scallop [21],
DeepProbLog [25], and DeepSoftLog [23] do. Scallop uses probabilistic Datalog to specify the
symbolic program c and can be configured with different provenance semirings, which determine
how to aggregate proofs of each fact when evaluating a query. However, one limitation of many
logic programming frameworks is that they often do not support external API calls to black-box
modules within the symbolic program. This means they cannot use large language models (LLMs)
to perform reasoning, which can be useful for certain tasks. For example, scene recognition has a
natural decomposition of an object detector followed by a program that prompts an LLM to classify
the scene based on the object predictions.
∗
2

Equal contribution.
Code is available at https://github.com/alaiasolkobreslin/CTSketch

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

