Mitigating Overthinking in Large Reasoning Models
via Manifold Steering

Yao Huang1,2 , Huanran Chen2 , Shouwei Ruan1 ,
∗
Yichi Zhang2 , Xingxing Wei1,4 , Yinpeng Dong2,3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
College of AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
4
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
: {y_huang, xxwei}@buaa.edu.cn, dongyinpeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in solving complex tasks such as mathematics and coding. However, these models frequently exhibit a phenomenon known as overthinking during
inference, characterized by excessive validation loops and redundant deliberation,
leading to substantial computational overheads. In this paper, we aim to mitigate
overthinking by investigating the underlying mechanisms from the perspective of
mechanistic interpretability. We first showcase that the tendency of overthinking
can be effectively captured by a single direction in the model’s activation space
and the issue can be eased by intervening the activations along this direction. However, this efficacy soon reaches a plateau and even deteriorates as the intervention
strength increases. We therefore systematically explore the activation space and
find that the overthinking phenomenon is actually tied to a low-dimensional manifold, which indicates that the limited effect stems from the noises introduced by the
high-dimensional steering direction. Based on this insight, we propose Manifold
Steering, a novel approach that elegantly projects the steering direction onto the
low-dimensional activation manifold given the theoretical approximation of the interference noise. Extensive experiments on DeepSeek-R1 distilled models validate
that our method reduces output tokens by up to 71% while maintaining and even
improving the accuracy on several mathematical benchmarks. Our method also
exhibits robust cross-domain transferability, delivering consistent token reduction
performance in code generation and knowledge-based QA tasks. Code is available
at: https://github.com/Aries-iai/Manifold_Steering.

1

Introduction

Building on the versatility of Large Language Models (LLMs) in text generation, particularly their
emergent ability in chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning [41], the field is now undergoing a transition
toward Large Reasoning Models (LRMs). Exemplified by the OpenAI o-series [28] and the DeepSeekR1 series [14], LRMs acquire internal capabilities for long-horizon reasoning through reinforcement
learning with verifiable rewards. These models are able to explore diverse solution paths, reflect on
potential errors, refine intermediate steps, and validate final outputs, mimicking the process of human
problem-solving by scaling inference-time computations [28]. As a result, they excel in domains
such as mathematics [1, 23, 39] and coding [27, 43, 44]. This makes them well-suited for tasks that
demand deep logical analysis and paves the way for their applications in more complex scenarios,
including web search [19] and research assistance [49].
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

