Semantic Surgery: Zero-Shot Concept Erasure in
Diffusion Models
Lexiang Xiong1,2 Chengyu Liu1 Jingwen Ye1 Yan Liu2 Yuecong Xu1
{e1520135@u.nus.edu, e1554340@u.nus.edu, jingweny@nus.edu.sg}
liuyan@scu.edu.cn, yc.xu@nus.edu.sg
1

National University of Singapore

2

Sichuan University

Abstract
With the growing power of text-to-image diffusion models, their potential to generate harmful or biased content has become a pressing concern, motivating the
development of concept erasure techniques. Existing approaches, whether relying on retraining or not, frequently compromise the generative capabilities of
the target model in achieving concept erasure. Here, we introduce Semantic
Surgery, a novel training-free framework for zero-shot concept erasure. Semantic
Surgery directly operates on text embeddings before the diffusion process, aiming to neutralize undesired concepts at their semantic origin with dynamism to
enhance both erasure completeness and the locality of generation. Specifically,
Semantic Surgery dynamically estimates the presence of target concepts in an
input prompt, based on which it performs a calibrated, scaled vector subtraction
to neutralize their influence at the source. The overall framework consists of a
Co-Occurrence Encoding module for robust multi-concept erasure and a visual
feedback loop to address latent concept persistence, thereby reinforcing erasure
throughout the subsequent denoising process. Our proposed Semantic Surgery
requires no model retraining and adapts dynamically to the specific concepts and
their intensity detected in each input prompt, ensuring precise and context-aware
interventions. Extensive experiments are conducted on object, explicit content,
artistic style, and multi-celebrity erasure tasks, demonstrating that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches. That is, our proposed concept
erasure framework achieves superior completeness and robustness while preserving locality and general image quality(e.g., achieving a 93.58 H-score in object
erasure, reducing explicit content to just 1 instance with a 12.2 FID, and attaining
an 8.09 Ha in style erasure with no MS-COCO FID/CLIP degradation). Crucially,
this robustness enables our framework to function as a built-in threat detection
system by monitoring concept presence scores, offering a highly effective and
practical solution for safer text-to-image generation. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/Lexiang-Xiong/Semantic-Surgery.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models [16, 17, 33, 42, 57] offer remarkable image
generation capabilities but also risk producing harmful or infringing content (e.g., explicit material, copyrighted styles) [43, 47, 46, 48]. Initial mitigations like dataset filtering [3] or post-hoc
checkers [1] are often costly or offer limited protection [43, 50, 53].
A primary challenge in concept erasure is achieving both high completeness (thorough removal
of target concepts) and locality (minimal impact on unrelated content). Parameter-Modifying
Methods[10, 11, 13, 19, 21, 27, 28, 58, 56] which modify model parameters to “unlearn” concepts,
often excel in demonstrating erasure potential but inherently struggle with this trade-off [19, 27, 43].
Effective unlearning frequently leads to catastrophic forgetting, degrading general capabilities. Such
modifications are also computationally expensive per new concept and establish pre-defined static
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

