Enhancing Consistency of Flow-Based Image Editing
through Kalman Control

Haozhe Chi 1 Zhicheng Sun 1 Yang Jin 1 Yi Ma 2 Jing Wang 2 Yadong Mu 1∗
1
Peking University, 2 Central Media Technology Institute, Huawei

Abstract
Flow-based generative models have gained popularity for image generation and
editing. For instruction-based image editing, it is critical to ensure that modifications are confined to the targeted regions. Yet existing methods often fail to
maintain consistency in non-targeted regions between the original / edited images.
Our primary contribution is to identify the cause of this limitation as the error
accumulation across individual editing steps and to address it by incorporating the
historical editing trajectory. Specifically, we formulate image editing as a control
problem and leverage the Kalman filter to integrate the historical editing trajectory.
Our proposed algorithm, dubbed Kalman-Edit, reuses early-stage details from the
historical trajectory to enhance the structural consistency of the editing results. To
speed up editing, we introduce a shortcut technique based on approximate vector
field velocity estimation. Extensive experiments on several datasets demonstrate
its superior performance compared to previous state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [44, 47, 17] have revolutionized the field of image and video generation, bringing
unprecedented advancements. The recent development of the Diffusion Transformer [39] has enabled
current diffusion-based models to scale up their parameters, achieving a higher level of generative
capability. Notable works such as Stable Diffusion 3 [10] and Sora [5] demonstrate the remarkable
potential of diffusion models in generating complex and intricate scenarios in both images and
videos. Furthermore, researchers have explored the potential of diffusion models in editing tasks.
For instance, DDIM inversion [45] progressively matches the target image distribution back to the
original latent space, allowing for the generation of edited images by incorporating new prompt
conditions. Additionally, some studies have modified attention maps [6, 18, 14] during the generation
process to directly alter specific characteristics of objects. More recently, efforts have been made
to integrate pretrained modules for more precise editing. For example, existing work [29] utilizes
SAM [25] to extract specific regions requiring modification. Nevertheless, many diffusion-based
editing methods still face challenges related to imprecise editing, primarily due to the non-linear
nature of the generation trajectory.
Rectified flow [30, 31, 2], a special class of diffusion models, transforms random noise into the target
distribution by linear interpolation between the two distributions. These models achieve distribution
matching by constructing a velocity field, resulting in an efficient trajectory. Recent advancements
have extended rectified flow models to image editing tasks. However, existing methods often struggle
to balance structural consistency and editing quality effectively. For instance, Wang et al. [53] employ
a new sampler to achieve more precise inversion and freeze specific attention values to preserve the
overall semantics of edited images. While this approach maintains structural consistency, it sacrifices
editing flexibility, as we will demonstrate later. Similarly, Rout et al. [43] utilize Linear Quadratic
Regulator (LQR) control [21] to guide the editing process, and Kulikov et al. [27] propose using
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

