Regression Trees Know Calculus

Nathan Wycoff
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003
nwycoff@umass.edu

Abstract
Regression trees have emerged as a preeminent tool for solving real-world regression problems due to their ability to deal with nonlinearities, interaction effects
and sharp discontinuities. In this article, we rather study regression trees applied
to well-behaved, differentiable functions, and determine the relationship between
node parameters and the local gradient of the function being approximated. We
find a simple estimate of the gradient which can be efficiently computed using
quantities exposed by popular tree learning libraries. This allows tools developed
in the context of differentiable algorithms, like neural nets and Gaussian processes,
to be deployed to tree-based models. To demonstrate this, we study measures of
model sensitivity defined in terms of integro-differential quantities and demonstrate
how to compute them for regression trees using the proposed gradient estimates.
Quantitative and qualitative numerical experiments reveal the capability of gradients estimated by regression trees to improve predictive analysis, solve tasks in
uncertainty quantification, and provide interpretation of model behavior.

1

Introduction

Tree-based methods, such as regression trees, are a workhorse of the contemporary data scientist.
Their ease of use, computational efficiency and predictive capability without the need for extensive
feature engineering makes them popular with practitioners. The most widely used version of
regression trees approximate with greedily constructed, piecewise-constant functions than can handle
data which exhibit discontinuities or divergent behavior in various parts of the feature-space. Perhaps
because of their capability to tackle pathological problems, it seems that some of their properties in
approximating well-behaved functions may have gone unnoticed.
In this article, we will study the approximation of a well-behaved differentiable function f on the
unit cube in dimension P with a piecewise constant regression tree. In particular, we will investigate
a means of approximating ∇f using only information contained in the tree structure computable in a
single pass through the tree. We find a simple and easily computable quantity analogous to a finite
difference and use it to rapidly form estimates of integro-differential quantities. Previously, gradient
estimation in regression trees has been studied in the context where the leaves have differentiable
models, and the gradients of these models are used to estimate the gradient (e.g. Chaudhuri et al.
(1995); Loh (2011)). However, the constant-leaf tree remains prevalent in practice, and the purpose of
this article is rather to examine the implicit gradient estimation that occurs within these constant-leaf
trees where, formally, the gradient of the tree is almost-everywhere zero.
With a gradient estimator in hand, we unlock for tree-based models the stable of existing gradientbased methods for variable interpretation and dimension reduction developed in other areas. Among
many possibilities, we will study in particular the Active Subspace Method (Constantine, 2015),
a global dimension reduction technique from the Uncertainty Quantification literature, and the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

