Hyperparameter Transfer Enables Consistent Gains of
Matrix-Preconditioned Optimizers Across Scales

Shikai Qiu∗ Zixi Chen∗

Hoang Phan Qi Lei
New York University

Andrew Gordon Wilson

Abstract
Several recently introduced deep learning optimizers utilizing matrix-level preconditioning have shown promising speedups relative to the current dominant optimizer
AdamW, particularly in relatively small-scale experiments. However, efforts to
validate and replicate their successes have reported mixed results. To better understand the effectiveness of these optimizers at scale, in this work we investigate how
to scale preconditioned optimizers via hyperparameter transfer, building on prior
works such as µP. We study how the optimal learning rate and weight decay should
scale with model width and depth for a wide range of optimizers, including Shampoo, SOAP, and Muon, accounting for the impact of commonly used techniques
such as blocking and grafting. We find that scaling the learning rate according to
µP improves transfer, but can still suffer from significant finite-width deviations
that cause drifting optimal learning rates, which we show can be mitigated by
blocking and explicit spectral normalization. For compute-optimal scaling, we find
scaling independent weight decay as 1/width is nearly optimal across optimizers.
Applying these scaling rules, we show Muon, SOAP and Shampoo consistently
achieve near 1.4× speedup over AdamW for training Llama-architecture language
models of sizes ranging from 190M to 1.4B, whereas the speedup vanishes rapidly
with scale under incorrect scaling. Based on these results and further ablations,
we argue that studying optimal hyperparameter transfer is essential for reliably
comparing optimizers at scale given a realistic tuning budget.

1

Introduction

Developing better optimization techniques can fundamentally accelerate deep learning. While
AdamW [31] continues to dominate deep learning workloads, including training frontier-scale
language models [16, 51, 29], several recently introduced optimizers have demonstrated significant
speedups relative to AdamW, including Shampoo [19, 25, 3], SOAP [47], and Muon [23]. These
optimizers use matrix rather than elementwise preconditioners that lead to faster learning per step
while incurring a mild overhead. Notably, Muon’s recent success in training trillion-parameter
language models [45] points to the potential in replacing AdamW as the default optimizer at scale.
Unfortunately, subsequent works have reported mixed results in replicating these claimed speedups,
especially on larger-scale experiments. For example, while Liu et al. [30] demonstrates consistent 2×
speedup of Muon relative to AdamW from 400M to 1.5B-parameter language models, Wen et al. [49]
show that Muon is at most 1.4× more efficient than well-tuned AdamW, and this speedup quickly
diminishes to 1.1× for 1.2B models, with SOAP following a similar trend. Similarly, Semenov
et al. [39] shows the speedups of matrix-preconditioned optimizers over AdamW decrease with scale.
While the different experiment setups make it difficult to fully reconcile these studies, we hypothesize
that the lack of a robust and consistent way of choosing hyperparameters, particularly for the larger
models where careful tuning is impractical, is likely the main reason for these inconsistent findings.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to sq2129@nyu.edu, zc2157@nyu.edu, andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

