Structure Matters: Dynamic Policy Gradient

Sara Klein1,3 Xiangyuan Zhang2 Tamer Başar2 Simon Weissmann1 Leif Döring1
1
Institut for Mathematics, University of Mannheim, 68138 Mannheim
{simon.weissmann, leif.doering}@uni-mannheim.de
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Coordinated Science Laboratory,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801
{xz7, basar1}@illinois.edu
3
August-Wilhelm Scheer Institute for Digital Products and Processes gGmbH, 66123 Saarbrücken
sara.klein@aws-institut.de

Abstract
In this work, we study γ-discounted infinite-horizon tabular Markov decision processes (MDPs) and introduce a framework called dynamic policy gradient (DynPG).
The framework directly integrates dynamic programming with (any) policy gradient method, explicitly leveraging the Markovian property of the environment.
DynPG dynamically adjusts the problem horizon during training, decomposing
the original infinite-horizon MDP into a sequence of contextual bandit problems.
By iteratively solving these contextual bandits, DynPG converges to the stationary
optimal policy of the infinite-horizon MDP. To demonstrate the power of DynPG,
we establish its non-asymptotic global convergence rate under the tabular softmax
parametrization, focusing on the dependencies on salient but essential parameters
of the MDP. By combining classical arguments from dynamic programming with
more recent convergence arguments of policy gradient schemes, we prove that softmax DynPG scales polynomially in the effective horizon (1 − γ)−1 . Our findings
contrast recent exponential lower bound examples for vanilla policy gradient.

1

Introduction

The overarching goal in reinforcement learning (RL) is to train an agent that interacts with an
unknown environment. This is mathematically modeled through a Markov decision process (MDP),
where the agent actively learns a policy that, given a state, executes actions and receives rewards in
return. The objective is to find a policy that maximizes the expected discounted reward. We categorize
RL algorithms into two groups. Rather than the conventional separation between value-based and
policy-based algorithms, we distinguish between algorithms that leverage the model’s structure
and those that do not. The first class utilizes the dynamic programming (DP) principle, such as
value iteration, policy iteration, or Q-learning. Those algorithms optimize essentially single-period
problems, where a single reward feedback is used in the update procedure and the future payoff is
estimated by evaluation. The second class considers the entire multi-period problem at once and
solves it using classical optimization, as in policy gradient (PG) methods [29, 27, 13, 10]. Over time,
hybrid approaches integrating both methods, such as actor-critic (AC) methods, have consistently
demonstrated superior performance in practical applications even though dynamic programming is
used rather indirectly. In AC, the critic suggests a baseline, estimating either the value or action-value
function. Dynamic programming becomes essential during the critic update process, effectively
diminishing variance in gradient estimation. The essence of employing dynamic programming lies in
the fact that parameter updates are not solely reliant on new trajectories, information is bootstrapped.
Efforts of a broad research community have led to tremendous success of AC type algorithms (such as
natural policy gradient (NPG), trust region policy optimization (TRPO), proximal policy optimization
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

