Accurate and Efficient Low-Rank
Model Merging in Core Space

Aniello Panariello1∗ Daniel Marczak2,3 ∗
Simone Magistri4

Angelo Porrello1

Andrew D. Bagdanov4

Bartłomiej Twardowski5,6

Simone Calderara1

Joost van de Weijer6

1

AImageLab, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
Warsaw University of Technology, Poland 3 IDEAS NCBR, Warsaw, Poland
4
Media Integration and Communication Center (MICC), University of Florence, Italy
5
IDEAS Research Institute, Warsaw, Poland
6
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
2

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenges associated with merging low-rank adaptations of large neural networks. With the rise of parameter-efficient adaptation
techniques, such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), model fine-tuning has become
more accessible. While fine-tuning models with LoRA is highly efficient, existing
merging methods often sacrifice this efficiency by merging fully-sized weight matrices. We propose the Core Space merging framework, which enables the merging
of LoRA-adapted models within a common alignment basis, thereby preserving the
efficiency of low-rank adaptation while substantially improving accuracy across
tasks. We further provide a formal proof that projection into Core Space ensures no
loss of information and provide a complexity analysis showing the efficiency gains.
Extensive empirical results demonstrate that Core Space significantly improves
existing merging techniques and achieves state-of-the-art results on both vision and
language tasks while utilizing a fraction of the computational resources. Codebase
is available at https://github.com/apanariello4/core-space-merging.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the size of neural networks has grown substantially [2, 4, 9, 13, 51], increasing
the economic and computational costs associated with training from scratch and fine-tuning. As a
consequence, efficient low-rank adaptation techniques have emerged, which enable broader access
to these powerful models [15, 16, 21, 26, 56]. Techniques like Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [16]
reparameterize model updates to significantly reduce the number of trainable parameters. This makes
it feasible for a broader range of users to fine-tune large architectures on their specific tasks.
At the same time, the advent of model hubs such as Hugging Face [17] has simplified the diffusion
of pre-trained and fine-tuned models, opening new opportunities for collaborative and multi-task
learning by allowing users to acquire and build upon existing models easily. In this context, model
merging, which aims to combine multiple specialized models into one capable of handling various
tasks, has been gaining interest [32, 37, 48, 27, 39]. However, most prior works focus on fully
fine-tuned models [6, 12, 18, 28, 34, 46, 50, 38]. While this is practical for smaller architectures, fully
fine-tuned versions of larger models are rare due to their high memory and compute costs. As model
∗

Equal Contribution. aniello.panariello@unimore.it, daniel.marczak.dokt@pw.edu.pl

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

