FNOPE: Simulation-based inference on function
spaces with Fourier Neural Operators

Guy Moss1,2∗

Leah Sophie Muhle3

Jakob H. Macke1,2,4,†

Reinhard Drews3

Cornelius Schröder1,2,†∗

1

Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
2
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany
3
Department of Geosciences, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
4
Department Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
†
Joint supervision

Abstract
Simulation-based inference (SBI) is an established approach for performing
Bayesian inference on scientific simulators. SBI so far works best on lowdimensional parametric models. However, it is difficult to infer function-valued
parameters, which frequently occur in disciplines that model spatiotemporal processes such as the climate and earth sciences. Here, we introduce an approach for
efficient posterior estimation, using a Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) architecture
with a flow matching objective. We show that our approach, FNOPE, can perform
inference of function-valued parameters at a fraction of the simulation budget
of state of the art methods. In addition, FNOPE supports posterior evaluation
at arbitrary discretizations of the domain, as well as simultaneous estimation of
vector-valued parameters. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
several benchmark tasks and a challenging spatial inference task from glaciology.
FNOPE extends the applicability of SBI methods to new scientific domains by
enabling the inference of function-valued parameters.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic inference of mechanistic parameters in numerical models is a ubiquitous task across
many scientific and engineering disciplines. Among methods for Bayesian inference, simulationbased inference (SBI, [1–6]) has emerged as a powerful approach for performing inference without
requiring explicit formulation or evaluation of the likelihood. Instead, SBI only requires a simulator
model which can sample from the likelihood. By training a generative model on pairs of parameters
and simulation outputs, SBI can directly estimate probability distributions such as the posterior
distribution.
However, existing SBI methods are designed to infer a limited number of vector-valued parameters,
which strongly limits their use for inferring spatially and/or temporarily varying, function-valued
parameters. In these cases, parameters are commonly inferred on fixed discretizations of the domain.
Despite some recent advances leveraging generative models to infer higher-dimensional posterior
∗

{firstname.secondname}@uni-tuebingen.de
Code available at https://github.com/mackelab/fnope

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

