Dynamic Semantic-Aware Correlation Modeling for
UAV Tracking

Xinyu Zhou1∗ Tongxin Pan1∗ Lingyi Hong1

Pinxue Guo2

Haijing Guo1

Zhaoyu Chen2 Kaixun Jiang2 Wenqiang Zhang1,2†
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University
2
College of Intelligent Robotics and Advanced Manufacturing, Fudan University
{zhouxinyu20,wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn, kamipantx@gmail.com
1

Abstract
UAV tracking can be widely applied in scenarios such as disaster rescue, environmental monitoring, and logistics transportation. However, existing UAV
tracking methods predominantly emphasize speed and lack exploration in semantic
awareness, which hinders the search region from extracting accurate localization
information from the template. The limitation results in suboptimal performance
under typical UAV tracking challenges such as camera motion, fast motion, and
low resolution, etc. To address this issue, we propose a dynamic semantic aware
correlation modeling tracking framework. The core of our framework is a Dynamic
Semantic Relevance Generator, which, in combination with the correlation map
from the Transformer, explore semantic relevance. The approach enhances the
search region’s ability to extract important information from the template, improving accuracy and robustness under the aforementioned challenges. Additionally,
to enhance the tracking speed, we design a pruning method for the proposed
framework. Therefore, we present multiple model variants that achieve trade-offs
between speed and accuracy, enabling flexible deployment according to the available computational resources. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of
our method, achieving competitive performance on multiple UAV tracking datasets.
The code is available at https://github.com/zxyyxzz/DSATrack.

1

Introduction

Visual object tracking[55, 9, 29, 28, 59] is a fundamental and important task in computer vision. In
recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) technology has rapidly developed and demonstrated
broad application in various fields such as military, transportation, environmental monitoring, and
disaster relief [43]. However, to achieve autonomous task execution in complex environments, object
tracking is a crucial component. UAV tracking must address various challenges in dynamic scenarios.
The early UAV tracking methods [36, 31, 35, 27] employed a correlation filter to enhance the
discriminative capability, enabling location and tracking. However, these correlation filter-based
methods lacked robust representation capabilities. Consequently, UAV tracking methods based on
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [4, 49, 52] emerged, utilizing Siamese network to enhance
feature representation, significantly improving tracking accuracy. With the rise of Transformers
[55, 11, 6, 51], UAV tracking based on one-stream framework [37, 34, 32, 21] have been studied.
Most of the methods focus on improving the efficiency of UAV tracking, while neglecting exploration
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

