More Thinking, Less Seeing? Assessing Amplified
Hallucination in Multimodal Reasoning Models
Zhongxing Xu1,3∗ Chengzhi Liu2∗ Qingyue Wei1 Juncheng Wu3
James Zou1 Xin Eric Wang2 Yuyin Zhou3 Sheng Liu1
1
Stanford University 2 UC Santa Barbara 3 UC Santa Cruz
chengzhi@ucsb.edu, zhongxingxu1@gmail.com, shengl@stanford.edu

Abstract
Test-time compute has empowered multimodal large language models to generate
extended reasoning chains, yielding strong performance on tasks such as multimodal math reasoning. However, we observe that this improved reasoning ability
often comes with increased hallucination: as generations become longer, models
tend to drift away from image-grounded content and rely more on language priors.
Attention analysis reveals that longer reasoning chains reduce focus on visual
inputs, contributing to hallucination. To systematically study this phenomenon, we
introduce RH-AUC, a metric that quantifies how a model’s perception accuracy
changes with reasoning length, enabling evaluation of whether the model preserves
visual grounding while reasoning. We also release RH-Bench, a diagnostic benchmark covering diverse multimodal tasks, designed to jointly assess the balance of
reasoning ability and hallucination. We find that (i) larger models generally exhibit
a better balance between reasoning and perception; (ii) reasoning and perception
balance depends more on the types and domains of the training data than its volume.
Our findings highlight the need for evaluation frameworks that account for both
reasoning quality and perceptual reliability.

1

Introduction

Large reasoning models scale test-time computation to improve complex reasoning. These models [6,
7, 32, 2] generate longer outputs and engage in deeper reasoning before producing final answers,
resulting in more comprehensive solutions for complex mathematical and scientific problems. This
paradigm has been extended to multimodal large language models: non-reasoning base models are
supervised finetuned (SFT), or finetuned with reinforcement learning (RL) to obtain strong reasoning
ability [36, 56, 10, 49, 54, 21], demonstrating exceptional capabilities in multimodal reasoning tasks,
particularly in domains like mathematical problem solving.
Most existing studies on multimodal reasoning models focus on enhancing reasoning performance,
with limited attention paid to perception-focused tasks. As illustrated in Figure 1a, although the
reasoning model generates an extended reasoning chain in visual question answering, its answer is
largely driven by language priors rather than visual evidence, leading to hallucination. Our empirical
study reveals a consistent and significant finding: although reasoning models can generate more
detailed reasoning chains, they introduce more hallucinations in perception-focused tasks than the
non-reasoning counterparts, as shown in Figure 1b.
Through attention analysis, we investigate the decrease of attention on visual tokens in multimodal
reasoning models, which exacerbates visual hallucinations. The reasoning model allocates significantly less attention to visual tokens compared to its non-reasoning counterpart, while directing
more attention to the instruction tokens. This bias increases reliance on language priors and amplifies
1

https://mlrm-halu.github.io/. Work was partially done while ZX was visiting Stanford.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

