Hierarchical Fine-grained Preference Optimization for
Physically Plausible Video Generation

Harold Haodong Chen1,2,3 , Haojian Huang1,2 ,
Qifeng Chen2,3 , Harry Yang†2,3 , Ser-Nam Lim†3,4
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Everlyn AI, 4 University of Central Florida
†
Corresponding Author
✉ haroldchen328@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in video generation have enabled the creation of high-quality,
visually compelling videos. However, generating videos that adhere to the laws of
physics remains a critical challenge for applications requiring realism and accuracy.
In this work, we propose PhysHPO, a novel framework for Hierarchical CrossModal Direct Preference Optimization, to tackle this challenge by enabling finegrained preference alignment for physically plausible video generation. PhysHPO
optimizes video alignment across four hierarchical granularities: a) Instance Level,
aligning the overall video content with the input prompt; b) State Level, ensuring
temporal consistency using boundary frames as anchors; c) Motion Level, modeling
motion trajectories for realistic dynamics; and d) Semantic Level, maintaining
logical consistency between narrative and visuals. Recognizing that real-world
videos are the best reflections of physical phenomena, we further introduce an
automated data selection pipeline to efficiently identify and utilize "good data"
from existing large-scale text-video datasets, thereby eliminating the need for costly
and time-intensive dataset construction. Extensive experiments on both physicsfocused and general capability benchmarks demonstrate that PhysHPO significantly
improves physical plausibility and overall video generation quality of advanced
models. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to explore fine-grained
preference alignment and data selection for video generation, paving the way for
more realistic and human-preferred video generation paradigms. PhysHPO Page

1

Introduction

Video generation has recently achieved significant strides in producing high-quality, visually compelling [39, 73, 90, 99, 64], and lengthy [28, 19, 60, 96] videos depicting real-world scenarios.
Despite these advancements, generating videos that adhere to the laws of physics remains a challenging and critical research problem. The ability to create physically plausible videos is essential for
applications ranging from virtual reality to simulations, where realism and accuracy are paramount.
Current efforts to enhance the physical fidelity of text-to-video (T2V) generation can be broadly
categorized into test-time reflection-based optimization and training-time tuning-based optimization. Test-time reflection-based methods, such as PhyT2V [85], employ a large language model
(LLM) to iteratively refine initial T2V prompts. While effective, these methods significantly decrease
computational efficiency and are inherently limited by the upper bounds of the model’s capabilities in
self-correction paradigms. Conversely, recent tuning-based methods (e.g., WISA [75] and SynVideo
[98]) focus on traditional supervised fine-tuning (SFT) paradigms. Although effective, SFT relies
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

