CTRL-ALT-DECEIT
Sabotage Evaluations for Automated AI R&D

Francis Rhys Ward⋆§∗ Teun van der Weij⋆§
LawZero
Apollo Research
Raja Mehta Moreno†
Imperial College London

Hanna Gábor†
Independent

Harel Lidar‡
Imperial College London

Thomas Jodrell‡
Imperial College London

Sam Martin†
Imperial College London
Louis Makower‡
Imperial College London

Lauren Robson‡
Imperial College London

Abstract
AI systems are increasingly able to autonomously conduct realistic software engineering tasks, and may soon be deployed to automate machine learning (ML) R&D
itself. Frontier AI systems may be deployed in safety-critical settings, including to
help ensure the safety of future systems. Unfortunately, frontier and future systems
may not be sufficiently trustworthy, and there is evidence that these systems may
even be misaligned with their developers or users. Therefore, we investigate the
capabilities of AI agents to act against the interests of their users when conducting
ML engineering, by sabotaging ML models, sandbagging their performance, and
subverting oversight mechanisms. First, we extend MLE-Bench, a benchmark for
realistic ML tasks, with code-sabotage tasks such as implanting backdoors and
purposefully causing generalisation failures. Frontier agents make meaningful
progress on our sabotage tasks. In addition, we study agent capabilities to sandbag
on MLE-Bench. Agents can calibrate their performance to specified target levels
below their actual capability. To mitigate sabotage, we use LM monitors to detect
suspicious agent behaviour, and we measure model capability to sabotage and
sandbag without being detected by these monitors. Overall, monitors are capable
at detecting code-sabotage attempts but our results suggest that detecting sandbagging is more difficult. Additionally, aggregating multiple monitor predictions
works well, but monitoring may not be sufficiently reliable to mitigate sabotage
in high-stakes domains. Our benchmark is implemented in the UK AISI’s Inspect
framework and we make our code publicly available.

1

Introduction

AI systems are being deployed to automate and assist with software engineering in the real world,
with tools such as GitHub CoPilot, Cursor, Deep Research, and Claude Code [1]. As these systems
are deployed in high-stakes and safety-critical domains, their reliability becomes correspondingly important. Notably, the most capable AI systems may first be deployed inside AI companies to automate
AI R&D — “potentially significantly accelerating AI development in an unpredictable way" [2, 3].
There is growing evidence that frontier and future AI systems may be misaligned with their developers
or users and may intentionally act against human interests [4, 5]. Misaligned AI systems may have
incentives to sabotage efforts to evaluate their own dangerous capabilities [6], monitor their behaviour
∗
Correspondence: francisrhysward@gmail.com. ⋆ joint first author, † joint second author, ‡ joint third author,
§ did this work while independent.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

