Are Greedy Task Orderings Better Than Random
in Continual Linear Regression?

Matan Tsipory ∗ †

Ran Levinstein ∗ †

Deanna Needell ‡

Itay Evron ∗ †

Mark Kong ∗ ‡

Daniel Soudry †

Abstract
We analyze task orderings in continual learning for linear regression, assuming
joint realizability of training data. We focus on orderings that greedily maximize
dissimilarity between consecutive tasks, a concept briefly explored in prior work
but still surrounded by open questions. Using tools from the Kaczmarz method literature, we formalize such orderings and develop geometric and algebraic intuitions
around them. Empirically, we demonstrate that greedy orderings converge faster
than random ones in terms of the average loss across tasks, both for linear regression with random data and for linear probing on CIFAR-100 classification tasks.
Analytically, in a high-rank regression setting, we prove a loss bound for greedy
orderings analogous to that of random ones. However, under general rank, we
establish a repetition-dependent separation. Specifically, while prior work showed
that for random orderings, with
√ or without replacement, the average loss after k iterations is bounded by O(1/ k)—we prove that single-pass greedy orderings √
may
fail catastrophically, whereas those allowing repetition converge at rate O(1/ 3 k).
Overall, we reveal nuances within and between greedy and random orderings.

1

Introduction

Continual learning is a subfield of machine learning in which a learner is exposed to tasks or datasets
sequentially. In such setups, only a single task is fully accessible at any given time, due to, for
instance, computational limitations, data retention or privacy constraints, or the temporal nature of
the environment. While much of the continual learning research focuses on mitigating forgetting or
improving transfer, the role of task ordering is not yet fully understood.
Understanding how task order affects learning and what characterizes optimal orderings is important
for both theoretical and practical reasons. Such understanding can illuminate failure modes, clarify
the interplay between forgetting and transfer, and guide the design of continual environments and
algorithms. Furthermore, it can inform active control over task sequences in settings that permit it
(e.g., robotic environments), situating the problem at the intersection of continual learning, multitask
learning, curriculum learning, and active learning. This line of inquiry raises impactful computational
and financial questions in the era of large language models and foundation models:
• Can task ordering by itself mitigate forgetting, even under vanilla continual training?
• What constitutes an “optimal” task ordering?
• Is it better to learn when adjacent tasks are similar or dissimilar?
• Can greedy strategies systematically outperform random task orderings?
∗

Equal contribution.
Technion, Haifa.
‡
University of California, Los Angeles.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

