PMQ-VE: Progressive Multi-Frame Quantization for
Video Enhancement
ZhanFeng Feng1† , Long Peng1†‡ , Xin Di1† , Yong Guo2 , Wenbo Li3 , Yulun Zhang4 ,
Renjing Pei5∗ , Yang Wang1,6∗, Yang Cao1∗ , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1

5

USTC, 2 Max Planck Institute, 3 CUHK, 4 SJTU,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 6 Chang’an University
{xiaobigfeng, longp2001, dx9826}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, ywang120@chd.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-frame video enhancement tasks aim to improve the spatial and temporal
resolution and quality of video sequences by leveraging temporal information from
multiple frames, which are widely used in streaming video processing, surveillance,
and generation. Although numerous Transformer-based enhancement methods
have achieved impressive performance, their computational and memory demands
hinder deployment on edge devices. Quantization offers a practical solution by
reducing the bit-width of weights and activations to improve efficiency. However,
directly applying existing quantization methods to video enhancement tasks often
leads to significant performance degradation and loss of fine details. This stems
from two limitations: (a) inability to allocate varying representational capacity
across frames, which results in suboptimal dynamic range adaptation; (b) overreliance on full-precision teachers, which limits the learning of low-bit student
models. To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel quantization method for
video enhancement: Progressive Multi-Frame Quantization for Video Enhancement (PMQ-VE). This framework features a coarse-to-fine two-stage process:
Backtracking-based Multi-Frame Quantization (BMFQ) and Progressive MultiTeacher Distillation (PMTD). BMFQ utilizes a percentile-based initialization and
iterative search with pruning and backtracking for robust clipping bounds. PMTD
employs a progressive distillation strategy with both full-precision and multiple
high-bit (INT) teachers to enhance low-bit models’ capacity and quality. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms existing approaches, achieving state-of-the-art performance across multiple tasks and benchmarks. The code
will be made publicly available.

1

Introduction

Multi-frame video enhancement tasks aim to enhance the spatial and temporal resolution and quality of
video sequences by exploiting temporal information from multiple frames. Among these, Video Frame
Interpolation (VFI) [1, 20, 25, 39, 44, 46, 50, 53, 78–80, 86, 89], Video Super-Resolution (VSR) [3–
6, 9, 22, 26], and Spatio-Temporal Video Super-Resolution (STVSR) [12, 17, 38, 66, 71, 72, 74, 87]
are the most representative video enhancement methods. They are widely employed as post-processing
and pre-processing techniques in social media platforms, gaming environments, and various video
perception and generation tasks [4, 12]. Recent Transformer-based approaches for video enhancement exploit attention mechanisms to capture temporal dependencies across multiple frames, enabling
substantial improvements in visual quality and structural fidelity. However, their high computational
and memory demands remain a major obstacle for real-world deployment. Therefore, numerous
∗
* Renjing Pei, Yang Wang and Yang Cao are the corresponding authors. † ZhanFeng Feng, Long Peng, and
Xin Di contributed equally to this work. ‡ Long Peng is the project leader.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

