Local Learning for Covariate Selection in
Nonparametric Causal Effect Estimation with Latent
Variables
Zheng Li1,2 , Xichen Guo1 , Feng Xie1,∗ , Yan Zeng1 , Hao Zhang2,∗ , Zhi Geng1
1

Department of Applied Statistics, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, China
2
SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Estimating causal effects from nonexperimental data is a fundamental problem in
many fields of science. A key component of this task is selecting an appropriate
set of covariates for confounding adjustment to avoid bias. Most existing methods
for covariate selection often assume the absence of latent variables and rely on
learning the global causal structure among variables. However, identifying the
global structure can be unnecessary and inefficient, especially when our primary
interest lies in estimating the effect of a treatment variable on an outcome variable.
To address this limitation, we propose a novel local learning approach for covariate
selection in nonparametric causal effect estimation, which accounts for the presence
of latent variables. Our approach leverages testable independence and dependence
relationships among observed variables to identify a valid adjustment set for a target
causal relationship, ensuring both soundness and completeness under standard
assumptions. We validate the effectiveness of our algorithm through extensive
experiments on both synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Estimating causal effects is crucial in various fields such as epidemiology [Hernán and Robins, 2006],
social sciences [Spirtes et al., 2000], economics [Imbens and Rubin, 2015], and artificial intelligence
[Peters et al., 2017, Chu et al., 2021]. In these domains, understanding and accurately estimating
causal relationships are vital for policy-making, clinical decisions, and scientific research. Within
the framework of causal graphical models, covariate adjustment, such as the use of the back-door
criterion [Pearl, 1993], emerges as a powerful and primary tool for estimating causal effects from
observational data, since implementing idealized experiments in practice is difficult [Pearl, 2009].
Formally speaking, let do(x) stand for an idealized experiment or intervention, where the values of X
are set to x, and f (y|do(x)) R
denote the causal effect of X on Y . A valid covariate is a set of variables
Z such that f (y | do(x)) = z f (y | x, z)f (z)dz [Pearl, 2009, Shpitser et al., 2010]. Consider the
graph (a) in Figure. 1, Z = {V5 } is a valid covariate set w.r.t. (with respect to) the causal relationship
X →Y.
Given a causal graph, one can determine whether a set is a valid adjustment set using adjustment
criteria such as the back-door criterion [Pearl, 1993, 2009]. The main challenge in covariate adjustment estimation is to find a valid covariate set that satisfies the back-door criterion using only
observational data, without prior knowledge of the causal graph. To tackle this challenge, Maathuis
et al. [2009] proposed the IDA (Intervention do-calculus when the DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) is
Absent) algorithm. This algorithm first learns a CPDAG (Complete Partial Directed Acyclic Graph)
∗

Corresponding authors: Feng Xie <fengxie@btbu.edu.cn>, Hao Zhang <h.zhang10@siat.ac.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

