ConTextTab: A Semantics-Aware Tabular In-Context
Learner
Marco Spinaci∗1

Marek Polewczyk∗2 Maximilian Schambach∗2
1
SAP France 2 SAP SE
{firstname.lastname}@sap.com

Sam Thelin2

Abstract
Tabular in-context learning (ICL) has recently achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on several tabular prediction tasks. Previously restricted to classification
problems on small tables, recent advances such as TabPFN [18] and TabICL [30]
have extended its use to larger datasets. Although current table-native ICL architectures are architecturally efficient and well-adapted to tabular data structures,
their exclusive training on synthetic data limits their ability to fully leverage the
rich semantics and world knowledge contained in real-world tabular data. At the
other end of the spectrum, tabular ICL models based on pretrained large language
models such as TabuLa-8B [12] integrate deep semantic understanding and world
knowledge but are only able to make use of a small amount of context due to
inherent architectural limitations. With the aim to combine the best of both these
worlds, we introduce ConTextTab, integrating semantic understanding and alignment into a table-native ICL framework. By employing specialized embeddings for
different data modalities and by training on large-scale real-world tabular data, our
model is competitive with SOTA across a broad set of benchmarks while setting
a new standard on the semantically rich CARTE benchmark. Code and model
checkpoints are available at: https://github.com/SAP-samples/contexttab.

1

Introduction

Tables with information spread across rows and columns remain a predominant data format in many
real-world applications [3], making their understanding through machine learning algorithms critical.
Despite the great success of deep learning approaches in natural language processing and computer
vision, leveraging large amounts of pretraining data, conventional machine learning methods such
as gradient boosted trees and their variants remain the predominant state-of-the-art (SOTA) across
tabular prediction benchmarks. Recently, however, applying the in-context learning (ICL) paradigm
to tabular prediction tasks has shown promising results by enabling pretraining of deep learning
models across a large set of heterogeneous tables, constituting a new SOTA on small to medium
tabular prediction tasks [18]. In this setting, predicting a target value y based on the input features x
of a row in a table T additionally uses further rows from T (the context), including their target values.
This enables the model to adapt to new, unseen prediction problems at inference time, removing the
need for task-specific fine-tuning.
This approach was pioneered by the transformer-based TabPFN [17]. Pretrained on large amounts
of synthetically generated classification tasks, its latest incarnation TabPFNv2 [18] produces SOTA
results on tabular datasets with up to 10 000 samples for both classification and regression tasks. In
recent work, TabICL [30] extends the success story of this approach to even larger datasets, using
special tabular embedding modules improving on the quadratic scaling in both the number of features
and rows present in the TabPFN architecture.
*

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

