Enhancing Infrared Vision: Progressive Prompt
Fusion Network and Benchmark
Jinyuan Liu† , Zihang Chen† , Zhu Liu† , Zhiying Jiang‡ , Long Ma† , Xin Fan† , Risheng Liu†∗
†
School of Software Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
‡
Information Science and Technology College, Dalian Martime University
atlantis918@hotmail.com, chenzi_hang@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
We engage in the relatively underexplored task named thermal infrared image
enhancement. Existing infrared image enhancement methods primarily focus on
tackling individual degradations, such as noise, contrast, and blurring, making
it difficult to handle coupled degradations. Meanwhile, all-in-one enhancement
methods, commonly applied to RGB sensors, often demonstrate limited effectiveness due to the significant differences in imaging models. In sight of this, we
first revisit the imaging mechanism and introduce a Progressive Prompt Fusion
Network (PPFN). Specifically, the PPFN initially establishes prompt pairs based
on the thermal imaging process. For each type of degradation, we fuse the corresponding prompt pairs to modulate the model’s features, providing adaptive
guidance that enables the model to better address specific degradations under single or multiple conditions. In addition, a Selective Progressive Training (SPT)
mechanism is introduced to gradually refine the model’s handling of composite
cases to align the enhancement process, which not only allows the model to remove camera noise and retain key structural details, but also enhancing the overall
contrast of the thermal image. Furthermore, we introduce the most high-quality,
multi-scenarios infrared benchmark covering a wide range of scenarios. Extensive
experiments substantiate that our approach not only delivers promising visual
results under specific degradation but also significantly improves performance on
complex degradation scenes, achieving a notable 8.76% improvement. Code is
available at https://github.com/Zihang-Chen/HM-TIR.

1

Introduction

Thermal Infrared (TIR) imaging captures images by
detecting the thermal radiation emitted by objects,
typically within the wavelength range of 8 to 14 miAtmospheric
Radiation
Scattering
crometers. Unlike visible light imaging, TIR does
not depend on external light sources, allowing it to
Turbulence
function effectively in complete darkness or low-light
Lens
conditions. Its ability to penetrate smoke, haze, and
Sensor
minor obstructions, coupled with accurate temperature data, makes TIR essential for diverse appliFigure 1: An illustration of the thermal infrared cations [69, 67], such as object detection [32, 35],
degradation pipeline. Thermal infrared imaging
semantic segmentation [68], and autonomous drivis prone to degradation from external factors such
as solar radiation, atmospheric scattering, and tur- ing [31].
bulence, as well as internal factors like pixel size, Despite its advantages, TIR imaging faces significant
internal noise, and jitter.
challenges that limit its widespread use. The comDefocus

FPA

∗

Degraded Infrared Image

Random
Noise

Contrast
Degradation

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

