Know What You Don’t Know:
Uncertainty Calibration of Process Reward Models

Young-Jin Park1 , Kristjan Greenewald2 , Kaveh Alim1 , Hao Wang2,3 , Navid Azizan1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3
Red Hat AI Innovation

Abstract
Process reward models (PRMs) play a central role in guiding inference-time scaling
algorithms for large language models (LLMs). However, we observe that even stateof-the-art PRMs can be poorly calibrated. Specifically, they tend to overestimate the
success probability that a partial reasoning step will lead to a correct final answer,
particularly when smaller LLMs are used to complete the reasoning trajectory. To
address this, we present a calibration approach—performed via quantile regression—
that adjusts PRM outputs to better align with true success probabilities. Leveraging
these calibrated success estimates and their associated confidence bounds, we
introduce an instance-adaptive scaling (IAS) framework that dynamically adjusts
the compute budget based on the estimated likelihood that a partial reasoning
trajectory will yield a correct final answer. Unlike conventional methods that
allocate a fixed number of reasoning trajectories per query, this approach adapts to
each instance and reasoning step when using our calibrated PRMs. Experiments
on mathematical reasoning benchmarks show that (i) our PRM calibration method
achieves small calibration error, outperforming the baseline methods, (ii) calibration
is crucial for enabling effective IAS, and (iii) the proposed IAS strategy reduces
inference costs while maintaining final answer accuracy, utilizing less compute on
more confident problems as desired.
Project Page: http://young-j-park.github.io/know-what-you-dont-know

1

Introduction

Inference-time scaling is an emerging paradigm that improves the output quality of LLMs by trading
off inference speed. Just as humans approach complex problems by breaking them down, reasoning
through each step, and revising their thoughts, LLMs can also benefit from being given more time
to “think” during inference [1]. While a myriad of inference-time scaling approaches have emerged,
they often involve prompting the model with explicit reasoning instructions to encourage a structured
thought process [51, 24]. Recent studies extend this idea by generating multiple candidate reasoning
paths or answers and aggregating them to improve robustness [43]. Such strategies allow smallsized LLMs to achieve comparable (or even better) performance with large models when tackling
challenging tasks, such as advanced mathematics or complex coding [20, 31].
An important component in many inference-time scaling algorithms is the chosen process reward model (PRM). PRMs are trained to quantify, as a reward, how good or desirable a model’s
intermediate-step outputs are with respect to a given task and/or to alignment with human preferences
[6, 48, 30]. When normalized, reward scores are often interpreted as the probability that continuing
from the current output will lead to a desirable outcome (e.g., producing a correct final answer in a
math problem) [28]. In our experiments, we find, however, that even state-of-the-art PRMs can be
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

