Projection-based Lyapunov method for fully
heterogeneous weakly-coupled MDPs
Xiangcheng Zhang1→ † Yige Hong2→ Weina Wang2
Weiyang College, Tsinghua University
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University
xc-zhang21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{yigeh,weinaw}@cs.cmu.edu
1

2

Abstract
Heterogeneity poses a fundamental challenge for many real-world large-scale
decision-making problems but remains largely understudied. In this paper, we
study the fully heterogeneous setting of a prominent class of such problems, known
as weakly-coupled Markov decision processes (WCMDPs). Each WCMDP consists of N arms (or subproblems), which have distinct model parameters in the
fully heterogeneous setting, leading to the curse of dimensionality when N is
large. We show that,
→ under mild assumptions, an efficiently computable policy
achieves an O(1/ N ) optimality gap in the long-run average reward per arm for
fully heterogeneous WCMDPs as N becomes large. This is the first asymptotic
optimality result for fully heterogeneous average-reward WCMDPs. Our main
technical innovation is the construction of projection-based Lyapunov functions
that certify the convergence of rewards and costs to an optimal region, even under
full heterogeneity.1

1

Introduction

Heterogeneity poses a fundamental challenge for many real-world decision-making problems, where
each problem consists of a large number of interacting components. However, despite its practical
significance, heterogeneity remains largely understudied in the literature. In this paper, we study
heterogeneous settings of a prominent class of such problems, known as weakly-coupled Markov
decision processes (WCMDPs) [23]. A WCMDP consists of N arms (or subproblems), where each
arm itself is a Markov decision process (MDP). In a heterogeneous setting, the MDPs could be
distinct. At each time step, the decision-maker selects an action for each arm, which affects the arm’s
transition probabiltities and reward, and then the arms make state transitions independently. However,
these actions are subject to a set of global budget constraints, where each constraint limits one type
of total cost across all arms at each time step. The objective is to find a policy that maximizes the
long-run average reward over an infinite time horizon. We focus on the planning setting, where all
the model parameters (reward function, cost functions, budget, and transition kernel) are known.
WCMDPs have been used to model a wide range of applications, including online advertising [7, 57],
job scheduling [48], healthcare [5], surveillance [40], and machine maintenance [21]. A faithful
modeling of these applications calls for heterogeneity. For instance, in [5], arms are beneficiaries
of a health program and they could react to interventions differently; in [40], arms are targets of
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†
1

Work done during a visit at Carnegie Mellon University.
A full version of this paper [54] can be found at https://www.arxiv.org/abs/2502.06072v6.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

