Chirality in Action: Time-Aware Video Representation
Learning by Latent Straightening

Piyush Bagad
Andrew Zisserman
VGG, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
Our objective is to develop compact video representations that are sensitive to
visual change over time. To measure such time-sensitivity, we introduce a new
task: chiral action recognition, where one needs to distinguish between a pair of
temporally opposite actions, such as “opening vs. closing a door", “approaching vs.
moving away from something", “folding vs. unfolding paper", etc. Such actions (i)
occur frequently in everyday life, (ii) require understanding of simple visual change
over time (in object state, size, spatial position, count . . . ), and (iii) are known to
be poorly represented by many video embeddings. Our goal is to build time aware
video representations which offer linear separability between these chiral pairs. To
that end, we propose a self-supervised adaptation recipe to inject time-sensitivity
into a sequence of frozen image features. Our model is based on an auto-encoder
with a latent space with inductive bias inspired by perceptual straightening. We
show that this results in a compact but time-sensitive video representation for
the proposed task across three datasets: Something-Something, EPIC-Kitchens,
and Charade. Our method (i) outperforms much larger video models pre-trained
on large-scale video datasets, and (ii) leads to an improvement in classification
performance on standard benchmarks when combined with these existing models.

1

Introduction

The ever-increasing scale of video content on the Internet demands efficient and compact descriptors
that can be readily used for classification, ranking and search. The goodness of video descriptors (or
video representations) is largely measured in terms of action recognition on standard benchmarks
such as Kinetics-400 [11], UCF101 [75] and Something-Something [28] to name a few. While action
recognition performance provides a reliable single measure for the representation, more insight is
obtained by establishing how well a given video descriptor encodes various aspects of the video such
as objects, scene context, motion and temporal dynamics. We can coarsely categorize these aspects
into: static properties (objects, scene, etc) and dynamic properties (motion, visual change, etc). It
is well established that, apart from Something-Something, most contemporary video benchmarks
tend to focus more on static properties [10, 35, 44, 49, 108]. While there has been an effort to shift
the focus to evaluating dynamic [28, 49, 59, 73], properties of actions are still entangled with static
understanding without a clear definition of dynamics. In this work, our objective is to study a specific
time-sensitive property: understanding how well video descriptors encode visual change in a video.
What do we mean by “understanding” visual change? Consider an example action pair: “a person
climbing up a ladder” vs. “a person climbing down a ladder”. In this case, the vertical position of the
person changes over time and it is temporally opposite in the two actions. An ideal video descriptor
should encode this change and use it distinguish between such action pairs. We call such action
pairs‘chiral’, and the task of distinguishing between them ‘chiral action recognition’. Where can we
find such actions? These are quite common in everyday life, and humans effortlessly recognize them.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

