Generating Physically Sound Designs from Text
and a Set of Physical Constraints

Gregory Barber, Todd C. Henry, Mulugeta A. Haile
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21005
gregory.j.barber2.civ@army.mil

Abstract
We present TIDES, a text informed design approach for generating physically sound
designs based on a textual description and a set of physical constraints. TIDES
jointly optimizes structural (topology) and visual properties. A pre-trained textimage model is used to measure the design’s visual alignment with a text prompt
and a differentiable physics simulator is used to measure its physical performance.
We evaluate TIDES on a series of structural optimization problems operating under
different load and support conditions, at different resolutions, and experimentally
in the lab by performing the 3-point bending test on 2D beam designs that are
extruded and 3D printed. We find that it can jointly optimize the two objectives
and return designs that satisfy engineering design requirements (compliance and
density) while utilizing features specified by text.

1

Introduction

Generative design has advanced rapidly and independently across the text-to-image (physics agnostic)
and engineering (physics constrained) design domains. In this work, we bridge the two to address
a major challenge with each. First, text-image models [1–6] are powerful pattern generators and
understand design concepts such as bilateral symmetry, asymmetry, and shapes such as hexagons,
arches, and triangles. However, their application to the domain of physical design is limited due to
their inability to consider crucial physical design constraints, such as excessive structural deformation,
material weight, and manufacturability, in the generated designs. That is to say, while they can
generate artistic depictions of “a chair in the shape of an avocado” they can not ensure the chair can
support weight, is made of real materials, or can be constructed. Here we introduce a method for
placing physical constraints on the output of a text-image generator ensuring the generated design is
physically sound and validate by 3D printing and testing a set of designs in the lab.
Second, structural optimization is an approach for designing load-bearing structures such as support
columns, beams, and bridges. Given a set of applied forces, materials, and supports, the goal is to
generate the design that offers the greatest resistance to the applied force. However, it is challenging
to embed complex design goals into the design process, e.g. specifying the type of structural features
present in the design such as arch, hexagonal, or triangular supports or an aesthetic goal. Here, we
introduce a method for using text-based guidance to explore the design space and return diverse
functional designs that utilize visual features specified by text. That is to say, we modify the structural
optimization goal from generating the strongest possible design given a set of physical constraints
to generating the strongest possible design that meets an additional visual design criteria supplied
by text, e.g. “Generate a chair shaped like an avocado that supports the most weight”. Additionally,
unrelated text prompts have been found to increase originality in human generated designs [7]. We
aim to investigate if a similar phenomenon can be observed in an algorithmic design approach.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

