On the Stability of Graph Convolutional Neural
Networks: A Probabilistic Perspective

Ning Zhang
University of Oxford
ning.zhang@stats.ox.ac.uk

Henry Kenlay
Independent Researcher∗
henrykenlay@pm.me

Mihai Cucuringu
UCLA, University of Oxford
mihai@math.ucla.edu

Li Zhang
University College London
ucesl07@ucl.ac.uk

Xiaowen Dong
University of Oxford
xdong@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) have emerged as powerful tools
for analyzing graph-structured data, achieving remarkable success across diverse
applications. However, the theoretical understanding of the stability of these
models, i.e., their sensitivity to small changes in the graph structure, remains in
rather limited settings, hampering the development and deployment of robust and
trustworthy models in practice. To fill this gap, we study how perturbations in the
graph topology affect GCNN outputs and propose a novel formulation for analyzing
model stability. Unlike prior studies that focus only on worst-case perturbations,
our distribution-aware formulation characterizes output perturbations across a
broad range of input data. This way, our framework enables, for the first time,
a probabilistic perspective on the interplay between the statistical properties of
the node data and perturbations in the graph topology. We conduct extensive
experiments to validate our theoretical findings and demonstrate their benefits
over existing baselines, in terms of both representation stability and adversarial
attacks on downstream tasks. Our results demonstrate the practical significance
of the proposed formulation and highlight the importance of incorporating data
distribution into stability analysis.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed an explosion of interest in analyzing data that resides on the vertices
of a graph, known as graph signals or node features. Graph signals extend the concept of traditional
data defined over regular Euclidean domains to the irregular structure of graphs. To facilitate machine
learning over graph signals, classical convolution neural networks have been adapted to operate on
graph domains, giving rise to a class of graph-based machine learning models – graph convolutional
neural networks (GCNNs) [9, 27, 52, 28, 13]. At the heart of GCNNs lies the use of graph filters,
which aggregate information from neighboring vertices in a way that respects the underlying graph
structure [22, 12]. This mechanism enables GCNNs to produce structure-aware embeddings that
effectively integrate information from both the input signals and the graph structure.
As GCNNs become prevalent in real-world applications, understanding their robustness under
graph perturbations has become increasingly important. In particular, to ensure the deployment of
trustworthy models, it is essential to assess their inference-time stability, how sensitive a pre-trained
GCNN’s predictions are to a small input perturbation. This is especially critical because real-world
networks could differ from the clear and idealized samples seen during training. For instance, in social
∗

Work done while at the University of Oxford.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

