Uncertainty-Guided Exploration for Efficient
AlphaZero Training

Scott Cheng1

Meng-Yu Tsai2

Ding-Yong Hong3

Mahmut Taylan Kandemir1

1
3
1

The Pennsylvania State University, USA 2 Independent
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

{ypc5394,mtk2}@psu.edu

2

adamatuno@gmail.com

3

dyhong@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
AlphaZero has achieved remarkable success in complex decision-making problems
through self-play and neural network training. However, its self-play process
remains inefficient due to limited exploration of high-uncertainty positions, the
overlooked runner-up decisions in Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), and high
variance in value labels. To address these challenges, we propose and evaluate
uncertainty-guided exploration by branching from high-uncertainty positions using
our proposed Label Change Rate (LCR) metric, which is further refined by a
Bayesian inference framework. Our proposed approach leverages runner-up MCTS
decisions to create multiple variations, and ensembles value labels across these
variations to reduce variance. We investigate three key design parameters for our
branching strategy: where to branch, how many variations to branch, and which
move to play in the new branch. Our empirical findings indicate that branching with
10 variations per game provides the best performance-exploration balance. Overall,
our end-to-end results show an improved sample efficiency over the baseline by
58.5% on 9x9 Go in the early stage of training and by 47.3% on 19x19 Go in the
late stage of training.

Introduction
main sequence
branched sequence
high-uncertainty position
unplayed position

Which move to play? 3
Where to branch? 1

…

…
…

…

…

…

…

…
…

How many to branch? 2

…

possible move

1

time step

Figure 1: Our proposed method enhances exploration in self-play by branching at high-uncertainty
positions to explore additional runner-up MCTS decisions, and reduces the variance of the value label
by ensembling multiple game results, thus improving training efficiency.
AlphaZero [1] has demonstrated remarkable capabilities by combining Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) [2, 3] and deep neural networks, achieving superhuman performance in games such as Go,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

