UtilGen: Utility-Centric Generative Data
Augmentation with Dual-Level Task Adaptation

Jiyu Guo1

Shuo Yang1∗ Yiming Huang1 Yancheng Long1 Xiaobo Xia2,3
Xiu Su4 Bo Zhao5 Zeke Xie6 Liqiang Nie1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 National University of Singapore
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
4
Central South University 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{ 220110126@stu.hit.edu.cn, shuoyang@hit.edu.cn }

Abstract
Data augmentation using generative models has emerged as a powerful paradigm
for enhancing performance in computer vision tasks. However, most existing
augmentation approaches primarily focus on optimizing intrinsic data attributes –
such as fidelity and diversity – to generate visually high-quality synthetic data, while
often neglecting task-specific requirements. Yet, it is essential for data generators
to account for the needs of downstream tasks, as training data requirements can
vary significantly across different tasks and network architectures. To address
these limitations, we propose U TIL G EN, a novel utility-centric data augmentation
framework that adaptively optimizes the data generation process to produce taskspecific, high-utility training data via downstream task feedback. Specifically, we
first introduce a weight allocation network to evaluate the task-specific utility of
each synthetic sample. Guided by these evaluations, U TIL G EN iteratively refines
the data generation process using a dual-level optimization strategy to maximize the
synthetic data utility: (1) model-level optimization tailors the generative model to
the downstream task, and (2) instance-level optimization adjusts generation policies
– such as prompt embeddings and initial noise – at each generation round. Extensive
experiments on eight benchmark datasets of varying complexity and granularity
demonstrate that U TIL G EN consistently achieves superior performance, with an
average accuracy improvement of 3.87% over previous SOTA. Further analysis of
data influence and distribution reveals that U TIL G EN produces more impactful and
task-relevant synthetic data, validating the effectiveness of the paradigm shift from
visual characteristics-centric to task utility-centric data augmentation.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative models, particularly diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], have
significantly advanced data augmentation by enabling the creation of photorealistic images. Such
text-to-image systems are capable of generating diverse and high-fidelity samples, and empirical
evidence has shown their potential to enhance downstream model performance [8].
Current generative data augmentation approaches can be categorized into two main paradigms:
fidelity preservation and diversity enhancement. The former employs techniques such as LoRA-based
fine-tuning [9] to align synthetic data with real-world distributions [10, 11], while the latter employs
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

