Dual-Space Semantic Synergy Distillation
for Continual Learning of Unlabeled Streams

Donghao Sun∗

Xi Wang∗

Xu Yang†

Kun Wei

Cheng Deng

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{donghaosun508, wangxi6317, xuyang.xd, weikunsk, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual learning from unlabeled data streams while effectively combating catastrophic forgetting poses an intractable challenge. Traditional methods predominantly rely on visual clustering techniques to generate pseudo labels, which often
suffer from semantic inconsistencies and limited discriminative precision, thereby
impeding stable model evolution. To surmount these obstacles, we introduce an
innovative approach that synergistically combines both visual and textual information to generate dual space hybrid pseudo labels for reliable model continual
evolution. Specifically, by harnessing the capabilities of large multimodal models, we initially generate generalizable text descriptions for a few representative
samples. These descriptions then undergo a ‘Coarse to Fine’ refinement process to
capture the subtle nuances between different data points, significantly enhancing
the semantic accuracy of the descriptions. Simultaneously, a novel cross-modal
hybrid approach seamlessly integrates these fine-grained textual descriptions with
visual features, thereby creating a more robust and reliable supervisory signal.
Finally, such descriptions are employed to alleviate the catastrophic forgetting issue
via a semantic alignment distillation, which capitalizes on the stability inherent in
language knowledge to effectively prevent the model from forgetting previously
learned information. Comprehensive experiments conducted on a variety of benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed method attains state-of-the-art performance,
and ablation studies further substantiate the effectiveness and superiority of the
proposed method.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have demonstrated robust and well-established performance when trained on
independently and identically distributed data, but real-world data is often nonstationary and arrives
sequentially in tasks. In such scenarios, the model must continually learn new tasks while retaining
knowledge of previous ones to avoid catastrophic forgetting [1, 2]. This learning paradigm is known
as continual learning (CL), among which class-incremental learning (CIL) [3, 4] is particularly
challenging and realistic, as it requires the model to perform unified classification while new classes
are introduced progressively.
In many real-world scenarios, due to the high cost or even the infeasibility of labeling, data generally
arrives in a continuous, unstructured, and unlabeled manner [5]. This raises a critical challenge: how
can we perform structured modeling of continual streaming data in a fully unsupervised setting?
Unlike conventional unsupervised learning [6], what makes the problem thornier is that unsupervised
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

