Sharp Analysis for KL-Regularized Contextual
Bandits and RLHF
Heyang Zhao
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
hyzhao@cs.ucla.edu

Chenlu Ye
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
chenluy3@illinois.edu

Quanquan Gu
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Tong Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Reverse-Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization has emerged to be a predominant
technique to enhance policy optimization in reinforcement learning (RL) and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), which forces the learned policy
to stay close to a reference policy. While the effectiveness of KL-regularization
has been empirically demonstrated in various practical scenarios, current theoretical analyses of KL-regularized RLHF still yield the same O(1/ϵ2 ) sample
complexity as ones without KL-regularization. To understand the fundamental distinction between objectives with KL-regularization and ones without KLregularization, we are the first to theoretically demonstrate the power of KLregularization by providing a sharp analysis for KL-regularized contextual bandits
and RLHF, revealing an O(1/ϵ) sample complexity when ϵ is sufficiently small.
We also prove matching lower bounds for both settings. More specifically, we
study how the coverage of the reference policy affects the sample complexity of
KL-regularized online contextual bandits and RLHF. We show that with sufficient
coverage from the reference policy, a simple two-stage mixed sampling algorithm
can achieve an O(1/ϵ) sample complexity with only an additive dependence on
the coverage coefficient, thus proving the benefits of online data even without explicit exploration. Our results provide a comprehensive understanding of the roles
of KL-regularization and data coverage in online decision making, shedding light
on the design of more efficient algorithms.

1

Introduction

The KL-regularized contextual bandit problem (Langford and Zhang, 2007; Xiong et al., 2024a) has
raised tremendous interest recently because of the significant development of the post-training stage
in large language models (LLMs) and diffusion models from preference feedback (Christiano et al.,
2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2024), which is called
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). RLHF aims to optimize the policy by
aligning it with human feedback, exhibiting impressive capabilities in applications such as Chatgpt
(Achiam et al., 2023), Claude (Anthropic, 2023), Gemini (Team et al., 2023), and LLaMA-3 (Meta,
2024).
In RLHF, we treat the language model as a policy that takes a prompt x and produces a response a
conditioned on x, optimizing the policy by aligning it with human feedback. There are mainly two
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

