Graph-Theoretic Insights into Bayesian Personalized
Ranking for Recommendation

Kai Zheng1,2,3 , Jianxin Wang1,2,∗, Jinhui Xu4,5,∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
Changsha 410083, China
2
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central South University
Changsha 410083, China
3
The College of Computer Science and Technology,China University of Petroleum
Qingdao 266580, China
4
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
HeFei, 230026, China
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
HeFei, 230026, China
jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn, jhxu@ustc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Graph self-supervised learning (GSL) is essential for processing graph-structured
data, reducing the need for manual labeling. Traditionally, this paradigm has extensively utilized Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) as its primary loss function.
Despite its widespread application, the theoretical analysis of its node relations evaluation have remained largely unexplored. This paper employs recent advancements
in latent hyperbolic geometry to deepen our understanding of node relationships
from a graph-theoretical perspective. We analyze BPR’s limitations, particularly
its reliance on local connectivity through 2-hop paths, which overlooks global
connectivity and the broader topological structure. To address these shortcomings,
we purpose a novel loss function, BPR+, designed to encompass even-hop paths
and better capture global connectivity and topological nuances. This approach
facilitates a more detailed measurement of user-item relationships and improves
the granularity of relationship assessments. We validate BPR+ through extensive
empirical testing across five real-world datasets and demonstrate its efficacy in
refining graph self-supervised learning frameworks. Additionally, we explore the
application of BPR+ in drug repositioning, highlighting its potential to support
pharmaceutical research and development. Our findings not only illuminate the
success factors of previous methodologies but also offer new theoretical insights
into this learning paradigm.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is revolutionizing deep learning by significantly reducing the reliance
on manually annotated labels [1]. This approach has gained considerable traction, especially in the
application to graph-structured data, referred to as graph self-supervised learning (GSL) [2]. GSL
exploits the unique, complex topological structures of nodes (non-Euclidean data space) to generate
embeddings [2]. This contrasts sharply with the more straightforward Euclidean spaces typical of
image and language data, presenting unique challenges and opportunities for innovation [1].
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

