Omni-Mol: Multitask Molecular Model
for Any-to-any Modalities

Chengxin Hu1,∗ Hao Li2,∗ Yihe Yuan1,∗ Zezheng Song3
Chenyang Zhao4 Haixin Wang4,†
1
National University of Singapore 2 Independent Researcher
3
University of Maryland, College Park 4 University of California, Los Angeles
{e1324268@u.nus.edu, whx@ucla.edu}
GitHub: Omni-Mol-Code

HuggingFace: Omni-Mol-Data&Weight

Abstract
In the molecular domain, numerous studies have explored the use of multimodal
large language models (LLMs) to construct a general-purpose, multi-task molecular model. However, these efforts are still far from achieving a truly universal
molecular model. We identify three key challenges in this endeavor: (1) Existing
molecular task datasets are typically small in scale and lack comprehensive domain
coverage. (2) Tasks from different molecular subfields are difficult to effectively
learn jointly through LLMs due to significant distributional shifts and competition
among tasks, which introduces instability in the learning process. (3) Both intertask and intra-task molecular representations demand different intrinsic dimensions
in the language space, making it challenging to balance between redundancy and
insufficiency in language model representations. To address these challenges, we
innovatively categorize existing small-molecule tasks into four types: Mol2Mol,
Mol2Text, Mol2Num, and Text2Mol. We then collect a dataset encompassing
over 16 tasks with more than 1.4 million samples, making it the largest molecular
instruction-tuning dataset to date. Leveraging the extensive pretraining of LLMs
on existing chemical literature, we propose a novel multimodal LLM framework,
named Omni-Mol, which unifies all small-molecule tasks and supports both molecular generation and understanding. The core of Omni-Mol is our proposed MoGE,
which dynamically adapts to the intrinsic rank of different tasks. This mixtureof-experts architecture enhances the model’s ability to handle diverse tasks and
modalities effectively. Our model achieves unified instruction tuning across 16
tasks and attains state-of-the-art performance on 13 of them. Extensive experiments
further demonstrate the scalability and versatility of Omni-Mol.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), especially multimodal LLMs, have achieved significant breakthroughs in various scientific tasks due to their powerful representational capabilities and general
reasoning abilities, spanning domains such as medicine [29, 82], chemistry [6], and biology [77].
This cutting-edge technology has also sparked an increasing number of studies exploring how to
align molecular representation spaces with textual representation spaces [10, 13, 21, 11, 25]. These
works hold great promise to build powerful AI chemists for advancing molecule captioning, property/structure prediction, and text-conditioned de novo drug design.
∗
†

Equal contribution, listings are alphabetic.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

