Reasoning Models Better Express Their Confidence

Dongkeun Yoon1∗ Seungone Kim3
Soyeon Kim2

Yongil Kim2
1

KAIST

2

Sohee Yang4

Eunbi Choi2

LG AI Research

Sunkyoung Kim2

Yireun Kim2
3

CMU

4

Minjoon Seo1

UCL

dkyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite their strengths, large language models (LLMs) often fail to communicate their confidence accurately, making it difficult to assess when they might be
wrong and limiting their reliability. In this work, we demonstrate that reasoning
models that engage in extended chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning exhibit superior performance not only in problem-solving but also in accurately expressing
their confidence. Specifically, we benchmark six reasoning models across six
datasets and find that they achieve strictly better confidence calibration than their
non-reasoning counterparts in 33 out of the 36 settings. Our detailed analysis
reveals that these gains in calibration stem from the slow thinking behaviors of
reasoning models (e.g., exploring alternative approaches and backtracking) which
enable them to adjust their confidence dynamically throughout their CoT, making it progressively more accurate. In particular, we find that reasoning models
become increasingly better calibrated as their CoT unfolds, a trend not observed
in non-reasoning models. Moreover, removing slow thinking behaviors from the
CoT leads to a significant drop in calibration. Lastly, we show that non-reasoning
models also demonstrate enhanced calibration when simply guided to slow think
via in-context learning, fully isolating slow thinking as the source of the calibration
gains.2

1

Introduction

A persistent weakness of large language models (LLMs) is their tendency to sound confident even
when they are wrong [13, 45]. This overconfidence threatens their reliability, especially in high-stakes
scenarios [32, 49]. Meanwhile, recent reasoning models like OpenAI’s o1 [30] and Deepseek-R1 [4]
have demonstrated strong problem-solving capabilities through chain-of-thought (CoT) [43] eliciting
slow thinking behaviors such as exploring alternative approaches and verifying their answers [24, 6].
Yet, it remains underexplored whether such slow thinking behaviors also help LLMs to “know what
they know” [16] and accurately communicate the limits of their knowledge.
To this end, we present an extensive study of reasoning models’ ability to accurately estimate and
express confidence in their output; a process known as verbalized confidence estimation [40, 7]. We
demonstrate that reasoning models exhibit superior confidence calibration compared to non-reasoning
models, and that this improvement stems from slow thinking behaviors, which allow LLMs to
dynamically adjust their confidence throughout the reasoning process. For instance, as shown in
Figure 1, the model’s confidence increases when it first verifies its answer (“Oh, and he also created
∗
2

Work done during internship at LG AI Research.
Our code is available at https://github.com/MattYoon/reasoning-models-confidence

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

