Reliably Detecting Model Failures in Deployment
Without Labels
Viet Nguyen1,3,† , Changjian Shui2,†, Vijay Giri4 ,
Siddarth Arya1,3 , Amol Verma1,5 , Fahad Razak1,5 , Rahul G. Krishnan1,3
1

University of Toronto 2 University of Ottawa 3 Vector Institute
4
University of Pennsylvania 5 Unity Health Toronto

Abstract
The distribution of data changes over time; models operating in dynamic environments need retraining. But knowing when to retrain, without access to labels, is an
open challenge since some, but not all shifts degrade model performance. This paper formalizes and addresses the problem of post-deployment deterioration (PDD)
monitoring. We propose D3M, a practical and efficient monitoring algorithm
based on the disagreement of predictive models, achieving low false positive rates
under non-deteriorating shifts and provides sample complexity bounds for high
true positive rates under deteriorating shifts. Empirical results on both standard
benchmark and a real-world large-scale internal medicine dataset demonstrate the
effectiveness of the framework and highlight its viability as an alert mechanism for
high-stakes machine learning pipelines.

1

Introduction

Performance guarantees of conventional machine learning (ML) models hinge on the belief that the
distribution of data with which these models train is identical to the distribution on which they are
deployed [1, 2, 3]. In many real-world scenarios such as healthcare, however, this assumption fails
due to distribution shift during model deployment. Benchmarks such as WILDS [4] and WILDTime [5] have encouraged machine learning researchers to study and better understand how data
shifts influence predictive systems. Yet, the number of tools at a practitioner’s disposal for building
predictive models far exceeds those to monitor model failures. There is a need to create guardrails
that self-detect and alert end-users to critical changes in the model when its performance drops below
acceptable thresholds [6, 7].
We define post-deployment deterioration (PDD) as the scenario where a trained ML model underperforms on a distributionally shifted deployment query with respect to its validation performance. PDD
presents a distinct set of systemic challenges stemming from considerations over the feasibility of
deployment in real-world ML pipelines. Predominant is the scarcity of labels during deployment: for
many downstream tasks such as in healthcare, labels are expensive to obtain [8] or require human
intervention [9]. Due to deployed models predicting events temporally extended in the future [10, 11],
labels might even be unavailable. Another is the robustness of the monitoring system: it should
flag critical changes in model deterioration early, using few samples, while remaining resilient to
non-deteriorating changes to minimize unnecessary interruptions of service among other practical
considerations.
To address these challenges, we conceive a set of desiderata for any algorithm monitoring PDD,
targeting their practicality and effectiveness as plug-ins to ML pipelines. To address the scarcity of
†

Equal contribution, correspondence to Viet Nguyen: viet@cs.toronto.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

