APOLLO: Automated LLM and Lean Collaboration
for Advanced Formal Reasoning

Azim Ospanov ∗ †
aospanov9@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Farzan Farnia †
farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Roozbeh Yousefzadeh ∗
roozbeh.yz@gmail.com

Abstract
Formal reasoning and automated theorem proving constitute a challenging subfield
of machine learning, in which machines are tasked with proving mathematical
theorems using formal languages like Lean. A formal verification system can check
whether a formal proof is correct or not almost instantaneously, but generating a
completely correct formal proof with large language models (LLMs) remains a
formidable task. The usual approach in the literature is to prompt the LLM many
times (up to several thousands) until one of the generated proofs passes the verification system. In this work, we present APOLLO (Automated PrOof repair via
LLM and Lean cOllaboration), a modular, model-agnostic agentic framework that
combines the strengths of the Lean compiler with an LLM’s reasoning abilities to
achieve better proof-generation results at a low token and sampling budgets. Apollo
directs a fully automated process in which the LLM generates proofs for theorems,
a set of agents analyze the proofs, fix the syntax errors, identify the mistakes in the
proofs using Lean, isolate failing sub-lemmas, utilize automated solvers, and invoke
an LLM on each remaining goal with a low top-K budget. The repaired sub-proofs
are recombined and reverified, iterating up to a user-controlled maximum number of
attempts. On the miniF2F benchmark, we establish a new state-of-the-art accuracy
of 84.9% among sub 8B-parameter models (as of August 2025) while keeping the
sampling budget below one hundred. Moreover, Apollo raises the state-of-the-art
accuracy for Goedel-Prover-SFT to 65.6% while cutting sample complexity from
25,600 to a few hundred. General-purpose models (o3-mini, o4-mini) jump from
3–7% to over 40% accuracy. Our results demonstrate that targeted, compiler-guided
repair of LLM outputs yields dramatic gains in both efficiency and correctness, suggesting a general paradigm for scalable automated theorem proving. The codebase
is available at https://github.com/aziksh-ospanov/APOLLO

1

Introduction

Formal reasoning has emerged as one of the most challenging fields of AI with recent achievements
such as AlphaProof and AlphaGeometry doing well at the International Math Olympiad competing
with humans [1, 2, 3]. Formal reasoning relies both on AI models and a formal verification system
that can automatically verify whether a mathematical proof is correct or not. In recent years, formal
verification systems such as Lean [4] have facilitated a new form of doing mathematical research by
enabling mathematicians to interact with the formal verification system and also with each other via
the system, enabling larger numbers of mathematicians to collaborate with each other on a single
project. As such, these formal verification systems are also called proof assistants as one can use
them interactively to write a formal proof and instantaneously observe the current state of the proof
and any possible errors or shortcomings in the proof generated by the compiler. Immediate access
∗
†

Huawei Hong Kong Research Center
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

