A unified framework for establishing the universal
approximation of transformer-type architectures

Jingpu Cheng
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
chengjingpu@u.nus.edu
Zuowei Shen
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
matzuows@nus.edu.sg

Ting Lin
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
lintingsms@pku.edu.cn
Qianxiao Li
Department of Mathematics
Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials
National University of Singapore
qianxiao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We investigate the universal approximation property (UAP) of transformer-type
architectures, providing a unified theoretical framework that extends prior results
on residual networks to models incorporating attention mechanisms. Our work
identifies token distinguishability as a fundamental requirement for UAP and
introduces a general sufficient condition that applies to a broad class of architectures.
Leveraging an analyticity assumption on the attention layer, we can significantly
simplify the verification of this condition, providing a non-constructive approach
in establishing UAP for such architectures. We demonstrate the applicability of our
framework by proving UAP for transformers with various attention mechanisms,
including kernel-based and sparse ones. The corollaries of our results either
generalize prior works or establish UAP for architectures not previously covered.
Furthermore, our framework offers a principled foundation for designing novel
transformer architectures with inherent UAP guarantees, including those with
specific functional symmetries. We propose examples to illustrate these insights.

1

Introduction

Transformers [66] are a family of deep learning architectures that have achieved remarkable performance in natural language processing [5, 57, 58], computer vision [7, 16], and other fields [36]. Given
an input sequence of tokens, a transformer processes it through a deep composition of alternating
attention and token-wise feedforward layers. Besides the original softmax attention [66], a variety
of different attention mechanisms have been proposed to enhance performance or computational
efficiency, such as kernel-based attention [9, 12, 38, 65], sparse attention [3, 40, 76], and attention
with low-rank structures [68, 82].
A natural theoretical question is: What is the expressive power of these architectures? Previous studies
have shown that transformers achieve the universal approximation property (UAP) via architecturespecific constructions, meaning they can approximate any continuous sequence-to-sequence function
over compact domains [37, 75, 76] in certain measures. However, these results heavily rely on explicit,
architecture-specific constructions, and a unified theoretical framework of deep transformer-type
architectures remains elusive. In particular, it is highly desirable to derive a verifiable condition that
guarantees UAP of deep transformer-type architectures, independent of specific architectural details
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

