Adaptive Kernel Design for Bayesian Optimization
Is a Piece of CAKE with LLMs
Richard Cornelius Suwandi1 Feng Yin1∗ Juntao Wang1
Renjie Li2,3 Tsung-Hui Chang1 Sergios Theodoridis4
1
School of Artificial Intelligence (SAI), The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
School of Science and Engineering (SSE), The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Holonyak Micro & Nanotechnology Lab, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
4
HERON CoE for Robotics and AI-ATHENA R.C., Greece
{richardsuwandi, juntaowang}@link.cuhk.edu.cn
{yinfeng, changtsunghui}@cuhk.edu.cn, renjie2@illinois.edu, stheodor@di.uoa.gr

Abstract
The efficiency of Bayesian optimization (BO) relies heavily on the choice of the
Gaussian process (GP) kernel, which plays a central role in balancing exploration
and exploitation under limited evaluation budgets. Traditional BO methods often
rely on fixed or heuristic kernel selection strategies, which can result in slow
convergence or suboptimal solutions when the chosen kernel is poorly suited to
the underlying objective function. To address this limitation, we propose a freshlybaked Context-Aware Kernel Evolution (CAKE) to enhance BO with large language
models (LLMs). Concretely, CAKE leverages LLMs as the crossover and mutation
operators to adaptively generate and refine GP kernels based on the observed data
throughout the optimization process. To maximize the power of CAKE, we further
propose BIC-Acquisition Kernel Ranking (BAKER) to select the most effective
kernel through balancing the model fit measured by the Bayesian information
criterion (BIC) with the expected improvement at each iteration of BO. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our fresh CAKE-based BO method consistently
outperforms established baselines across a range of real-world tasks, including
hyperparameter optimization, controller tuning, and photonic chip design. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/richardcsuwandi/cake.

1

Introduction

Many important scientific and engineering problems require optimizing objective functions that are
noisy and expensive to evaluate. These objective functions often lack closed-form expressions, let
alone gradient information, making optimization particularly difficult [50]. Nonetheless, Bayesian
optimization (BO) has shown remarkable success in optimizing such functions, due to its ability to
operate on limited data and incorporate prior knowledge to guide the optimization process [17]. In the
past couple of decades, BO has been used for diverse tasks ranging from tuning hyperparameters in
machine learning [43, 29] to designing policies in robotics [9, 33] and recommending new molecules
in drug discovery [25, 49]. The main idea behind BO is to first construct a surrogate model, typically
using a Gaussian process (GP) [36], to represent the prior belief about the objective function. Then,
by conditioning on the observations and the prior, the posterior is calculated using Bayes’ rule to
reflect the updated belief about the objective function. Based on this posterior, an acquisition function
is further used to determine the next promising query positions while balancing exploration (i.e.,
moving to regions with high uncertainty) and exploitation (i.e., moving to regions with high expected
value).
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

