Personalized Exercise Recommendation with
Semantically-Grounded Knowledge Tracing

Yilmazcan Ozyurt∗ †
ETH Zürich

Tunaberk Almaci∗
ETH Zürich

Stefan Feuerriegel
Munich Center for Machine Learning & LMU Munich

Mrinmaya Sachan
ETH Zürich

Abstract
We introduce ExRec, a general framework for personalized exercise recommendation with semantically-grounded knowledge tracing. Our method builds on the
observation that existing exercise recommendation approaches simulate student
performance via knowledge tracing (KT) but they often overlook two key aspects:
(a) the semantic content of questions and (b) the sequential, structured progression
of student learning. To address this, our ExRec presents an end-to-end pipeline,
from annotating the KCs of questions and learning their semantic representations to
training KT models and optimizing several reinforcement learning (RL) methods.
Moreover, we improve standard Q-learning-based continuous RL methods via a
tailored model-based value estimation (MVE) approach that directly leverages the
components of KT model in estimating cumulative knowledge improvement. We
validate the effectiveness of our ExRec using various RL methods across four realworld tasks with different educational goals in online math learning. We further
show that ExRec generalizes robustly to new, unseen questions and that it produces
interpretable student learning trajectories. Together, our findings highlight the
promise of KT-guided RL for effective personalization in education.

1

Introduction

The rapid rise of online learning platforms has revolutionized education by offering students access to
interactive learning materials and exercises [3, 29, 41, 53]. A key factor in enhancing student learning
is personalization, where exercises are recommended based on students’ evolving knowledge states
[22, 77].
A central method for assessing learning progress is knowledge tracing (KT), which models the
temporal dynamics of student learning by predicting responses to future exercises. This enables
real-time monitoring of knowledge states, which are structured around fundamental skills known as
knowledge concepts (KCs). Over the years, numerous KT approaches have been developed [e. g.,
1, 12, 15, 20, 39, 59, 61, 63, 70, 71, 81, 83]1 . Yet, only a small number of works have actually
leveraged KT for personalized exercise recommendations.
Recent methods for personalized exercise recommendation have integrated KT into reinforcement
learning (RL) frameworks to simulate student behavior and learn optimal recommendation policies
[4, 10, 14, 42, 75, 82]. However, these methods suffer from several key limitations: 1 they often
rely on ID-based embeddings, which neglects the semantics of questions; 2 they define states as the
full exercise history, making them computationally impractical for long exercise sequences; 3 the
* Equal contribution.
†
1

Correspondence to Yilmazcan Ozyurt <yozyurt@ethz.ch>.
For a more comprehensive overview, we refer to [2] and [68].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

