Transformer Key-Value Memories Are
Nearly as Interpretable as Sparse Autoencoders

Mengyu Ye
Tohoku University
ye.mengyu.s1@dc.tohoku.ac.jp
Tatsuro Inaba∗
MBZUAI
tatsuro.inaba@mbzuai.ac.ae

Jun Suzuki
Tohoku University & RIKEN
jun.suzuki@tohoku.ac.jp
Tatsuki Kuribayashi
MBZUAI
tatsuki.kuribayashi@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Recent interpretability work on large language models (LLMs) has been increasingly dominated by a feature-discovery approach with the help of proxy modules.
Then, the quality of features learned by, e.g., sparse auto-encoders (SAEs), is
evaluated. This paradigm naturally raises a critical question: do such learned
features have better properties than those already represented within the original
model parameters, and unfortunately, only a few studies have made such comparisons systematically so far. In this work, we revisit the interpretability of feature
vectors stored in feed-forward (FF) layers, given the perspective of FF as key-value
memories, with modern interpretability benchmarks. Our extensive evaluation revealed that SAE and FFs exhibits a similar range of interpretability, although SAEs
displayed an observable but minimal improvement in some aspects. Furthermore,
in certain aspects, surprisingly, even vanilla FFs yielded better interpretability than
the SAEs, and features discovered in SAEs and FFs diverged. These bring questions about the advantage of SAEs from both perspectives of feature quality and
faithfulness, compared to directly interpreting FF feature vectors, and FF key-value
parameters serve as a strong baseline in modern interpretability research2 .

1

Introduction

Transformer-based language models (LMs) have exhibited outstanding performance on a wide variety
of tasks [10, 35, 1, 44, 45], whereas their underlying mechanisms remain opaque [47, 37, 50, 17,
38, 18, 34, 28, 31]. This issue has been tackled in the interpretability field, and in earlier days, the
field has typically adopted a top-down approach, where, given candidate features or algorithms, e.g.,
syntactic structure, it has been inspected where in the original model those are encoded. Nowadays,
as a variety of capabilities emerge in larger LMs, the question tends to be more on the bottom-up,
feature-discovery side: what kind of features are encoded in the model?; and how can we discover and
control them? This feature-discovery age has brought two trends to the interpretability community
simultaneously: (i) training an external proxy module dedicated to this purpose, namely, sparse autoencoder (SAEs), to decompose neuron activations into simpler basic features [53, 8, 24, 30, 21, 16]
(proxy-based analysis), and (ii) developing new comprehensive interpretability benchmarks [36, 27]
to test the quality of discovered features.
∗
2

Work done at Tohoku University.
Project page: https://muyo8692.com/projects/ff-kv-sae

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

