Diffusing DeBias:
Synthetic Bias Amplification for Model Debiasing

Massimiliano Ciranni1∗ Vito Paolo Pastore1,2∗ Roberto Di Via1∗
Enzo Tartaglione3 Francesca Odone1 Vittorio Murino2,4
1

2

MaLGa-DIBRIS, University of Genoa, Italy
AI for Good (AIGO), Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy
3
Telècom-Paris, Ecole Polytechnique Superior, France
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Italy

{massimiliano.ciranni, roberto.divia}@edu.unige.it, vito.paolo.pastore@unige.it
enzo.tartaglione@telecom-paris.fr, francesca.odone@unige.it, vittorio.murino@iit.it

Abstract
The effectiveness of deep learning models in classification tasks is often challenged
by the quality and quantity of training data whenever they are affected by strong spurious correlations between specific attributes and target labels. This results in a form
of bias affecting training data, which typically leads to unrecoverable weak generalization in prediction. This paper addresses this problem by leveraging bias amplification with generated synthetic data only: we introduce Diffusing DeBias (DDB),
a novel approach acting as a plug-in for common methods of unsupervised model
debiasing, exploiting the inherent bias-learning tendency of diffusion models in
data generation. Specifically, our approach adopts conditional diffusion models to
generate synthetic bias-aligned images, which fully replace the original training set
for learning an effective bias amplifier model to be subsequently incorporated into
an end-to-end and a two-step unsupervised debiasing approach. By tackling the fundamental issue of bias-conflicting training samples’ memorization in learning auxiliary models, typical of this type of technique, our proposed method outperforms the
current state-of-the-art in multiple benchmark datasets, demonstrating its potential
as a versatile and effective tool for tackling bias in deep learning models. Code is
available at https://github.com/Malga-Vision/DiffusingDeBias.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have shown impressive results in various vision tasks, including image classification. However, their success is highly dependent on the quality and representativeness of the
training data. When a deep neural network is trained on a biased dataset, so-called “shortcuts”, corresponding to spurious correlations (i.e., biases) between irrelevant attributes and labels, are learned
instead of semantic class attributes, affecting model generalization and impacting test performances.
In other words, the model becomes biased towards specific training sub-populations presenting biases,
known as bias-aligned, while samples not affected by the bias are referred to as bias-conflicting or
unbiased. In this scenario, where it is generally assumed that most of the training samples available
in a biased data set are biased (typically, 95% or higher [39]), several debiasing methods have been
proposed addressing the problem from different points of view [23, 46, 41, 22, 29]. When annotations
on bias attributes are available, common supervised debiasing strategies involve reweighting the
training set to give more importance to the few available bias-conflicting data [29], for example, by
upsampling [31] or upweighting [43] them. Conversely, unsupervised debiasing methods, which
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

