Optimal Spectral Transitions in
High-Dimensional Multi-Index Models
Leonardo Defilippis1 , Yatin Dandi2,3 , Pierre Mergny2 , Florent Krzakala2 , and Bruno Loureiro1
1
2

Département d’Informatique, École Normale Supérieure, PSL & CNRS, Paris, France
Information, Learning and Physics Laboratory. EPFL, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
3
Sloan School of Management, MIT, United States.

Abstract
We consider the problem of how many samples from a Gaussian multi-index
model are required to weakly reconstruct the relevant index subspace. Despite its
increasing popularity as a testbed for investigating the computational complexity
of neural networks, results beyond the single-index setting remain elusive. In this
work, we introduce spectral algorithms based on the linearization of a message
passing scheme tailored to this problem. Our main contribution is to show that
the proposed methods achieve the optimal reconstruction threshold. Leveraging a
high-dimensional characterization of the algorithms, we show that above the critical
threshold the leading eigenvector correlates with the relevant index subspace, a
phenomenon reminiscent of the Baik–Ben Arous–Peche (BBP) transition in spiked
models arising in random matrix theory. Supported by numerical experiments and a
rigorous theoretical framework, our work bridges critical gaps in the computational
limits of weak learnability in multi-index model.
A popular model to study learning problems in statistics, computer science and machine learning
is the multi-index model, where the target function depends on a low-dimensional subspace of the
covariates. In this problem, one aims at identifying the p-dimensional linear subspace spanned by a
family of orthonormal vectors w⋆,1 , . . . , w⋆,p ∈ Rd from n independent observations (xi , yi ) from
the model:
yi = g (⟨w⋆,1 , xi ⟩, . . . , ⟨w⋆,p , xi ⟩) ,

i ∈ JnK.

(1)

This formulation encompasses several fundamental problems in machine learning, signal processing,
and theoretical computer science, including: (i) Linear estimation, where p = 1 and g(z) = z, (ii)
Phase retrieval, where P
p = 1 and g(z) = |z|. (iii) Learning Two-layer neural networks, where p is
the width and g(z) = j∈JpK aj σ(zj ) for some non-linear activation function σ : R → R, or (iv)
Q
learning Sparse parity functions, where g(z) = sign( j∈JpK zj ).

A classical problem in statistics [1, 2, 3], the multi-index model has recently gained in popularity in
the machine learning community as a generative model for supervised learning data where the labels
only depend on an underlying low-dimensional latent subspace of the covariates [4, 5, 6].

Of particular interest to this work are spectral methods, which play a fundamental role in machine
learning by offering an efficient and computationally tractable approach to extracting meaningful
structure from high-dimensional noisy data. A paradigmatic example is the Baik–Ben Arous–Péché
(BBP) transition [7], where the leading eigenvalue of a matrix correlates with the hidden signal
— a phenomenon that is ubiquitous in machine learning theory. Beyond their practical utility,
spectral methods often serve as a starting point for more advanced approaches, including iterative
and nonlinear techniques. This leads us to the central question of this paper:
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

