Safe-Sora: Safe Text-to-Video Generation via
Graphical Watermarking

Zihan Su1

Xuerui Qiu2,3 Hongbin Xu4 Tangyu Jiang1 Junhao Zhuang1
Chun Yuan1∗ Ming Li5∗ Shengfeng He6 Fei Richard Yu5
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Zhongguancun Academy 4 Bytedance
5
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
6
Singapore Management University
zh-su24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The explosive growth of generative video models has amplified the demand for
reliable copyright preservation of AI-generated content. Despite its popularity in
image synthesis, invisible generative watermarking remains largely underexplored
in video generation. To address this gap, we propose Safe-Sora, the first framework
to embed graphical watermarks directly into the video generation process. Motivated by the observation that watermarking performance is closely tied to the visual
similarity between the watermark and cover content, we introduce a hierarchical
coarse-to-fine adaptive matching mechanism. Specifically, the watermark image is
divided into patches, each assigned to the most visually similar video frame, and
further localized to the optimal spatial region for seamless embedding. To enable
spatiotemporal fusion of watermark patches across video frames, we develop a 3D
wavelet transform-enhanced Mamba architecture with a novel spatiotemporal local
scanning strategy, effectively modeling long-range dependencies during watermark
embedding and retrieval. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to
apply state space models to watermarking, opening new avenues for efficient and
robust watermark protection. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Safe-Sora
achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of video quality, watermark fidelity,
and robustness, which is largely attributed to our proposals. Code is publicly
available at https://github.com/Sugewud/Safe-Sora

1

Introduction

Recent advances in video generation models have significantly transformed digital content creation [1–
6]. VideoCrafter2 [2] delivers high-fidelity video generation results, while Open-Sora [7] enables
efficient and scalable video generation. However, this rapid progress also raises growing concerns
over copyright protection and ownership verification of generated videos.
Invisible watermarking has proven effective for copyright protection in image generation [8–15].
However, its extension to video generation remains relatively underexplored. Recent efforts such
as VideoShield [16] and LVMark [17] embed watermarks by modifying latent noise or applying
importance-based modulation strategies. Despite these advancements, existing approaches rely on
embedding bitstring-based identifiers, which fall short of leveraging the high information capacity
inherent in video content. Unlike static images, videos offer significantly greater embedding bandwidth, making them well-suited for graphical watermarks—e.g., logos or icons—that serve as more
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

