Learning Urban Climate Dynamics via Physics-Guided
Urban Surface-Atmosphere Interactions

Jiyang Xia ∗1,2

Fenghua Ling2 Zhenhui Jessie Li3 Junjie Yu1 Hongliang Zhang4
David O. Topping1 Lei Bai2 Zhonghua Zheng1
1

The University of Manchester 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Yunqi Academy of Engineering 4 Fudan University

{jiyang.xia, junjie.yu, david.topping, zhonghua.zheng}@manchester.ac.uk
{lingfenghua, bailei}@pjlab.org.cn jessielzh@gmail.com zhanghl@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Urban warming differs markedly from regional background trends, highlighting
the unique behavior of urban climates and the challenges they present. Accurately
predicting local urban climate necessitates modeling the interactions between urban
surfaces and atmospheric forcing. Although off-the-shelf machine learning (ML)
algorithms offer considerable accuracy for climate prediction, they often function
as black boxes, learning data mappings rather than capturing physical evolution.
As a result, they struggle to capture key land-atmosphere interactions and may produce physically inconsistent predictions. To address these limitations, we propose
UCformer, a novel multi-task, physics-guided Transformer architecture designed
to emulate nonlinear urban climate processes. UCformer jointly estimates 2-m air
temperature (T ), specific humidity (q), and dew point temperature (t) in urban areas,
while embedding domain and physical priors into its learning structure. Experimental results demonstrate that incorporating domain and physical knowledge leads to
significant improvements in emulation accuracy and generalizability under future
urban climate scenarios. Further analysis reveals that learning shared correlations
across cities enables the model to capture transferable urban surface–atmosphere
interaction patterns, resulting in improved accuracy in urban climate emulation.
Finally, UCformer shows strong potential to fit real-world data: when fine-tuned
with limited observational data, it achieves competitive performance in estimating
urban heat fluxes compared to a physics-based model. 1

1

Introduction

Occupying only ~3% of the Earth’s land surface [27, 31], urban areas concentrate more than 50%
of the global population [30], emit ~70% of total greenhouse gases [1], and represent the primary
settings where humans experience the impacts of climate change [46]. This disproportion between
the climatic importance of cities and their limited representation in global land cover highlights the
pressing need to understand and predict urban climate. Nevertheless, urban climates remain largely
underrepresented in machine learning (ML)-based climate models [7, 12, 23]. A primary reason is
that urban areas constitute only ~8% of grid cells in coarse-resolution global climate models (0.9°
× 1.25°), leading to their marginalization in most ML-based approaches. Moreover, urban climate
modeling poses unique challenges that are not captured by these approaches.
* This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
1

The code and datasets of this work are available at https://github.com/envdes/code_UCformer.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

