Towards Understanding the Mechanisms of
Classifier-Free Guidance
Xiang Li1 , Rongrong Wang2 , Qing Qu1
Department of EECS, University of Michigan,
2
Department of CMSE and Mathematics, Michigan State University,
forkobe@umich.edu, wangron6@msu.edu, qingqu@umich.edu
1

Abstract
Classifier-free guidance (CFG) is a core technique powering state-of-the-art image
generation systems, yet its underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. In
this work, we begin by analyzing CFG in a simplified linear diffusion model,
where we show its behavior closely resembles that observed in the nonlinear
case. Our analysis reveals that linear CFG improves generation quality via three
distinct components: (i) a mean-shift term that approximately steers samples in
the direction of class means, (ii) a positive Contrastive Principal Components
(CPC) term that amplifies class-specific features, and (iii) a negative CPC term that
suppresses generic features prevalent in unconditional data. We then verify these
insights in real-world, nonlinear diffusion models: over a broad range of noise
levels, linear CFG resembles the behavior of its nonlinear counterpart. Although
the two eventually diverge at low noise levels, we discuss how the insights from the
linear analysis still shed light on the CFG’s mechanism in the nonlinear regime.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1–4] generate samples from a data distribution pdata (x), where x ∈ Rd , by
reversing a forward noising process. This forward process, defined in (1), progressively corrupts the
2
clean data until p(x; σmax ) becomes indistinguishable from a Gaussian distribution N (0, σmax
I),
Z
p0t (x|x0 )pdata (x0 )dx0 .
(1)
p(x; σ(t)) =
Rd

Following the state-of-the-art EDM framework [4, 5], the forward transition kernel is set to
p0t (x|x0 ) = N (x0 , σ 2 (t)I). The reverse process can then be expressed as a probabilistic ODE:
dxt = −σ(t)∇xt log p(x; σ(t))dt,

(2)

such that xt ∼ p(x; σ(t)) for every σ(t) ∈ (0, σmax ]. In practice, the score function can be
approximated as ∇x log p(x; σ(t)) ≈ (Dθ (x; σ(t)) − x)/σ 2 (t), where Dθ is a deep network-based
denoiser with parameter θ optimized by minimizing the denoising score matching objective [6]:
Ex∼pdata ,ϵ∼N (0,σ2 (t)I) [||Dθ (x + ϵ; σ(t)) − x||22 ].

(3)

To sample from conditional distribution p(x|c), the deep denoiser Dθ (x; σ(t), c) receives an auxiliary
embedding c specifying the target class or other conditions during training such that conditional
sampling can be performed with:
dxt = −σ(t)∇xt log p(x|c; σ(t))dt,

(4)

where ∇x log p(x|c; σ(t)) ≈ (Dθ (x; σ(t), c) − x)/σ 2 (t). However, the naive (standard) conditional
sampling (4) alone often results in images with incoherent structures and fail to align well with the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

