KTAE: A Model-Free Algorithm to Key-Tokens
Advantage Estimation in Mathematical Reasoning

Wei Sun1,2 ,Wen Yang1,2 ,Pu Jian1,2 ,
Qianlong Du1 ,Fuwei Cui1 ,Shuo Ren1 ,Jiajun Zhang†1,2,3
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Wuhan AI Research
{sunwei2023,yangwen2023,jianpu2023,shuo.ren,fuwei.cui}@ia.ac.cn
{qianlong.du,jjzhang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Project Page: https://github.com/ZNLP/KTAE.git

Abstract
Recent advances have demonstrated that integrating reinforcement learning with
rule-based rewards can significantly enhance the reasoning capabilities of large
language models, even without supervised fine-tuning. However, prevalent reinforcement learning algorithms such as GRPO and its variants like DAPO, suffer
from a coarse granularity issue when computing the advantage. Specifically, they
compute rollout-level advantages that assign identical values to every token within
a sequence, failing to capture token-specific contributions and hindering effective
learning. To address this limitation, we propose Key-token Advantage Estimation
(KTAE) - a novel algorithm that estimates fine-grained, token-level advantages
without introducing additional models. KTAE leverages the correctness of sampled
rollouts and applies statistical analysis to quantify the importance of individual tokens within a sequence to the final outcome. This quantified token-level importance
is then combined with the rollout-level advantage to obtain a more fine-grained
token-level advantage estimation. Empirical results show that models trained with
GRPO+KTAE and DAPO+KTAE outperform baseline methods across five mathematical reasoning benchmarks. Notably, they achieve higher accuracy with shorter
responses and even surpass R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B using the same base model.

1

Introduction

Notably, large reasoning language models (LRMs) like OpenAI o1 [1] and DeepSeek R1 [2] have
demonstrated the capability to solve complex mathematical reasoning problems that challenge
even human experts. This progress marks a significant step toward Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI) [3, 4, 5]. These reasoning language models often exhibit behaviors such as self-reflection
and self-verification within the reasoning chain, which are critical for enhancing reasoning accuracy.
DeepSeek R1 aptly refers to the critical turning points that lead to improved performance as “aha
moments”. The emergence and cultivation of such moments are greatly facilitated by the application
of reinforcement learning (RL) or distilled from more powerful LRMs [6, 7, 2]. For instance,
DeepSeek applied RL directly to the base language model, using a simple rule-based reward function
to encourage the model to explore and unlock its reasoning potential [8] through self-exploration.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

