Optical Coherence Tomography Harmonization with
Anatomy-Guided Latent Metric Schrödinger Bridges

Shuwen Wei1∗
Samuel W. Remedios1
Blake E. Dewey2
Zhangxing Bian1
1
2
3
Shimeng Wang
Junyu Chen
Bruno M. Jedynak
Shiv Saidha2
Peter A. Calabresi2
Aaron Carass1
Jerry L. Prince1
1
2
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine
3
Portland State University

Abstract
Medical image harmonization aims to reduce the differences in appearance caused
by scanner hardware variations to allow for consistent and reliable comparisons
across devices. Harmonization based on paired images from different devices has
limited applicability in real-world clinical settings. On the other hand, unpaired
harmonization typically does not guarantee anatomy consistency, which is problematic because anatomical information preservation is paramount. The Schrödinger
bridge framework has achieved state-of-the-art style transfer performance with
natural images by matching distributions of unpaired images, but this approach
can also introduce anatomy changes when applied to medical images. We show
that such changes occur because the Schrödinger bridge uses the square of the
Euclidean distance between images as the transport cost in an entropy-regularized
optimal transport problem. Such a transport cost is not appropriate for measuring
anatomical distances, as medical images with the same anatomy need not have a
small Euclidean distance between them. In this paper, we propose a latent metric
Schrödinger bridge (LMSB) framework to improve the anatomical consistency for
the harmonization of medical images. We develop an invertible network that maps
medical images into a latent Euclidean metric space where the distances among
images with the same anatomy are minimized using the pullback latent metric.
Within this latent space, we train a Schrödinger bridge to match distributions. We
show that the proposed LMSB is superior to the direct application of a Schrödinger
bridge to harmonize optical coherence tomography (OCT) images.

1

Introduction

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Huang et al., 1991) is a medical image modality that uses lowcoherence interferometry to visualize micro structures in biological tissue. Its current primary clinical
uses are for retina and cornea health monitoring and disease diagnosis (Petzold et al., 2010; Saidha
et al., 2015; Rothman et al., 2019), but different hardware configurations and scanning settings cause
image variations in the forms of contrast, speckle, and noise (Wei et al., 2023). For example, Zeiss
Cirrus OCT quickly scans the retina in exchange for low contrast and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR),
whereas Heidelberg Spectralis OCT slowly scans the retina (via multiple image acquisitions) in
exchange for superior contrast and SNR (via averaging of the multiple acquisitions). This type
of domain shift caused by different scanners or acquisition parameters creates a challenge in the
development and deployment of robust and generalizable medical image analysis methods (Guan and
Liu, 2021), affecting multi-center studies and longitudinal analyses where imaging data are pooled
∗

Corresponding author: swei14@jhu.edu

code: https://github.com/Shuwen-Wei/lmsb

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

