PLMTrajRec: A Scalable and Generalizable
Trajectory Recovery Method with Pre-trained
Language Models

Tonglong Wei1∗, Yan Lin2∗, Youfang Lin1,3 , Shengnan Guo1,4†, Jilin Hu5
Haitao Yuan6 , Gao Cong6 , Huaiyu Wan1,3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence, China
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
5
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, China
6
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
{weitonglong, guoshn, yflin, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn, lyan@cs.aau.dk,
jlhu@dase.ecnu.edu.cn, {haitao.yuan, gaocong}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Spatiotemporal trajectory data is crucial for various traffic-related applications.
However, issues such as device malfunctions and network instability often result in
sparse trajectories that lose detailed movement information compared to their dense
counterparts. Recovering missing points in sparse trajectories is thus essential.
Despite recent progress, three challenges remain. First, the lack of large-scale dense
trajectory datasets hinders the training of a trajectory recovery model. Second, the
varying spatiotemporal correlations in sparse trajectories make it hard to generalize
across different sampling intervals. Third, extracting road conditions for missing
points is non-trivial.
To address these challenges, we propose PLMTrajRec, a novel trajectory recovery
model. It leverages the scalability of a pre-trained language model (PLM) and
can effectively recover trajectories by fine-tuning with small-scale dense trajectory
datasets. To handle different sampling intervals in sparse trajectories, we first
convert sampling intervals and movement features into prompts for the PLM
to understand. We then introduce a trajectory encoder to unify trajectories of
varying intervals into a single interval. To extract road conditions for missing
points, we propose an area flow-guided implicit trajectory prompt that represents
traffic conditions in each region, and a road condition passing mechanism that
infers the road conditions of missing points using the observed ones. Experiments
on four public trajectory datasets with three sampling intervals demonstrate the
effectiveness, scalability, and generalization ability of PLMTrajRec. Code is
available at https://github.com/wtl52656/PLMTrajRec.

1

Introduction

Spatiotemporal trajectories are sequences of (location, timestamp) pairs that record the movement of
individuals and vehicles. They play a pivotal role in various applications, such as urban planning [36,
43, 1, 19, 37], traffic management [25, 34, 47], and personalized location services [46, 33, 6, 5].
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

