Contextual Thompson Sampling
via Generation of Missing Data

Kelly W. Zhang
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
kelly.zhang@imperial.ac.uk

Tiffany (Tianhui) Cai
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
tiffany.cai@columbia.edu

Hongseok Namkoong
Decision, Risk, and Operations
Columbia Business School
namkoong@gsb.columbia.edu

Daniel Russo
Decision, Risk, and Operations
Columbia Business School
djr2174@columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce a framework for Thompson sampling (TS) contextual bandit algorithms, in which the algorithm’s ability to quantify uncertainty and make decisions
depends on the quality of a generative model that is learned offline. Instead of
viewing uncertainty in the environment as arising from unobservable latent parameters, our algorithm treats uncertainty as stemming from missing, but potentially
observable outcomes (including both future and counterfactual outcomes). If these
outcomes were all observed, one could simply make decisions using an “oracle”
policy fit on the complete dataset. Inspired by this conceptualization, at each
decision-time, our algorithm uses a generative model to probabilistically impute
missing outcomes, fits a policy using the imputed complete dataset, and uses that
policy to select the next action. We formally show that this algorithm is a generative
formulation of TS and establish a state-of-the-art regret bound. Notably, our regret
bound depends on the generative model only through the quality of its offline
prediction loss, and applies to any method of fitting the “oracle” policy.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning have transformed our ability to develop high quality predictive
and generative models for complex data. This work introduces a framework for developing decisionmaking algorithms, specifically for contextual bandit problems, that can take advantage of these
machine learning advances. By design, we assume the algorithm developer is able to apply these
techniques (e.g., minimize a loss via gradient descent) and employ these methods as subroutines
in our decision-making algorithm. Moreover, our theory formally connects the quality of effective
(self-)supervised learning via loss minimization to the quality of decision-making.
Classically, Thompson sampling (TS) algorithms form a parametric model of the environment and
consider the decision-maker’s uncertainty as arising from unknown latent parameters of that model
[Thompson, 1933, Russo et al., 2020]. The primitive operations used by TS include i) specifying an
informative prior for the latent parameter using domain knowledge, ii) sampling from the posterior
distribution of the latent parameter, and iii) updating the posterior distribution as more data is collected.
Unfortunately, it is well known that all three of these operations are non-trivial to perform with
neural networks [Tran et al., 2020, Goan and Fookes, 2020]. In this work, we view missing, but
potentially observable, counterfactual outcomes as the source of the decision-maker’s uncertainty.
This perspective allows us to replace the primitive operations required in the classical view with new
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

