Non-Adaptive Adversarial Face Generation

Sunpill Kim Seunghun Paik Chanwoo Hwang Minsu Kim Jae Hong Seo∗
Department of Mathematics & Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang University
{ksp0352, whitesoonguh, aa5568, iayaho3248, jaehongseo}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Adversarial attacks on face recognition systems (FRSs) pose serious security and
privacy threats, especially when these systems are used for identity verification. In
this paper, we propose a novel method for generating adversarial faces—synthetic
facial images that are visually distinct yet recognized as a target identity by the
FRS. Unlike iterative optimization-based approaches (e.g., gradient descent or other
iterative solvers), our method leverages the structural characteristics of the FRS
feature space. We figure out that individuals sharing the same attribute (e.g., gender
or race) form an attributed subsphere. By utilizing such subspheres, our method
achieves both non-adaptiveness and a remarkably small number of queries. This
eliminates the need for relying on transferability and open-source surrogate models,
which have been a typical strategy when repeated adaptive queries to commercial
FRSs are impossible. Despite requiring only a single non-adaptive query consisting
of 100 face images, our method achieves a high success rate of over 93% against
AWS’s CompareFaces API at its default threshold. Furthermore, unlike many
existing attacks that perturb a given image, our method can deliberately produce
adversarial faces that impersonate the target identity while exhibiting high-level
attributes chosen by the adversary.

1

Introduction

Computer vision has advanced significantly with the development of Deep Learning (DL) technologies, which enable the extraction of discriminative features from images and have proven useful in
various tasks such as classification and recognition. For example, with sufficient data, DL models
demonstrate remarkable accuracy in image classification [83, 26, 85] and face recognition [16, 3, 40].
However, the high accuracy of DL models has typically been evaluated using naturally generated (i.e.,
unaltered) images, and studies have shown that adversarially generated images, called adversarial
examples, can fool DL models with high probability [23, 53, 76]. Adversarial examples are artificially
generated images that are perceived differently by humans and DL models. Both the generation
of adversarial examples and the development of defense and detection methods are active areas
of research, as adversarial examples present significant security and privacy risks in the practical
deployment of DL [53, 23, 31]. For example, DL-based Face Recognition Systems (FRSs) are widely
used for mobiles and website logins, as well as for access control of buildings and airports [38, 44, 14].
In such systems, adversarial examples pose significant security and privacy risks [82, 79]. In this
paper, we focus on FRS, but we believe that the techniques we developed can be spread to other
biometric fields such as voice [46, 12, 47, 25]. This is a natural extension, as FRS is a representative
biometric authentication method, and the core objective of biometric systems is to achieve strong
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability—principles that apply across various modalities.
Several methods have been proposed to generate adversarial examples that can fool FRSs, and these
are typically categorized based on the adversary’s capabilities. If the adversary has full access to the
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

