LangSplatV2: High-dimensional 3D Language
Gaussian Splatting with 450+ FPS

Wanhua Li1,∗

Yujie Zhao1,2,∗ Minghan Qin3,∗ Yang Liu3 Yuanhao Cai4
Chuang Gan5,6 Hanspeter Pfister1
1
2
Harvard University University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Tsinghua University
4
Johns Hopkins University 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 6 UMass Amherst

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce LangSplatV2, which achieves high-dimensional feature
splatting at 476.2 FPS and 3D open-vocabulary text querying at 384.6 FPS for
high-resolution images, providing a 42 × speedup and a 47 × boost over LangSplat
respectively, along with improved query accuracy. LangSplat employs Gaussian
Splatting to embed 2D CLIP language features into 3D, significantly enhancing
speed and learning a precise 3D language field with SAM semantics. Such advancements in 3D language fields are crucial for applications that require language
interaction within complex scenes. However, LangSplat does not yet achieve realtime inference performance (8.2 FPS), even with advanced A100 GPUs, severely
limiting its broader application. In this paper, we first conduct a detailed time
analysis of LangSplat, identifying the heavyweight decoder as the primary speed
bottleneck. Our solution, LangSplatV2 assumes that each Gaussian acts as a sparse
code within a global dictionary, leading to the learning of a 3D sparse coefficient
field that entirely eliminates the need for a heavyweight decoder. By leveraging
this sparsity, we further propose an efficient sparse coefficient splatting method
with CUDA optimization, rendering high-dimensional feature maps at high quality
while incurring only the time cost of splatting an ultra-low-dimensional feature.
Our experimental results demonstrate that LangSplatV2 not only achieves better or
competitive query accuracy but is also significantly faster. Codes and demos are
available at our project page: https://langsplat-v2.github.io.

1

Introduction

Seamless and intuitive interactions between humans and complex 3D environments [1, 2] are
paramount for a wide range of applications, such as augmented reality [3, 4] and intelligent
robotics [5, 6, 7]. To achieve such interactions, systems must understand and respond to natural
language queries in real time. This capability hinges on advancements in 3D language fields—a technology at the intersection of vision-language models [8, 9] and 3D environmental modeling [10, 11].
LangSplat [12], a pioneering model in this domain, leverages 3D Gaussian Splatting to embed 2D
CLIP language features into 3D spaces. This method has significantly accelerated the 3D query
time, achieving speeds up to 199 × faster than its predecessors [13], which is critical for applications
in scenarios where rapid response is essential. Although many recent improvements have been
proposed [14, 15], the inference speed remains a major concern, especially at high resolutions, which
hinders their widespread application.
Real-time querying is crucial for applications such as real-time navigation [6], interactive gaming [16],
and on-the-fly educational tools [17], where delays can disrupt user experience and functionality. To
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

