The φ Curve: The Shape of Generalization through
the Lens of Norm-based Capacity Control

Yichen Wang ∗
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison, US
yichen.wang@wisc.edu

Yudong Chen
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison, US
yudong.chen@wisc.edu

Lorenzo Rosasco
Malga - DIBRIS, University of Genova, IT
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, IT
lorenzo.rosasco@unige.it

Fanghui Liu
School of Mathematical Sciences
Institute of Nature Sciences
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
DCS, University of Warwick
fanghui.liu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Understanding how the test risk scales with model complexity is a central question
in machine learning. Classical theory is challenged by the learning curves observed
for large over-parametrized deep networks. Capacity measures based on parameter
count typically fail to account for these empirical observations. To tackle this
challenge, we consider norm-based capacity measures and develop our study for
random features based estimators, widely used as simplified theoretical models for
more complex networks. In this context, we provide a precise characterization of
how the estimator’s norm concentrates and how it governs the associated test error.
Our results show that the predicted learning curve admits a phase transition from
under- to over-parameterization, but no double descent behavior. This confirms that
more classical U-shaped behavior is recovered considering appropriate capacity
measures based on models norms rather than size. From a technical point of view,
we leverage deterministic equivalence as the key tool and further develop new
deterministic quantities which are of independent interest.

1

Introduction

How the test risk scales with the data size and model size is always a central question in machine
learning, both empirically and theoretically. This is characterized as the shape of generalization, i.e.,
learning curves, that can be formulated as classical U-shaped curves [54], double descent [5], and
scaling laws [27, 59].
In these learning curves, the model size, i.e., the number of parameters, provides a basic measure
of the capacity of a machine learning (ML) model. However it is well known that model size
cannot describe the “true” model capacity [2, 63], especially for over-parameterized neural networks
[4, 62] and large language models (LLMs) [8]. The focus on the number of parameters results in
an inaccurate characterization of the learning curve, and consequently, an improper data-parameter
configuration in practice. For instance, even for the same architecture (model size), the learning curve
∗

Most of this work was done when Yichen was a visiting student at University of Warwick. Correspondence
to Fanghui Liu (fanghui.liu@{sjtu.edu.cn, warwick.ac.uk}).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

