Theoretical Investigation of Adafactor for Non-Convex
Smooth Optimization

Yusu Hong
Center for Data Science
and School of Mathematical Sciences
Zhejiang University
yusuhong@zju.edu.cn

Junhong Lin∗
Center for Data Science
Zhejiang University
junhong@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Adafactor is an early memory-efficient optimization algorithm proposed as an
alternative to Adam. By eliminating first-order momentum and employing a rank-1
matrix factorization to approximate the second-moment matrix, Adafactor achieves
near-zero memory overhead compared to traditional gradient descent methods. Despite its practical suitability for large-scale training tasks where memory efficiency
is critical, its theoretical convergence analysis remains unexplored, largely due to
the challenges posed by its matrix factorization and update clipping mechanisms.
In this work, we provide a convergence analysis of Adafactor for non-convex
smooth optimization. We establish optimal convergence rates (up to logarithmic
factors) for finding stationary points in both deterministic and stochastic settings,
the latter under sub-Gaussian noise. Central to our analysis is viewing Adafactor
as an approximation of Adam, and the use of a new proxy step-size to approximate the unique adaptive step-size induced by Adafactor’s matrix factorization
and update clipping, along with an induction argument to control the gradient
magnitude. Our findings may theoretically suggest that involving rank-1 matrix
approximation of the second-moment matrix in Adam does not fundamentally
hinder the convergence.

1

Introduction

Adaptive gradient-based methods, such as AdaGrad [12], RMSProp [41], Adadelta [47], Adam [22],
and AMSGrad [37], among others, are efficient approaches in solving the following unconstrained
stochastic optimization problem in deep learning fields:
min

X∈Rn×m

f (X) = EZ∈P [l(X; Z)],

(1)

where f is a smooth potentially non-convex function, P denotes a probability distribution and X
denotes all the trainable weights of the model2 . During the training process, these adaptive methods
store the historical gradients’ information to automatically tune their step-sizes. For example, both
RMSProp and Adam maintain the exponential moving average of squared gradients, and AdaGrad
stores the accumulation of squared gradients. Despite their effectiveness, adaptive gradient algorithms
incur memory overhead compared to standard gradient descent, as they must store additional gradient
statistics (e.g., first and second moments in Adam). This may become problematic when training
large-scale models, such as GPT-3 [4], which contains over 175 billion parameters. The extra memory
requirements may limit batch sizes or model complexity, posing challenges for resource-constrained
training environments.
∗
2

The corresponding author is Junhong Lin.
We consider the matrix parameter following the same setup in [38].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

