Uni-Instruct: One-step Diffusion Model through
Unified Diffusion Divergence Instruction

Yifei Wang1,5

Weimin Bai1,2,3 Colin Zhang4 Debing Zhang4
Weijian Luo4† He Sun1,2,3
1
College of Future Technology, Peking University
2
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
3
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
4
hi-lab, Xiaohongshu Inc 5 Yuanpei College, Peking University

Abstract
In this paper, we unify more than 10 existing one-step diffusion distillation approaches, such as Diff-Instruct, DMD, SIM, SiD, f -distill, etc, inside a theorydriven framework which we name the Uni-Instruct. Uni-Instruct is motivated
by our proposed diffusion expansion theory of the f -divergence family. Then
we introduce key theories that overcome the intractability issue of the original
expanded f -divergence, resulting in an equivalent yet tractable loss that effectively
trains one-step diffusion models by minimizing the expanded f -divergence family.
The novel unification introduced by Uni-Instruct not only offers new theoretical
contributions that help understand existing approaches from a high-level perspective but also leads to state-of-the-art one-step diffusion generation performances.
On the CIFAR10 generation benchmark, Uni-Instruct achieves record-breaking
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) values of 1.46 for unconditional generation and
1.38 for conditional generation. On the ImageNet 64 × 64 generation benchmark,
Uni-Instruct achieves a new SoTA one-step generation FID of 1.02, which outperforms its 79-step teacher diffusion with a significant improvement margin of
1.33 (1.02 vs 2.35). We also apply Uni-Instruct on broader tasks like text-to-3D
generation, which slightly outperform previous methods, such as SDS and VSD,
in terms of both generation quality and diversity. Both the solid theoretical and
empirical contributions of Uni-Instruct will potentially help future studies on onestep diffusion distillation and knowledge transfer of diffusion models. Code will
be available at Github.

1

Introduction

One-step diffusion models, also known as one-step generators [28, 30], have been recognized as a
stand-alone family of generative models that reach the leading generative performances in a wide
range of applications, including benchmarking image generation [30, 31, 62, 69, 68, 17, 59], text-toimage generation [29, 32, 61, 62, 31, 67, 16], text-to-video generation [1, 63], image-editing [13],
and numerous others [34, 41, 55].
Currently, the mainstream of training the one-step diffusion model is through proper distillation
approaches that minimize divergences between distributions of the one-step model and some teacher
diffusion models. For instance, Diff-Instruct[30] was the first work that introduced one-step diffusion
models by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence. DMD [62] improves the Diff-Instruct by
introducing an additional regression loss. Score-identity Distillation (SiD) [69] studies the onestep diffusion distillation by minimizing the Fisher divergence, but without the proof of gradient
†

Correspondence to pkulwj1994@icloud.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

