No Loss, No Gain: Gated Refinement and Adaptive
Compression for Prompt Optimization
Wenhang Shi1 Yiren Chen2 Shuqing Bian3 Xinyi Zhang1 Kai Tang3
Pengfei Hu3 Zhe Zhao3 Wei Lu1 Xiaoyong Du1∗
1
Renmin University of China
2
Peking University
3
Tencent
{wenhangshi, xinyizhang.info, lu-wei, duyong}@ruc.edu.cn,
yrchen92@pku.edu.cn, shuqingbian@gmail.com,
{aydentang, alanpfhu, nlpzhezhao}@tencent.com

Abstract
Prompt engineering is crucial for leveraging the full potential of large language
models (LLMs). While automatic prompt optimization offers a scalable alternative to costly manual design, generating effective prompts remains challenging.
Existing methods often struggle to stably generate improved prompts, leading to
low efficiency, and overlook that prompt optimization easily gets trapped in local
optima. Addressing this, we propose GRACE, a framework that integrates two
synergistic strategies: Gated Refinement and Adaptive Compression, achieving
Efficient prompt optimization. The gated refinement strategy introduces a feedback regulation gate and an update rejection gate, which refine update signals to
produce stable and effective prompt improvements. When optimization stagnates,
the adaptive compression strategy distills the prompt’s core concepts, restructuring the optimization trace and opening new paths. By strategically introducing
information loss through refinement and compression, GRACE delivers substantial
gains in performance and efficiency. In extensive experiments on 11 tasks across
three practical domains, including BIG-Bench Hard (BBH), domain-specific, and
general NLP tasks, GRACE achieves significant average relative performance
improvements of 4.7%, 4.4% and 2.7% over state-of-the-art methods, respectively.
Further analysis shows that GRACE achieves these gains using only 25% of the
prompt generation budget required by prior methods, highlighting its high optimization efficiency and low computational overhead. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Eric8932/GRACE.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive generalization abilities, being able to perform
various tasks based on simple instructions [40, 10]. However, downstream tasks often impose specific
requirements that require adaptations beyond these general capabilities. To bridge this gap, prompt
engineering has emerged as a lightweight alternative to traditional fine-tuning, aiming to craft effective
prompts that unlock the full potential of LLMs [20]. Some automatic methods adapt model training
by fine-tuning soft prompts or using reinforcement learning to combine discrete tokens, but they rely
heavily on access to the internal states or gradients of LLMs [14, 50]. For advanced API-based LLMs
like GPT-4 [1], prompt engineering remains a complex and labor-intensive process, often requiring
human experts with deep insight into both LLM behavior and task-specific nuances.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

