Intermediate Domain Alignment and Morphology
Analogy for Patent-Product Image Retrieval

Haifan Gong1,2† , Xuanye Zhang1,2† , Ruifei Zhang1,2 , Yun Su3 , Zhuo Li1,2 ,
Yuhao Du1,2 , Anningzhe Gao2 , Xiang Wan1,2∗ , Haofeng Li4,2∗
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
2
Shenzhen Research Institution of Big Data,
3
University of Waterloo,
4
School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
Recent advances in artificial intelligence have significantly impacted image retrieval
tasks, yet Patent-Product Image Retrieval (PPIR) has received limited attention.
PPIR, which retrieves patent images based on product images to identify potential
infringements, presents unique challenges: (1) both product and patent images often
contain numerous categories of artificial objects, but models pre-trained on standard
datasets exhibit limited discriminative power to recognize some of those unseen
objects; and (2) the significant domain gap between binary patent line drawings
and colorful RGB product images further complicates similarity comparisons for
product-patent pairs. To address these challenges, we formulate it as an open-set
image retrieval task and introduce a comprehensive Patent-Product Image Retrieval
Dataset (PPIRD) including a test set with 439 product-patent pairs, a retrieval pool
of 727,921 patents, and an unlabeled pre-training set of 3,799,695 images. We
further propose a novel Intermediate Domain Alignment and Morphology Analogy
(IDAMA) strategy. IDAMA maps both image types to an intermediate sketch
domain using edge detection to minimize the domain discrepancy, and employs a
Morphology Analogy Filter to select discriminative patent images based on visual
features via analogical reasoning. Extensive experiments on PPIRD demonstrate
that IDAMA significantly outperforms baseline methods (+7.58 mAR) and offers
valuable insights into domain mapping and representation learning for PPIR. (The
PPIRD dataset is available at: https://loslorien.github.io/idama-project/)

1

Introduction

Patent systems play a critical role in protecting intellectual property and fostering innovation. The
rapid advancement of artificial intelligence (AI) has revolutionized numerous domains, including
patent retrieval [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Specifically, in the NLP area, significant progress has been made in
both patent-patent retrieval [1, 2] and patent-product retrieval [3, 4], leveraging textual descriptions
to identify similarities and potential infringements. In contrast, the CV community has primarily
focused on patent-patent retrieval [5], leaving Patent-Product Image Retrieval (PPIR) unexplored.
Considering the increasing complexity of e-commerce platforms (a product may have an incomplete,
confusing name or descriptions, but its images are always clear) and the critical need to detect patent
infringements efficiently, there is an urgent demand for research on PPIR.
PPIR faces two primary challenges: 1) product and patent images often contain numerous categories
(more than 250,000) of artificial objects, such as mechanical parts or electronic devices, but most
∗

Corresponding Email: wanxiang@sribd.cn, lihf95@mail.sysu.edu.cn, † these authors contribute equally to
this work.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

