Uni-LoRA: One Vector is All You Need
Kaiyang Li
School of Computing
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
kaiyang.li@uconn.edu

Shaobo Han
Optical Networking and Sensing
NEC Labs America
Princeton, NJ 08540
shaobo@nec-labs.com

Qing Su
School of Computing
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
qing.2.su@uconn.edu

Wei Li
Dept. of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
wli28@gsu.edu

Zhipeng Cai
Dept. of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
zcai@gsu.edu

Shihao Ji
School of Computing
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
shihao.ji@uconn.edu

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has become the de facto parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) method for large language models (LLMs) by constraining weight
updates to low-rank matrices. Recent works such as Tied-LoRA, VeRA, and VBLoRA push efficiency further by introducing additional constraints to reduce the
trainable parameter space. In this paper, we show that the parameter space reduction
strategies employed by these LoRA variants can be formulated within a unified
framework, Uni-LoRA, where the LoRA parameter space, flattened as a highdimensional vector space RD , can be reconstructed through a projection from a
subspace Rd , with d ≪ D. We demonstrate that the fundamental difference among
various LoRA methods lies in the choice of the projection matrix, P ∈ RD×d . Most
existing LoRA variants rely on layer-wise or structure-specific projections that limit
cross-layer parameter sharing, thereby compromising parameter efficiency. In light
of this, we introduce an efficient and theoretically grounded projection matrix that
is isometric, enabling global parameter sharing and reducing computation overhead.
Furthermore, under the unified view of Uni-LoRA, this design requires only a single
trainable vector to reconstruct LoRA parameters for the entire LLM – making UniLoRA both a unified framework and a “one-vector-only” solution. Extensive
experiments on GLUE, mathematical reasoning, and instruction tuning benchmarks
demonstrate that Uni-LoRA achieves state-of-the-art parameter efficiency while
outperforming or matching prior approaches in predictive performance. Our code
is available at https://github.com/KaiyangLi1992/Uni-LoRA.

1

Introduction

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [1] casts a new paradigm that leverages strong prior knowledge
built in foundation models and adapts them to a wide range of downstream tasks by updating a small
amount of trainable parameters. Among various PEFT methods, LoRA [2] has been particularly
prevalent in recent studies. Given a pre-trained matrix W0 ∈ Rm×n , LoRA constrains the weight
increment ∆W as a low-rank decomposition ∆W = BA, where B ∈ Rm×r and A ∈ Rr×n are
trainable parameters, with r ≪ min(m, n). LoRA reduces the fine-tuning cost significantly, while
achieving impressive predictive performance.
To further reduce the number of trainable parameters for fine-tuning, recent methods augment [3, 4, 5]
or modify [6] the LoRA architecture and tighten the trainable parameter space of LoRA into a
lower-dimensional subspace, in which the fine-tuning is performed. For example, Tied-LoRA [3]
ties all the B and A matrices of different LoRA-adapted modules and optimizes one pair of B and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

