Sloth: scaling laws for LLM skills to predict
multi-benchmark performance across families

Felipe Maia Polo1 , Seamus Somerstep1
Leshem Choshen2,3 Yuekai Sun1 Mikhail Yurochkin4
1
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
3
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
4
Institute of Foundation Models, MBZUAI

Abstract
Scaling laws for large language models (LLMs) predict model performance based
on parameters like size and training data. However, differences in training configurations and data processing across model families lead to significant variations
in benchmark performance, making it difficult for a single scaling law to generalize across all LLMs. On the other hand, training family-specific scaling laws
requires training models of varying sizes for every family. In this work, we
propose Skills Scaling Laws (SSLaws, pronounced as Sloth), a novel scaling
law that leverages publicly available benchmark data and assumes LLM performance is driven by low-dimensional latent skills, such as reasoning and instruction
following. These latent skills are influenced by computational resources like
model size and training tokens, but with varying efficiencies across model families. Sloth exploits correlations across benchmarks to provide more accurate
and interpretable predictions while alleviating the need to train multiple LLMs
per family. We present both theoretical results on parameter identification and
empirical evaluations on 12 prominent benchmarks, from Open LLM Leaderboard v1/v2, demonstrating that Sloth predicts LLM performance accurately and
offers insights into scaling behaviors for complex downstream tasks, increased
test-time compute, and compute-optimal scaling of skills. Our code can be found
on https://github.com/felipemaiapolo/sloth.

1

Introduction

Large Language Model (LLM) scaling laws for benchmarks and downstream tasks efficiently predict
the performance of an LLM based on its parameter count and training set size. However, variations
in training configurations and data processing across different model families often lead to significant
differences in benchmark performance, even for models with comparable compute budgets [Ruan
et al., 2024]. Consequently, a single scaling law typically fails to predict performance across all
LLMs accurately [Choshen et al., 2024]. In contrast, creating family-specific scaling laws requires
training multiple models of increasing size, which is resource-intensive.
In this work, we propose a new class of scaling laws called Sloth to solve this dilemma. These
scaling laws are fitted using publicly available data (e.g., from LLM leaderboards) across multiple
benchmarks, leveraging information shared among benchmarks and model families to improve
prediction power and interpretability through parameter efficiency, i.e., fewer parameters without
hurting performance. Specifically, we utilize the correlations in benchmark scores to simplify the
scaling law in terms of parameter count without harming prediction power by assuming that LLM
performance is driven by a set of low-dimensional latent skills, such as reasoning and instruction
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

