Asymptotically exact variational ﬂows
via involutive MCMC kernels
Zuheng Xu
Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
[zuheng.xu | trevor]@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
Most expressive variational families—such as normalizing ﬂows—lack practical
convergence guarantees, as their theoretical assurances typically hold only at the
intractable global optimum. In this work, we present a general recipe for constructing tuning-free, asymptotically exact variational ﬂows on arbitrary state
spaces from involutive MCMC kernels. The core methodological component is a
novel representation of general involutive MCMC kernels as invertible, measurepreserving iterated random function systems, which act as the ﬂow maps of our
variational ﬂows. This leads to three new variational families with provable total
variation convergence. Our framework resolves key practical limitations of existing variational families with similar guarantees (e.g., MixFlows), while requiring
substantially weaker theoretical assumptions. Finally, we demonstrate the competitive performance of our ﬂows across tasks including posterior approximation,
Monte Carlo estimates, and normalization constant estimation, outperforming or
matching No-U-Turn sampler (NUTS) and black-box normalizing ﬂows.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) [1–3] is a general methodology for approximate probabilistic inference,
where the goal is to approximate a target distribution (e.g., a Bayesian posterior) within a speciﬁed
variational family. This variational family is typically chosen to be a parametric family that enables
tractable inference—allowing for i.i.d. sampling and density evaluation [2–7]. This tractability
offers key beneﬁts: it enables the evaluation and optimization of approximation quality via unbiased
estimates of the evidence lower bound (ELBO) [3], which corresponds to the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence [8] to the target distribution up to a constant. Moreover, it facilitates downstream tasks
such as importance sampling [9, 10] and normalization constant estimation.
The quality of a variational approximation is fundamentally determined by the expressiveness of
its variational family. Signiﬁcant progress has been made in constructing ﬂexible families, including boosted mixtures [11–16] and normalizing ﬂows [4, 6, 17–20]. These families often exhibit
universal approximation guarantees [16, 21, 22]: as the number of mixture components or ﬂow
layers grows, the family can approximate any distribution arbitrarily well under mild assumptions.
However, a major limitation remains—theoretical guarantees pertain only to the optimal variational
approximation, which is rarely obtained in practice due to non-convex optimization. In contrast,
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [23, 24; 25, Ch. 11, 12] is asymptotically exact, meaning it is
guaranteed to produce arbitrarily accurate results given sufﬁcient computation for any valid choice
of tuning parameters (though some values may yield higher efﬁciency than others).
This has motivated extensive work aimed at bridging VI and MCMC. In particular, many recent
approaches fall under the categories of differentiable annealed importance sampling (DAIS) or differentiable sequential Monte Carlo (DSMC) [26–36]. These methods can be interpreted as gradientbased tuning of AIS/SMC exploration or backward kernels to improve approximation quality. How39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

