Quantifying Uncertainty in Error Consistency:
Towards Reliable Behavioral Comparison of Classifiers

Thomas Klein1,2,3,4∗
Wieland Brendel‡1,2,3,4

Sascha Meyen2

Felix A. Wichmann‡2

Kristof Meding‡2,5

Abstract
Benchmarking models is a key factor for the rapid progress in machine learning
(ML) research. Thus, further progress depends on improving benchmarking metrics. A standard metric to measure the behavioral alignment between ML models
and human observers is error consistency (EC). EC allows for more fine-grained
comparisons of behavior than other metrics such as accuracy, and has been used
in the influential Brain-Score benchmark to rank different DNNs by their behavioral consistency with humans. Previously, EC values have been reported without
confidence intervals. However, empirically measured EC values are typically
noisy—thus, without confidence intervals, valid benchmarking conclusions are
problematic. Here we improve on standard EC in two ways: First, we show how
to obtain confidence intervals for EC using a bootstrapping technique, allowing
us to derive significance tests for EC. Second, we propose a new computational
model relating the EC between two classifiers to the implicit probability that one of
them copies responses from the other. This view of EC allows us to give practical
guidance to scientists regarding the number of trials required for sufficiently powerful, conclusive experiments. Finally, we use our methodology to revisit popular
NeuroAI-results. We find that while the general trend of behavioral differences
between humans and machines holds up to scrutiny, many reported differences
between deep vision models are statistically insignificant. Our methodology enables researchers to design adequately powered experiments that can reliably detect
behavioral differences between models, providing a foundation for more rigorous
benchmarking of behavioral alignment.

1

Introduction

Consider the following problem: Given two classifiers operating on the same domain, how should we
quantify their similarity? This abstract problem has become highly practically relevant in the context
of cognitive science and beyond. In cognitive science, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been
proposed as models of the human visual system [Doerig et al., 2023, Kriegeskorte, 2015, Cichy and
Kaiser, 2019, Kietzmann et al., 2017, Yamins et al., 2014], and thus the question arises how similarly
they behave to human observers. In other domains, e.g. law or medicine, it is also crucial to know
whether DNNs interpret and judge information similarly to humans. Thus, a metric is needed that
can reliably quantify the degree of behavioral similarity between DNNs and human decision makers.
The standard method proposed for this purpose is error consistency (EC) [Geirhos et al., 2020], which
has seen wide application in the context of human-machine comparisons, e.g. in Geirhos et al. [2021],
∗1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Tübingen. 3 Tübingen
AI Center 4 ELLIS Institute Tübingen. 5 CSZ Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Law. ‡ Joint supervision.
Correspondence to: t.klein@uni-tuebingen.de. Code: github.com/wichmann-lab/error_consistency.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

