SmallKV: Small Model Assisted Compensation of KV
Cache Compression for Efficient LLM Inference

Yi Zhao1∗, Yajuan Peng2∗ , Cam-Tu Nguyen3 ,
Zuchao Li4 , Xiaoliang Wang3 , Hai Zhao1†and Xiaoming Fu5,2†
1
AGI Institute, School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory for Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
5
Institute of Computer Science, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany

Abstract
KV cache eviction has emerged as an effective solution to alleviate resource constraints faced by LLMs in long-context scenarios. However, existing token-level
eviction methods often overlook two critical aspects: (1) their irreversible eviction strategy fails to adapt to dynamic attention patterns during decoding (the
saliency shift problem), and (2) they treat both marginally important tokens and
truly unimportant tokens equally, despite the collective significance of marginal
tokens to model performance (the marginal information over-compression problem). To address these issues, we design two compensation mechanisms based on
the high similarity of attention matrices between LLMs of different scales. We
propose SmallKV, a small model assisted compensation method for KV cache
compression. SmallKV can maintain attention matching between different-scale
LLMs to: 1) assist the larger model in perceiving globally important information
of attention; and 2) use the smaller model’s attention scores to approximate those
of marginal tokens in the larger model. Extensive experiments on benchmarks including GSM8K, BBH, MT-Bench, and LongBench demonstrate the effectiveness
of SmallKV. Moreover, efficiency evaluations show that SmallKV achieves 1.75 2.56 times higher throughput than baseline methods, highlighting its potential for
efficient and performant LLM inference in resource constrained environments.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [29] have emerged with remarkable natural language understanding
capabilities and broad application prospects. Despite the advancements, the deployment of LLMs is
hindered with significant computational challenges and high GPU memory consumption, particularly
when processing long contexts. This issue arises from the intrinsic complexity of their self-attention
mechanism, which scales quadratically with the length of the input sequence. Recent developments
in reasoning models, exemplified by ChatGPT-o1 [28] and DeepSeek-R1 [7] have exacerbated this
issue due to their lengthy reasoning process.
∗

Equal contribution: Yi Zhao (zhao-yi@sjtu.edu.cn) and Yajuan Peng (yjpeng24@m.fudan.edu.cn)
Corresponding author: Hai Zhao (zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn) and Xiaoming Fu (fuxiaoming@fudan.edu.cn).
This work was supported by The Major Program of Chinese National Foundation of Social Sciences under Grant
‘The Challenge and Governance of Smart Media on News Authenticity’ (No. 23ZD213), the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 62306216), and partially supported by the EU Horizon Europe CODECO
project (Grant No. 101092696).
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

