Broken Tokens? Your Language Model can
Secretly Handle No n - Ca noni cal Tokenizations

Brian Siyuan Zheng♡ Alisa Liu♡ Orevaoghene Ahia♡
Jonathan Hayase♡ Yejin Choi♠ Noah A. Smith♡♣
♡
University of Washington ♣ Allen Institute for AI ♠ Stanford University
zhengbr@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Modern tokenizers employ deterministic algorithms to map text into a single
“canonical” token sequence, yet the same string can be encoded as many noncanonical tokenizations using the tokenizer vocabulary. In this work, we investigate
the robustness of LMs to text encoded with non-canonical tokenizations entirely
unseen during training. Surprisingly, when evaluated across 20 benchmarks, we
find that instruction-tuned models retain up to 93.4% of their original performance
when given a randomly sampled tokenization, and 90.8% with character-level
tokenization. We see that overall stronger models tend to be more robust, and
robustness diminishes as the tokenization departs farther from the canonical form.
Motivated by these results, we then identify settings where non-canonical tokenization schemes can improve performance, finding that character-level segmentation
improves string manipulation and code understanding tasks by up to +14%, and
right-aligned digit grouping enhances large-number arithmetic by +33%. Finally,
we investigate the source of this robustness, finding that it arises in the instructiontuning phase. We show that while both base and post-trained models grasp the
semantics of non-canonical tokenizations (perceiving them as containing misspellings), base models try to mimic the imagined mistakes and degenerate into
nonsensical output, while post-trained models are committed to fluent responses.
Overall, our findings suggest that models are less tied to their tokenizer than previously believed, and demonstrate the promise of intervening on tokenization at
inference time to boost performance.1

1

Introduction

Tokenizers segment text into a sequence of discrete tokens in the language model’s (LM) vocabulary.
Most of today’s LMs use deterministic subword tokenization, which produces a single canonical
token sequence for a given piece of text, and further, for each whitespace-delimited word. One
commonly discussed limitation of this approach is that, by mapping byte strings to symbolic token
IDs, the orthographic makeup of tokens is obscured to the LM [52, 18]. This can be especially
harmful for LM understanding of numbers [47, 64, 61] and morphologically rich languages [2, 25],
and has motivated efforts to model text directly at the byte level [12, 70, 68, 63, 72, 46, 49, 1, 39].
To shed more light on this perceived limitation, in this work we study whether LMs can adapt at
inference time, without any additional training, to a different tokenization scheme than the one they
were trained with. While the tokenizer deterministically outputs a canonical tokenization of any
text into tokens (usually by applying an ordered list of merge rules), non-canonical tokenizations
of the same text using the same vocabulary are generally possible (see example in Figure 1). Here,
1

Code is available at https://github.com/Brianzhengca/Tokenizer-Robustness.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

