Learning and Planning Multi-Agent Tasks via an
MoE-based World Model
Zijie Zhao1,2 , Zhongyue Zhao2 , Kaixuan Xu2 , Yuqian Fu1,2 ,
Jiajun Chai3 , Yuanheng Zhu2,1,† , Dongbin Zhao2,1,†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 Meituan
{zhaozijie2022, zhaozhongyue2024, xukaixuan2023, fuyuqian2022}@ia.ac.cn
chaijiajun@meituan.com, {yuanheng.zhu, dongbin.zhao}@ia.ac.cn
†
Corresponding authors ∗

Abstract
Multi-task multi-agent reinforcement learning (MT-MARL) aims to develop a
single model capable of solving a diverse set of tasks. However, existing methods
often fall short due to the substantial variation in optimal policies across tasks,
making it challenging for a single policy model to generalize effectively. In
contrast, we find that many tasks exhibit bounded similarity in their underlying
dynamics—highly similar within certain groups (e.g., door-open/close) diverge
significantly between unrelated tasks (e.g., door-open & object-catch). To leverage
this property, we reconsider the role of modularity in multi-task learning, and
propose M3W, a novel approach that applies mixture-of-experts (MoE) to world
model instead of policy, enabling both learning and planning. For learning, it
uses a SoftMoE-based dynamics model alongside a SparseMoE-based predictor to
facilitate knowledge reuse across similar tasks while avoiding gradient conflicts
across dissimilar tasks. For planning, it evaluates and optimizes actions using the
predicted rollouts from the world model, without relying directly on a explicit
policy model, thereby overcoming the limitations of policy-centric methods. As the
first MoE-based multi-task world model, M3W demonstrates superior performance,
sample efficiency, and multi-task adaptability, as validated on Bi-DexHands with 14
tasks and MA-Mujoco with 24 tasks. The code are available at https://github.
com/zhaozijie2022/m3w-marl.

1

Introduction

Policies
Dynamics
The goal of multi-task MARL is to develop a
single model capable of solving multiple tasks,
improving both learning efficiency and generalization performance [3]. The core challenge lies
in reusing knowledge across similar tasks while
avoiding gradient conflicts between dissimilar
tasks [15]. Existing approaches attempted to
introduce modularity into policy learning to
Door-Close-Outward
Door-Open-Inward
Catch-Abreast
Catch-Underarm
address this issue, employing techniques such
as subtask reorganization [36], skill discov- Figure 1: T-SNE visualization comparing the distribuery [42, 22], and network decomposition [49]. tions of dynamics and policies.

∗

This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62136008,
62293541, in part by Beijing Nova Program under Grant 20240484514, and in part by Beijing Natural Science
Foundation under Grant No 4232056, L223020.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

