IPAD: Inverse Prompt for AI Detection - A Robust and
Interpretable LLM-Generated Text Detector

Zheng Chen1∗Yushi Feng2∗Jisheng Dang3 Yue Deng1 Changyang He4
Hongxi Pu5 Haoxuan Li6† Bo Li1†
1
Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
3
School of Information Science & Engineering, Lanzhou University
4
Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy
5
Computer Science, The University of Michigan
6
Center for Data Science, Peking University
zchenin@connect.ust.hk, fengys@connect.hku.hk, dangjisheng@lzu.edu.cn,
ydengbi@connect.ust.hk, changyang.he@mpi-sp.org,
hongxi@umich.edu, hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn, bli@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have attained human-level fluency in text generation, which complicates the distinguishing between human-written and LLMgenerated texts. This increases the risk of misuse and highlights the need for reliable
detectors. Yet, existing detectors exhibit poor robustness on out-of-distribution
(OOD) data and attacked data, which is critical for real-world scenarios. Also, they
struggle to provide interpretable evidence to support their decisions, thus undermining the reliability. In light of these challenges, we propose IPAD (Inverse
Prompt for AI Detection), a novel framework consisting of a Prompt Inverter
that identifies predicted prompts that could have generated the input text, and two
Distinguishers that examine the probability that the input texts align with the
predicted prompts. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that IPAD outperforms the
strongest baselines by 9.05% (Average Recall) on in-distribution data, 12.93% (AUROC) on out-of-distribution data, and 5.48% (AUROC) on attacked data. IPAD
also performs robustly on structured datasets. Furthermore, an interpretability
assessment is conducted to illustrate that IPAD enhances the AI detection trustworthiness by allowing users to directly examine the decision-making evidence, which
provides interpretable support for its state-of-the-art detection results.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), characterized by their massive scale and extensive training data
[Chen et al., 2024, Feng et al., 2025a, Cheng et al., 2025], have achieved significant advances
in natural language processing (NLP) [Ouyang et al., 2022, Veselovsky et al., 2023, Wu et al.,
2025]. However, with the advanced capabilities of LLMs, they are subject to frequent misused in
various domains, including academic fraud, the creation of deceptive material, and the generation
of fabricated information [Ji et al., 2023, Pagnoni et al., 2022, Mirsky et al., 2023, Chen et al.,
2025], which underscores the critical need to distinguish between human-written text (HWT) and
LLM-generated text (LGT) [Pagnoni et al., 2022, Yu et al., 2025, Kirchenbauer et al., 2023].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

