Stable Minima of ReLU Neural Networks Suffer from
the Curse of Dimensionality:
The Neural Shattering Phenomenon

Tongtong Liang
UC San Diego
ttliang@ucsd.edu

Dan Qiao
UC San Diego
d2qiao@ucsd.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
UC San Diego
yuxiangw@ucsd.edu

Rahul Parhi
UC San Diego
rahul@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study the implicit bias of flatness / low (loss) curvature and its effects on generalization in two-layer overparameterized ReLU networks with multivariate inputs—a
problem well motivated by the minima stability and edge-of-stability phenomena
in gradient-descent training. Existing work either requires interpolation or focuses
only on univariate inputs. This paper presents new and somewhat surprising theoretical results for multivariate inputs. On two natural settings (1) generalization
gap for flat solutions, and (2) mean-squared error (MSE) in nonparametric function
estimation by stable minima, we prove upper and lower bounds, which establish
that while flatness does imply generalization, the resulting rates of convergence
necessarily deteriorate exponentially as the input dimension grows. This gives an
exponential separation between the flat solutions compared to low-norm solutions
(i.e., weight decay), which are known not to suffer from the curse of dimensionality.
In particular, our minimax lower bound construction, based on a novel packing
argument with boundary-localized ReLU neurons, reveals how flat solutions can
exploit a kind of “neural shattering” where neurons rarely activate, but with high
weight magnitudes. This leads to poor performance in high dimensions. We corroborate these theoretical findings with extensive numerical simulations. To the
best of our knowledge, our analysis provides the first systematic explanation for
why flat minima may fail to generalize in high dimensions.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning is inherently overparameterized. In this regime, there are typically infinitely
many global (i.e., zero-loss or interpolating) minima to the training objective, yet gradient-descent
(GD) training seems to successfully avoid “bad” minima, finding those that generalize well. Understanding this phenomenon boils down to understanding the implicit biases of training algorithms [Zhang et al., 2021]. A large body of work has focused on understanding this phenomenon
in the interpolation regime [Du et al., 2018, Liu et al., 2022], and the related concept of “benign
overfitting” [Belkin et al., 2019, Bartlett et al., 2020, Frei et al., 2022].
While these directions have been fruitful, there is increasing evidence that rectified linear unit (ReLU)
neural networks do not benignly overfit [Mallinar et al., 2022, Haas et al., 2023], particularly in the
case of learning problems with noisy data [Joshi et al., 2023, Qiao et al., 2024]. Furthermore, for
noisy labels, it takes many iterations of GD to actually interpolate the labels [Zhang et al., 2021].
This discounts theories based on interpolation to explain the generalization performance of practical
neural networks, which would have entered the so-called edge-of-stability regime [Cohen et al., 2020],
or stopped long before interpolating the training data.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

