What makes math problems hard for reinforcement
learning: a case study

Ali Shehper1

Anibal Medina-Mardones2

Angus Gruen5

Yang Qiu6

Lucas Fagan3

Piotr Kucharski4

Bartłomiej Lewandowski4

Zhenghan Wang3

Sergei Gukov7

1

Department of Mathematics, California Institute of Technology
2
Department of Mathematics, Western University
3
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Santa Barbara
4
Institute of Mathematics, University of Warsaw
5
Polygon Zero 6 Chern Institute of Mathematics and LPMC, Nankai University
7
Richard N. Merkin Center for Pure and Applied Mathematics, California Institute of Technology
correspondence: mshehper@caltech.edu

Abstract
Using a long-standing conjecture from combinatorial group theory, we explore,
from multiple perspectives, the challenges of finding rare instances carrying disproportionately high rewards. Based on lessons learned in the context defined by the
Andrews–Curtis conjecture, we analyze how reinforcement learning agents handle
problems of varying hardness. We also address many mathematical questions as
a part of our study. Notably, we demonstrate the length reducibility of all but
two presentations in the Akbulut–Kirby series (1981), and resolve various potential counterexamples in the Miller–Schupp series (1991), including three infinite
subfamilies.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems have demonstrated remarkable success in board
games, video games, and other tasks requiring extensive planning and intelligence. Mathematics
appears to be the next frontier, with increasing advancements in theorem-provers and theorem-proving
assistants (Azerbayev et al., 2023; DeepMind, 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024). Mathematical
problems can often be framed as search problems, where the goal is to find a path from a hypothesis
to a conclusion through a sequence of basic logical steps.
For general mathematical problems, the action space is often vast—sometimes infinite—and solutions
may require long sequences of steps, which may additionally be extremely rare in a large search space.
As a result, mathematical problems, particularly those at the research level, present new challenges
for AI systems and demand novel reinforcement learning algorithms.
At the same time, some mathematical problems—such as the Andrews–Curtis conjecture (Andrews
& Curtis, 1965), which we study in this paper—offer distinct advantages for algorithm development
compared to generic mathematical problems. First, the action space in this setting is finite and
small, consisting of only a few basic moves, while the state space is infinite. Second, these problems
come with a notion of hardness, with difficulty levels ranging from very easy to those requiring
superexponential effort to resolve (Bridson, 2015; Lishak, 2017). Moreover, the distribution of states
with respect to this measure is very non-uniform.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

