Variational Inference with Mixtures of Isotropic
Gaussians
Marguerite Petit-Talamon
CREST, ENSAE
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
marguerite.petittalamon@ensae.fr

Marc Lambert
INRIA, Ecole Normale Supérieure
DGA, French Procurement Agency
marc.lambert@inria.fr

Anna Korba
CREST, ENSAE
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
anna.korba@ensae.fr

Abstract
Variational inference (VI) is a popular approach in Bayesian inference, that looks
for the best approximation of the posterior distribution within a parametric family,
minimizing a loss that is typically the (reverse) Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. In this paper, we focus on the following parametric family: mixtures of
isotropic Gaussians (i.e., with diagonal covariance matrices proportional to the
identity) and uniform weights. We develop a variational framework and provide
efficient algorithms suited for this family. In contrast with mixtures of Gaussian
with generic covariance matrices, this choice presents a balance between accurate
approximations of multimodal Bayesian posteriors, while being memory and
computationally efficient. Our algorithms implement gradient descent on the
location of the mixture components (the modes of the Gaussians), and either (an
entropic) Mirror or Bures descent on their variance parameters. We illustrate the
performance of our algorithms on numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The core problem of Bayesian inference is to sample from a posterior distribution π over model
parameters, combining prior knowledge with observed data. Unfortunately, the posterior distribution
is generally difficult to compute due to the presence of an intractable integral (the normalization
constant), and its density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Rd , also denoted π, is only known
in unnormalized form as π ∝ e−V . Variational inference (VI, [Blei et al., 2017]) is a prominent
alternative to standard Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC, [Roberts and Rosenthal, 2004]) that
approximates the posterior by optimizing over a family of tractable distributions. While this restriction
can introduce bias, VI is typically much faster than MCMC, since it reframes the sampling problem
as a (generally finite-dimensional) optimization one over the parameters of the variational family.
Specifically, VI seeks a distribution in a parametric family C that minimizes a discrepancy to the
target posterior, typically the reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence:
min KL(µ|π),
µ∈C

(1)

R

where KL(µ|π) = log(dµ/dπ)dµ if µ is absolutely continuous with respect to π denoting dµ/dπ its
Radon-Nikodym density, and +∞ else.
There exist various choices of variational families and suited algorithms in the literature of VI.
For instance, Mean-field variational inference (MFVI) aims to find an approximate posterior that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

