Test-Time Adaptation by Causal Trimming

Yingnan Liu1,2
Rui Qiao1,3
Mong Li Lee1,2
Wynne Hsu1,2
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
3
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology
{liu.yingnan, rui.qiao}@u.nus.edu, {dcsleeml, dcshsuw}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Test-time adaptation aims to improve model robustness under distribution shifts
by adapting models with access to unlabeled target samples. A primary cause of
performance degradation under such shifts is the model’s reliance on features that
lack a direct causal relationship with the prediction target. We introduce Test-time
Adaptation by Causal Trimming (TACT), a method that identifies and removes
non-causal components from representations for test distributions. TACT applies
data augmentations that preserve causal features while varying non-causal ones. By
analyzing the changes in the representations using Principal Component Analysis,
TACT identifies the highest variance directions associated with non-causal features.
It trims the representations by removing their projections on the identified directions, and uses the trimmed representations for the predictions. During adaptation,
TACT continuously tracks and refines these directions to get a better estimate of
non-causal features. We theoretically analyze the effectiveness of this approach and
empirically validate TACT on real-world out-of-distribution benchmarks. TACT
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin. Our
code is available at https://github.com/NancyQuris/TACT.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models often exhibit significant performance degradation when evaluated on data
drawn from a distribution that differs from their training data distribution [13]. To address this
challenge, test-time adaptation (TTA) has emerged as a promising approach. TTA methods adapt
a pretrained model to the test distribution dynamically, using the incoming test data to enhance
predictive performance without requiring access to the original training data [19, 51, 56]. Despite
recent advances, many existing TTA methods rely heavily on predicted labels generated by the model
itself to guide the adaptation process [12, 37, 38, 51]. However, the effectiveness of these methods
hinges critically on the quality of the predictions. When the model’s predictions are influenced by
non-causal features that do not have a direct causal relationship with the prediction target [26, 54],
the predicted label may be unreliable, leading to sub-optimal adaptation outcomes [29, 47].
Unlike causal features that have stable associations with the semantic structure of the prediction task
[27], non-causal features exhibit inconsistent or spurious correlations with the prediction target across
training and test distributions [55]. Over-reliance on non-causal features is a key factor in model
performance degradation under distribution shift. While DeYO [29] recognizes this issue, it does not
explicitly mitigate reliance on non-causal features. Instead, it updates the model using predictions
that leverage causal features only, relying on gradual adaptation to reinforce causal features over
time. Consequently, early predictions may still be influenced by non-causal signals, requiring many
adaptation steps to suppress their effects.
Given the above limitations, we propose to actively reduce non-causal features. Prior studies have
shown that feature representations learned through standard training encode a mixture of causal and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

