Learning Relative Gene Expression Trends
from Pathology Images in Spatial Transcriptomics

Kazuya Nishimura1

Haruka Hirose1

Ryoma Bise2

Kaito Shiku2

Yasuhiro Kojima1

1
2

Laboratory of Computational Life Science, National Cancer Center Japan
Department of Advanced Information Technology, Kyushu University, Japan
kanishi4@ncc.go.jp

Abstract
Gene expression estimation from pathology images has the potential to reduce the
RNA sequencing cost. Point-wise loss functions have been widely used to minimize
the discrepancy between predicted and absolute gene expression values. However,
due to the complexity of the sequencing techniques and intrinsic variability across
cells, the observed gene expression contains stochastic noise and batch effects, and
estimating the absolute expression values accurately remains a significant challenge. To mitigate this, we propose a novel objective of learning relative expression
patterns rather than absolute levels. We assume that the relative expression levels
of genes exhibit consistent patterns across independent experiments, even when absolute expression values are affected by batch effects and stochastic noise in tissue
samples. Based on the assumption, we model the relation and propose a novel loss
function called STRank that is robust to noise and batch effects. Experiments using
synthetic datasets and real datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method. The code is available at https://github.com/naivete5656/STRank.

1

Introduction

With the development of spatial transcriptomic techniques (ST), the comprehensive gene expression
profile can be captured on a small spot with a spatial location corresponding to the pathology image
[16]. Due to the high cost of acquiring spatial transcriptomics (ST) data, there is growing interest
in using computer vision techniques to estimate gene expression from pathology images as a more
affordable way [19, 30, 4, 7].
One of the main difficulties in estimating gene expression from pathology images is the batch effects
and stochastic fluctuations in observed data. As shown in Figure 1 (a), differences in reagent batches,
equipment, and other technical factors in the measurement process (i.e., batch effects) can cause
variations in data scaling across tissues [11, 18]. Additionally, due to cellular heterogeneity and
temporal dynamics, the observed gene expression level stochastically fluctuates even though the
appearance of the pathology image is the same as shown in Figure 1 (b).
Although mean squared error (MSE) is commonly used in the previous estimation methods [7, 19, 30,
4], it is hard to capture variations from the data containing batch effects and stochastic noise. MSE
loss focuses on predicting the absolute values of gene expression without correcting for batch effects.
Consequently, models trained with MSE loss may inadvertently learn patient-specific biases rather
than biologically relevant signals. Additionally, since MSE loss does not model stochastic noise
explicitly, it can not account for the significance of biological signals from expression count data.
In this paper, we aim to estimate the relative expression relation instead of directly estimating absolute
values of gene expression. The key hypothesis of this paper is that relative gene expression trends
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

