Searching Latent Program Spaces

Matthew V. Macfarlane⋆1

1

University of Amsterdam

Clément Bonnet⋆

⋆

Equal contribution

Abstract
General intelligence requires systems that acquire new skills efficiently and generalize beyond their training distributions. Although program synthesis approaches
have strong generalization power, they face scaling issues due to the large combinatorial spaces that quickly render them impractical, requiring human-generated
DSLs or pre-trained priors to narrow this search space. On the other hand, deep
learning methods have had high successes, but they lack structured test-time adaptation and rely on heavy stochastic sampling or expensive gradient updates for
fine-tuning. In this work, we propose the Latent Program Network (LPN), a novel
architecture that builds in test-time search directly into neural models. LPN learns
a latent space of implicit programs—neurally mapping inputs to outputs—through
which it can search using gradients at test time. LPN combines the adaptability of
symbolic approaches and the scalability of neural methods. It searches through a
compact latent space at test time and bypasses the need for pre-defined domainspecific languages. On a range of programming-by-examples tasks, LPN either
outperforms or matches performance compared to in-context learning and test-time
training methods. Tested on the ARC-AGI benchmark, we demonstrate that LPN
can both learn a compact program space and search through it at test time to adapt
to novel tasks. LPN doubles its performance on out-of-distribution tasks when
test-time search is switched on.

1

Introduction

The central goal of artificial intelligence has long been to create generally intelligent systems with
human-like cognitive capabilities. While recent years have seen remarkable achievements in narrow
AI domains, with systems achieving superhuman performance in games [Campbell et al., 2002, Silver
et al., 2017, Vinyals et al., 2019] and specialized tasks [He et al., 2015, Jumper et al., 2021], we face
a fundamental challenge: our systems struggle to generalize beyond their training distribution [Yu
et al., 2024a] or to effectively adapt to novelty [Zhang et al., 2021]. This highlights a critical gap
between optimizing for task-specific performance and achieving true general intelligence.
In On the Measure of Intelligence, Chollet [2019] argues that traditional benchmarks that measure
skills alone are insufficient for developing generally intelligent systems. Such benchmarks can be
"gamed" through either unlimited prior knowledge of the task encoded by developers or massive
amounts of training data, masking a system’s true ability to generalize and adapt. Instead, it is argued
we need to measure skill-acquisition efficiency—how effectively a system can learn new tasks with
minimal experience—and evaluate generalization capability in a way that controls for both prior
knowledge and training data.
By controlling for prior knowledge and experience, the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARCAGI) [Chollet, 2019] is a benchmark that measures skill acquisition efficiency rather than pure skills.
Correspondence to <matthew.v.m@live.co.uk>, <clement.bonnet16@gmail.com>
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

