VisionThink: Smart and Efficient
Vision Language Model via Reinforcement Learning
Senqiao Yang∗ 1,3 Junyi Li∗ 2,3 Xin Lai∗ 3 Jinming Wu3
Wei Li 3 Bei Yu1 Hengshuang Zhao‡2 Jiaya Jia1,4
1

CUHK

2

HKU

3

ByteDance

4

HKUST

Codes and models: https://github.com/dvlab-research/VisionThink

Abstract
Recent advancements in vision-language models (VLMs) have improved performance by increasing the number of visual tokens, which are often significantly
longer than text tokens. However, we observe that most real-world scenarios do
not require such an extensive number of visual tokens. While the performance
drops significantly in a small subset of OCR-related tasks, models still perform
accurately in most other general VQA tasks with only 1/4 resolution. Therefore,
we propose to dynamically process distinct samples with different resolutions,
and present a new paradigm for visual token reduction, namely, VisionThink. It
starts with a downsampled image and smartly decides whether it is sufficient for
problem solving. Otherwise, the model could output a special token to request
the higher-resolution image. Compared to existing Efficient VLM methods that
reduce tokens using fixed pruning ratios or thresholds, VisionThink autonomously
decides whether to reduce tokens case by case. As a result, it demonstrates strong
fine-grained visual understanding capability on OCR-related tasks, and meanwhile
saves substantial visual tokens on simpler tasks. We adopt reinforcement learning
and propose the LLM-as-Judge strategy to successfully apply RL to general VQA
tasks. Moreover, we carefully design a reward function and penalty mechanism
to achieve a stable and reasonable image resize call ratio. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority, efficiency, and effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Recently, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [31, 30, 33, 9, 3] have achieved remarkable performance
in general visual question answering (General VQA) and various real-world scenarios by projecting
and adapting visual tokens into the LLM space [66, 1, 102, 4]. However, as the performance of
VLMs continues to advance, the consumption of visual tokens has grown exponentially. For instance,
a 2048×1024 image captured by a smartphone requires 2,678 visual tokens in Qwen2.5-VL [5],
which significantly exceeds the number of text tokens. This leads to substantial memory consumption
and notable latency, further constraining the deployment of VLMs on edge devices. Therefore, it is
imperative to minimize the excessive use of visual tokens.
Numerous works on visual token reduction have been proposed [71, 59, 18, 22, 8, 100, 80]. Most
approaches prune or merge a fixed number of visual tokens using predetermined thresholds. However,
redundancy levels vary across different questions and images, leading to a natural question: Should
we really apply a uniform token reduction ratio across all scenarios?
To answer this question, we simply reduced the image resolution to decrease the number of visual
tokens and evaluated Qwen2.5-VL’s[5] performance on several benchmarks. As shown in the left
of Fig. 1, we found that for most real-world scenarios (general VQA scenarios), such as MME
∗

Equal Contribution, ‡ Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

