Epistemic Uncertainty Estimation in Regression
Ensemble Models with Pairwise Epistemic Estimators

Lucas Berry, David Meger
Department of Computer Science
McGill University
lucas.berry@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract
This work introduces a novel approach, Pairwise Epistemic Estimators (PairEpEsts),
for epistemic uncertainty estimation in ensemble models for regression tasks using
pairwise-distance estimators (PaiDEs). By utilizing the pairwise distances between
model components, PaiDEs establish bounds on entropy. We leverage this capability to enhance the performance of Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement
(BALD). Notably, unlike sample-based Monte Carlo estimators, PairEpEsts can
estimate epistemic uncertainty up to 100 times faster and demonstrate superior
performance in higher dimensions. To validate our approach, we conducted a
varied series of regression experiments on commonly used benchmarks: 1D sinusoidal data, Pendulum, Hopper, Ant, and Humanoid, demonstrating PairEpEsts’
advantage over baselines in high-dimensional regression active learning.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we propose Pairwise Epistemic Estimators (PairEpEsts) as a non-sample based method
for estimating epistemic uncertainty in deep ensembles with probabilistic outputs for regression tasks.
Epistemic uncertainty, often distinguished from aleatoric uncertainty, reflects a model’s ignorance and
can be reduced by increasing the amount of data available [26, 16, 29]. The significance of epistemic
uncertainty is particularly pronounced in safety-critical systems, where a single erroneous prediction
could lead to catastrophic consequences [43]. Moreover, leveraging epistemic uncertainty proves
beneficial as an acquisition criterion for active learning strategies [27].
Previously Monte Carlo (MC) methods have been employed for estimating epistemic uncertainty, in
regression tasks, due to the absence of closed-form expressions in most modeling scenarios [15, 4].
However, as the output dimension increases, these MC methods require a large number of samples to
get accurate estimates. PairEpEsts leverage Pairwise-Distance Estimators (PaiDEs), which provide a
non-sample-based alternative for estimating information-theoretic criteria in ensemble regression
models with probabilistic outputs [35].
Ensembles can be seen as committees, with each component acting as a member [50]. PairEpEsts synthesize the consensus amongst a committee of probabilistic learners by calculating the distributional
distance between each pair of committee members. Aggregating these distances allows accurate
estimation of the mutual information between the model output and weight distribution. When
pairwise distances are efficiently computable, PairEpEsts offer a fast, sample-free method to estimate
epistemic uncertainty. Figure 1 shows committee members in agreement with low uncertainty (small
distance) and disagreement with high uncertainty (large distance).
This study demonstrates the use of PairEpEsts to estimate epistemic uncertainty in regression
ensembles with probabilistic outputs. Unlike classification, regression poses unique challenges
because entropy is harder to estimate for mixtures of continuous distributions than for categorical
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

