Improving Target Sound Extraction via Disentangled
Codec Representations with Privileged Knowledge
Distillation
Dail Kim1 , Joon-Hyuk Chang1,2∗
Department of Artificial Intelligence
2
Department of Electronic Engineering
Hanyang University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
{roar27, jchang}@hanyang.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Target sound extraction aims to isolate target sound sources from an input mixture
using a target clue to identify the sounds of interest. To address the challenge posed
by the wide variety of sounds, recent work has introduced privileged knowledge
distillation (PKD), which utilizes privileged information (PI) about the target
sound, available only during training. While PKD has shown promise, existing
approaches often suffer from overfitting of the teacher model for the overly rich
PI and ineffective knowledge transfer to the student model. In this paper, we
propose Disentangled Codec Knowledge Distillation (DCKD) to mitigate these
issues by regulating the amount and the flow of target sound information within
the teacher model. We begin by extracting a compressed representation of the
target sound using a neural audio codec to regulate the amount of PI. Disentangled
representation learning is then applied to remove class information and extract
fine-grained temporal information as PI. Subsequently, an n-hot vector as the
class information and the class-independent PI are used to condition the early and
later layers of the teacher model, respectively, forming a regulated coarse-to-fine
target information flow. The resulting representation is transferred to the student
model through feature-level knowledge distillation. Experimental results show that
DCKD consistently improves existing methods across model architectures under
the multi-target selection condition.

1

Introduction

Humans possess a selective hearing ability to focus on a specific sound of interest among overlapping
sounds. This auditory perception ability has been extensively emulated across various signal processing studies [1–5]. One major approach to achieve this objective is target sound extraction (TSE),
which aims to extract one or more desired sound sources from a mixture of multiple sounds, given
target clues that indicate the classes of target sounds [5–10], as illustrated in Figure 1 (a). However, the
diversity of sound types and acoustic conditions remains a challenge to achieving robust performance.
To address this issue, recent studies have explored the use of additional information of target sound,
such as timestamps [11, 12], pitch information [13], and multimodal cues [14, 15], to better guide
TSE models. A notable work in this direction is the utilization of privileged knowledge distillation
(PKD) [12]. This work utilizes a teacher model trained with a timestamp of the target sound as
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

