Transferring Causal Effects using Proxies

Manuel Iglesias-Alonso∗
ETH Zürich

Felix Schur†
Seminar for Statistics
ETH Zürich

Julius von Kügelgen†
Seminar for Statistics
ETH Zürich

Jonas Peters†
Seminar for Statistics
ETH Zürich

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a causal effect in a multi-domain setting.
The causal effect of interest is confounded by an unobserved confounder and can
change between the different domains. We assume that we have access to a proxy of
the hidden confounder and that all variables are discrete or categorical. We propose
methodology to estimate the causal effect in the target domain, where we assume
to observe only the proxy variable. Under these conditions, we prove identifiability
(even when treatment and response variables are continuous). We introduce two
estimation techniques, prove consistency, and derive confidence intervals. The
theoretical results are supported by simulation studies and a real-world example
studying the causal effect of website rankings on consumer choices.

1

Introduction

Estimating the causal effect of a treatment or exposure X on an outcome or response Y of interest is a
core objective across the social and natural sciences [1–4]. However, a major obstacle to such causal
inference from observational (passively collected) data is the existence of unmeasured confounders U ,
i.e., unobserved variables that influence both the treatment and the outcome. For example, suppose that
we wish to study the causal effect of a new experimental drug X on survival Y . Since such drugs tend
to be administered only in severe cases, i.e., to patients in poor health with an already dire prognosis U ,
untreated patients will generally have better health outcomes. Naïvely comparing average survival
between treated and untreated patients can thus lead to erroneous conclusions [5]. For accurate causal
inference, it is therefore important that confounders are measured and correctly adjusted for [6].
Since it is difficult to rule out that some confounders remain unobserved, randomised controlled
trials (RCTs) are considered the gold standard for causal inference [7, 8]. In an RCT, the treatment
assignment is randomised, thereby eliminating any influences from potential confounders. However,
for most settings of interest, RCTs are infeasible due to ethical or practical constraints. Much
research has thus been dedicated to devising specialised methods for causal inference from purely
observational data. An important step in this endeavour is to establish identifiability, i.e., to show
that the causal estimand can be expressed in terms of distributions that only involve observed
quantities [9]. To this end, existing methods leverage additional structure and assumptions, often
in the form of other observed variables, such as instruments [10], mediators [11], or proxies [12, 13]
(sometimes called negative controls [14]), which have certain causal relationships to the treatment,
outcome, and confounder. In the present work, we propose a novel proxy-based approach.
∗
Not with ETH anymore, but most of this work was done while MIA was a student at this university.
Correspondence to: igalonsomanuel@gmail.com.
†
Joint supervision.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

