FedIGL: Federated Invariant Graph Learning for
Non-IID Graphs

Lingren Wang1

Wenxuan Tu2∗ Jiaxin Wang3 Xiong Wang2
Jieren Cheng2∗ Jingxin Liu3
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Hainan University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hainan University
3
School of Cyberspace Security, Hainan University
{twx,992730}@hainanu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Graph Learning (FGL) effectively facilitates cross-domain graph model
training by enabling decentralized learning across multiple domains, while ensuring data privacy through local data storage and communication of model updates
instead of raw data. Existing approaches usually assume shared generic knowledge
(e.g., prototypes, spectral features) via aggregating local structures statistically to alleviate structural heterogeneity. However, imposing overly strict assumptions about
the presumed correlation between structural features and the global objective often
fails in generalizing to local tasks, leading to suboptimal performance. To tackle
this issue, we propose a Federated Invariant Graph Learning (FedIGL) framework
based on invariant learning, which effectively disrupts spurious correlations and
further mines the invariant factors across different distributions. Specifically, a
server-side global model is trained to capture client-agnostic subgraph patterns
shared across clients, whereas client-side models specialize in client-specific subgraph patterns. Subsequently, without compromising privacy, we propose a novel
Bi-Gradient Regularization strategy that introduces gradient constraints to guide
the model in identifying client-agnostic and client-specific subgraph patterns for
better graph representations. Extensive experiments on graph-level clustering and
classification tasks demonstrate the superiority of FedIGL against its competitors.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) research [50, 33, 9, 11, 38, 36, 8] is rapidly growing due to the
ability of GNNs to learn representations from graph-structured data. In practice, centralizing large
amounts of real-world graph data for training is prohibitive due to privacy concerns and regulatory
restrictions [26, 47, 35]. Federated Graph Learning (FGL), a growing distributed learning paradigm,
offers a potential solution to this challenge while preserving data privacy [24, 23]. Nonetheless, the
non-IID problem remains a major challenge in FGL, as graph data from different distributions usually
vary significantly [40].
Existing approaches typically rely on the assumption that generic knowledge learned from training
on non-IID clients can be effectively reconstructed across clients to enable collaborative training
[53]. The shared knowledge includes consensus prototypes [22, 48], generic spectral knowledge [32],
and structure encoder parameters [31], which are introduced as shared knowledge representations
to facilitate the execution of graph-level learning tasks. Despite the enormous success, existing
methods overly rely on statistical correlation, misleadingly assuming that the robust representations
learned from prior knowledge are widely applicable. The correlation between generic knowledge
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

