Enhancing LLM Planning for Robotics Manipulation
through Hierarchical Procedural Knowledge Graphs

Jiacong Zhou1∗ Jiaxu Miao2∗ Xianyun Wang2,3 Jun Yu2,3†
1
School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University
2
The School of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Pengcheng Laboratory
jczhou@hdu.edu.cn yujun@hit.edu.cn
LLM Planning Task
Generate admissible plans for
assembling gift baskets. There
are four baskets on the tables…

Please extract … +
Task: Clean Chair
Steps: Search Cloth, ...

Extraction

Completion

Refinement

Verification

Web
How-to
Data

1. walk_to(table)
2. grab(cookie)
3. walk_to(basket)……

LLM Manipulation Task
“put the trash in
garbage"
MLLM
Subtask Planning

Summary
HP-KG

"pick trash"

"to garbage" "place trash"

Figure 1: Overview of our work. We propose a large-scale Procedural Knowledge Graph constructed from web
how-to data, which can significantly enhance the planning capabilities of LLMs in robot manipulation tasks.

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown the promising planning capabilities
for robotic manipulation, which advances the development of embodied intelligence
significantly. However, existing LLM-driven robotic manipulation approaches excel at simple pick-and-place tasks but are insufficient for complex manipulation
tasks due to inaccurate procedural knowledge. Besides, for embodied intelligence,
equipping a large scale LLM is energy-consuming and inefficient, which affects
its real-world application. To address the above problems, we propose Hierarchical Procedural Knowledge Graphs (HP-KG) to enhance LLMs for complex
robotic planning while significantly reducing the demand for LLM scale in robotic
manipulation. Considering that the complex real-world tasks require multiple
steps, and each step is composed of robotic-understandable atomic actions, we
design a hierarchical knowledge graph structure to model the relationships between
tasks, steps, and actions. This design bridges the gap between human instructions
and robotic manipulation actions. To construct HP-KG, we develop an automatic
knowledge graph construction framework powered by LLM-based multi-agents,
which eliminates costly manual efforts while maintaining high-quality graph structures. The resulting HP-KG encompasses over 40k activity steps across more than
6k household tasks, spanning diverse everyday scenarios. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that small scale LLMs (7B) enhanced by our HP-KG significantly
improve the planning capabilities, which are stronger than 72B LLMs only. En∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

