Compute-Optimal Scaling for Value-Based Deep RL

Preston Fu1,* Oleh Rybkin1,* Zhiyuan Zhou1 Michal Nauman1,2
Pieter Abbeel1 Sergey Levine1 Aviral Kumar3
1

UC Berkeley

2

University of Warsaw

3

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
As models grow larger and training them becomes expensive, it becomes increasingly important to scale training recipes not just to larger models and more data,
but to do so in a compute-optimal manner that extracts maximal performance per
unit of compute. While such scaling has been well studied for language modeling,
reinforcement learning (RL) has received less attention in this regard. In this paper,
we investigate compute scaling for online, value-based deep RL. These methods
present two primary axes for compute allocation: model capacity and the updateto-data (UTD) ratio. Given a fixed compute budget, we ask: how should resources
be partitioned across these axes to maximize data efficiency? Our analysis reveals
a nuanced interplay between model size, batch size, and UTD. In particular, we
identify a phenomenon we call TD-overfitting: increasing the batch quickly harms
Q-function accuracy for small models, but this effect is absent in large models,
enabling effective use of large batch size at scale. We provide a mental model for
understanding this phenomenon and build guidelines for choosing batch size and
UTD to optimize compute usage. Our findings provide a grounded starting point
for compute-optimal scaling in deep RL, mirroring studies in supervised learning
but adapted to TD learning. Project page: value-scaling.github.io.

1

Introduction

Scaling compute plays a crucial role in the success of modern machine learning (ML). In natural
language and computer vision, compute scaling takes a number of different forms: model size [19],
the number of experts in a mixture-of-experts model [20], or test-time compute [46]. Since these
approaches exhibit different opportunities and tradeoffs, a natural line of study has been to identify
strategies for “compute-optimal” scaling [19], that prescribe how to allocate a given fixed amount of
compute to attain the best downstream performance.
In this paper, we are interested in understanding tradeoffs between different ways to scale compute for
value-based deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods based on temporal-difference (TD) learning
to realize a similar promise of transforming more compute to better data efficiency. Value-based
TD-learning methods typically provide two mechanisms to scale compute: first, increasing the
capacity of the network representing the Q-function, and second, increasing the number of updates
made per data point (i.e., the updates-to-data, UTD ratio) collected by acting in the environment.
Scaling along these two sources present different benefits, challenges, and desiderata [34]. Therefore,
in this paper, we ask: What is the best strategy to scale model size and UTD to translate a given
fixed compute budget into maximal performance?
Analogous to prior scaling studies in language models [19] and deep RL [39], addressing this question
requires us to understand how scaling compute in different ways affects the behavior of the underlying
TD-learning algorithm. Concretely, we will need a mental model of how scaling model size interacts
with various other hyperparameters of the TD-learning algorithm, notably the UTD ratio. Most
* Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors: prestonfu@berkeley.edu, oleh.rybkin@gmail.com,
aviralku@andrew.cmu.edu. Code: github.com/prestonfu/model scaling.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

