Chiron-o1: Igniting Multimodal Large Language
Models towards Generalizable Medical Reasoning
via Mentor-Intern Collaborative Search
Haoran Sun1,2* , Yankai Jiang1* B , Wenjie Lou1 , Yujie Zhang2
Wenjie Li1,3 , Lilong Wang1 , Mianxin Liu1 , Lei Liu2 , Xiaosong Wang1B
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
Fudan University
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
jiangyankai@pjlab.org.cn, wangxiaosong@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have begun to demonstrate robust
reasoning capabilities on general tasks, yet their application in the medical domain
remains in its early stages. Constructing chain-of-thought (CoT) training data
is essential for bolstering the reasoning abilities of medical MLLMs. However,
existing approaches exhibit a deficiency in offering a comprehensive framework for
searching and evaluating effective reasoning paths towards critical diagnosis. To
address this challenge, we propose Mentor-Intern Collaborative Search (MICS), a
novel reasoning-path searching scheme to generate rigorous and effective medical
CoT data. MICS first leverages mentor models to initialize the reasoning, one
step at a time, then prompts each intern model to continue the thinking along
those initiated paths, and finally selects the optimal reasoning path according
to the overall reasoning performance of multiple intern models. The reasoning
performance is determined by an MICS-Score, which assesses the quality of
generated reasoning paths. Eventually, we construct MMRP, a multi-task medical
reasoning dataset with ranked difficulty, and Chiron-o1, a new medical MLLM
devised via a curriculum learning strategy, with robust visual question-answering
and generalizable reasoning capabilities. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
Chiron-o1, trained on our CoT dataset constructed using MICS, achieves state-ofthe-art performance across a list of medical visual question answering and reasoning
benchmarks. Codes are available at https://github.com/Yankai96/Chiron-o1

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [8, 23, 26, 34, 49, 72] have demonstrated prominent
performance in a wide range of tasks, including image captioning, visual question answering, and
video analysis. Recent breakthroughs in MLLMs have also shed new light on the development of
general-purpose medical AI. Remarkable efforts have been made to adapt existing MLLMs to address
complex clinical tasks through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on carefully curated multimodal medical
instruction fine-tuning datasets [7, 28, 30, 65, 69]. However, most current medical MLLMs rely
on a direct-prediction paradigm, which produces brief, immediate answers to problems and often
overlooks the interleaved image–text reasoning processes essential for real-world clinical scenarios.
This critical shortcoming, namely the inability to perform deep multimodal reasoning analysis of
* Equal contribution.
B

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

