Fully Dynamic Algorithms for Chamfer Distance∗

Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang
School of Computer Science
Peking University, China
shaofeng.jiang@pku.edu.cn

Gramoz Goranci
Faculty of Computer Science
University of Vienna, Austria
gramoz.goranci@univie.ac.at
Peter Kiss
Faculty of Computer Science
University of Vienna, Austria
peter.kiss@univie.ac.at

Eva Szilagyi
Faculty of Computer Science
UniVie Doctoral School Computer Science DoCS
University of Vienna, Austria
eva.szilagyi@univie.ac.at

Qiaoyuan Yang
School of Computer Science
Peking University, China
qiaoyuanyang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the problem of computing Chamfer distance in the fully dynamic setting,
where two sets of points A, B ⊂ Rd , each of size up to n, dynamically evolve
through point insertions or deletions
P and the goal is to efficiently maintain an approximation to distCH (A, B) = a∈A minb∈B dist(a, b), where dist is a distance
measure. Chamfer distance is a widely used dissimilarity metric for point clouds,
with many practical applications that require repeated evaluation on dynamically
changing datasets, e.g., when used as a loss function in machine learning. In this
paper, we present the first dynamic algorithm for maintaining an approximation
of the Chamfer distance under the ℓp norm for p ∈ {1, 2}. Our algorithm reduces
to approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search with little overhead. Plugging in
standard ANN bounds, we obtain (1+ϵ)-approximation in Õ(ϵ−d ) update time and
2
O(1/ϵ)-approximation in Õ(dnϵ ϵ−4 ) update time. We evaluate our method on
real-world datasets and demonstrate that it performs competitively against natural
baselines.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of computing the Chamfer distance, a popular dissimarlity metric between
point clouds. Given two sets of points A, B ⊂ Rd , each of size up to n, the Chamfer distance of A
from B with respect to a distance measure dist : Rd × Rd → R≥0 is defined as
X
distCH (A, B) =
min dist(a, b).
a∈A

b∈B

The Chamfer distance is typically defined with respect to distance measures such as Manhattan and
Euclidean metrics. It has found a wide range of applications in various domains, including machine
learning [KSKW15, WCL+ 19], computer vision [AS03, LJG05, FSG17, JSQJ18], and geometric
∗

Authors are listed in the alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

