Mixture-of-Experts Operator Transformer
for Large-Scale PDE Pre-Training

Hong Wang1,2,3∗, Haiyang Xin1∗, Jie Wang1,2,3† , Xuanze Yang1 , Fei Zha1 ,
Huanshuo Dong1,2,3 , Yan Jiang1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
wanghong1700@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xhy2878@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training has proven effective in addressing data scarcity and performance
limitations in solving PDE problems with neural operators. However, challenges
remain due to the heterogeneity of PDE datasets in equation types, which leads to
high errors in mixed training. Additionally, dense pre-training models that scale
parameters by increasing network width or depth incur significant inference costs.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel Mixture-of-Experts Pre-training
Operator Transformer (MoE-POT), a sparse-activated architecture that scales
parameters efficiently while controlling inference costs. Specifically, our model
adopts a layer-wise router-gating network to dynamically select 4 routed experts
from 16 expert networks during inference, enabling the model to focus on equationspecific features. Meanwhile, we also integrate 2 shared experts, aiming to capture
common properties of PDE and reduce redundancy among routed experts. The
final output is computed as the weighted average of the results from all activated
experts. We pre-train models with parameters from 30M to 0.5B on 6 public PDE
datasets. Our model with 90M activated parameters achieves up to a 40% reduction
in zero-shot error compared with existing models with 120M activated parameters.
Additionally, we conduct interpretability analysis, showing that dataset types can
be inferred from router-gating network decisions, which validates the rationality
and effectiveness of the MoE architecture 1 .

1

Introduction

Learning solution operators for partial differential equations (PDEs) has emerged as a fundamental paradigm in scientific machine learning, enabling data-driven modeling of complex physical
systems through neural operators [62, 22, 28, 12]. These operators learn mappings between infinitedimensional function spaces, offering surrogate models that can outperform traditional numerical
solvers by orders of magnitude in speed [45, 2]. To address the scarcity of PDE data and further
enhance the performance of neural operators, recent studies have introduced pre-training techniques
into neural operator frameworks [15]. However, their application to PDE learning remains nascent
due to unique challenges in operator learning.
First, (challenge 1) PDE datasets demonstrate substantial variations across equation types, boundary
conditions, and spatiotemporal resolutions. This diversity causes conflicting knowledge patterns when
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/haiyangxin/MoEPOT.

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

