Variational Uncertainty Decomposition
for In-Context Learning

I. Shavindra Jayasekera∗, Jacob Si∗,
Filippo Valdettaro, Wenlong Chen, A. Aldo Faisal, Yingzhen Li
Imperial College London
{i.jayasekera23, y.si23, yingzhen.li}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) gain popularity in conducting prediction tasks
in-context, understanding the sources of uncertainty in in-context learning becomes
essential to ensuring reliability. The recent hypothesis of in-context learning performing predictive Bayesian inference opens the avenue for Bayesian uncertainty
estimation, particularly for decomposing uncertainty into epistemic uncertainty due
to lack of in-context data and aleatoric uncertainty inherent in the in-context prediction task. However, the decomposition idea remains under-explored due to the
intractability of the latent parameter posterior from the underlying Bayesian model.
In this work, we introduce a variational uncertainty decomposition framework for
in-context learning without explicitly sampling from the latent parameter posterior,
by optimising auxiliary queries as probes to obtain an upper bound to the aleatoric
uncertainty of an LLM’s in-context learning procedure, which also induces a lower
bound to the epistemic uncertainty. Through experiments on synthetic and realworld tasks, we show quantitatively and qualitatively that the decomposed uncertainties obtained from our method exhibit desirable properties of epistemic and aleatoric
uncertainty. Code is available at: https://github.com/jacobyhsi/VUD.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable abilities in natural language generation [17, 88, 102], and are being extended to a wide range of applications such as question answering
[116], retrieval-augmented generation [55], information analysis [97, 75], and bandit problems [49].
In particular, an emergent property of an LLM is in-context learning (ICL), where the model acquires
task behavior at inference time, without the need for prior pre-training or fine-tuning [12]. With the
rising importance and presence of LLMs, understanding where and why these models are uncertain is
essential in assessing their trustworthiness and robustness. A straightforward method of assessing
uncertainty is to directly prompt the LLM to quantify the uncertainty of its outputs. However, this can
be unreliable due to the overconfidence of language models [106]. Therefore, being able to faithfully
quantify and determine the sources of uncertainties from the LLMs’ output can assist practitioners in
better understanding and addressing the model’s limitations.
Recent work has hypothesised that ICL exhibits properties of Bayesian inference [113]. If we
concatenate a dataset of a predictive task D = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 and a test input x∗ into a prompt,
then we can view ICL as (approximately) inferring an implicit latent parameter θ for an underlying
posterior distribution p(θ|D) and computing a posterior predictive distribution p(y∗ |x∗ , D). This
interpretation allows estimation of uncertainty through a Bayesian framework, which measures a
model’s total (predictive) uncertainty by computing the entropy H[y∗ |x∗ , D] or, in regression settings,
the total variance Var[y∗ |x∗ , D]. The total uncertainty can then be decomposed further into two
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

