A Single-Loop Gradient Algorithm for Pessimistic
Bilevel Optimization via Smooth Approximation

Qichao Cao1
caoqc2024@mail.sustech.edu.cn

Shangzhi Zeng2,1
zengsz@sustech.edu.cn
∗

Jin Zhang 1,2,3,
zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has garnered significant attention in the machine learning
community recently, particularly regarding the development of efficient numerical methods. While substantial progress has been made in developing efficient
algorithms for optimistic bilevel optimization, the study of methods for solving
Pessimistic Bilevel Optimization (PBO) remains relatively less explored, especially
the design of fully first-order, single-loop gradient-based algorithms. This paper
aims to bridge this research gap. We first propose a novel smooth approximation
to the PBO problem, using penalization and regularization techniques. Building
upon this approximation, we then propose SiPBA (Single-loop Pessimistic Bilevel
Algorithm), a new gradient-based method specifically designed for PBO which
avoids second-order derivative information or inner-loop iterations for subproblem
solving. We provide theoretical validation for the proposed smooth approximation
scheme and establish theoretical convergence for the algorithm SiPBA. Numerical experiments on synthetic examples and practical applications demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of SiPBA.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization constitutes a hierarchical optimization problem formulated as follows:
min F (x, y)

x∈X

s.t.

y ∈ S(x) := arg minf (x, y ′ ),
y ′ ∈Y

where x ∈ Rn and y ∈ Rm represent the upper-level and lower-level decision variables, respectively,
and X ⊆ Rn and Y ⊆ Rm are closed convex sets. The functions F : Rn × Rm → R and
f : Rn × Rm → R are the upper-level and lower-level objective functions, respectively. Bilevel
optimization naturally models non-cooperative game between two players, often referred to as a
Stackelberg game [66]. When the lower-level problem in bilevel optimization admits multiple optimal
solutions for a given x, the corresponding decision variable y in the upper-level objective becomes
ambiguous. To resolve this, bilevel optimization is commonly formulated in two distinct settings:
Optimistic Bilevel Optimization (OBO) and Pessimistic Bilevel Optimization (PBO).
1

Department of Mathematics, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
National Center for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Shenzhen, China.
3
Detection Institute for Advanced Technology Longhua-Shenzhen (DIATLHSZ), Shenzhen, China.
* Corresponding Author.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

