Heavy-Ball Momentum Method in Continuous Time
and Discretization Error Analysis

Bochen Lyua,b,*

a

Xiaojing Zhangb

Fangyi Zhengc

He Wangd

Zheng Wange

Zhanxing Zhua*
University of Southampton DataCanvas c Pony.ai d University College London
e
University of Leeds
*
{bochen.lyu, z.zhu}@soton.ac.uk
b

Abstract
This paper establishes a continuous time approximation, a piece-wise continuous
differential equation, for the discrete Heavy-Ball (HB) momentum method with
explicit discretization error. Investigating continuous differential equations has
been a promising approach for studying the discrete optimization methods. Despite
the crucial role of momentum in gradient-based optimization methods, the gap
between the original discrete dynamics and the continuous time approximations
due to the discretization error has not been comprehensively bridged yet. In this
work, we study the HB momentum method in continuous time while putting more
focus on the discretization error to provide additional theoretical tools to this area.
In particular, we design a first-order piece-wise continuous differential equation,
where we add a number of counter terms to account for the discretization error
explicitly. As a result, we provide a continuous time model for the HB momentum
method that allows the control of discretization error to arbitrary order of the step
size. As an application, we leverage it to find a new implicit regularization of the
directional smoothness and investigate the implicit bias of HB for diagonal linear
networks, indicating how our results can be used in deep learning. Our theoretical
findings are further supported by numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Gradient descent (GD) and its variants momentum methods, such as Polyak’s Heavy-Ball momentum
(HB) (Polyak, 1964), Nesterov’s method of accelerated gradients (NAG) (Nesterov, 1983), and
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2017), are at the core of the success of training deep neural networks. This
leads to the importance of understanding the gradient-based optimization methods, whereas the direct
analysis for their discrete learning dynamics is challenging. Hence an optional approach is generally
applied in this area: leveraging tools from dynamical systems to study the learning dynamics in
continuous time to shed light on the dynamical behaviors of the discrete updates, e.g., Barrett and
Dherin (2022); Lyu and Li (2020); Ji and Telgarsky (2019); Li et al. (2022); Lyu and Zhu (2023);
Miyagawa (2023); Rosca et al. (2023). However, one fundamental gap—the discrepancy between the
discrete optimizations and their continuous time models named as the discretization error—becomes
manifest when employing this approach.
While recent works have made significant efforts to fill the aforementioned gap for GD (Barrett and
Dherin, 2022; Miyagawa, 2023; Rosca et al., 2023), the analysis for the discretization error of the
important variants of GD—momentum methods—in continuous time is still far from comprehensive.
Along this line of research, Kovachki and Stuart (2020) demonstrated that the continuous time
approximation of HB and NAG, which solves minβ L(β), can be expressed as a rescaled gradient
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

