4Real-Video-V2: Fused View-Time Attention and
Feedforward Reconstruction for 4D Scene Generation
Chaoyang Wang1∗ Ashkan Mirzaei 1∗ Vidit Goel1 Willi Menapace1 Aliaksandr Siarohin1
Avalon Vinella1 Michael Vasilkovsky1 Ivan Skorokhodov1 Vladislav Shakhrai1
Sergey Korolev1 Sergey Tulyakov1 Peter Wonka1,2
1
Snap Inc. 2 KAUST
Project page: https://snap-research.github.io/4Real-Video-V2/
(1) 4D Video Generation

(2) Feedforward Reconstruction

View

Time

A monkey holding a colorful candy bar

A chubby man munching on a colorful ice cream

A dog jumping with a skateboard

A skeleton holding a wine glass

A princess bunny holding a wand in the snow

A bustling street with many cars, lively

Figure 1: Our method enables the creation of 4D scenes from a text prompt by combining a diffusion
model that directly generates synchronized multi-view videos with a feedforward reconstruction
model that efficiently produces Gaussian-based representations.

Abstract
We propose the first framework capable of computing a 4D spatio-temporal grid of
video frames and 3D Gaussian particles for each time step using a feed-forward
architecture. Our architecture has two main components, a 4D video model and a
4D reconstruction model. In the first part, we analyze current 4D video diffusion
architectures that perform spatial and temporal attention either sequentially or
in parallel within a two-stream design. We highlight the limitations of existing
approaches and introduce a novel fused architecture that performs spatial and
temporal attention within a single layer. The key to our method is a sparse attention
pattern, where tokens attend to others in the same frame, at the same timestamp, or
from the same viewpoint. In the second part, we extend existing 3D reconstruction
algorithms by introducing a Gaussian head, a camera token replacement algorithm,
and additional dynamic layers and training. Overall, we establish a new state of the
art for 4D generation, improving both visual quality and reconstruction capability.

1

Introduction

Immersive visual experiences are becoming increasingly popular in fields such as virtual reality and
film production. This growing demand drives the need for technologies that enable the creation of
4D content, where users can interactively explore dynamic scenes. A key challenge in enabling
such capabilities is the limited availability of high-quality 3D and 4D data. This scarcity presents a
significant obstacle to training generative models that can directly produce 4D representations.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

