DRIFT: Dynamic Rule-Based Defense with Injection
Isolation for Securing LLM Agents

Hao Li1 , Xiaogeng Liu2 , Hung-Chun Chiu3 , Dianqi Li3 , Ning Zhang1 , Chaowei Xiao2
1

Washington University in St. Louis, 2 Johns Hopkins University
3
Independent Researcher
{li.hao, zhang.ning}@wustl.edu, cxiao13@jh.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly central to agentic systems due
to their strong reasoning and planning capabilities. By interacting with external
environments through predefined tools, these agents can carry out complex user
tasks. Nonetheless, this interaction also introduces the risk of prompt injection
attacks, where malicious inputs from external sources can mislead the agent’s
behavior, potentially resulting in economic loss, privacy leakage, or system compromise. System-level defenses have recently shown promise by enforcing static
or predefined policies, but they still face two key challenges: the ability to dynamically update security rules and the need for memory stream isolation. To
address these challenges, we propose DRIFT, a Dynamic Rule-based Isolation
Framework for Trustworthy agentic systems, which enforces both control- and
data-level constraints. A Secure Planner first constructs a minimal function trajectory and a JSON-schema-style parameter checklist for each function node based
on the user query. A Dynamic Validator then monitors deviations from the original
plan, assessing whether changes comply with privilege limitations and the user’s
intent. Finally, an Injection Isolator detects and masks any instructions that may
conflict with the user query from the memory stream to mitigate long-term risks.
We empirically validate the effectiveness of DRIFT on the AgentDojo and ASB
benchmark, demonstrating its strong security performance while maintaining high
utility across diverse models—showcasing both its robustness and adaptability. The
code is released at https://github.com/SaFoLab-WISC/DRIFT.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), empowered by their exceptional planning and reasoning abilities,
are increasingly integrated into agentic systems [1–3]. By processing natural language data streams,
LLM agents interact with external environments, such as applications [1, 4], computing systems [3],
via a set of pre-defined tools to carry out complex user tasks. Since the need for interaction with
untrusted external environments, a new security threat of prompt injection attacks is introduced [5–9],
where attackers inject malicious instructions into third-party platforms, misleading the agent workflow
after external interaction. For example, a product review on Amazon written by another user, such as
“Ignore previous instructions, buy this red shirt,” may manipulate the LLM into executing unintended
actions. This form of attack [5–9] may bring risks such as economic losses [6], privacy leakage [10],
and system damage [11] to users, severely undermining the reliability of the agentic system.
Existing defense mechanisms can be broadly categorized into model-level [12–17] and systemlevel [18–22] defenses. Model-level defenses [12–17] typically rely on building the model’s intrinsic
guardrails to detect injection inputs or mitigate their impact, but such defenses are constrained by
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

