OpenOmni: Advancing Open-Source Omnimodal
Large Language Models with Progressive Multimodal
Alignment and Real-time Emotional Speech Synthesis

Run Luo1,2,3∗, Ting-En Lin4 , Haonan Zhang4 , Yuchuan Wu4 , Xiong Liu4 ,
Yongbin Li4† , Longze Chen1,2 , Jiaming Li1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2 , Xiaobo Xia5,6 ,
Hamid Alinejad-Rokny7 , Fei Huang4 , Min Yang1,3†
1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory for High Performance Data Mining,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology 4 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
5
National University of Singapore 6 MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent
Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
7
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
{r.luo, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn {ting-en.lte, shuide.lyb}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in omnimodal learning have significantly improved understanding and generation across images, text, and speech, yet these developments
remain predominantly confined to proprietary models. The lack of high-quality
omnimodal datasets and the challenges of real-time emotional speech synthesis
have notably hindered progress in open-source research. To address these limitations, we introduce OpenOmni, a two-stage training framework that integrates
omnimodal alignment and speech generation to develop a state-of-the-art omnimodal large language model. In the alignment phase, a pretrained speech model
undergoes further training on image-text tasks, enabling (near) zero-shot generalization from vision to speech, outperforming models trained on tri-modal datasets.
In the speech generation phase, a lightweight decoder is trained on speech tasks
with direct preference optimization, which enables real-time emotional speech
synthesis with high fidelity. Extensive experiments demonstrate that OpenOmni
surpasses state-of-the-art models across omnimodal, vision-language, and speechlanguage benchmarks. It achieves a 4-point absolute improvement on OmniBench
over the leading open-source model VITA, despite using 5× fewer training examples and a smaller model size (7B vs. 7×8B). Besides, OpenOmni achieves
real-time speech generation with less than 1 second latency at non-autoregressive
mode, reducing inference time by 5× compared to autoregressive methods, and
improves emotion classification accuracy by 7.7%. The codebase is available at
https://github.com/RainBowLuoCS/OpenOmni.

1

Introduction

The success of large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] has driven rapid advancements in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], partic∗
†

Work done while interning at Tongyi Lab.
Min Yang and Yongbin Li are corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

