Optimizing Retrieval for RAG
via Reinforcement Learning

Jiawei Zhou Lei Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{jzhoubu,leichen}@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
As retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) becomes more widespread, the role of
retrieval is shifting from retrieving information for human browsing to retrieving
context for AI reasoning. This shift creates more complex search environments,
where relevance is difficult to pre-define. Existing retrievers rely on supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) with human labels or synthetic data, resulting in static relevance
that struggles to adapt to diverse RAG environments. To address this challenge, we
propose R3, a Retrieval framework optimized for RAG through Reinforcement
learning (RL). Specifically, we adopt an RL training paradigm that enables the retriever to explore and self-improve within given RAG environments, automating the
learning process with minimal manual experimentation or tuning effort. Extensive
experiments across diverse tasks demonstrate that R3 improves RAG performance
by 5.2% over the original retriever and surpasses state-of-the-art retrievers by 4.9%,
while achieving comparable results to LLM-augmented retrieval and RAG systems
built on post-trained or instruction-tuned LLMs. It is both efficient and practical,
requiring only 4 GPUs and completing training within a single day.

1

Introduction

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [1, 2, 3] is a well-established paradigm that integrates large
language models (LLMs) [4] with information retrieval (IR) [5] to access external knowledge.
Recently, RAG has rapidly evolved into a foundation for a new wave of advanced AI applications [6].
Examples include web-browsing agents [7, 8] that interact with live web content, conversational
chatbots [9, 10, 11] that integrate retrieval to enable knowledge-grounded and emotionally aware
dialogue, and DeepResearch assistants [12, 13, 14] that autonomously analyze and synthesize
information across multiple sources to produce comprehensive reports.
These RAG applications signify a fundamental shift in the role of retrieval, from search for humans to
search for AI. As illustrated in Figure 1, traditional IR searches information for human users, where
relevance is pre-defined as superficial similarity to ensure interpretability [15, 16], so that human
users can instantly grasp the underlying relations. In contrast, RAG searches contextual knowledge
for AI systems, which can efficiently process and reason over vast amounts of information and are
designed to handle diverse and evolving tasks. The retriever functions as an internal component
within a RAG environment that encompasses tasks, workflows, LLMs, and other components, making
relevance more environment-dependent, hard to pre-define, and necessary to explore.
Existing RAG applications have several retrieval options. Some leverage search engine APIs, which
are convenient but expensive, difficult to scale, and cannot be further optimized [17]. Others deploy
neural retrievers locally. However, directly applying these off-the-shelf retrievers can suffer from gap
between IR and RAG. Studies have shown that traditional IR often retrieve semantically related
but unhelpful content [18, 19, 20], LLM-generated documents [21], or misleading evidence [22],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

