VidEmo: Affective-Tree Reasoning for
Emotion-Centric Video Foundation Models
Zhicheng Zhang1∗ , Weicheng Wang1∗ , Yongjie Zhu3†
Wenyu Qin3 , Pengfei Wan3 , Di Zhang3 , Jufeng Yang124‡
1
Nankai University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory 3 Kuaishou Technology
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN·FUTIAN)
gloryzzc6@sina.com, 2120230639@mail.nankai.edu.cn
{zhuyongjie,qinwenyu,wanpengfei}@kuaishou.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn
4

https://zzcheng.top/VidEmo

Attribute Perception
① Appearance
Classify
Caption

② Action
Classify
Caption

③ Face Iden/ty
④ Head Pose
⑤ Open A5ribute

Eye, Nose, Mouth,
Chin, Shape, Hair, Skin,
Action, Feature, …

Expression Analysis
① Emotion
Classify, Multiclass
Fine-grained

② Sentiment
Classify
Fine-grained

③ Affective Cues
Micro-expression
Ac@on Unit

④ Complex Scenario
Emotion Caption
Conversation

Emotional Intelligent: Fine-grained Caption & Rationale Reasoning
Back
ground

Person 2
App
Act
Emo
Time

Person 4
App
Act
Emo
Time

Four young girls are sitting on the floor in front of a gray sofa with multiple patterned cushions, all gazing forward,
seemingly at a screen. The girl on the left has brown, wavy, long hair, big almond-shaped brown eyes, thick
brown eyebrows, a small nose with a high bridge, and thick pink lips. She is wearing a gray long-sleeved shirt and
bright pink pants. Initially, her mouth is closed, but around mid of the video, she opens her mouth in a slight gasp.
The girl in the center has brown, curly, long hair, big almond-shaped brown eyes, thick brown eyebrows, a small
nose with a high bridge, and thick pink lips. She wears a light pink tank top and gray pants and has bracelets on
both her wrists. She sits with her arms clasped around her knees. She is pleased with TV show, that is indicated
by her smile. The girl to the immediate right has blonde, straight, long hair, big almond-shaped blue eyes, narrow
blonde eyebrows, a small nose with a high bridge, and thick pink lips. She wears a light pink shirt and a white
pajama bottom, as well as a bracelet on her left wrist, and is holding a small piece of popcorn. At first her mouth
is closed, then she puts the popcorn into her mouth, her expression briefly shows concern; from the mid, she
seems shocked by something in the screen at throw out the popcorn, and the expression turns fear. The fourth
girl sits on the far right, with blonde, straight, long hair, big almond-shaped blue eyes, narrow blonde eyebrows, a
small nose with a high bridge, and thick pink lips. She is wearing a light purple shirt with white and pink polka dot
pajama pants. From the mid of video, she's chewing popcorn with her mouth closed, and again she is seen eating
popcorn at the end. They all have fair, smooth skin and are focused forward. The lighting is from above with
white light. The camera angle is front-facing and there is no camera movement.

Person 1
App
Act
Emo
Time

Person 3
App
Act
Emo
Time

Scenario
Camera
Lighting

Figure 1: Selected examples of inputs and outputs obtained from VidEmo. Apart from providing
toolkits for basic attribute perception and expression analysis (top), VidEmo extends the cognitive
capacity and is able to generate fine-grained emotional captions with explainable rationale (bottom).

Abstract
Understanding and predicting emotion from videos has gathered significant attention in recent studies, driven by advancements in video large language models
(VideoLLMs). While advanced methods have made progress in video emotion
analysis, the intrinsic nature of emotions poses significant challenges. Emotions
∗: Equal Contribution. †: Project Leader. ‡: Corresponding Author.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

