A Smooth Sea Never Made a Skilled SAILOR:
Robust Imitation via Learning to Search

Arnav Kumar Jain∗
Mila- Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
Atiksh Bhardwaj
Cornell University

Vibhakar Mohta∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Juntao Ren
Cornell University

Yunhai Feng
Cornell University

Subin Kim
Cornell University

Sanjiban Choudhury
Cornell University

Gokul Swamy
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The fundamental limitation of the behavioral cloning (BC) approach to imitation
learning is that it only teaches an agent what the expert did at states the expert
visited. This means that when a BC agent makes a mistake which takes them
out of the support of the demonstrations, they often don’t know how to recover
from it. In this sense, BC is akin to giving the agent the fish – giving them dense
supervision across a narrow set of states – rather than teaching them to fish: to
be able to reason independently about achieving the expert’s outcome even when
faced with unseen situations at test-time. In response, we explore learning to
search (L2S) from expert demonstrations, i.e. learning the components required to,
at test time, plan to match expert outcomes, even after making a mistake. These
include (1) a world model and (2) a reward model. We carefully ablate the set of
algorithmic and design decisions required to combine these and other components
for stable and sample/interaction-efficient learning of recovery behavior without
additional human corrections. Across a dozen visual manipulation tasks from
three benchmarks, our approach SAILOR consistently out-performs state-of-the-art
Diffusion Policies trained via BC on the same data. Furthermore, scaling up the
amount of demonstrations used for BC by 5-10× still leaves a performance gap.
We find that SAILOR can identify nuanced failures and is robust to reward hacking.
Our code is available at https://github.com/arnavkj1995/SAILOR.

1

Introduction

The workhorse of modern imitation learning (IL) is behavioral cloning (BC, Pomerleau [1988]).
From training Diffusion Policies (DPs, Chi et al. [2023]) on per-task expert demonstrations collected
via a variety of teleoperation interfaces [Zhao et al., 2023, Chi et al., 2024, Wu et al., 2024] to
Visual-Language-Action models (VLAs, Team et al. [2024], Kim et al. [2024], Intelligence et al.
[2025]) trained on wider, multi-task datasets [Khazatsky et al., 2024, ONeill et al., 2024], we see the
same recipe applied: collecting more data to train more expressive policy models. The latent hope
here is that scaling will eventually lead to a “ChatGPT moment” for robotics [Vemprala et al., 2023].
∗

Equal Contribution.
Correspondence to Arnav <arnav-kumar.jain@mila.quebec> and Gokul <gswamy@cmu.edu>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

