Polar Sparsity: High Throughput Batched LLM
Inferencing with Scalable Contextual Sparsity

Susav Shrestha
Texas A&M University
sls7161@tamu.edu

Brad Settlemyer
NVIDIA
bsettlemyer@nvidia.com

Nikoli Dryden
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
dryden1@llnl.gov

Narasimha Reddy
Texas A&M University
reddy@tamu.edu

Abstract
Accelerating large language model (LLM) inference is critical for real-world
deployments requiring high throughput and low latency. Contextual sparsity, where
each token dynamically activates only a small subset of the model parameters,
shows promise but does not scale to large batch sizes due to union of active neurons
quickly approaching dense computation. We introduce Polar Sparsity, highlighting
a key shift in sparsity importance from MLP to Attention layers as we scale batch
size and sequence length. While MLP layers become more compute-efficient under
batching, their sparsity vanishes. In contrast, attention becomes increasingly more
expensive at scale, while their head sparsity remains stable and batch-invariant.
We develop Selective Head Attention with hardware-efficient, sparsity-aware GPU
kernels, delivering up to 2.2× end-to-end speedups for models like OPT, LLaMA2 & 3, Qwen, Mistral across various batch sizes and sequence lengths without
compromising accuracy. To our knowledge, this is the first work to demonstrate that
contextual sparsity can scale effectively to large batch sizes, delivering substantial
inference acceleration with minimal changes, making Polar Sparsity practical for
large-scale, high-throughput LLM deployment systems. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/susavlsh10/Polar-Sparsity.

1

Introduction

Modern LLMs have emerged as powerful tools capable of excelling at diverse tasks, leading to their
widespread adoption in modern systems [56, 46, 15, 52]. However, their massive scale, typically
involving billions of parameters, makes them computationally expensive and highlights the need for
more efficient and cost-effective deployment solutions.
While sparsity and pruning have been extensively studied, their use in production LLMs remains
limited due to poor workload generalization and inefficient hardware utilization caused by irregular
memory access [26, 61, 55, 59, 37, 58, 35]. A recent line of research has uncovered the phenomenon
of contextual activation sparsity, where each input token dynamically activates only a small subset of
input-dependent neurons, enabling efficient acceleration without compromising model quality [39].
Activation sparsity emerges as a promising acceleration technique for LLMs with structured sparsity
which enables coalesced memory access and measurable wall-clock speedups.
Activation sparsity has been shown to be effective in reducing inference latency, but its application
has been largely limited to single-query workloads [39, 54, 4]. Modern inferencing systems depend
on batching to maximize hardware efficiency and reduce serving costs [31, 10, 69, 45]. Neural
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

