Understanding the Gain from Data Filtering
in Multimodal Contrastive Learning

Divyansh Pareek
Sewoong Oh
Simon S. Du
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
{dpareek,sewoong,ssdu}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
The success of modern multimodal representation learning relies on internet-scale
datasets. Due to the low quality of a large fraction of raw web data, data curation
has become a critical step in the training pipeline. Filtering using a trained model
(i.e., teacher-based filtering) has emerged as a successful solution, leveraging a
pre-trained model to compute quality scores. To explain the empirical success
of teacher-based filtering, we characterize the performance of filtered contrastive
learning under the standard bimodal data generation model. Denoting η ∈ (0, 1]
as the fraction of data with correctly matched modalities among n paired samples,
we utilize a linear contrastive learning setup to show a provable benefit of data
√
filtering: (i) the error without filtering is upper and lower bounded by 1/η n, and
√
(ii) the error with teacher-based filtering is upper bounded by 1/ ηn in the large η
√
regime, and by 1/ n in the small η regime.

1

Introduction

The seminal work of Radford et al. [29] introduced CLIP, a large-scale multimodal training paradigm
that leverages contrastive learning on image and language modalities. This marked a significant
advancement in general purpose representation learning that enabled unprecedented zero-shot downstream performance. A crucial factor in the success of CLIP and other vision-language models
(VLMs) was the shift towards training on massive datasets [39], often comprising billions of imagetext pairs scraped from the internet (e.g., LAION-5B [30] and DataComp-1B [11]). The sheer quantity
of data unlocks the capability to learn robust representations [9]. However, due to the inherently noisy
nature of web data, this introduces significant challenges regarding the quality, resulting in the need
for data curation. Smaller but higher quality subsets of the data have been observed to result in better
models than larger but noisier datasets [39, 25, 11]. Gadre et al. [11, Figure 2] observe that training
on only a selected 30% of the dataset results in a better performing model than training on the full
corpus. To handle such a significant fraction of low-quality data, data curation has become a critical
step in modern internet-scale pretraining pipeline of foundation models [1].
For vision-language datasets, a number of methods have been introduced for data filtering [10, 35, 18,
8, 32, 22]. Among these, teacher-based filtering, where a pre-trained model is used to score samples
and retain high-quality ones, has emerged as a particularly effective strategy [10, 35]. This approach
marks a progression from earlier efforts which relied on heuristic-based filtering (e.g., the WIT400M
dataset used in CLIP [29]). Subsequent and ongoing curation efforts have increasingly leveraged
strong existing models, like CLIP itself, to refine datasets further [30, 11].
In the theory community, the success of CLIP models has been attributed to two factors: the choice of
using a contrastive loss and the use of multimodal datasets. A series of modeling and analyses followed
to explain the benefits from these two factors under various scenarios [24, 14, 33, 27, 17, 13, 6, 7].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

