Adapting to Stochastic and Adversarial Losses in
Episodic MDPs with Aggregate Bandit Feedback

Shinji Ito
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN
shinji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington
jamieson@cs.washington.edu
Arnab Maiti
University of Washington
arnabm2@uw.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu
Taira Tsuchiya
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN
tsuchiya@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We study online learning in finite-horizon episodic Markov decision processes
(MDPs) under the challenging aggregate bandit feedback model, where the learner
observes only the cumulative loss incurred in each episode, rather than individual
losses at each state-action pair. While prior work in this setting has focused
exclusively on worst-case analysis, we initiate the study of best-of-both-worlds
(BOBW) algorithms that achieve low regret in both stochastic and adversarial
environments. We propose the first BOBW algorithms for episodic tabular MDPs
with aggregate bandit feedback. In the case of known transitions,
our algorithms
√
achieve O(log T ) regret in stochastic settings and O( T ) regret in adversarial
ones. Importantly, we also establish matching lower bounds, showing the optimality
of our algorithms in this setting. We further extend our approach to unknowntransition settings by incorporating confidence-based techniques. Our results rely
on a combination of FTRL over occupancy measures, self-bounding techniques, and
new loss estimators inspired by recent advances in online shortest path problems.
Along the way, we also provide the first individual-gap-dependent lower bounds
and demonstrate near-optimal BOBW algorithms for shortest path problems with
bandit feedback.

1

Introduction

This paper considers online learning problems for finite-horizon episodic Markov decision processes
(MDPs) with aggregate bandit feedback [Efroni et al., 2021, Cohen et al., 2021]. In this feedback
model, the learner receives feedback on the aggregate loss in each episode, which is the sum of losses
for all state-action pairs in the learner’s trajectory of that episode, rather than individual losses for
each state-action pair. The aggregate bandit feedback model naturally arises in various real-world
applications where only trajectory-level outcomes are observable. For example, in personalized
healthcare, a sequence of medical treatments is administered, but only the final patient outcome (e.g.,
recovery rate) is observed, without attributing effects to individual actions. Similarly, in application to
the design of educational programs, students experience a curriculum composed of multiple learning
activities, while feedback is typically available only in the form of an overall test score.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

