Learning Equilibria from Data:
Provably Efficient Multi-Agent Imitation Learning

Till Freihaut∗
University of Zurich
freihaut@ifi.uzh.ch
Volkan Cevher
EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Luca Viano∗
EPFL
luca.viano@epfl.ch

Matthieu Geist
Earth Species Project
matthieu@earthspecies.org

Giorgia Ramponi
University of Zurich
ramponi@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract
This paper provides the first expert sample complexity characterization for learning
a Nash equilibrium from expert data in Markov Games. We show that a new
quantity named the all policy deviation concentrability coefficient is unavoidable in
the non-interactive imitation learning setting, and we provide an upper bound for
behavioral cloning (BC) featuring such coefficient. BC exhibits substantial regret
in games with high concentrability coefficient, leading us to utilize expert queries to
develop and introduce two novel solution algorithms: MAIL-BRO and MURMAIL.
The former employs a best response oracle and learns an ε-Nash equilibrium with
O(ε−4 ) expert and oracle queries. The latter bypasses completely the best response
oracle at the cost of a worse expert query complexity of order O(ε−8 ). Finally, we
provide numerical evidence, confirming our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Learning in systems with multiple agents is common in real-world applications, such as autonomous
driving [Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016], traffic light control [Bakker et al., 2010], and games [Samvelyan
et al., 2019]. Designing reward functions in these applications is challenging, as it requires defining
multiple, potentially opposing, objectives. However, expert data are often available, making MultiAgent Imitation Learning (MAIL) an important approach for learning policies that perform well in
underlying Markov Games (MGs) with unknown reward functions. MAIL has the potential to ensure
the alignment of agents with the original experts’ goals and to avoid potentially exploitable policies
that can lead to socially undesirable behavior [Hammond et al., 2025].
A key distinction between Multi-Agent Imitation Learning and Single-Agent Imitation Learning
(SAIL) is that the performance of a strategy in MAIL depends on the strategies of other agents. This
means that an expert need not maximize reward directly; instead, the goal is to reach a state where no
agent benefits from unilaterally deviating from its strategy, typically referred to as an equilibrium.
The most common equilibrium concept is the Nash equilibrium (NE). To evaluate how close a given
strategy is to an NE, the objective must consider strategic deviations of one agent while holding the
others fixed.
In this work, we consider 2-player Zero-Sum Markov Games1 where the agents’ rewards are perfectly
opposing, i.e., r1 (s, a, b) = −r2 (s, a, b). In this setting, denoting the state value function of a strategy
∗

Equal contribution.
For the sake of simplicity, the main text will focus on this case. The appendix outlines the extension to n
player general-sum games.
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

