Cognitive Mirrors: Exploring the Diverse Functional
Roles of Attention Heads in LLM Reasoning

Xueqi Ma1

Jun Wang1,3∗ Yanbei Jiang1 Sarah Monazam Erfani1
Tongliang Liu2 James Bailey1
1
The University of Melbourne 2 The University of Sydney
3
Amazon
{xueqim, jun2, yanbeij}@student.unimelb.edu.au
{sarah.erfani, baileyj}@unimelb.edu.au
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in
a variety of tasks, but remain largely opaque in terms of their internal mechanisms. Understanding these mechanisms is crucial to improve their reasoning
abilities. Drawing inspiration from the interplay between neural processes and
human cognition, we propose a novel interpretability framework to systematically
analyze the roles and behaviors of attention heads, which are key components
of LLMs. We introduce CogQA, a dataset that decomposes complex questions
into step-by-step subquestions with a chain-of-thought design, each associated
with specific cognitive functions such as retrieval or logical reasoning. By applying a multi-class probing method, we identify the attention heads responsible for
these functions. Our analysis across multiple LLM families reveals that attention
heads exhibit functional specialization, characterized as cognitive heads. These
cognitive heads exhibit several key properties: they are universally sparse, and
vary in number and distribution across different cognitive functions, and they
display interactive and hierarchical structures. We further show that cognitive
heads play a vital role in reasoning tasks—removing them leads to performance
degradation, while augmenting them enhances reasoning accuracy. These insights
offer a deeper understanding of LLM reasoning and suggest important implications
for model design, training and fine-tuning strategies. The code is available at
https://github.com/sihuo-design/CognitiveMirrors.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 14, 30, 38], built on neural networks that mimic the structure
of the human brain, have demonstrated exceptional performance across various natural language
processing (NLP) tasks, often exceeding human capabilities. This has sparked growing interest in
exploring the potential similarities between the cognitive processes of LLMs and the human brain.
Prior studies have demonstrated that LLMs can predict brain responses to natural language [8, 28],
indicating a functional alignment between artificial models and biological systems. However, to the
best of our knowledge, systematic efforts to align reasoning processes between LLMs and human
cognitive agents remain scarce. When solving complex reasoning tasks (e.g., a mathematical multiplechoice question; Figure 1), the human brain engages a network of specialized regions: the frontal
lobe recalls relevant knowledge [35], language areas (e.g., Wernicke’s and Broca’s) support semantic
processing [23, 20], and the parietal and prefrontal cortices carry out higher-order reasoning [5, 15].
∗

This work is not related to Amazon.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

