EfficientNav: Towards On-Device Object-Goal
Navigation with Navigation Map Caching and
Retrieval
Zebin Yang1,2 Sunjian Zheng3,4 Tong Xie1,2 Tianshi Xu1,2 Bo Yu3†
Fan Wang3 Jie Tang4 Shaoshan Liu3 Meng Li1,2,5†
1

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
5
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Integrated Circuits

Abstract
Object-goal navigation (ObjNav) tasks an agent with navigating to the location of
a specific object in an unseen environment. Embodied agents equipped with large
language models (LLMs) and online constructed navigation maps can perform
ObjNav in a zero-shot manner. However, existing agents heavily rely on giant
LLMs on the cloud, e.g., GPT-4, while directly switching to small LLMs, e.g.,
LLaMA3.2-11b, suffer from significant success rate drops due to limited model
capacity for understanding complex navigation maps, which prevents deploying
ObjNav on local devices. At the same time, the long prompt introduced by the
navigation map description will cause high planning latency on local devices.
In this paper, we propose EfficientNav to enable on-device efficient LLM-based
zero-shot ObjNav. To help the smaller LLMs better understand the environment,
we propose semantics-aware memory retrieval to prune redundant information in
navigation maps. To reduce planning latency, we propose discrete memory caching
and attention-based memory clustering to efficiently save and re-use the KV cache.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that EfficientNav achieves 11.1%
improvement in success rate on HM3D benchmark over GPT-4-based baselines,
and demonstrates 6.7× real-time latency reduction and 4.7× end-to-end latency
reduction over GPT-4 planner. Our code is available on https://github.com/PKUSEC-Lab/EfficientNav.

1

Introduction

Aiming to navigate an agent to an object specified by its category in an unknown environment, objectgoal navigation (ObjNav) presents a crucial yet challenging task for embodied agents [1, 58, 43, 25].
To enhance the generality of ObjNav, recent studies have proposed leveraging the common-sense
reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to achieve long-term planning in a zero-shot
manner [40, 4, 54, 23, 65]. Specifically, LLMs act as planners and determine a series of navigation
sub-goals to guide the agent to the final destination [11]. In such systems, navigation goals, maps of
explored areas, and current observations are typically provided as context for the LLMs [10, 91, 8].
This information can be conceived as memory for LLMs, providing information of explored areas
and visited objects to facilitate planning and decision-making.
†

Corresponding author. Emails: boyu@cuhk.edu.cn, meng.li@pku.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

