SD-VLM: Spatial Measuring and Understanding
with Depth-Encoded Vision-Language Models
∗†

†

‡

Pingyi Chen1,2,3 , Yujing Lou3,4 , Shen Cao3 , Jinhui Guo3 , Lubin Fan 3 ,
Yue Wu3 , Lin Yang2 , Lizhuang Ma4 , Jieping Ye3
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Westlake University, 3 Alibaba Cloud Computing,
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
While vision language models (VLMs) excel in 2D semantic visual understanding,
their ability to quantitatively reason about 3D spatial relationships remains underexplored due to the deficiency of spatial representation ability of 2D images.
In this paper, we analyze the problem hindering VLMs’ spatial understanding
abilities and propose SD-VLM, a novel framework that significantly enhances
fundamental spatial perception abilities of VLMs through two key contributions:
(1) propose Massive Spatial Measuring and Understanding (MSMU) dataset with
precise spatial annotations, and (2) introduce a simple depth positional encoding
method strengthening VLMs’ spatial awareness. MSMU dataset includes massive
quantitative spatial tasks with 700K QA pairs, 2.5M physical numerical annotations,
and 10K chain-of-thought augmented samples. We have trained SD-VLM, a
strong generalist VLM which shows superior quantitative spatial measuring and
understanding capability. SD-VLM not only achieves state-of-the-art performance
on our proposed MSMU-Bench, but also shows spatial generalization abilities
on other spatial understanding benchmarks including Q-Spatial and SpatialRGPTBench. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SD-VLM outperforms GPT-4o
and Intern-VL3-78B by 26.91% and 25.56% respectively on MSMU-Bench. Code
and models are released at https://github.com/cpystan/SD-VLM.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] have revolutionized how machines interpret
and reason about visual content, achieving human-level performance on tasks like visual question
answering (VQA). However, these models exhibit significant limitations in understanding 3D spatial
concepts, particularly regarding quantitative spatial reasoning, e.g., absolute distances and physical
dimensions. Even state-of-the-art models struggle with queries like "What is the size of the table in
the image?", which reveals the gap between 2D perception and 3D quantitative spatial understanding.
This limitation is particularly concerning given the increasing demand for models that can be operated
effectively in real-world environments, such as robotics [10, 11], autonomous vehicles [12, 13], and
augmented reality [14, 15].
Humans perceive spatial relationships based on building a 3D cognitive map of a scene in their
mind. However, images, as the vision input of VLMs, are merely projections from the 3D scene to
planes, losing much of the original 3D structural information. Although some works [16, 17, 18,
19, 20] explicitly use 3D scene representations as input to provide sufficient spatial information, we
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Cloud Computing
†
‡

Equal contributions
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

