Grids Often Outperform Implicit Neural
Representation at Compressing Dense Signals

Namhoon Kim Sara Fridovich-Keil
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
{namhoon, sfk}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have recently shown impressive results,
but their fundamental capacity, implicit biases, and scaling behavior remain poorly
understood. We investigate the performance of diverse INRs across a suite of 2D
and 3D real and synthetic signals with varying effective bandwidth, as well as
both overfitting and generalization tasks including tomography, super-resolution,
and denoising. By stratifying performance according to model size as well as
signal type and bandwidth, our results shed light on how different INR and grid
representations allocate their capacity. We find that, for most tasks and signals, a
simple regularized grid with interpolation trains faster and to higher quality than
any INR with the same number of parameters. We also find limited settings–namely
fitting binary signals such as shape contours–where INRs outperform grids, to guide
future development and use of INRs towards the most advantageous applications.

1

Introduction

Signal representation is fundamental to sensing and learning, especially for spatial and visual applications including computer vision and computational imaging [1–4]. Recently, implicit neural
representations (INRs) have shown promising performance in a range of imaging and inverse problems, yielding high perceptual quality with small memory footprint. However, their representation
capacity, scaling behavior, and implicit biases are not well understood, limiting the impact and
confidence with which they can be deployed. Our work aims to shed light on these properties of
different representations through principled experiments, to guide practitioners toward the most
suitable strategy for their specific datasets and use cases as well as inform development of future
signal representations.
Modern signal representations rely on four main strategies, each with unique advantages and limitations. Interpolated grid-based representations [5–8] are fundamentally continuous, enjoy well-behaved
gradients for fast optimization, and inherit classical representation guarantees rooted in sampling
theory [9]. However, they suffer the curse of dimensionality: for fixed resolution, model size grows
exponentially with dimension. In contrast, truly discrete representations such as point clouds and
surface meshes [10–13] can use fewer parameters to represent a sparse signal, but often lack useful
gradients and require heuristic discrete optimization strategies that are sensitive to initialization.
INRs model continuous signals using neural networks to map input coordinates to output signal
values [1, 14–18]. They can provide plausible and stable reconstructions even with very limited
model size, but suffer slow optimization and poorly understood resolution and scaling behavior.
Hybrid approaches merge the strengths of both grids and neural networks [19–26] by learning gridbased features alongside a lightweight neural network decoder, but questions remain regarding their
representation capacity and implicit biases.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

