UniZyme: A Unified Protein Cleavage Site Predictor
Enhanced with Enzyme Active-Site Knowledge

Chenao Li, Shuo Yan, Enyan Dai∗
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Abstract
Enzyme-catalyzed protein cleavage is essential for many biological functions. Accurate prediction of cleavage sites can facilitate various applications such as drug
development, enzyme design, and a deeper understanding of biological mechanisms. However, most existing models are restricted to an individual enzyme, which
neglects shared knowledge of enzymes and fails to generalize to novel enzymes.
Thus, we introduce a unified protein cleavage site predictor named UniZyme, which
can generalize across diverse enzymes. To enhance the enzyme encoding for the
protein cleavage site prediction, UniZyme employs a novel biochemically-informed
model architecture along with active-site knowledge of proteolytic enzymes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that UniZyme achieves high accuracy in predicting
cleavage sites across a range of proteolytic enzymes, including unseen enzymes.
The code is available in https://github.com/Ao-LiChen/UniZyme.

1

Introduction

During enzyme-catalyzed protein hydrolysis, proteolytic enzymes cleave proteins at specific cleavage
sites. This process is illustrated in Fig. 1, and it is crucial for a variety of physiological processes,
including cell proliferation, immune response, and cell death [1, 2]. Accurate prediction of enzymecatalyzed cleavage sites in the substrate proteins facilitates the identification of therapeutic targets and
guides drug design [3]. For instance, abnormal protein hydrolysis is closely associated with cancer,
viral infections, and neurodegenerative diseases, and predicting the cleavage sites of abnormal proteins
under pathological conditions can reveal biomarkers or intervention targets [4, 5]. Additionally,
in the design of enzyme inhibitors or prodrugs, identifying key cleavage peptides, such as those
cleaved under the catalysis of HIV enzyme, helps enhance drug specificity and minimize off-target
effects [6, 7].
Mapping cleavage sites experimentally via peptide assays or high-throughput mass spectrometry is arduous and costly [8]. Therefore, recent
studies have employed machine learning methods to advance the prediction of protein cleavage
sites. For example, CAT3 [9] predicts caspase-3
cleavage sites based on position-specific scoring
matrices (PSSM), and ProsperousPlus [10] integrates multiple methods to comprehensively
evaluate cleavage site predictions. However, Figure 1: Enzyme-catalyzed protein hydrolysis.
these methods generally focus on an individual enzyme system, overlooking shared patterns and
failing to generalize to proteases without labeled data. This limitation impedes tasks like off-target
∗

Corresponding author: enyandai@hkust-gz.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

