Distribution-Aware Tensor Decomposition for
Compression of Convolutional Neural Networks

Alper Kalle∗†
alper.kalle@cea.fr

Theo Rudkiewicz∗‡
theo.rudkiewicz@inria.fr

Mohamed-Oumar Ouerfelli†
mohamed-oumar.ouerfelli@cea.fr

Mohamed Tamaazousti†
mohamed.tamaazousti@cea.fr

Abstract
Neural networks are widely used for image–related tasks but typically demand considerable computing power. Once a network has been trained, however, its memoryand compute-footprint can be reduced by compression. In this work, we focus on
compression through tensorization and low-rank representations. Whereas classical
approaches search for a low-rank approximation by minimizing an isotropic norm
such as the Frobenius norm in weight-space, we use data-informed norms that
measure the error in function space. Concretely, we minimize the change in the
f )Σ1/2 ∥F where
layer’s output distribution, which can be expressed as ∥(W − W
f
Σ1/2 is the square root of the covariance matrix of the layer’s input and W , W
are the original and compressed weights. We propose new alternating least square
algorithms for the two most common tensor decompositions (Tucker-2 and CPD)
that directly optimize the new norm. Unlike conventional compression pipelines,
which almost always require post-compression fine-tuning, our data-informed approach often achieves competitive accuracy without any fine-tuning. We further
show that the same covariance-based norm can be transferred from one dataset to
another with only a minor accuracy drop, enabling compression even when the
original training dataset is unavailable. Experiments on several CNN architectures
(ResNet-18/50, and GoogLeNet) and datasets (ImageNet, FGVC-Aircraft, Cifar10,
and Cifar100) confirm the advantages of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

For the past decade, neural networks have consistently outperformed other algorithms across a wide
array of tasks particularly in computer vision, including character recognition, image classification,
object detection, image segmentation, and depth estimation. Notably, even with the rise of other
architectures, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) continue to push the boundaries of performance
in computer vision, with recent advancements demonstrating their sustained competitiveness for the
state-of-the-art results [Liu et al., 2022, Woo et al., 2023]. A defining characteristic of these networks,
in contrast to traditional algorithms (e.g., nearest neighbors, decision trees), is their substantial
number of parameters. For instance, prominent architectures such as AlexNet [Krizhevsky et al.,
2017], VGG-16 [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015], ResNet [He et al., 2016] and GoogleNet [Szegedy
et al., 2015] possess tens of millions of trainable parameters.
* These authors contributed equally
†
‡

Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France
TAU team, LISN, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria, 91405, Orsay, France

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

