Lorentz Local Canonicalization:
How to Make Any Network Lorentz-Equivariant

Jonas Spinner∗ 1
Luigi Favaro∗ 2
Peter Lippmann∗ 3
1
Sebastian Pitz
Gerrit Gerhartz1
Tilman Plehn1
Fred A. Hamprecht3
1
ITP, Heidelberg University, Germany, 2 CP3, UCLouvain, Belgium,
3
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
j.spinner@thphys.uni-heidelberg.de
luigi.favaro@uclouvain.be
peter.lippmann@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Lorentz-equivariant neural networks are becoming the leading architectures for
high-energy physics. Current implementations rely on specialized layers, limiting
architectural choices. We introduce Lorentz Local Canonicalization (LLoCa), a
general framework that renders any backbone network exactly Lorentz-equivariant.
Using equivariantly predicted local reference frames, we construct LLoCatransformers and graph networks. We adapt a recent approach for geometric message passing to the non-compact Lorentz group, allowing propagation of space-time
tensorial features. Data augmentation emerges from LLoCa as a special choice of
reference frame. Our models achieve competitive and state-of-the-art accuracy on
relevant particle physics tasks, while being 4× faster and using 10× fewer FLOPs.

1

Introduction

Many significant recent discoveries in the natural sciences are enhanced by Machine Learning
(ML) [2, 14, 23, 46]. In particular, High Energy Physics (HEP) experiments profit from ML as a
vast amount of data is available [12, 22, 25]. For instance, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
CERN collects data at rates which are unmatched in the natural sciences, seeking to explain the most
fundamental building blocks of nature [13].
The collision between two highly-energetic particles produces a multitude of scattered particles. The
physical laws which govern the dynamics of these particles respect Lorentz symmetry, the symmetry
group of special relativity. Incorporating the Lorentz symmetry in neural networks, in the form of
Lorentz equivariance, has proven to be critical for physics tasks which require data efficiency and
high accuracy [7, 21, 39, 42]. However, existing Lorentz-equivariant architectures often rely on
task-specific building blocks which impede the general applicability of Lorentz-equivariant networks
in the field. Other more versatile equivariant architectures impose prohibitive computational costs,
limiting usability at scale, and increasing the energy footprint from training. In this work, we address
these limitations by introducing a method that guarantees exact, but also partial and approximate,
Lorentz equivariance with minimal additional computational costs. Our approach is agnostic to the
architecture of the model, enabling the adaptation of existing graph neural networks (GNNs) and
transformers to Lorentz-equivariant neural networks. We make the following contributions:
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

