Fast Solvers for Discrete Diffusion Models:
Theory and Applications of High-Order Algorithms

Yinuo Ren1,∗
Haoxuan Chen1,∗,†
Yuchen Zhu2,∗
Wei Guo2,∗
2
1
2
Yongxin Chen
Grant M. Rotskoff
Molei Tao
Lexing Ying1
1
2
Stanford University
Georgia Institute of Technology
{yinuoren, haoxuanc, rotskoff, lexing}@stanford.edu
{yzhu738, wei.guo, yongchen, mtao}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Discrete diffusion models have emerged as a powerful generative modeling framework for discrete data with successful applications spanning from text generation
to image synthesis. However, their deployment faces challenges due to the high
dimensionality of the state space, necessitating the development of efﬁcient inference algorithms. Current inference approaches mainly fall into two categories:
exact simulation and approximate methods such as τ -leaping. While exact methods suffer from unpredictable inference time and redundant function evaluations,
τ -leaping is limited by its ﬁrst-order accuracy. In this work, we advance the latter
category by tailoring the ﬁrst extension of high-order numerical inference schemes
to discrete diffusion models, enabling larger step sizes while reducing error. We
rigorously analyze the proposed schemes and establish the second-order accuracy
of the θ-Trapezoidal method in KL divergence. Empirical evaluations on GSM8Klevel math-reasoning, GPT-2-level text, and ImageNet-level image generation
tasks demonstrate that our method achieves superior sample quality compared to
existing approaches under equivalent computational constraints, with consistent
performance gains across models ranging from 200M to 8B. Our code is available
at https://github.com/yuchen-zhu-zyc/DiscreteFastSolver.

1

Introduction

Diffusion and ﬂow-based models on discrete spaces [1–10] have emerged as a cornerstone of modern
generative modeling for categorical data, offering unique advantages in domains where continuity
assumptions fail. Unlike their continuous counterparts, discrete diffusion models inherently accommodate data with discrete structures, e.g., language tokens, molecular sequences, tokenized images,
and graphs, enabling principled generation and inference in combinatorially complex spaces. These
models have exerted a large impact on numerous applications, from the design of molecules [11],
proteins [12], and DNA sequences [13, 14] under biophysical constraints, to the generation of
high-ﬁdelity text [15] and images [16] via autoregressive or masked transitions, etc.. Beyond standalone tasks, discrete diffusion models also synergize with methodologies, ranging from tensor networks [17] to guidance mechanisms [18–20].
Discrete diffusion models, despite their broad applicability, face a critical bottleneck: inference
inefﬁciency. Current inference methods include: (1) exact simulation methods [21], which ensure
unbiased sampling from the pre-trained model but suffer from unpredictable inference time and
redundant score evaluations, resulting in poor scaling w.r.t. dimensionality; and (2) approximate
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

