Improving the Euclidean Diffusion Generation of
Manifold Data by Mitigating Score Function
Singularity
Zichen Liu 1 , Wei Zhang ∗,2 , and Tiejun Li ∗,1,3,4
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
Zuse Institute Berlin
3
LMAM and School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
4
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University

Abstract
Euclidean diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in generative modeling across diverse domains, and they have been extended to manifold cases in
recent advances. Instead of explicitly utilizing the structure of special manifolds
as studied in previous works, in this paper we investigate direct sampling of the
Euclidean diffusion models for general manifold-structured data. We reveal the
multiscale singularity of the score function in the ambient space, which hinders the
accuracy of diffusion-generated samples. We then present an elaborate theoretical
analysis of the singularity structure of the score function by decomposing it along
the tangential and normal directions of the manifold. To mitigate the singularity
and improve the sampling accuracy, we propose two novel methods: (1) Niso-DM,
which reduces the scale discrepancies in the score function by utilizing a nonisotropic noise, and (2) Tango-DM, which trains only the tangential component of
the score function using a tangential-only loss function. Numerical experiments
demonstrate that our methods achieve superior performance on distributions over
various manifolds with complex geometries.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [11, 35, 36, 38] have demonstrated remarkable success in generative modeling in
various domains, including image generation [12], audio synthesis [5], molecule generation [13],
and other applications [22, 48]. These models operate through a forward process, which gradually
perturbs data into noise, and a reverse process, which reconstructs the data from noise.
Beyond Euclidean space, many scientific fields involve data distributions constrained on Riemannian
manifolds. Examples include geographical sciences [28] using spheres, protein structures [45] and
robotic movements [34] with SE(3) and SO(3), lattice quantum chromodynamics [26] with SU(3),
3D computer graphics [14] with triangular meshes, and cell development [21] with the Poincaré disk.
To model such data, recent works [8, 17, 26, 49] have extended diffusion models to Riemannian
manifolds, achieving notable progress by leveraging manifold geometry. Nonetheless, these methods
face challenges due to the computational complexity of simulating diffusion and obtaining accurate
geometric information like the heat kernel.
On the other hand, a natural idea is to directly apply diffusion models designed for Euclidean space
to manifold-structured data. However, this approach encounters a fundamental challenge due to the
* Corresponding author: tieli@pku.edu.cn (T. Li), wei.zhang@fu-berlin.de (W. Zhang)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

