MoBA: Mixture of Block Attention for Long-Context
LLMs
Enzhe Lu1 Zhejun Jiang1 Jingyuan Liu1 Yulun Du1 Tao Jiang1 Chao Hong1
Shaowei Liu1 Weiran He1 Enming Yuan1 Yuzhi Wang1 Zhiqi Huang1 Huan Yuan1
Suting Xu1 Xinran Xu1 Guokun Lai1 Yanru Chen1 Huabin Zheng1 Junjie Yan1
Jianlin Su1 Yuxin Wu1 Yutao Zhang1 Zhilin Yang1
Xinyu Zhou1 Mingxing Zhang2 Jiezhong Qiu3 ∗
1
Moonshot AI 2 Tsinghua University 3 Hangzhou Institute of Medicine, CAS

Abstract
Scaling the effective context length is essential for advancing large language
models (LLMs) toward artificial general intelligence (AGI). However, the quadratic
increase in computational complexity inherent in traditional attention mechanisms
presents a prohibitive overhead. Existing approaches either impose strongly biased
structures, such as sink or window attention which are task-specific, or radically
modify the attention mechanism into linear approximations, whose performance in
complex reasoning tasks remains inadequately explored.
In this work, we propose a solution that adheres to the “less structure” principle,
allowing the model to determine where to attend autonomously, rather than introducing predefined biases. We introduce Mixture of Block Attention (MoBA), an
innovative approach that applies the principles of Mixture of Experts (MoE) to the
attention mechanism. This novel architecture demonstrates superior performance
on long-context tasks while offering a key advantage: the ability to seamlessly
transition between full and sparse attention, enhancing efficiency without the risk
of compromising performance. MoBA has already been deployed to handle actual
production workloads with long-context requirements, demonstrating significant
advancements in efficient attention computation for LLMs. Our code is available
at https://github.com/MoonshotAI/MoBA.

1

Introduction

The pursuit of artificial general intelligence (AGI) has driven the development of large language
models (LLMs) to unprecedented scales, with the promise of handling complex tasks that mimic
human cognition. A pivotal capability for achieving AGI is the ability to process, understand, and
generate long sequences, which is essential for many applications, from historical data analysis
to complex reasoning and decision-making processes. This growing demand for extended context
processing can be seen not only in the popularity of long input prompt understanding, as showcased
by models like Kimi [1], Claude [2] and Gemini [3], but also in recent explorations of long chain-ofthought (CoT) output capabilities in Kimi k1.5 [4], DeepSeek-R1 [5], and OpenAI o1/o3 [6].
However, extending the sequence length in LLMs is non-trivial due to the quadratic growth in
computational complexity associated with the vanilla attention [7]. This challenge has spurred a wave
of research aimed at improving efficiency without sacrificing performance. One prominent direction
capitalizes on the inherent sparsity of attention scores. This sparsity arises both mathematically
∗
Co-corresponding authors: Xinyu Zhou (zhouxinyu@moonshot.cn), Mingxing Zhang (zhang
mingxing@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn) and Jiezhong Qiu (qiujiezhong@him.cas.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

