IBGS: Image-Based Gaussian Splatting

Hoang Chuong Nguyen1
Wei Mao
Jose M. Alvarez2
Miaomiao Liu1
1
2
Australian National University
NVIDIA
hoangchuong.nguyen@anu.edu.au miaomiao.liu@anu.edu.au
wei.mao.research@gmail.com josea@nvidia.com

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has recently emerged as a fast, high-quality method
for novel view synthesis (NVS). However, its use of low-degree spherical harmonics
limits its ability to capture spatially varying color and view-dependent effects such
as specular highlights. Existing works augment Gaussians with either a global
texture map, which struggles with complex scenes, or per-Gaussian texture maps,
which introduces high storage overhead. We propose Image-Based Gaussian
Splatting, an efficient alternative that leverages high-resolution source images for
fine details and view-specific color modeling. Specifically, we model each pixel
color as a combination of a base color from standard 3DGS rendering and a learned
residual inferred from neighboring training images. This promotes accurate surface
alignment and enables rendering images of high-frequency details and accurate
view-dependent effects. Experiments on standard NVS benchmarks show that our
method significantly outperforms prior Gaussian Splatting approaches in rendering
quality, without increasing the storage footprint. Our project page is available at
https://hoangchuongnguyen.github.io/ibgs.

1

Introduction

Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [16] have emerged
as advanced techniques for Novel View Synthesis (NVS) thanks to their high-quality image rendering.
3DGS, in particular, outperforms NeRF in terms of rendering speed and faster optimization. However,
since each Gaussian primitive in 3DGS can only represent a single color at a given camera viewpoint,
3DGS struggles to recover high-frequency details of the scene appearance without a large number of
Gaussians [4]. Furthermore, due to the smooth characteristic of the color representation i.e., spherical
harmonic (SH) functions, it is hard for 3DGS to capture complex view-dependent effects such as
reflections and specular highlights [4].
To address this issue, recent works have attempted to model Gaussian’s spatially varying colors by
either mapping each Gaussian-ray intersection to a global texture map [34], or a per-Gaussian texture
map [4, 28, 33]. While global texture maps perform well for single-object scenes [34], they struggle
with complex multi-object scenes due to the difficulty of learning a global mapping. Per-Gaussian
texture map [4, 28, 33] can handle real-world scenes with multiple objects, but it incurs a significant
storage overhead because the number of parameters per Gaussian grows quadratically as the texturemap resolution increases. This storage overhead constrains the resolution of per-Gaussian’s texture
map, leading to inferior modeling of high-frequency details in the rendered images. Additionally,
such texture map still cannot handle view-dependent effects.
In this work, we propose a drastically different approach to render high-frequency details and handle
view-dependent effects while avoid significantly increasing the storage memory. Specifically, inspired
by image-based rendering techniques [8, 22], we introduce an Image-Based Gaussian Splatting
(IBGS) approach that utilizes the high-frequency details and view-dependent effects captured in
training images. During rendering, the color of a pixel consists of two components i.e., the base color
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

