A Unified Approach to Submodular Maximization
Under Noise
Yang Cai
Yale University
New Haven, CT
yang.cai@yale.edu

Kshipra Bhawalkar
Google
Mountain View, CA
kshipra@google.com
Zhe Feng
Google
Mountain View, CA
zhef@google.com

Christopher Liaw
Google
Mountain View, CA
cvliaw@google.com

Tao Lin∗
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
tlin@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of maximizing a submodular function with access to a
noisy value oracle for the function instead of an exact value oracle. Similar to
prior work [13, 16], we assume that the noisy oracle is persistent in that multiple
calls to the oracle for a specific set always return the same value. In this model,
Hassidim and Singer [13] design a (1 − 1/e)-approximation algorithm for monotone submodular maximization subject to a cardinality constraint and Huang et al.
[16] design a (1 − 1/e)/2-approximation algorithm for monotone submodular
maximization subject to any arbitrary matroid constraint. In this paper, we design a
meta-algorithm that allows us to take any “robust” algorithm for exact submodular
maximization as a black box and transform it into an algorithm for the noisy setting
while retaining the approximation guarantee. By using the meta-algorithm with
the measured continuous greedy algorithm, we obtain a (1 − 1/e)-approximation
(resp. 1/e-approximation) for monotone (resp. non-monotone) submodular maximization subject to a matroid constraint under noise. Furthermore, by using the
meta-algorithm with the double greedy algorithm, we obtain a 1/2-approximation
for unconstrained (non-monotone) submodular maximization under noise.

1

Introduction

Submodular maximization is a fundamental problem that frequently appears in various forms in many
fields such as machine learning, combinatorial optimization, and economics. Submodular functions
are functions that satisfy the diminishing returns property. More formally, a function f : 2N → R
on a ground set N is said to be submodular if for any sets S ⊆ T ⊆ N and element i ∈ N \ T , we
have f (S ∪ {i}) − f (S) ≥ f (T ∪ {i}) − f (T ). Despite the intuitive nature of submodular functions,
many basic problems are NP-hard such as maximizing a monotone submodular function subject to a
cardinality constraint or maximizing a non-monotone submodular function without any constraints.
Given the inherent intractability of this problem, there has been a vast body of research that aims to
develop computationally efficient approximation algorithms for maximizing submodular functions in
various settings.
The standard model in submodular maximization assumes that we have value oracle access to the
submodular function f where, given a set S, we can retrieve the exact value of f (S). However, in
∗

Work done as a student researcher at Google in 2024.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

