SEEA-R1: Tree-Structured Reinforcement
Fine-Tuning for Self-Evolving Embodied Agents
Wanxin Tian1,⇤, Shijie Zhang1,⇤ , Kevin Zhang2,⇤ , Xiaowei Chi2 , Chun-Kai Fan2 , Junyu Lu1 ,
Yulin Luo2 , Qiang Zhou1 , Yiming Zhao1 , Ning Liu1 , Siyu Lin2 , Zhiyuan Qin1 ,
Xiaozhu Ju1,† , Shanghang Zhang2,‡ , Jian Tang1,‡
1

2

Beijing Innovation Center of Humanoid Robotics
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

Reasoning

Environment
Action Space:
Pick:

put some spray bottle on toilet.

Task: heat some tomato and put it in sink basin.

Clean:

put a clean lettuce in dining table.

Heat:

SEEA-R1

heat some egg and put it in dining
table.

Cool:

Looking quickly around you, you see a countertop, a cabinet, a
sink, a cabinet, a microwave, a table, a drawer, a sink basin, …

cool some pan and put it in stove
burner.

Agent

Pick2:

put two credit card in dresser.

Reward Model

Look:

Data

Model

1. Reason: To solve the task, I need to find and take a
tomato, then heat it with microwave, then put it in sink
basin. First, I need to find a tomato. A tomato is more likely
to appear in fridge, countertop, dining table, etc. I can start
with countertop
2. Action: go to countertop 1, go to countertop 2.

3. Reason: Two tomatoes found, I will pick up one and
heat it with a microwave.
4. Action: go to microwave, heat tomato 2 with microwave.

…

examine the pen with the desk
lamp.

5. Reason: Need to open microwave and go to sinkbasin.
6. Action: go to sink basin, put tomato in sink basin

Failed Leaf Nodes

Continue,

Continue,
Continue,
Continue,
Continue,
Done!

Goal

Figure 1: SEEA-R1 self-evolves by reasoning over its environment with perception-grounded
planning. The agent explores task solutions using tree-based search guided by a reward model,
iteratively refining actions to achieve complex goals. Given a high-level instruction, it explores, plans,
and executes actions in an embodied environment.

Abstract
Self-evolution, the ability of agents to autonomously improve their reasoning and
behavior, is essential for the embodied domain with long-horizon, real-world tasks.
Despite current advancements in reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) showing strong
performance in enhancing reasoning in LLMs, its potential to enable self-evolving
embodied intelligence with multi-modal interactions remains largely unexplored.
Specifically, reinforcement fine-tuning faces two fundamental obstacles in embodied settings: (i) the lack of accessible intermediate rewards in multi-step reasoning
tasks limits effective learning signals, and (ii) reliance on hand-crafted reward
functions restricts generalization to novel tasks and environments. To address these
challenges, we present Self-Evolving E mbodied A gents-R1, SEEA-R1, the first
RFT framework designed for enabling the self-evolving capabilities of embodied
agents. Specifically, to convert sparse delayed rewards into denser intermediate
signals that improve multi-step reasoning, we propose Tree-based Group Relative
Policy Optimization (Tree-GRPO) integrates Monte Carlo Tree Search into GRPO.
To generalize reward estimation across tasks and scenes, supporting unsupervised
⇤

Equal Contribution, † Project Leader, ‡ Corresponding Authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

