Time-Embedded Algorithm Unrolling for
Computational MRI

Junno Yun
University of Minnesota
yun00049@umn.edu

Yaşar Utku Alçalar
University of Minnesota
alcal029@umn.edu

Mehmet Akçakaya∗
University of Minnesota
akcakaya@umn.edu

Abstract
Algorithm unrolling methods have proven powerful for solving the regularized
least squares problem in computational magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These
approaches unfold an iterative algorithm with a fixed number of iterations, typically
alternating between a neural network-based proximal operator for regularization,
a data fidelity operation and auxiliary updates with learnable parameters. While
the connection to optimization methods dictate that the proximal operator network
should be shared across unrolls, this can introduce artifacts or blurring. Heuristically, practitioners have shown that using distinct networks may be beneficial, but
this significantly increases the number of learnable parameters, making it challenging to prevent overfitting. To address these shortcomings, by taking inspirations
from proximal operators with varying thresholds in approximate message passing
(AMP) and the success of time-embedding in diffusion models, we propose a
time-embedded algorithm unrolling scheme for inverse problems. Specifically,
we introduce a novel perspective on the iteration-dependent proximal operation in
vector AMP (VAMP) and the subsequent Onsager correction in the context of algorithm unrolling, framing them as a time-embedded neural network. Similarly, the
scalar weights in the data fidelity operation and its associated Onsager correction
are cast as time-dependent learnable parameters. Our extensive experiments on the
fastMRI dataset, spanning various acceleration rates and datasets, demonstrate that
our method effectively reduces aliasing artifacts and mitigates noise amplification,
achieving state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, we show that our timeembedding strategy extends to existing algorithm unrolling approaches, enhancing
reconstruction quality without increasing the computational complexity significantly. Code available at https://github.com/JN-Yun/TE-Unrolling-MRI.

1

Introduction

Algorithm unrolling/unfolding has emerged as an effective method for addressing inverse problems
in computational MRI [40, 28, 3, 29, 37, 50, 43, 54, 64]. In this framework, traditional iterative
optimization problems are unrolled for a fixed number of steps, with the network alternating between
enforcing data fidelity based on the known physics-based forward operator and applying implicit
regularization via a neural network based proximal operator. This unrolled network is trained endto-end to jointly optimize the weight(s) for data fidelity and the neural network parameters for the
proximal operator. Several different optimization methods have been explored for algorithm unrolling
in MRI [40, 37, 25, 34, 63, 33], including gradient descent (GD) [28], proximal gradient descent
(PGD) [54, 69, 33, 43], variable splitting with quadratic penalty (VSQP) [3, 24, 64] and alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [58, 66], among others [50, 1].
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

