Consistency of the kn-nearest neighbor rule
under adaptive sampling

Robi Bhattacharjee1

Sanjoy Dasgupta2

Geelon So2

1

2

University of Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego

Abstract
In the adaptive sampling model of online learning, future prediction tasks can be
arbitrarily dependent on the past. Every round, an adversary selects an instance to
test the learner. After the learner makes a prediction, a noisy label is drawn from
an underlying conditional label distribution and is revealed to both learner and
adversary. A learner is consistent if it eventually performs no worse than the Bayes
predictor. We study the kn -nearest neighbor learner within this setting. In the
worst-case, the learner will fail because an adaptive process can generate spurious
patterns out of noise. However, under the mild smoothing assumption that the
process generating the instances is uniformly absolutely continuous and that choice
of (kn )n is reasonable, the kn -nearest neighbor rule is online consistent.

1

Introduction

We study binary classification with noisy labels in the online setting where predictions are made
using the kn -nearest neighbor rule (Fix and Hodges, 1951; Cover and Hart, 1967). Let (X , ρ) be a
instance space equipped with a metric, let Y = {0, 1} be a binary label space, and let the labels be
chosen by nature, drawn from a conditional label distribution defined by η : X → [0, 1],
η(x) ≡ Pr(Y = 1|X = x).
In the adaptive sampling model, the label noise is benign, but the sequence of prediction tasks can be
adversarial and adapt to the sequence of observed labels. For n = 1, 2, . . . ,
- a data-generating process with knowledge of the past selects an instance Xn ∈ X ,
- the learner makes a prediction Ŷn ∈ Y,
- nature reveals a label Yn , freshly drawn from the Bernoulli distribution, Ber(η(Xn )).
The goal is to make as few mistakes Ŷn ̸= Yn as possible.
If the learner knew η, then it should predict the Bayes optimal label Yn∗ = 1{η(Xn ) ≥ 1/2}, as this
minimizes the expected error at each time step. But this strategy is not generally possible when η is
unknown. Still, we measure our learner against it: a learner is consistent if its asymptotic mistake
rate is no worse than what is achieved by making the Bayes optimal prediction every round:
lim sup
N →∞

N

1 X 
1 Ŷn ̸= Yn − 1 Yn∗ ̸= Yn ≤ 0
N n=1

a.s.

(1)

In other words, the learner is asymptotically consistent if its performance in the long run is on par
with the best predictor given knowledge of ground-truth label distribution.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

