From Style to Facts: Mapping the Boundaries of
Knowledge Injection with Finetuning

Eric Zhao∗
Google Research
University of California, Berkeley

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research

Nika Haghtalab
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Finetuning provides a scalable and cost-effective means of customizing language
models for specific tasks or response styles, with greater reliability than prompting
or in-context learning. In contrast, the conventional wisdom is that injecting
knowledge via finetuning results in brittle performance and poor generalization.
We argue that the dichotomy of “task customization” (e.g., instruction tuning) and
“knowledge injection” (e.g., teaching new facts) is a distinction without a difference.
We instead identify concrete factors that explain the heterogeneous effectiveness
observed with finetuning. To this end, we conduct a large-scale experimental study
of finetuning the frontier Gemini v1.5 model family on a spectrum of datasets
that are artificially engineered to interpolate between the strengths and failure
modes of finetuning. Our findings indicate that question-answer training data
formats provide much stronger knowledge generalization than document/articlestyle training data, numerical information can be harder for finetuning to retain
than categorical information, and models struggle to apply finetuned knowledge
during multi-step reasoning even when trained on similar examples—all factors that
render “knowledge injection” to be especially difficult, even after controlling for
considerations like data augmentation and information volume. On the other hand,
our findings also indicate that it is not fundamentally more difficult to finetune
information about a real-world event than information about writing style.

1

Introduction

The development pipeline of large language models involves various stages such as pre-training,
supervised finetuning during post-training, and reinforcement learning to further align the model’s
output with human preferences [Achiam et al., 2023, Team, 2024, Bai et al., 2022]. Once deployed,
these models are often adapted with finetuning [Brown et al., 2020] to specific downstream tasks,
where the model is further trained on a small task-specific dataset of (input, output) pairs.
There is a commonly held belief that finetuning excels at “show, not tell” [OpenAI, 2024] tasks.
That is, the common use case often cited for finetuning is to align the model’s style, tone, format,
or other qualitative aspects with a particular user’s writing style. In contrast, incorporating new
knowledge and specialized facts through finetuning is generally considered challenging and less
likely to succeed, as noted in technical documentation from model providers [OpenAI, 2024, Zhang
et al., 2024]. In particular, recent works have empirically demonstrated that injecting new knowledge
during finetuning is indeed hard and may make the model performance worse on other tasks [Ovadia
et al., 2024, Gekhman et al., 2024]. Despite these apparent challenges, finetuning remains one of the
most desirable—and, in some cases, the only practical—approach for downstream users to customize
large models for specific tasks and inject proprietary task-specific information.
∗

Correspondence to: eric.zh@berkeley.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

