Theoretical Guarantees for the Retention of Strict
Nash Equilibria by Coevolutionary Algorithms

Alistair Benford
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
a.s.benford@bham.ac.uk

Per Kristian Lehre
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
p.k.lehre@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Most methods for finding a Nash equilibrium rely on procedures that operate over
the entire action space, making them infeasible for settings with too many actions
to be searched exhaustively. Randomised search heuristics such as coevolutionary
algorithms offer benefits in such settings, however they lack many of the theoretical
guarantees established for exhaustive methods such as zero-regret learning. We
address this by developing a method for proving necessary and sufficient conditions
for a coevolutionary algorithm to be stable, in the sense that it reliably retains a
Nash equilibrium following discovery. As the method provides bounds that are
adapted to both application and algorithm instance, it can be used as a practical
tool for parameter configuration. We additionally show how bounds on regret may
be deduced from our results and undertake corresponding empirical analysis.

1

Introduction

As many challenging problems are characterised by the presence of competition between agents,
the demand for efficient techniques for the determination of Nash equilibria has brought about a
range of powerful machine learning techniques, including Q-Learning [10, 20, 33], Fictitious SelfPlay [7, 25], Counterfactual Regret Minimisation [8, 9, 64], and gradient-based approaches [4, 19,
57, 63]. Analysis of regret for algorithms such as EXP3 [3] and FTRL [23] provide theoretical
guarantees of convergence to a Nash equilibrium in the zero-sum adversarial multi-armed bandit
setting, however such algorithms rely on procedures operating over the entire strategy space (such as
storing a vector over all available actions). In many settings, such as those characterised by a sequence
of binary decisions, a combinatorial explosion in the number of actions quickly make any exhaustive
approach infeasible. These many-action settings can only be addressed using procedures that exploit
underlying topological features of the strategic representation and corresponding payoff landscape in
order to guide a search towards a Nash equilibrium. Coevolutionary algorithms (CoEAs), a form of
evolutionary algorithms (EAs) employing two or more competing populations, are one such approach,
and recent theoretical work proves that CoEAs can efficiently discover the Nash equilibrium of a
range of two-player many-action games defined over bitstrings [5, 30, 31, 32, 40, 43].
The successful application of adversarial and self-play techniques is uniquely challenging due to the
potential for pathologies such as cycling or instability, and such pathologies have been observed in
a range of such methods including GANs [53, 62], AlphaStar [60], SGA [4], as well as CoEAs in
general [18]. In the case of CoEAs, one major open problem is the question of when to terminate and
extract an output from the current populations. This is an important consideration even for standard
evolutionary algorithms in non-adversarial settings [46], and made even more challenging for CoEAs
as the absence of a unary fitness function makes the identification of best-so-far strategies both
expensive and subjective. Thus, to maintain confidence in the output of a CoEA, one should ensure
that the algorithm is designed and configured in such a way that any discovered Nash equilibrium will
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

