Logical Expressiveness of Graph Neural Networks
with Hierarchical Node Individualization

1

Arie Soeteman1 Balder ten Cate1
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We propose and study Hierarchical Ego Graph Neural Networks (HE-GNNs), an
expressive extension of graph neural networks (GNNs) with hierarchical node
individualization, inspired by the Individualization-Refinement paradigm for isomorphism testing. HE-GNNs generalize subgraph-GNNs and form a hierarchy
of increasingly expressive models that, in the limit, distinguish graphs up to isomorphism. We show that, over graphs of bounded degree, the expressive power of
HE-GNN node classifiers equals that of graded hybrid logic. This characterization
enables us to relate the separating power of HE-GNNs to that of higher-order
GNNs, GNNs enriched with local homomorphism count features, and color refinement algorithms based on Individualization-Refinement. Our experimental results
confirm the practical feasibility of HE-GNNs and show benefits in comparison
with traditional GNN architectures, both with and without local homomorphism
count features.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs), and specifically message-passing neural networks [22, 25], are a
dominant approach for representation learning on graph-structured data [49, 55]. Since the expressive
power of GNNs within the message-passing framework is limited by the one-dimensional WeisfeilerLeman test (WL) [38, 50], numerous architectures have been proposed with increased separating
power—the ability to distinguish pairs of nodes or graphs. The separating power of deterministic
isomorphism invariant GNN architectures can be studied logically. Morris et al. [38] and Barcelo et
al. [6], building on earlier results by Cai et al. [9], gave logical characterizations of the separating
power of standard message-passing GNNs, which matches Graded Modal Logic. Higher-order
k-GNNs [38] have the separating power of (k − 1)-WL [38], which equals that of First-Order Logic
with k variables and counting quantifiers. This yields a hierarchy of increasingly expressive models
that separate nodes in graphs of size n up to isomorphism when k ≥ n. The logical study of GNNs
has addressed fundamental questions about their expressive power [1, 23, 26, 46], convergence
behavior [2], decidability [7], and explainability [48].
In this work, we introduce Hierarchical Ego GNNs (HE-GNNs), a fully isomorphism-invariant
graph learning model inspired by the individualization-refinement (IR) paradigm used by graph
isomorphism solvers, where node individualization is alternated with simple message-passing. We
study the separating power of HE-GNN in detail through a logical lens, and make explicit connections
with IR and existing expressive GNNs. Our main contributions are:
• We characterize the separating power of HE-GNNs with and without subgraph restrictions.
Specifically, we provide logical characterizations in graded hybrid logic, situate the separating
power of HE-GNNs within the WL hierarchy and show that HE-GNNs constitute a strict hierarchy
in terms of their nesting depth d. HE-GNNs are able to separate nodes in graphs of size n up to
isomorphism when d ≥ n, like higher-order GNNs, but at lower cost in terms of space complexity.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

