ZPressor: Bottleneck-Aware Compression for
Scalable Feed-Forward 3DGS
Weijie Wang1 Donny Y. Chen2 Zeyu Zhang2
Duochao Shi1 Akide Liu2 Bohan Zhuang1
1

ZIP Lab, Zhejiang University

2

Monash University

Abstract
Feed-forward 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) models have recently emerged as a
promising solution for novel view synthesis, enabling one-pass inference without
the need for per-scene 3DGS optimization. However, their scalability is fundamentally constrained by the limited capacity of their models, leading to degraded performance or excessive memory consumption as the number of input views increases.
In this work, we analyze feed-forward 3DGS frameworks through the lens of the
Information Bottleneck principle and introduce ZPressor, a lightweight architectureagnostic module that enables efficient compression of multi-view inputs into a
compact latent state Z that retains essential scene information while discarding
redundancy. Concretely, ZPressor enables existing feed-forward 3DGS models to
scale to over 100 input views at 480P resolution on an 80GB GPU, by partitioning
the views into anchor and support sets and using cross attention to compress the
information from the support views into anchor views, forming the compressed
latent state Z. We show that integrating ZPressor into several state-of-the-art
feed-forward 3DGS models consistently improves performance under moderate
input views and enhances robustness under dense view settings on two large-scale
benchmarks DL3DV-10K and RealEstate10K. The video results, code and trained
models are available on our project page: https://lhmd.top/zpressor.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis (NVS) has played an important role in many everyday applications and is
expected to become even more crucial in the future as a foundational technique for augmented reality
(AR) and virtual reality (VR). It has also received growing attention in the research community with
the introduction of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [1] and a series of subsequent developments [2–6].
Although 3DGS achieves real time rendering and high visual quality, its reliance on slow per-scene
tuning significantly limits its practical use in real world scenarios.
To address this limitation, feed-forward 3DGS [7, 8] has been introduced to improve the usability of
3DGS. Unlike conventional 3DGS approaches that rely on slow per-scene backward optimization,
feed-forward 3DGS introduces an “encoder” to extract scene dependent features from input images,
allowing the model to benefit from large scale training and predict 3DGS in a single forward pass.
Despite notable progress [9–13], these methods remain constrained to a small number of input views,
limiting their ability to fully utilize datasets with dense multiple input views [14–17]. For example,
our experiments show that the state-of-the-art model DepthSplat [12] suffers a significant performance
drop and increased computational cost as input views become denser (see Tab. 1 and Fig. 1), . While
better engineering might alleviate this memory issue to some extent, it cannot address the huge
1
2

Corresponding authors: wangweijie@zju.edu.cn, donny.chen@outlook.sg.
This work was conducted while D. Y. Chen was affiliated with Monash University.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

