X 2-DFD: A framework for eX plainable and
eX tendable Deepfake Detection
†

Yize Chen1,2∗, Zhiyuan Yan3∗ ,Guangliang Cheng4 , Kangran Zhao1,2 , Siwei Lyu5 , Baoyuan Wu1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Shenzhen Loop Area Institute
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, P.R. China
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZX, UK
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA

Abstract
This paper proposes X 2 -DFD, an eX plainable and eX tendable framework based
on multimodal large-language models (MLLMs) for deepfake detection, consisting
of three key stages (see Figure 1). The first stage, Model Feature Assessment,
systematically evaluates the detectability of forgery-related features for the MLLM,
generating a prioritized ranking of features based on their intrinsic importance to the
model. The second stage, Explainable Dataset Construction, consists of two key
modules: Strong Feature Strengthening, which is designed to enhance the model’s
existing detection and explanation capabilities by reinforcing its well-learned
features, and Weak Feature Supplementing, which addresses gaps by integrating
specific feature detectors (e.g., low-level artifact analyzers) to compensate for the
MLLM’s limitations. The third stage, Fine-tuning and Inference, involves finetuning the MLLM on the constructed dataset and deploying it for final detection
and explanation. By integrating these three stages, our approach enhances the
MLLM’s strengths while supplementing its weaknesses, ultimately improving
both the detectability and explainability. Extensive experiments and ablations,
followed by a comprehensive human study, validate the improved performance
of our approach compared to the original MLLMs. More encouragingly, our
framework is designed to be plug-and-play, allowing it to seamlessly integrate with
future more advanced MLLMs and specific feature detectors, leading to continual
improvement and extension to face the challenges of rapidly evolving deepfakes.
Code can be found on https://github.com/chenyize111/X2DFD.

1

Introduction

Current generative AI technologies have enabled easy manipulation of facial identities, with many
applications such as filmmaking and entertainment [52]. However, these technologies can also be
misused to create deepfakes2 for malicious purposes, including violating personal privacy, spreading
misinformation, and eroding trust in digital media. Therefore, there is a pressing need to establish
a reliable and robust system for detecting deepfakes. In recent years, numerous deepfake detection
methods have been proposed [36, 45, 88, 32, 6, 60, 77, 73], with the majority focusing on addressing
the generalization issue when the manipulation methods between training and testing vary. However,
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.
The term “deepfake" used here refers explicitly to face forgery images or videos. Full (natural) image
synthesis is not strictly within our scope.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

