Memorization in Graph Neural Networks

Adarsh Jamadandi1∗, Jing Xu2 , Adam Dziedzic2 , Franziska Boenisch2
CNRS IRISA1 , CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security2
adarsh.jamadandi@irisa.fr, {jing.xu, adam.dziedzic, boenisch}@cispa.de

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to memorize their training data,
but similar analyses for graph neural networks (GNNs) remain under-explored.
We introduce NCMemo (Node Classification Memorization), the first framework to quantify label memorization in semi-supervised node classification. We
establish an inverse relationship between memorization and graph homophily, i.e.,
the tendency of connected nodes to share labels or features. Lower homophily
significantly increases memorization, indicating that GNNs rely on label memorization when learning less homophilic graphs. We then analyze GNN training
dynamics and find that increased memorization in low-homophily graphs is tightly
coupled to GNNs’ implicit bias toward using graph structure. When structure is
less informative, models instead memorize node labels to minimize training loss.
Finally, we show that nodes with higher label inconsistency in their feature-space
neighborhood are more prone to memorization. Based on these insights, we investigate graph rewiring as a mitigation strategy. Our results show that rewiring reduces
memorization without harming model performance, while also lowering the privacy
risk for previously memorized data points. Thus, our work advances understanding
of GNN learning and supports more privacy-preserving GNN deployment.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a class of deep learning algorithms that adopt the paradigm of
message passing [27, 55, 24, 14] to learn on graph-structured data. GNNs have found successful
applications in diverse domains such as chemistry [52], biology [12], high-energy physics [58], and
even contribute to the discovery of novel materials [42]. Despite their empirical success, the inherent
limitations of GNNs continue to be an active area of research, one of which is the challenge of
generalization. In deep neural networks (DNNs), memorization, the model’s ability to remember
individual training data points, and how it benefits generalization has been explored [21]. While
recent studies [60, 64, 3, 39] have focused on establishing generalization bounds and errors for
GNNs, investigation of GNN memorization is notably scarce. A primary reason for the gap in the
understanding of memorization for GNNs is the inherent difficulty in conceptualizing and defining
per-sample memorization. In other domains, such as computer vision, samples are independent from
each other, which allows for a straightforward definition of per-sample memorization. However, in a
node classification setting, the GNN operates on a single graph where all nodes are inter-connected.
This makes analyzing the model’s ability to memorize individual nodes challenging, as it requires
modeling a complex interplay of factors: the node’s own features, the features of its neighbors, the
information content of its label relative to its neighborhood [49], the overall graph homophily level,
and the GNN’s training dynamics.
In light of these challenges, we propose a systematic framework for measuring memorization
in node classification. Our approach, called NCMemo (Node Classification Memorization),
∗

work carried out at CISPA.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

