Improved Regret Bounds for Gaussian Process Upper
Confidence Bound in Bayesian Optimization

Shogo Iwazaki
LY Corporation
Tokyo, Japan
siwazaki@lycorp.co.jp

Abstract
This paper addresses the Bayesian optimization problem (also referred to as the
Bayesian setting of the Gaussian process bandit), where the learner seeks to minimize the regret under a function drawn from a known Gaussian process (GP). Under
a Matérn kernel with a certain degree of smoothness, we show that
√ the Gaussian
e( 𝑇) cumulative
process upper confidence bound (GP-UCB) algorithm achieves 𝑂
√︁

regret with high probability. Furthermore, our analysis yields 𝑂 ( 𝑇 ln2 𝑇) regret
under a squared exponential kernel. These results fill the gap between the existing
regret upper bound for GP-UCB and the best-known bound provided by Scarlett
[46]. The key idea in our proof is to capture the concentration behavior of the
input sequence realized by GP-UCB, enabling a more refined analysis of the GP’s
information gain.

1

Introduction

We study the Bayesian optimization (BO) problem, where the learner seeks to minimize the regret
under a random function drawn from a known Gaussian process (GP) [18, 19]. Throughout this
paper, we focus on the GP-UCB algorithm [51], which combines the posterior distribution of GP with
the optimism principle. Due to its simple algorithm construction and general theoretical framework
provided by Srinivas et al. [51], GP-UCB has played an important role in the advancement of the BO
field. On the other hand, our theoretical understanding of the performance of GP-UCB has not been
improved from [51] in the Bayesian setting, while its frequentist counterpart is studied in several
existing works [11, 61]. Specifically, the current regret upper bound for GP-UCB, as provided by
Srinivas et al.√[51], is known to be worse than that of the algorithm in [46], which achieves stateof-the-art 𝑂 ( 𝑇 ln 𝑇) cumulative regret. Then, the natural question is whether there is further room
for improvement in the existing regret upper bound of GP-UCB.
√ This paper provides an affirmative
e( 𝑇) regret with high probability.
answer to this question by showing that GP-UCB achieves 𝑂
Contribution.

We summarize our contributions as follows.

√
e( 𝑇) regret with high
• We show that the GP-UCB proposed by Srinivas et al. [51] achieves 𝑂
probability under a Matérn kernel with a certain degree of smoothness (precise condition
e(·) is the order notation that hides polylogarithmic
is provided in Theorem 3). Here, 𝑂
√
dependence. This result is comparable to state-of-the-art 𝑂 ( 𝑇 ln 𝑇) regret provided by
𝜈+𝑑
e(𝑇 2𝜈+𝑑
Scarlett [46] up to a polylogarithmic factor and strictly improves upon the existing 𝑂
)
upper bound of GP-UCB [51, 58]. Here, 𝑑 and 𝜈 denote the dimension of the input domain
and smoothness parameter, respectively.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

