Learning non-equilibrium diffusions with Schrödinger
bridges: from exactly solvable to simulation-free

Stephen Y. Zhang˚
University of Melbourne

Michael P. H. Stumpf
University of Melbourne

Abstract
We consider the Schrödinger bridge problem which, given ensemble measurements
of the initial and final configurations of a stochastic dynamical system and some
prior knowledge on the dynamics, aims to reconstruct the “most likely” evolution
of the system compatible with the data. Most existing literature assume Brownian
reference dynamics, and are implicitly limited to modelling systems driven by the
gradient of a potential energy. We depart from this regime and consider reference
processes described by a multivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process with generic drift
matrix A P Rdˆd . When A is asymmetric, this corresponds to a non-equilibrium
system in which non-gradient forces are at play: this is important for applications
to biological systems, which naturally exist out-of-equilibrium. In the case of
Gaussian marginals, we derive explicit expressions that characterise exactly the
solution of both the static and dynamic Schrödinger bridge. For general marginals,
we propose MVOU-OTFM, a simulation-free algorithm based on flow and score
matching for learning an approximation to the Schrödinger bridge. In application
to a range of problems based on synthetic and real single cell data, we demonstrate
that MVOU-OTFM achieves higher accuracy compared to competing methods,
whilst being significantly faster to train.

1

Introduction

We are interested in reconstruction of stochastic dynamics of individuals from static population
snapshots. This is a central problem with applications arising across the natural and social sciences,
whenever longitudinal tracking of individuals over time is either impossible or impractical [56, 35, 48,
43, 34, 1]. In simple terms, consider a system of indistinguishable particles xt P Rd undergoing some
unobserved temporal dynamics. The practitioner observes the system to have distribution x0 „ ρ0
at an initial time t “ 0 and later to be x1 „ ρ1 at a final time t “ 1. The question is then: can we,
under some suitable assumptions, reconstruct the continuous-time behaviour of the system for the
unobserved time interval 0 ă t ă 1?
The Schrödinger bridge problem (SBP), by now a centrepiece of the theoretical literature on this topic,
places this task on a theoretical footing in terms of a mathematical formulation of this problem as a
large deviations principle on the path space [28] and a (stochastic) least action principle intimately
linked to optimal transportation theory [12]. Given a reference process that encodes prior knowledge
on the dynamics, the SBP can be understood as identifying the “most likely” evolution of the system
that is compatible with the snapshot observations.
The SBP and related topics have enjoyed a great deal of recent interest from both applied and
theoretical perspectives. Many applications arise from biological modelling of cell dynamics [7, 42].
The majority of existing work assumes, either explicitly or implicitly, that the system of interest is
potential driven, that is, driven by the gradient of a potential energy [26, 13, 52, 5, 51, 57, 6]. In fact,
˚

Correspondence to syz@syz.id.au

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

