COLA: Towards Efficient Multi-Objective
Reinforcement Learning with Conflict Objective
Regularization in Latent Space

Pengyi Li*, Hongyao Tang†, Yifu Yuan, Jianye Hao†, Zibin Dong, Yan Zheng
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University

Abstract
Many real-world control problems require continual policy adjustments to balance multiple objectives, which requires the acquisition of high-quality policies
to cover diverse preferences. Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning (MORL)
provides a general framework to solve such problems. However, current MORL
methods suffer from high sample complexity, primarily due to the neglect of efficient knowledge sharing and conflicts in optimization with different preferences.
To this end, this paper introduces a novel framework, Conflict Objective Regularization in Latent Space (COLA). To enable efficient knowledge sharing, COLA
establishes a shared latent representation space for common knowledge, which
can avoid redundant learning under different preferences. Besides, COLA introduces a regularization term for the value function to mitigate the negative effects of conflicting preferences on the value function approximation, thereby improving the accuracy of value estimation. The experimental results across various multi-objective continuous control tasks demonstrate the significant superiority of COLA over the state-of-the-art MORL baselines. Code is available at
https://github.com/yeshenpy/COLA.

1

Introduction

Real-world problems often involve multiple performance metrics, where conflicts among these metrics make it infeasible to maximize all metrics simultaneously with a single policy. This necessitates
a trade-off among different metrics, requiring the learning of multiple high-quality policies to meet
diverse preferences [1–3]. For instance, in robot control problems, performance metrics may include
both forward speed and energy consumption. In such cases, two reward signals are returned, and
multiple optimal policies exist based on different trade-offs between the two metrics [4]. Learning
these policies enables us to control the robot more flexibly [5]. For example, initially, one might
prefer a policy that prioritizes speed without considering energy consumption. Still, as energy loss
accumulates, a preference may shift towards an energy-efficient policy to extend running time.
A popular approach to addressing the multi-objective control problems involves leveraging MultiObjective Reinforcement Learning (MORL) to acquire policies that meet human preferences [6, 7].
Current MORL algorithms can be roughly categorized into three categories: Single-policy methods,
Multi-policy methods, and General policy methods. Single-policy methods directly transform multiobjective problems into single-objective problems and solve them using standard RL [6, 8, 9]. These
methods typically require expert knowledge to predefine preferences, and the obtained policies are
difficult to generalize to unknown preferences. Multi-policy methods seek a set of policies to cover
optimal solutions under diverse preferences, which often require a substantial amount of sample
*
†

Contact me at lipengyi@tju.edu.cn
Corresponding authors: Hongyao Tang (tanghongyao@tju.edu.cn) & Jianye Hao (jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

