Per-Architecture Training-Free Metric
Optimization for Neural Architecture Search

Mingzhuo Lin1 , Jianping Luo1*
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
1

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to identify high-performance networks
within a defined search space. Training-free metrics have been proposed to estimate
network performance without actual training, reducing NAS deployment costs.
However, individual training-free metrics often capture only partial architectural
features, and their estimation capabilities are different in various tasks. Combining
multiple training-free metrics has been explored to enhance scalability across tasks.
Yet, these methods typically optimize global metric combinations over the entire
search space, overlooking the varying sensitivities of different architectures to
specific metrics, which may limit the final architectures’ performance. To address
these challenges, we propose the Per-Architecture Training-Free Metric Optimization NAS (PO-NAS) algorithm. This algorithm: (a) Integrates multiple trainingfree metrics as auxiliary scores, dynamically optimizing their combinations using
limited real-time training data, without relying on benchmarks; (b) Individually
optimizes metric combinations for each architecture; (c) Integrates an evolutionary
algorithm that leverages efficient predictions from the surrogate model, enhancing
search efficiency in large search spaces. Notably, PO-NAS combines the efficiency
of training-free search with the robust performance of training-based evaluations.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Our code
has been made publicly available at https://github.com/LMZ-Zhuo/PO-NAS.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has emerged as a method to automate architecture engineering.
Currently, NAS methods have surpassed many manually designed architectures in various tasks,
such as image classification (1), object detection (2), and semantic segmentation (3). While many
training-based NAS algorithms have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance across various
tasks, their search costs are often prohibitively high in resource-constrained scenarios, primarily
due to the necessity of training deep neural networks during the search process. To address this,
numerous training-free metrics have been developed to evaluate candidate architectures’ performance
(4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10), eliminating the need for actual training. For instance, SWAP-NAS (10) achieves
SOTA performance on the ImageNet dataset within the DARTS (11) search space in just 9 minutes
of search time. These metrics are typically computed through a single forward and backward
pass using a small batch of data, rendering their computational overhead negligible compared to
traditional NAS methods. The efficacy of training-free metrics is typically assessed by evaluating the
correlation between the rankings they produce and the actual performance rankings of architectures
(12). However, a significant limitation of these metrics lies in their transferability. Studies have
demonstrated considerable variability in the consistency between scores derived from training-free
metrics and actual performance rankings across different tasks (5; 13; 14; 15).
To address the limited transferability of individual training-free metrics in diverse tasks, researchers
have explored combining multiple such metrics for architecture evaluation. Depending on the methods
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

