RAT
: Bridging RNN Efficiency and Attention
Accuracy via Chunk-based Sequence Modeling

Xiuying Wei1∗, Anunay Yadav1 , Razvan Pascanu2 , Caglar Gulcehre1
1
CLAIRE, EPFL 2 Google DeepMind

Abstract
Transformers have become the cornerstone of modern large-scale language models,
but their reliance on softmax attention poses a computational bottleneck at both
training and inference. Recurrent models offer high efficiency, but compressing the
full sequence into a fixed-size and holistic representation can suffer from memory
degradation in long contexts and limit fine-grained retrieval. To address this, we
propose RAT, an intermediate design that bridges the efficiency of RNNs and capacity of attention. RAT partitions the input into chunks, applies recurrence within each
chunk for local dependencies, and softmax-based attention across chunks for longrange interactions. This design mitigates memory degradation and enables direct
access to distant tokens, while retaining computational efficiency. Empirically, with
a chunk size of 16, the RAT block achieves a 7× improvement in training speed
for 100K sequence length and 9× in generation at the 4K position, while maintaining similar performance compared to standard attention. We demonstrate this by
training 1.3B parameter models from scratch and performing large-scale evaluations, including short- and long-context benchmarks, as well as supervised finetuning (SFT). We further propose a hybrid architecture that interleaves RAT with
local attention. By combining efficient long-range modeling with strong local interactions, this hybrid design not only improves inference speed and reduces cache
memory usage, but also consistently enhances performance and shows the overall
best results. Code is available at https://github.com/CLAIRE-Labo/RAT.

1

Introduction

Language modeling has long been dominated by Transformer-based architectures due to their strong
performance across a wide range of tasks. However, their reliance on full self-attention [1] results
in quadratic time and memory complexity with respect to sequence length, which limits scalability in
long-context processing. This limitation has motivated a wave of recent efforts to revisit recurrent models or propose novel linear recurrent models such as state space models, linear attention methods [2–8].
By comparing these architectures, we observe a key difference between recurrent models and
self-attention. Recurrent approaches compress the full sequence history into fixed-size and holistic
representations, which can lead to degraded memory when modeling long sequences and limit
precise information retrieval. In contrast, self-attention retains full-token access and thus do not
suffer from the two problems, but at the cost of heavy computation. This motivates us to explore
an intermediate design that partially compresses the sequence while still maintaining global access.
We propose a RAT layer, a simple yet effective temporal mixing method with a chunk-based design.
It divides long sequences into chunks, applying recurrence within each chunk for local modeling and
softmax-based attention across chunks for direct access to distant information (see Fig. 1a). Recurrence efficiently captures short-range dependencies while avoiding the memory degradation common
∗

Correspondence to xiuying.wei@epfl.ch.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

