Individual Regret in Cooperative Stochastic
Multi-Armed Bandits
Idan Barnea
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
Tel Aviv University, Israel
idanbarnea1@mail.tau.ac.il

Tal Lancewicki
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
Tel Aviv University, Israel
lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il

Yishay Mansour
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
Tel Aviv University, Israel
Google Research, Tel Aviv, Israel

Abstract
We study the regret in stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) with multiple agents
that communicate over an arbitrary connected communication graph. We analyzed
a variant of Cooperative Successive Elimination √
algorithm, Coop-SE, and show
an individual regret bound of O(R/m + A2 + A log T ) and a nearly matching
lower bound. Here APis the number of actions, T the time horizon, m the number
of agents, and R = ∆i >0 log(T )/∆i is the optimal single agent regret, where
∆i is the sub-optimality gap of action i. Our work is the first to show an individual
regret bound in cooperative stochastic MAB that is independent of the graph’s
diameter.
When considering communication networks there are additional considerations
beyond regret, such as message size and number of communication rounds. First,
we show that our regret bound holds even if we restrict the messages to be of
logarithmic size. Second, for logarithmic number of communication rounds, we
obtain a regret bound of O(R/m + A log T ).

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) is a fundamental framework for studying sequential decision making,
with an expanding scope of practical applications (see, [22, 33]). Recent research expanded the
classic MAB problem into a cooperative setting, sometimes referred to as cooperative multiplayer or
multi-agent MAB, where multiple agents share the same goal and can communicate with each other.
A significant focus of recent research has centered on cooperating agents within a communication
graph, often referred to as a communication network. This framework, in which all agents address
the same problem, dates back to Landgren et al. [18] for stochastic rewards and Cesa-Bianchi et al.
[5] for the nonstochastic case. In this setting, agents transmit information to adjacent neighbors, from
which it continues to propagate throughout the entire network while encountering a delay at each
step. Communication graphs paired with stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits provide a framework for
distributed decision-making under uncertainty. As an example of our setting, consider computer
networks. In large-scale High Performance Computing (HPC) or AI systems, individual machines
often have flexible hardware, e.g., tunable cores, caches, or memory controllers, that adapt based
on workload pattern. These computers (agents), connected over a network (graph), must quickly
choose a hardware configuration (action) to optimize their performance (reward). Social networks
are good examples as well: individuals share experiences directly with friends, forming a natural
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

