A General-Purpose Theorem for High-Probability
Bounds of Stochastic Approximation with Polyak
Averaging

Sajad Khodadadian∗
Grado Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Blacksburg, VA 24061
sajadk@vt.edu
Martin Zubeldia∗
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
zubeldia@umn.edu

Abstract
Polyak–Ruppert averaging is a widely used technique to achieve the optimal asymptotic variance of stochastic approximation (SA) algorithms, yet its high-probability
performance guarantees remain underexplored in general settings. In this paper, we
present a general framework for establishing non-asymptotic concentration bounds
for the error of averaged SA iterates. Our approach assumes access to individual
concentration bounds for the unaveraged iterates and yields a sharp bound on the
averaged iterates. We also construct an example, showing the tightness of our
result up to constant multiplicative factors. As direct applications, we derive tight
concentration bounds for contractive SA algorithms and for algorithms such as
temporal difference learning and Q-learning with averaging, obtaining new bounds
in settings where traditional analysis is challenging.

1

Introduction

Stochastic approximation (SA) algorithms are central to modern machine learning and optimization,
serving as the foundation for methods ranging from stochastic gradient descent to Reinforcement
Learning (RL) algorithms such as temporal difference (TD) learning and Q-learning. The general
form of an SA algorithm is given by
xk+1 = (1 − αk )xk + αk F (xk , wk+1 ),

(1.1)

where αk = α/(k + h)ξ for some h > 1, α > 0, and ξ ∈ [0, 1] is the step size, and wk+1 represents
random noise, possibly arising from sampling or environmental interactions. A significant body of
work has been devoted to analyzing the convergence of such algorithms, providing both mean-square
and high-probability error bounds under various assumptions (e.g., [49, 12, 19]).
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

