Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma Beyond
Euclidean Geometry

Chengyuan Deng, Jie Gao, Kevin Lu, Feng Luo, Cheng Xin∗

Abstract
The Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma is a cornerstone of dimensionality reduction in Euclidean space, but its applicability to non-Euclidean data has remained
limited. This paper extends the JL lemma beyond Euclidean geometry to handle
general dissimilarity matrices that are prevalent in real-world applications. We
present two complementary approaches: First, we show the JL transform can be
applied to vectors in pseudo-Euclidean space with signature (p, q), providing theoretical guarantees that depend on the ratio of the (p, q) norm and Euclidean norm of
two vectors, measuring the deviation from Euclidean geometry. Second, we prove
that any symmetric hollow dissimilarity matrix can be represented as a matrix of
generalized power distances, with an additional parameter representing the uncertainty level within the data. In this representation, applying the JL transform yields
multiplicative approximation with a controlled additive error term proportional to
the deviation from Euclidean geometry. Our theoretical results provide fine-grained
performance analysis based on the degree to which the input data deviates from
Euclidean geometry, making practical and meaningful reduction in dimensionality
accessible to a wider class of data. We validate our approaches on both synthetic
and real-world datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of extending the JL lemma
to non-Euclidean settings.

1

Introduction

The Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma [1] stands as a cornerstone result in dimensionality reduction.
It states that random linear projection can reduce the dimensionality of datasets in Euclidean space,
while approximately preserving pairwise distances. Formally,
Proposition 1.1 (Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma). For any set of n points x1 , x2 , . . . xn in Rd and
ε ∈ (0, 1), there exists a map f : Rd → Rm , where m = O(log n/ε2 ) such that for any i, j ∈ [n],
(1 − ε)∥xi − xj ∥2 ≤ ∥f (xi ) − f (xj )∥2 ≤ (1 + ε)∥xi − xj ∥2

(1)

In modern algorithm design, the JL lemma is widely used as a key component or pre-processing
step for high-dimensional data analysis. In addition to effectiveness, another crucial reason for its
significant impact is that the JL lemma can be achieved by random linear maps, which are dataindependent and easy to implement. Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma has found numerous applications
in machine learning, from the most immediate applications in approximating all pairs distances (when
the input data is high-dimensional), to approximate nearest neighbor search [2], approximate linear
regression [3], clustering [4, 5, 6, 7], functional analysis [8] and compressed sensing [9].
Note that two conditions must be met to apply the JL lemma: (1) the data points lie in highdimensional Euclidean space, and (2) the coordinates of all points are available. However, many
real-world applications do not satisfy these two conditions. First, the dissimilarity measures used in
modern data analysis are often non-Euclidean and sometimes even non-metric. Common examples
∗

Rutgers University. {cd751,jg1555,kll160,fluo,cx122}@rutgers.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

