Enhancing Vision-Language Model Reliability with
Uncertainty-Guided Dropout Decoding

Yixiong Fang∗
Carnegie Mellon University
yixiongf@cs.cmu.edu

Ziran Yang∗
Princeton University
zirany@princeton.edu

Zhuokai Zhao†
University of Chicago
zhuokai@uchicago.edu

Zhaorun Chen
University of Chicago
zhaorun@uchicago.edu

Jiawei Zhou†
Stony Brook University
jiawei.zhou.1@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) excel at multimodal tasks but are prone
to misinterpreting visual inputs, often resulting in hallucinations and unreliable
outputs. We present D ROPOUT D ECODING, a novel inference-time approach that
quantifies the uncertainty of visual tokens and selectively masks uncertain tokens
to improve decoding. Our method measures the uncertainty of each visual token
by projecting it onto the text space and decomposing it into aleatoric and epistemic components. Specifically, we focus on epistemic uncertainty, which captures
perception-related errors more effectively. Inspired by dropout regularization, we
introduce uncertainty-guided token dropout, which applies the dropout principle to
input visual tokens instead of model parameters, and during inference rather than
training. By aggregating predictions from an ensemble of masked decoding contexts, we can robustly mitigate errors arising from visual token misinterpretations.
Evaluations on benchmarks including CHAIR, THRONE, and MMBench demonstrate that D ROPOUT D ECODING significantly reduces object hallucinations (OH)
and enhances both reliability and quality of LVLM outputs across diverse visual
contexts. Code is released at https://github.com/kigb/DropoutDecoding.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large vision-language models (LVLMs) have demonstrated impressive
capabilities [1, 2, 3] in tasks such as image captioning, visual question answering (VQA), and
multimodal reasoning [4, 5, 6, 7]. However, LVLMs still face challenges in accurately perceiving and
interpreting visual inputs, leading to inaccurate outputs and hallucinations [8]. These issues often
stem from LVLMs misrepresenting key image elements or overlooking critical details [9, 10]. In
practice, LVLMs typically process visual inputs token by token [11], which we refer to as visual
tokens.3 This can fall short in effectively focusing on the most informative parts of the visual context.
While attention mechanisms are designed to prioritize relevant information, they are not always
perfect [12, 13, 14], especially when the inputs are complex or ambiguous for the model, or in other
words, of high uncertainty. Existing methods to address these challenges in the training stage often
involve fine-tuning on specific tasks [15, 16, 17, 18, 19], or using additional supervision signals
especially at lower level to guide the model [20, 21]. However, these approaches are resource-intensive
∗

Equal contribution. Work done during their research internship at Stony Brook University.
Joint last author.
3
We specifically refer to the tokens that are already in the input prompt to the text decoder. Concrete definition
is in §3.1.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

