Robust Hyperbolic Learning with Curvature-Aware
Optimization

Ahmad Bdeir
Department of Data Science
University of Hildesheim
Hildesheim, Germany
bdeira@uni-hildesheim.de

Johannes Burchert
ISMLL
University of Hildesheim
Hildesheim, Germany
burchert@ismll.de

Lars Schmidt-Thieme
ISMLL
University of Hildesheim
Hildesheim, Germany
schmidt-thieme@ismll.de

Niels Landwehr
Department of Data Science
University of Hildesheim
Hildesheim, Germany
landwehr@uni-hildesheim.de

Abstract
Hyperbolic deep learning has become a growing research direction in computer
vision due to the unique properties afforded by the alternate embedding space.
The negative curvature and exponentially growing distance metric provide a natural framework for capturing hierarchical relationships between datapoints and
allowing for finer separability between their embeddings. However, current hyperbolic learning approaches are still prone to overfitting, computationally expensive, and prone to instability, especially when attempting to learn the manifold
curvature to adapt to tasks and different datasets. To address these issues, our
paper presents a derivation for Riemannian AdamW that helps increase hyperbolic
generalization ability. For improved stability, we introduce a novel fine-tunable
hyperbolic scaling approach to constrain hyperbolic embeddings and reduce approximation errors. Using this along with our curvature-aware learning schema for
Riemannian Optimizers enables the combination of curvature and non-trivialized
hyperbolic parameter learning. Our approach demonstrates consistent performance
improvements across Computer Vision, EEG classification, and hierarchical metric
learning tasks while greatly reducing runtime. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/inboxedshoe/Robust-Hyperbolic-Learning

1

Introduction

Recently, hyperbolic manifolds have gained attention in deep learning for their ability to model
hierarchical and tree-like data structures efficiently. Unlike Euclidean space, hyperbolic space has
negative curvature, allowing it to represent exponentially growing distances. This makes these
manifolds ideal for tasks like natural language processing, graph representation, and metric learning
[33]. By embedding data into hyperbolic space, models can capture complex relationships more
effectively, and often with fewer parameters [11]. Hyperbolic geometry has also been applied in
computer vision, where its ability to better separate embeddings in high-dimensional spaces has
shown promise in improving tasks like image classification and segmentation [2, 3, 18, 40], few-shot
learning [25], and feature representation [44].
These works rely on two main derivations of the hyperbolic space, the hyperboloid or Lorentz space
(L) and the Poincaré manifold (P). Typically, the hyperboloid offers better operational stability, as
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

