Unifying and Enhancing Graph Transformers
via a Hierarchical Mask Framework
Yujie Xing1 , Xiao Wang2∗, Bin Wu1 , Hai Huang1 , Chuan Shi1∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Beihang University, China
{yujie-xing,wb789,hhuang,shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, xiao_wang@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Transformers (GTs) have emerged as a powerful paradigm for graph representation learning due to their ability to model diverse node interactions. However,
existing GTs often rely on intricate architectural designs tailored to specific interactions, limiting their flexibly. To address this, we propose a unified hierarchical
mask framework that reveals an underlying equivalence between model architecture
and attention mask construction. This framework enables a consistent modeling
paradigm by capturing diverse interactions through carefully designed attention
masks. Theoretical analysis under this framework demonstrates that the probability
of correct classification positively correlates with the receptive field size and label
consistency, leading to a fundamental design principle: An effective attention mask
should ensure both a sufficiently large receptive field and a high level of label consistency. While no single existing mask satisfies this principle across all scenarios, our
analysis reveals that hierarchical masks offer complementary strengths—motivating
their effective integration. Then, we introduce M3 Dphormer, a Mixture-of-Experts
based Graph Transformer with Multi-Level Masking and Dual Attention Computation. M3 Dphormer incorporates three theoretically grounded hierarchical masks
and employs a bi-level expert routing mechanism to adaptively integrate multi-level
interaction information. To ensure scalability, we further introduce a dual attention
computation scheme that dynamically switches between dense and sparse modes
based on local mask sparsity. Extensive experiments across multiple benchmarks
demonstrate that M3 Dphormer achieves state-of-the-art performance, validating
the effectiveness of our unified framework and model design. The source code is
available for reproducibility at: https://github.com/null-xyj/M3Dphormer.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental data structure, graphs have been widely used to model complex and diverse
interactions in real-world systems, such as social networks and brain networks. To learn high-quality
node representations, a variety of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been proposed [23, 38, 16].
However, their performance is inherently constrained by the message-passing mechanism, which
imposes a strong locality inductive bias. Inspired by the success of Transformers [37] across various
machine learning domains [12, 13], adapting Transformer architectures to graphs has emerged as a
promising direction, owing to their strong capability to model interactions over a broader range.
Graph Transformers (GTs) leverage the core component of the Transformer architecture, Multi-Head
Attention (MHA), to adaptively model diverse node interactions and learn expressive representations.
One prominent line of research treats the entire graph as fully connected and applies attention
mechanisms to capture pairwise node dependencies [42, 43, 11]. Another line constructs a token
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

