FHGS: Feature-Homogenized Gaussian Splatting

Q. G. Duan Benyun Zhao Mingqiao Han Yijun Huang Ben M. Chen†
Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Scene understanding based on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has recently achieved
notable advances. Although 3DGS related methods have efficient rendering capabilities, they fail to address the inherent contradiction between the anisotropic color
representation of gaussian primitives and the isotropic requirements of semantic
features, leading to insufficient cross-view feature consistency. To overcome the
limitation, we proposes FHGS (Feature-Homogenized Gaussian Splatting), a novel
3D feature distillation framework inspired by physical models, which freezes and
distills 2D pre-trained features into 3D representations while preserving the realtime rendering efficiency of 3DGS. Specifically, our FHGS introduces the following
innovations: Firstly, a universal feature fusion architecture is proposed, enabling
robust embedding of large-scale pre-trained models’ semantic features (e.g., SAM,
CLIP) into sparse 3D structures. Secondly, a non-differentiable feature fusion
mechanism is introduced, which enables semantic features to exhibit viewpoint
independent isotropic distributions. This fundamentally balances the anisotropic
rendering of gaussian primitives and the isotropic expression of features; Thirdly, a
dual-driven optimization strategy inspired by electric potential fields is proposed,
which combines external supervision from semantic feature fields with internal
primitive clustering guidance. This mechanism enables synergistic optimization of
global semantic alignment and local structural consistency. Extensive comparison
experiments with other state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our FHGS exhibits superior reconstruction performance in feature fusion,
noise suppression, and geometric precision, while maintaining a significantly lower
training time. This work establishes a novel Gaussian Splatting data structure, offering practical advancements for real-time semantic mapping, 3D stylization, and
Vision-Language Navigation (VLN). Our code and additional results are available
on our project page: https://fhgs.cuastro.org/.

1

Introduction

In recent years, scene representation particularly understanding has emerged as a prominent research
focus, as it enables unmanned systems to better perceive and interpret their surrounding environments.
Traditional scene representation frameworks such as Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [1] and Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [2] can achieve geometric reconstruction. However, these
methods rely on non-differentiable pipelines and remain limited in high-level semantic perception
and nonlinear feature fusion. As a result, the differentiable approaches have gradually come into
focus. Among them, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [3] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [4] have
revolutionized the scene representation framework. NeRF models implicit radiance fields and learns
continuous 3D spatial representations under 2D image supervision via differentiable volume rendering
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

