ParetoQ: Improving Scaling Laws in Extremely
Low-bit LLM Quantization
Zechun Liu1 †
Changsheng Zhao1
Hanxian Huang1
Sijia Chen1
Jing Zhang1
Jiawei Zhao1
Scott Roy1
Lisa Jin1
Yunyang Xiong1
Yangyang Shi1
Lin Xiao1
Yuandong Tian1
Bilge Soran1
Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi1
Tijmen Blankevoort1
Vikas Chandra1
1

Meta AI

Abstract
The optimal bit-width for achieving the best trade-off between quantized model
size and accuracy has been a subject of ongoing debate. While some advocate for
4-bit quantization, others propose that 1.58-bit offers superior results. However,
the lack of a cohesive framework for different bits has left such conclusions
relatively tenuous. We present ParetoQ, the first unified framework that facilitates
rigorous comparisons across 1-bit, 1.58-bit, 2-bit, 3-bit, and 4-bit quantization
settings. Our findings reveal a notable learning transition between 2 and 3 bits:
For 3-bits and above, the fine-tuned models stay close to their original pre-trained
distributions, whereas for learning 2-bit networks or below, the representations
change drastically. By optimizing training schemes and refining quantization
functions, ParetoQ surpasses all previous methods tailored to specific bit widths.
Remarkably, our ParetoQ ternary 600M-parameter model even outperforms the
previous SoTA ternary 3B-parameter model in accuracy, using only one-fifth of
the parameters. Extensive experimentation shows that ternary, 2-bit, and 3-bit
quantization maintains comparable performance in the size-accuracy trade-off and
generally exceeds 4-bit and binary quantization. Considering hardware constraints,
2-bit quantization offers promising potential for memory reduction and speedup.

1

Introduction

As deep learning continues to scale toward larger models and datasets, significant attention has
been devoted to studying the scaling laws that trade-off between model and dataset size to optimize
performance and computational efficiency [Hoffmann et al., 2022, Kumar et al., 2024, Dettmers
and Zettlemoyer, 2023]. In the meantime, the field is shifting toward lower-precision computation,
particularly in large language models, driven by the substantial benefits of memory savings and
computational efficiency [Liu et al., 2023a, Ma et al., 2024]. This shift necessitates a rethinking of
scaling laws to account for the effects of quantization on resulting quantized model performance.
When allowing for lower-bit quantization, we can freely trade off the bit-width and the number of
parameters. Keeping the amount of memory used the same, we could have an 8-bit model, or a 4-bit
model twice the size. This begs the question: What is the optimal trade-off between bit-width and
model size? Recent papers [Dettmers and Zettlemoyer, 2023, Kumar et al., 2024] on scaling laws
for low-precision conclude that 4 or 6-bit quantization often resides on the Pareto frontier to balance
accuracy and efficiency. Other studies [Ma et al., 2024, Kaushal et al., 2024] suggest that bit-widths
as low as 1.58-bit per parameter hold significant promise for the optimal scaling law trade-off. These
opposing conclusions highlight the challenges of studying scaling laws in the low-precision domain.
†

Correspondence to: Zechun Liu zechunliu@meta.com .

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

