Learning to Plan Like the Human Brain via
Visuospatial Perception and Semantic-Episodic
Synergistic Decision-Making

Tianyuan Jia
Beijing Normal University
Beijing Institute of Technology
tianyj@mail.bnu.edu.cn
Qing Li∗
Beijing Institute of Technology
liqing@bit.edu.cn
Wei Chen
Li Auto Inc.
chenwei10@lixiang.com

Ziyu Li
Beijing Institute of Technology
ziyuli@bit.edu.cn

Xiuxing Li
Beijing Institute of Technology
xxl@bit.edu.cn

Li Yao
Beijing Normal University
yaoli@bnu.edu.cn

Xiang Li
Li Auto Inc.
lixiang39@lixiang.com

Xia Wu
Beijing Institute of Technology
wuxia@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Motion planning in high-dimensional continuous spaces remains challenging due
to complex environments and computational constraints. Although learning-based
planners, especially graph neural network (GNN)-based, have significantly improved planning performance, they still struggle with inaccurate graph construction
and limited structural reasoning, constraining search efficiency and path quality. The human brain exhibits efficient planning through a two-stage PerceptionDecision model. First, egocentric spatial representations from visual and proprioceptive input are constructed, and then semantic–episodic synergy is leveraged
to support decision-making in uncertainty scenarios. Inspired by this process, we
propose NeuroMP, a brain-inspired planning framework that learns to plan like
the human brain. NeuroMP integrates a Perceptive Segment Selector inspired by
visuospatial perception to construct safer graphs, and a Global Alignment Heuristic
guide search in weakly connected graphs by modeling semantic-episodic synergistic decision-making. Experimental results demonstrate that NeuroMP significantly
outperforms existing planning methods in efficiency and quality while maintaining
a high success rate.

1

Introduction

Motion planning is fundamental to robotic systems, with broad applications in autonomous vehicles
[1], logistics [2], and so on. Its primary objective is to compute a high-quality, collision-free path in
the configuration space that connects the start and goal [3]. However, real-world configuration spaces
often involve numerous continuous variables and complex high-dimensional properties, significantly
increasing the difficulty of the planning problem. Classical motion planners are typically categorized
as search-based or sampling-based. Search-based methods, such as A* [3] and Dijkstra [4], formulate
planning as a graph search. While sampling-based methods, such as RRT [5] and its variants [6, 7],
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

