Probabilistic Stability Guarantees for
Feature Attributions
Helen Jin∗
University of Pennsylvania
helenjin@seas.upenn.edu
Weiqiu You
University of Pennsylvania
weiqiuy@seas.upenn.edu

Anton Xue∗
University of Texas at Austin
anton.xue@austin.utexas.edu

Surbhi Goel
University of Pennsylvania
surbhig@seas.upenn.edu

Eric Wong
University of Pennsylvania
exwong@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Stability guarantees have emerged as a principled way to evaluate feature attributions, but existing certification methods rely on heavily smoothed classifiers
and often produce conservative guarantees. To address these limitations, we introduce soft stability and propose a simple, model-agnostic, sample-efficient stability
certification algorithm (SCA) that yields non-trivial and interpretable guarantees
for any attribution method. Moreover, we show that mild smoothing achieves a
more favorable trade-off between accuracy and stability, avoiding the aggressive
compromises made in prior certification methods. To explain this behavior, we
use Boolean function analysis to derive a novel characterization of stability under
smoothing. We evaluate SCA on vision and language tasks and demonstrate the
effectiveness of soft stability in measuring the robustness of explanation methods.

1

Introduction

Powerful machine learning models are increasingly deployed in practice. However, their opacity
presents a major challenge when adopted in high-stakes domains, where transparent explanations are
needed in decision-making. In healthcare, for instance, doctors require insights into the diagnostic
steps to trust a model and effectively integrate it into clinical practice [32]. In the legal domain,
attorneys must likewise ensure that model-assisted decisions meet stringent judicial standards [53].
There is much interest in explaining the behavior of complex models. One popular class of explanation
methods is feature attributions [39, 51], which aim to select the input features most important to a
model’s prediction. However, many explanations are unstable, such as in Figure 1, where additionally
including a few features may change the output. Such instability suggests that the explanation may
be unreliable [47, 65, 72]. This phenomenon has motivated efforts to quantify how model predictions
vary with explanations, including the effects of adding or removing features [55, 68] and the influence
of the selection’s shape [23, 54]. However, most existing works focus on empirical measures [3],
with limited formal guarantees of robustness.
To address this gap, prior work in Xue et al. [70] considers stability as a formal certification framework
for robust explanations. In particular, a hard stable explanation is one where adding any small number
of features, up to some maximum tolerance, does not alter the prediction. However, finding this
tolerance is non-trivial: for an arbitrary model, one must exhaustively enumerate and check all possible
perturbations in a computationally intractable manner. To overcome this, Xue et al. [70] introduce the
MuS algorithmic framework for constructing smoothed models, which have mathematical properties
∗

Equal contribution. Code is available at: https://github.com/helenjin/soft_stability/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

