Private Online Learning against an Adaptive
Adversary: Realizable and Agnostic Settings

Bo Li1,2 Wei Wang2 Peng Ye2
Guangzhou HKUST Fok Ying Tung Research Institute
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST
bli@ust.hk, weiwa@cse.ust.hk, pyeac@connect.ust.hk
1

Abstract
We revisit the problem of private online learning, in which a learner receives a
sequence of T data points and has to respond at each time-step a hypothesis. It
is required that the entire stream of output hypotheses should satisfy differential
privacy. Prior work of Golowich and Livni [2021] established that every concept
class H with finite Littlestone dimension d is privately online learnable in the
realizable setting. In particular, they proposed an algorithm that achieves an
Od (log T ) mistake bound√against an oblivious adversary. However, their approach
yields a suboptimal Õd ( T ) bound against an adaptive adversary. In this work,
we present a new algorithm with a mistake bound of Od (log T ) against an adaptive
adversary, closing this gap. We further investigate the problem in the agnostic
setting, which is more general than the realizable setting as it does not impose any
assumptions
on the data. We give an algorithm that obtains a sublinear regret of
√
Õd ( T ) for generic Littlestone classes, demonstrating that they are also privately
online learnable in the agnostic setting.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has demonstrated remarkable performance in various applications due to its
capability of extracting informative patterns from vast amounts of data. However, this success also
raises critical privacy concerns, particularly in domains like healthcare or finance, where models often
process sensitive personal data. As machine learning technologies continue to advance, ensuring the
protection of individual privacy has become an urgent societal and technical challenge.
Differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006b,a] is the de facto privacy-preserving technique that
addresses these concerns by rigorously formalized privacy guarantees. To ensure that an algorithm
protects privacy, DP requires that its output distribution remains nearly indistinguishable when any
single individual’s data is modified, thereby limiting privacy leakage. The central challenge in
differentially private learning lies in designing algorithms that satisfy the DP requirement while
remaining effective.
To understand the statistical cost of DP in learning, extensive research has studied probably approximately correct (PAC) learning under DP. A line of works [Alon et al., 2019, Bun et al., 2020, Alon
et al., 2022] has established that private learnability is characterized by the Littlestone dimension,
a combinatorial measure originally proposed by Littlestone [1988] to describe (non-private) online
learnability. In other words, a concept class is privately learnable if and only if it is online learnable.
Motivated by this compelling equivalence, Golowich and Livni [2021] pioneered the study of privately
online learning generic concept classes and demonstrated that the equivalence includes private online
learnability in the realizable setting. For any concept class H with Littlestone dimension d, their algorithm achieves an Od (log T ) mistake bound in T rounds against an oblivious adversary that generates
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

