NegoCollab: A Common Representation Negotiation
Approach for Heterogeneous Collaborative Perception
Congzhang Shao1 Quan Yuan1∗ Guiyang Luo1∗ Yue Hu2
Yilin Liu1 Rui Pan1 Bo Chen1 Jinglin Li 1
1

Danni Wang1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
Shanghai Jiaotong University
{shaocongzhang,yuanquan,luoguiyang}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Collaborative perception improves task performance by expanding the perception
range through information sharing among agents. Immutable heterogeneity poses
a significant challenge in collaborative perception, as participating agents may
employ different and fixed perception models. This leads to domain gaps in the
intermediate features shared among agents, consequently degrading collaborative
performance. Aligning the features of all agents to a common representation can
eliminate domain gaps with low training cost. However, in existing methods, the
common representation is designated as the representation of a specific agent, making it difficult for agents with significant domain discrepancies from this specific
agent to achieve proper alignment. This paper proposes NegoCollab, a heterogeneous collaboration method based on the negotiated common representation.
It introduces a negotiator during training to derive the common representation
from the local representations of each modality’s agent, effectively reducing the
inherent domain gap with the various local representations. In NegoCollab, the
mutual transformation of features between the local representation space and the
common representation space is achieved by a pair of sender and receiver. To better
align local representations to the common representation containing multimodal
information, we introduce structural alignment loss and pragmatic alignment loss
in addition to the distribution alignment loss to supervise the training. This enables
the knowledge in the common representation to be fully distilled into the sender.
The experimental results demonstrate that NegoCollab significantly outperforms
existing methods in common representation-based collaboration approaches. The
mechanism of obtaining common representations through negotiation provides a
more reliable and flexible option for common representations in heterogeneous
collaborative perception.

1

Introduction

Collaborative perception has gained significant attention in recent years. By sharing intermediate
features among agents, it expands the perception range and provides more supporting information
for downstream tasks. In autonomous driving, collaborative perception enables vehicles to detect
obstacles in blind spots, thereby preventing traffic accidents and effectively enhancing driving safety.
Heterogeneity is one of the key challenges in practical applications of collaborative perception
* Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

