L2M: Mutual Information Scaling Law for
Long-Context Language Modeling

Zhuo Chen12∗

Oriol Mayné i Comas23
Zhuotao Jin24
1245
12
Di Luo
Marin Soljačić
1
NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Polytechnic University of Catalonia
4
Harvard University
5
University of California, Los Angeles
{chenzhuo, omayne, jinzhta, diluo, soljacic}@mit.edu

Abstract
We present a universal† theoretical framework for understanding long-context
language modeling based on a bipartite mutual information scaling law that we
rigorously verify in natural language. We demonstrate that bipartite mutual information captures multi-token interactions distinct from and scaling independently
of conventional two-point mutual information, and show that this provides a more
complete characterization of the dependencies needed for accurately modeling long
sequences. Leveraging this scaling law, we formulate the Long-context Language
Modeling (L2 M) condition, which lower bounds the necessary scaling of a model’s
history state—the latent variables responsible for storing past information—for
effective long-context modeling. We validate the framework and its predictions on
transformer and state-space models. Our work provides a principled foundation
to understand long-context modeling and to design more efficient architectures
with stronger long-context capabilities, with potential applications beyond natural
language.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural language processing, achieving remarkable capabilities across a wide range of tasks [1–4]. Recent advances in large language models,
including ChatGPT [1, 5], Claude, Gemini [6, 7], Grok, LLaMA [4, 8], DeepSeek [9, 10], and Qwen
[11, 12] have achieved breakthroughs across diverse tasks, including code generation, mathematical
problem solving, text summarization, and creative writing [13–16]. These models have become
increasingly powerful and versatile, pushing the boundaries of what’s possible in natural language
processing and marking significant steps toward artificial general intelligence [17–19].
In pushing these advances further, the ability to handle long contexts has become increasingly crucial.
This ability is the key to document-level understanding, multi-turn dialogue, and complex reasoning.
Models like GPT-o1/o3, Claude Opus, Gemini 2.5 pro, and DeepSeek-R1 often generate extensive
chains of thought, spanning tens of thousands of tokens to solve complex problems [20, 21]. However,
processing long contexts remains a significant challenge. Despite their success and expressiveness,
transformer architectures suffer from an intrinsic quadratic computational cost in sequence length,
∗

Corresponding author
Our framework applies to autoregressive language models, which encompass all widely-used LLMs such
as GPT, Claude, Gemini, and LLaMA.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

