To Think or Not To Think: A Study of Thinking in
Rule-Based Visual Reinforcement Fine-Tuning

Ming Li1

Jike Zhong2

Shitian Zhao1 Yuxiang Lai3 Haoquan Zhang1, 4
Kaipeng Zhang1∗
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory
2
University of Southern California
3
Emory University
4
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Wang Bill Zhu2

lm1640362161@gmail.com, zhangkaipeng@pjlab.org.cn

Project code: https://github.com/minglllli/CLS-RL

Abstract
This paper investigates the role of explicit thinking process in rule-based reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) for multi-modal large language models (MLLMs). We
first extend Thinking-RFT to image classification task, using verifiable rewards
for fine-tuning (FT). Experiments show Thinking-RFT significantly outperforms
supervised FT and yields a cross-dataset generalization effect. We then rethink
and question whether explicit thinking in RFT is always necessary and beneficial.
Challenging the convention that explicit thinking is crucial for the success of RFT,
we introduce No-Thinking-RFT, exploring RFT without thinking by introducing a
simple equality accuracy reward. We evaluate No-Thinking-RFT on six diverse
tasks across different model sizes and types. Experiment results reveal four key
findings: (1). Visual perception tasks do not require thinking during RFT, as NoThinking-RFT consistently outperforms or matches Thinking-RFT across model
sizes and types. (2). Models with limited capabilities struggle to generate highquality CoT for RFT, making Thinking-RFT less effective than No-Thinking-RFT.
(3). There are inconsistencies between the answers in the thinking tags and answer
tags for some responses of Thinking-RFT, which show lower average accuracy than
the overall accuracy. (4). The performance gain of No-Thinking-RFT mainly stems
from improved learning during no thinking FT and the avoidance of inference
overthinking, as evidenced by the partial gains from appending empty thinking tags
at inference time of Thinking-RFT. We hypothesize that explicit thinking before
verifiable answers may hinder reward convergence and reduce performance in certain scenarios. To test this, we propose Think-After-Answer, which places thinking
after the answer to mitigate this effect for experimental verification. Lastly, we conduct a pilot study to explore whether MLLMs can learn when to think during RFT,
introducing an Adaptive-Thinking method. Experiments show that model converges
to either thinking or not depending on model capability, achieving comparable
or better performance than both Thinking and No-Thinking-RFT. Our findings
suggest MLLMs can adaptively decide to think or not based on their capabilities
and task complexity, offering insights into the thinking process in RFT.

1

Introduction

Recently, rule-based reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) has made significant progress and achieved
better performance than traditional supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [19, 68, 26]. RFT leverages verifiable
∗

Corresponding Author: zhangkaipeng@pjlab.org.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

