LLM Unlearning via Neural Activation Redirection

William F. Shen1∗† Xinchi Qiu1,2∗ Meghdad Kurmanji1 Alex Iacob1
Lorenzo Sani1 Yihong Chen3 Nicola Cancedda4 ‡ Nicholas D. Lane1 ‡
1
University of Cambridge 2 Meta 3 UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence 4 FAIR at Meta

Abstract
The ability to selectively remove knowledge from LLMs is highly desirable. However, existing methods often struggle with balancing unlearning efficacy and retain
model utility, and lack controllability at inference time to emulate base model behavior as if it had never seen the unlearned data. In this paper, we propose LUNAR,
a novel unlearning method grounded in the Linear Representation Hypothesis and
operates by redirecting the representations of unlearned data to activation regions
that expresses its inability to answer. We show that contrastive features are not a
prerequisite for effective activation redirection, and LUNAR achieves state-of-the-art
unlearning performance and superior controllability. Specifically, LUNAR achieves
between 2.9× and 11.7× improvement in the combined unlearning efficacy and
model utility score (Deviation Score) across various base models and generates
coherent, contextually appropriate responses post-unlearning. Moreover, LUNAR
effectively reduces parameter updates to a single down-projection matrix, a novel
design that significantly enhances efficiency by 20× and robustness. Finally, we
demonstrate that LUNAR is robust to white-box adversarial attacks and versatile in
real-world scenarios, including handling sequential unlearning requests.

1

Introduction

Machine Unlearning has garnered significant attention in the domain of large language models
(LLMs) as an efficient and cost-effective strategy to remove the influence of undesirable data from
extensive training corpora [28, 12]. Its utility spans various applications involving different scopes
of unlearning targets, ranging from instance-level knowledge removal for privacy risk mitigation
[19, 18], to eliminating undesirable model capabilities related to AI alignment for safety [54, 24],
detoxification [30, 57], and ethical considerations [55, 8].
Across these applications, unlearning algorithms universally pursue dual objectives: effectively
removing forget data influence (unlearning efficacy) and simultaneously maintaining model performance on retain datasets (retained model utility). Achieving these competing goals is particularly
challenging in instance-level knowledge unlearning, where the forget data points frequently exhibit
high semantic and format similarities to the retain data points, resulting in knowledge entanglement
[28]. Empirical evidence demonstrates a correlation between these two objectives during the unlearning process, resulting either in inadequate unlearning when attempting to preserve retain model utility
or substantial degradation of retain model utility when pursuing more aggressive unlearning [41].
Additionally, existing unlearning methods often claim success based solely on output deviation from
the forget-set ground truth [28], neglecting critical, undesirable side effects [54, 52, 4] including hal∗

Equal contribution
Correspondence to: fs604@cam.ac.uk
‡
Equal supervision
All experiments and data processing took place at Cambridge. Meta served only in an advisory role.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

