Sparse Diffusion Autoencoder for Test-time Adapting
Prediction of Complex Systems

Jingwen Cheng∗
Department of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Ruikun Li∗
Shenzhen International Graduate School
Tsinghua University
Shenzhen, China

Huandong Wang†
Department of Electronic Engineering
BNRist, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Yong Li
Department of Electronic Engineering
BNRist, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Abstract
Predicting the behavior of complex systems is critical in many scientific and engineering domains, and hinges on the model’s ability to capture their underlying
dynamics. Existing methods encode the intrinsic dynamics of high-dimensional
observations through latent representations and predict autoregressively. However,
these latent representations lose the inherent spatial structure of spatiotemporal dynamics, leading to the predictor’s inability to effectively model spatial interactions
and neglect emerging dynamics during long-term prediction. In this work, we propose SparseDiff, introducing a test-time adaptation strategy to dynamically update
the encoding scheme to accommodate emergent spatiotemporal structures during
the long-term evolution of the system. Specifically, we first design a codebookbased sparse encoder, which coarsens the continuous spatial domain into a sparse
graph topology. Then, we employ a graph neural ordinary differential equation to
model the dynamics and guide a diffusion decoder for reconstruction. SparseDiff autoregressively predicts the spatiotemporal evolution and adjust the sparse
topological structure to adapt to emergent spatiotemporal patterns by adaptive
re-encoding. Extensive evaluations on representative systems demonstrate that
SparseDiff achieves an average prediction error reduction of 49.99% compared to
baselines, requiring only 1% of the spatial resolution.

Introduction
Spatiotemporal Dynamics

Probe Topology

t4
Test-time Adaption

The dynamics of complex systems are driven by the
nonlinear interactions and co-evolution of numerous
components, giving rise to rich emergent spatiotemporal structures, as seen in fluid dynamics [1], climate science [2], and molecular dynamics [3]. Accurate long-term prediction of these systems is crucial for many real-world applications [4, 5]. However, complex systems are typically observed in highdimensional spaces with unknown intrinsic dynam-

Time

1

t3
t2
t1

Space

t0

Figure 1: Adapting probe topologies.

∗

Equal contribution (see § 7).
†
Corresponding author (wanghuandong@tsinghua.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

