Learning Sparse Approximate Inverse Preconditioners
for Conjugate Gradient Solvers on GPUs

Zherui Yang1 Zhehao Li2 Kangbo Lyu3,4 Yixuan Li1 Tao Du3,4 Ligang Liu1§
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Stanford University
3
Tsinghua University 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
The conjugate gradient solver (CG) is a prevalent method for solving symmetric
and positive definite linear systems Ax = b, where effective preconditioners are
crucial for fast convergence. Traditional preconditioners rely on prescribed algorithms to offer rigorous theoretical guarantees, while limiting their ability to exploit
optimization from data. Existing learning-based methods often utilize Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to improve the performance and speed up the construction.
However, their reliance on incomplete factorization leads to significant challenges:
the associated triangular solve hinders GPU parallelization in practice, and introduces long-range dependencies which are difficult for GNNs to model. To address
these issues, we propose a learning-based method to generate GPU-friendly preconditioners, particularly using GNNs to construct Sparse Approximate Inverse (SPAI)
preconditioners, which avoids triangular solves and requires only two matrix-vector
products at each CG step. The locality of matrix-vector product is compatible with
the local propagation mechanism of GNNs. The flexibility of GNNs also allows
our approach to be applied in a wide range of scenarios. Furthermore, we introduce
a statistics-based scale-invariant loss function. Its design matches CG’s property
that the convergence rate depends on the condition number, rather than the absolute
scale of A, leading to improved performance of the learned preconditioner. Evaluations on three PDE-derived datasets and one synthetic dataset demonstrate that our
method outperforms standard preconditioners (Diagonal, IC, and traditional SPAI)
and previous learning-based preconditioners on GPUs. We reduce solution time on
GPUs by 40%-53% (68%-113% faster), along with better condition numbers and
superior generalization performance.

1

Introduction

Solving symmetric positive definite(SPD) sparse linear systems Ax = b is essential in scientific
computing and has wide applications in science and engineering, while the development of efficient
numerical solvers remains a challenge. The conjugate gradient (CG) method is widely used for its
efficiency, yet the convergence rate depends critically on preconditioning techniques that effectively
transform the original linear system into an easier one to solve at low computational cost.
Traditional preconditioners have a long history of development and have achieved considerable
success. Although modern GPUs provide massive parallelism, existing preconditioners struggle to
leverage it, becoming the computational bottleneck despite their convergence benefits. The diagonal
preconditioner offers a simple and GPU-friendly implementation but provides limited convergence
improvement. Incomplete Cholesky (IC) demonstrates strong CPU performance and effectiveness in
ill-conditioned problems [1]. However, its requires two triangular solves at each CG step, which are
typically difficult to parallelize [2, 3], hindering its performance on GPUs.
§

Corresponding author: lgliu@ustc.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

