How Benchmark Prediction from Fewer Data
Misses the Mark
Guanhua Zhang∗ 1,2 , Florian E. Dorner1,2,3 , Moritz Hardt1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2
Tübingen AI Center 3 ETH Zurich

Abstract
Large language model (LLM) evaluation is increasingly costly, prompting interest
in methods that speed up evaluation by shrinking benchmark datasets. Benchmark
prediction (also called efficient LLM evaluation) aims to select a small subset of
evaluation points and predict overall benchmark performance from that subset. In
this paper, we systematically assess the strengths and limitations of 11 benchmark
prediction methods across 19 diverse benchmarks. First, we identify a highly competitive baseline: Take a random sample and fit a regression model on the sample
to predict missing entries. Outperforming most existing methods, this baseline
challenges the assumption that careful subset selection is necessary for benchmark
prediction. Second, we discover that all existing methods crucially depend on
model similarity. They work best when interpolating scores among similar models.
The effectiveness of benchmark prediction sharply declines when new models
have higher accuracy than previously seen models. In this setting of extrapolation,
none of the previous methods consistently beat a simple average over random
samples. To improve over the sample average, we introduce a new method inspired
by augmented inverse propensity weighting. This method consistently outperforms
the random sample average even for extrapolation. However, its performance still
relies on model similarity and the gains are modest in general. This shows that
benchmark prediction fails just when it is most needed: at the evaluation frontier,
where the goal is to evaluate new models of unknown capabilities† .

1

Introduction

Increasingly, computational cost is a major bottleneck in the evaluation of recent generative models. Growing model size and benchmark task difficulty, as well as the sheer number of available
benchmarks all escalate the problem. For example, evaluating a single 176B parameter model on
the HELM multi-task benchmark required 4,200 GPU hours [35]; even major companies noted the
significant computational burden of evaluation on the BigBench multi-task benchmark [17].
The problem has prompted much recent work on more efficient LLM evaluation. The typical approach
is to find a subset of data points to evaluate on, and to predict benchmark performance from these
few evaluations. The simplest method is the random sample mean: Take a random sample of n
evaluation points, and compute the mean of the benchmark metric on the sample. For a metric, like
accuracy, with
√ values in the interval [0, 1], the sample mean gives an additive approximation up to
error O(1/ n). More sophisticated methods try to improve over this baseline by following a common
strategy: cleverly choose a small core set of evaluation points, evaluate multiple known models on
these points, then fit a model to predict overall benchmark performance from these evaluations.
∗
†

Corresponding author: guanhua.zhang@tuebingen.mpg.de
Code is available at https://github.com/socialfoundations/benchmark-prediction.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

