Quantifying task-relevant representational similarity
using decision variable correlation

Yu (Eric) Qian
Department of Neuroscience
The University of Texas at Austin
ericqian@utexas.edu

Wilson S. Geisler
Department of Psychology
The University of Texas at Austin
w.geisler@utexas.edu

Xue-Xin Wei
Department of Neuroscience
The University of Texas at Austin
weixx@utexas.edu

Abstract
Previous studies have compared neural activities in the visual cortex to representations in deep neural networks trained on image classification. Interestingly,
while some suggest that their representations are highly similar, others argued the
opposite. Here, we propose a new approach to characterize the similarity of the
decision strategies of two observers (models or brains) using decision variable
correlation (DVC). DVC quantifies the image-by-image correlation between the
decoded decisions based on the internal neural representations in a classification
task. Thus, it can capture task-relevant information rather than general representational alignment. We evaluate DVC using monkey V4/IT recordings and network
models trained on image classification tasks. We find that model–model similarity
is comparable to monkey-monkey similarity, whereas model–monkey similarity
is consistently lower. Strikingly, DVC decreases with increasing network performance on ImageNet-1k. Adversarial training does not improve model–monkey
similarity in task-relevant dimensions assessed using DVC, although it markedly
increases the model–model similarity. Similarly, pre-training on larger datasets
does not improve model–monkey similarity. These results suggest a divergence
between the task-relevant representations in monkey V4/IT and those learned by
models trained on image classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning [1; 2] has substantially impacted how neuroscientists construct brain models. For vision
neuroscience, deep neural networks offer candidate models for studying the primate ventral pathway
[3; 4; 5] and, more recently, dorsal pathway [6; 7; 8]. Early work reported that the representations in
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on image categorization tasks can explain a substantial
fraction of variance in high-level visual areas, surpassing classic models for these areas [3]. Follow-up
research has tested many variants of deep networks on their alignment with the brain using both
neural data [9; 10; 11] and behavior data [12; 13; 14]. One appealing hypothesis is that deep networks
that exhibit higher accuracy and robustness in vision tasks, or trained on larger datasets would better
explain visual processing in the brain.
One important question is how to compare deep network models and the brain. One class of methods
seeks to quantify the similarity of internal representations between models and brains. This includes
methods such as representational similarity analysis (RSA) [15], linear regression [5; 16], and
generalized shape metrics [17; 18]. More recently, another class of methods that put more emphasis
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

