Towards foundational LiDAR world models
with efficient latent flow matching

Tianran Liu

Shengwen Zhao

{tianran.liu, jm.zhao}@mail.utoronto.ca

Nicholas Rhinehart
nick.rhinehart@utoronto.ca

University of Toronto

Abstract
LiDAR-based world models offer more structured and geometry-aware representations than their image-based counterparts. However, existing LiDAR world models
are narrowly trained; each model excels only in the domain for which it was built.
This raises a critical question: can we develop LiDAR world models that exhibit
strong transferability across multiple domains? To answer this, we conduct the first
systematic domain transfer study across three demanding scenarios: (i) outdoor to
indoor generalization, (ii) sparse- to dense-beam adaptation, and (iii) non-semantic
to semantic transfer. Given different amounts of fine-tuning data, our experiments
show that a single pretrained model can achieve up to 11% absolute improvement
(83% relative) over training from scratch and outperforms training from scratch in
30/36 of our comparisons. This transferability significantly reduces the reliance
on manually annotated data for semantic occupancy forecasting: our method exceeds previous baselines with only 5% of the labeled training data of prior work.
We also observed inefficiencies of current generative-model-based LiDAR world
models, mainly through their under-compression of LiDAR data and inefficient
training objectives. To address these issues, we propose a latent conditional flow
matching (CFM)-based framework that achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction
accuracy using only half the training data and a compression ratio 6 times higher
than that of prior methods. Our model also achieves SOTA performance on semantic occupancy forecasting while being 1.98x-23x more computationally efficient
(a 1.1x-3.9x FPS speedup) than previous methods. Our project page contains
additional visualizations and released code.

1

Introduction

World models enable agents to implicitly learn the dynamics of the environment by predicting future
sensory observations, typically through generative models operating in a latent space [40, 33]. Starting
from classic motion prediction tasks like optical flow [29, 31], recent advances have extended motion
prediction to RGB-video-based forecasting, i.e., RGB world models, which have demonstrated
impressive performance in applications such as autonomous driving [41, 16, 47], robotic navigation
[4], and other embodied tasks [7, 54, 28, 55, 21, 1, 3]. These models can generate video sequences
conditioned on historical frames and sometimes natural language input. While an image-based world
model may suffice for repetitive tasks (e.g., learning robotic arm movements), its utility is limited in
complex scenarios that demand geometrically structured information, such as autonomous driving.
In these scenarios, the lack of explicit semantic and geometric representations restricts practical
application, as it necessitates additional steps to extract spatial information.
In contrast to RGB images, LiDAR provides rich geometric structure and implicitly offers a sparse
representation for semantic cues about the environment. Unlike dense, pixel-based observations, a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

