The Cost of Robustness: Tighter Bounds on Parameter
Complexity for Robust Memorization in ReLU Nets

Yujun Kim ∗

Chaewon Moon ∗
Chulhee Yun
KAIST
{kyujun02, chaewon.moon, chulhee.yun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We study the parameter complexity of robust memorization for ReLU networks:
the number of parameters required to interpolate any given dataset with ϵ-separation
between differently labeled points, while ensuring predictions remain consistent
within a µ-ball around each training sample. We establish upper and lower bounds
on the parameter count as a function of the robustness ratio ρ = µ/ϵ. Unlike prior
work, we provide a fine-grained analysis across the entire range ρ ∈ (0, 1) and
obtain tighter upper and lower bounds that improve upon existing results. Our
findings reveal that the parameter complexity of robust memorization matches that
of non-robust memorization when ρ is small, but grows with increasing ρ.

1

Introduction

The topic of memorization investigates the expressive power of neural networks required to fit any
given dataset exactly. This line of inquiry seeks to determine the minimal network size—measured
in the number of parameters, or equivalently, parameter complexity—needed to interpolate any
finite collection of N labeled examples. A number of works study both upper and lower bounds
on the parameter complexity [Baum, 1988, Yun et
√ al., 2019, Bubeck et al., 2020, Park et al., 2021].
The VC-dimension implies a lower bound of Ω( N ) [Chervonenkis,
2015, Goldberg and Jerrum,
√
1995, Bartlett et al., 2019], while Vardi et al. [2021] show that Θ̃( N ) parameters suffice for ReLU
networks. Together, these results
√ establish that memorizing any N distinct samples with ReLU
networks can be done with Θ̃( N ) parameters, tight up to logarithmic factors.
We now turn to a more challenging task beyond mere interpolation of data: robust memorization. We
aim to quantify the additional parameter complexity required for a network to remain robust against
adversarial attacks, going beyond standard non-robust memorization. To address the sensitivity of
neural networks to small adversarial perturbations [Szegedy et al., 2014, Goodfellow et al., 2015, Ding
et al., 2019, Gowal et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2021, Bastounis et al., 2025], we consider the setting
in which not only the data points but all points within a distance µ—referred to as the robustness
radius—from each data point must be mapped to the corresponding label. More concretely, for any
dataset with ϵ-separation between differently labeled data points, the network must memorize the
dataset and the prediction must remain consistent within a µ-ball centered at each training sample. As
will be seen shortly, the parameter complexity for robust memorization is governed by the robustness
ratio ρ = µ/ϵ ∈ (0, 1) rather than the individual values of µ and ϵ. However, a precise understanding
of how this complexity scales with ρ remains limited.
∗

Authors contributed equally to this paper.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

