Contrastive Learning with Data Misalignment:
Feature Purity, Training Dynamics and Theoretical
Generalization Guarantees
Jiawei Sun
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
sunj11@rpi.edu

Shuai Zhang
New Jersey Institute of Technology
sz457@njit.edu

Hongkang Li
University of Pennsylvania
lihk@seas.upenn.edu

Meng Wang
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
wangm7@rpi.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning is a powerful framework for learning discriminative representations from image-text pairs. Despite its success, its theoretical foundations,
especially when the image-text pair exhibits misalignment, remain underexplored.
This paper provides the first theoretical analysis of contrastive learning under data
misalignment, proving how the ground-truth modality-paired features are amplified
while spurious features are suppressed through the training dynamics analysis.
Specifically, we study two nonlinear encoders trained jointly with a contrastive loss
and demonstrate that noisy (or misaligned) data pairs result in mixed representations and degrade the model’s generalization ability. In contrast, recaptioning and
filtering improve the data alignment, which in turn purifies the features learned by
neurons and subsequently enhances generalization. Our analysis identifies feature
purity as a key factor in the success of contrastive learning and offers insights
into how data quality and training procedures impact representation learning and
downstream generalization. Theoretical insights are supported by experiments on
standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved strong performance across diverse multimodal tasks
such as vision-language understanding and generation. State-of-the-art methods like CLIP [37] and
SimVLM [50] use contrastive learning to train dual encoders on large-scale image-text pairs scraped
from the web, aligning embeddings by pulling paired samples closer in a shared space. These models
excel in zero-shot scenarios, requiring no task-specific fine-tuning.
However, web-sourced captions are often noisy or misaligned, containing irrelevant or spurious details
that hinder cross-modal alignment and reduce representation quality. For example, [34] cites an
image of a blue Mercedes-Benz in a parking lot paired with the caption: "2003 Mercedes-Benz C240
sedan, Leather, MUST BE SEEN – $6199." The price information in this caption is only superficially
correlated with the image and does not contribute meaningfully to understanding the image context.
To mitigate this issue, many works [13, 34, 46, 3, 38, 16, 45] adopt text generation methods during
VLM training to produce high-quality synthetic captions more faithful to the corresponding images.
Models like LaCLIP [13] and BLIP [25] show that such recaptioning improves both the quality and
diversity of training data, leading to significantly better performance. Further, [34] demonstrates that
the cosine similarities between BLIP2 generated captions [24] and their paired images is higher than
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

