Learning to Focus: Causal Attention Distillation via
Gradient-Guided Token Pruning
Yiju Guo , Wenkai Yang , Zexu Sun , Ning Ding♩ , Zhiyuan Liu♩ , Yankai Lin B
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
♩ Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Baidu Inc.
B{yijuguo, yankailin}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant improvements in
contextual understanding. However, their ability to attend to truly critical information during long-context reasoning and generation still falls behind the pace.
Specifically, our preliminary experiments reveal that certain distracting patterns
can misdirect the model’s attention during inference, and removing these patterns
substantially improves reasoning accuracy and generation quality. We attribute
this phenomenon to spurious correlations in the training data, which obstruct the
model’s capacity to infer authentic causal instruction–response relationships. This
phenomenon may induce redundant reasoning processes, potentially resulting in
significant inference overhead and, more critically, the generation of erroneous or
suboptimal responses. To mitigate this, we introduce a two-stage framework called
Learning to Focus (LeaF) leveraging intervention-based inference to disentangle
confounding factors. In the first stage, LeaF employs gradient-based comparisons
with an advanced teacher to automatically identify confounding tokens based on
causal relationships in the training corpus. Then, in the second stage, it prunes
these tokens during distillation to enact intervention, aligning the student’s attention
with the teacher’s focus distribution on truly critical context tokens. Experimental
results demonstrate that LeaF not only achieves an absolute improvement in various mathematical reasoning, code generation and multi-hop question answering
benchmarks but also effectively suppresses attention to confounding tokens during
inference, yielding a more interpretable and reliable reasoning model. 2

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in natural language processing tasks, demonstrating strong capabilities in contextual understanding [57, 37, 4] and language
generation [14, 11]. Despite these advancements, LLMs still struggle to maintain focus on truly
critical information, especially in long-context reasoning [52, 55, 20] and complex instruction-based
tasks [51, 31], which adversely impacts reasoning accuracy and generation quality.
To systematically investigate this phenomenon, we first identify distracting patterns via gradient-based
comparisons of teacher and student sensitivities, then assess the performance of student models on
NuminaMath-CoT [26] and AceCode-87K [53]. Surprisingly, as shown in Figure 1, simply pruning
distracting patterns yields substantial gains—improving average accuracy by over 20% on the MATH
2

B Corresponding author: Yankai Lin (yankailin@ruc.edu.cn).
Code and data are available at https://github.com/RUCBM/LeaF.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

