From Pose to Muscle: Multimodal Learning for Piano
Hand Muscle Electromyography

Ruofan Liu1,2 Yichen Peng1 Takanori Oku2 Chen-Chieh Liao1
Erwin Wu1 Shinichi Furuya2 Hideki Koike1
{liu.r.ac, peng.y.ag, liao.c.aa, wu.e.aa}@m.titech.ac.jp
t-oku@shibaura-it.ac.jp, shinichi.furuya@sony.com, koike@c.titech.ac.jp
1
Institute of Science Tokyo, 2 Sony Computer Science Laboratories

Abstract
Muscle coordination is fundamental when humans interact with the world. Reliable estimation of hand muscle engagement can serve as a source of internal
feedback, supporting the development of embodied intelligence and the acquisition
of dexterous skills. However, contemporary electromyography (EMG) sensing
techniques either require prohibitively expensive devices or are constrained to gross
motor movements, which inherently involve large muscles. On the other hand,
EMGs exhibit dependency on individual anatomical variability and task-specific
contexts, resulting in limited generalization. In this work, we preliminarily investigate the latent pose-EMG correspondence using a general EMG gesture dataset.
We further introduce a multimodal dataset, PianoKPM Dataset, and a hand muscle
estimation framework, PianoKPM Net, to facilitate high-fidelity EMG inference.
Subsequently, our approach is compared against reproducible competitive baselines.
The generalization and adaptation across unseen users and tasks are evaluated by
quantifying the training set scale and the included data amount.

1

Introduction

Human-world interaction is an interdependent loop involving explicit visual, auditory, haptic cues,
and implicit physiological signals. Among these, internal information, such as hand muscle electromyography (EMG), is critical for embodied interaction [1, 2], assistive technology [3, 4], and skill
acquisition [5, 6], yet remains difficult to access in real-world ubiquitous scenarios due to the cost,
obtrusiveness, and expertise required by conventional sensing systems [7].
On the other hand, the emergence of large-scale datasets and deep learning networks increasingly
facilitates cross-modal synthesis, which enables transformation between different modalities. For
instance, text to image [8], audio to motion [9], or text to music [10]. These developments offer new
insights into inferring internal physiological signals like EMG from readily accessible modalities.
Also, the invisible yet informative muscle activations are highly correlated with body postures, which
is validated in several recently released large-scale datasets containing EMG and motion data. The
public datasets, like EMGBench [11] and emg2pose [12], demonstrate the feasibility of classifying
and estimating gestures from EMG. However, the inverse task to infer EMG from postures or other
modalities, remains substantially challenging and underexplored. The difficulty stems from the richer
semantic information embedded in EMG compared to posture alone, as there is no strict one-to-one
mapping and the same postures may correspond to different muscle recruitment patterns.
To pioneer this promising yet insufficiently studied field, this work begins by leveraging emg2pose
[12], currently the largest and most diverse paired dataset of EMG and hand poses. We pretrain
a foundational model capable to learn latent relationships between muscular activations and hand
postures, which serves as a preliminary step toward assessing the feasibility of pose-to-EMG inference.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

