Robust Minimax Boosting with
Performance Guarantees
Santiago Mazuelas1,3 Verónica Álvarez2,1
Basque Center of Applied Mathematics (BCAM)
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
3
IKERBASQUE-Basque Foundation for Science
smazuelas@bcamath.org, vealvar@mit.edu

1

Abstract
Boosting methods often achieve excellent classification accuracy, but can experience notable performance degradation in the presence of label noise. Existing
robust methods for boosting provide theoretical robustness guarantees for certain types of label noise, and can exhibit only moderate performance degradation.
However, previous theoretical results do not account for realistic types of noise
and finite training sizes, and existing robust methods can provide unsatisfactory
accuracies, even without noise. This paper presents methods for robust minimax
boosting (RMBoost) that minimize worst-case error probabilities and are robust
to general types of label noise. In addition, we provide finite-sample performance
guarantees for RMBoost with respect to the error obtained without noise and with
respect to the best possible error (Bayes risk). The experimental results corroborate that RMBoost is not only resilient to label noise but can also provide strong
classification accuracy.

1 Introduction
Boosting methods provide excellent predictive performance in numerous practical scenarios (see
e.g., [1]). These methods determine a linear combination of base-rules through a sequential optimization process that minimizes a certain functional (often the empirical average of a convex potential). After the introduction of AdaBoost in [2], multiple boosting methods have been presented [3]
together with highly-efficient implementations [4, 5]. Unfortunately, it has been widely observed
that the performance of boosting methods can be significantly affected by the presence of label
noise (see e.g., [6–8]). Certain boosting methods such as LogitBoost and GentleBoost provide an
improved resilience to noise by using alternative convex potentials or optimization approaches [3,9].
However, as shown in [10], any boosting method that minimizes empirical averages of a convex and
bounded potential can lead to poor performances in the presence of label noise (even if only a very
small portion of labels are incorrect). Such a result posed a serious concern on boosting methods, as
label noise is often unavoidable in practice and its extent is typically hard to quantify. For instance,
in cases where an adversary intentionally modifies some labels, the machine learning practitioner
may be entirely unaware of the resulting noise in the training data.
Multiple alternative boosting methods have been proposed to bypass the negative result of Long
and Servedio in [10] by minimizing empirical averages of non-convex or unbounded potentials [11–
15]. These robust methods can result in performances that are only mildly affected by label noise.
Notably, previous theoretical results show that methods based on specific potentials (e.g., unhinged,
quadratic, and sigmoid) are provably robust to certain types of label noise [13–15]. Specifically, the
accuracy of these methods is not degraded by symmetric and uniform label noise for large enough
training sizes. However, previous theoretical results do not show how the performance of boosting
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

