A Single-Swap Local Search Algorithm for k-means of
Lines
Ting Liang1 , Xiaoliang Wu1 , Junyu Huang1 , Jianxin Wang1,2 , Qilong Feng1,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
2
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central South University,
Changsha 410083, China
tingliang@csu.edu.cn, xiaoliangwucsu@163.com, junyuhuangcsu@foxmail.com,
jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental problem that has been extensively studied over past
few decades, with most research focusing on point-based clustering such as kmeans, k-median, and k-center. However, numerous real-world applications, such
as motion analysis, computer vision, and missing data analysis, require clustering
over structured data, including lines, time series and affine subspaces (flats), where
traditional point-based clustering algorithms often fall short. In this paper, we
study the k-means of lines problem, where the input is a set L of lines in Rd ,
and the goal is to find k centers C in Rd such that the sum of squared distances
from each line in L to its nearest center in C is minimized. The local search
algorithm is a well-established strategy for point-based k-means clustering, known
for its efficiency and provable approximation guarantees. However, extending
local search algorithm to the k-means of lines problem is nontrivial, as the capture
relation used in point-based clustering does not generalize to the line setting.
This is because that the point-to-line distance function lack the triangle inequality
property that supports geometric analysis in point-based clustering. Moreover,
since lines extend infinitely in space, it is difficult to identify effective swap points
that can significantly reduce the clustering cost. To overcome above obstacles, we
introduce a proportional capture relation that links optimal and current centers
based the assignment proportions of lines, enabling a refined analysis that bypasses
the triangle inequality barrier. We also introduce a CrossLine structure, which
provides a principled discretization of the geometric space around line pairs, and
ensures coverage of high-quality swap points essential for local search, thereby
enabling effective execution of the local search process. Consequently, based on the
proposed components, we develop the first single-swap local search algorithm for
the k-means of lines problem, achieving a (500 + ε)-approximation in polynomial
time for low-dimensional Euclidean space.

1

Introduction

Clustering is one of the most popular problems in machine learning, and has lots of applications in
data mining, image classification, etc. The goal of clustering is to partition a given set of points into
several disjoint clusters such that similar points end up in the same cluster, and dissimilar points are
separated into different clusters [23]. Among classical clustering models [11, 12, 25], k-means is one
of the most extensively studied, aiming to minimize the total squared distance from each data point to
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

