Sequence Modeling with Spectral Mean Flows

Jinwoo Kim
KAIST

Max Beier
TU Munich

Petar Bevanda
TU Munich

Nayun Kim
KAIST

Seunghoon Hong
KAIST

Abstract
A key question in sequence modeling with neural networks is how to represent and
learn highly nonlinear and probabilistic state dynamics. Operator theory views such
dynamics as linear maps on Hilbert spaces containing mean embedding vectors
of distributions, offering an appealing but currently overlooked perspective. We
propose a new approach to sequence modeling based on an operator-theoretic view
of a hidden Markov model (HMM). Instead of materializing stochastic recurrence,
we embed the full sequence distribution as a tensor in the product Hilbert space. A
generative process is then defined as maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) gradient
flow in the space of sequences. To overcome challenges with large tensors and
slow sampling convergence, we introduce spectral mean flows, a novel tractable
algorithm integrating two core concepts. First, we propose a new neural architecture
by leveraging spectral decomposition of linear operators to derive a scalable tensor
network decomposition of sequence mean embeddings. Second, we extend MMD
gradient flows to time-dependent Hilbert spaces and connect them to flow matching
via the continuity equation, enabling simulation-free learning and faster sampling.
We demonstrate competitive results on a range of time-series modeling datasets.1

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in sequence modeling with neural networks is how to represent and learn
highly nonlinear and probabilistic state dynamics throughout a sequence. A popular method is to
model each step with a stochastic nonlinear network [5, 23, 47, 62, 98]. Since this requires serialization over steps at test time, there has been recent interest in linear recurrence [36, 37, 77] that offers
more parallelizability. Yet, their underlying theory often only covers deterministic linear dynamics,
requiring probabilistic dynamics to be handled in a post hoc manner via autoregression [36, 37] or
stepwise variational inference [82, 104, 72]. This leaves room for a new method that computationally
uses linear recurrence while natively handling the nonlinear and probabilistic nature of state dynamics.
Operator theory suggests an appealing approach in this context: embedding probability distributions
in Hilbert spaces in which nonlinear dynamics become linear [68]. Specifically, consider Markovian
dynamics (Z n )n∈N on a state space Z. The theory states that, with a proper choice of Hilbert space G,
the distribution of each state Z n can be uniquely embedded as a vector µZ n in G. Furthermore, the
state dynamics P[Z n+1 |Z n ] can be represented as a linear operator U : G → G such that:
µZ n+1 = U µZ n .

(1.1)

This enables the use of standard linear algebraic tools, such as spectral decomposition of linear
operators, to implicitly but correctly represent and learn nonlinear probabilistic dynamics. This
approach has been extensively explored in kernel algorithms for learning dynamical systems [51, 55].
However, its application in neural sequence modeling has been limited.
In this work, we propose a new approach to neural sequence modeling that leverages this perspective.
We begin with the classical notion of a hidden Markov model (HMM), which is a probabilistic model
1

Code is available at https://github.com/jw9730/spectral-mean-flow.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

