HCRMP: A LLM-Hinted Contextual Reinforcement
Learning Framework for Autonomous Driving

Zhiwen Chen
Tongji University
zhiwen_chen725@163.com

Hanming Deng
SenseTime Research
denghanming@sensetime.com

Zhuoren Li∗
Tongji University
1911055@tongji.edu.cn

Huanxi Wen
Tongji University
2311385@tongji.edu.cn

Guizhe Jin
Tongji University
jgz13573016892@163.com

Ran Yu
Tongji University
ranyu@tongji.edu.cn

Bo Leng∗
Tongji University
lengbo@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Integrating the understanding and reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLM) with the self-learning capabilities of Reinforcement Learning (RL) enables
more reliable driving performance under complex driving conditions. There has
been a lot of work exploring LLM-Dominated RL methods in the field of autonomous driving motion planning. These methods, which utilize LLM to directly
generate policies or provide decisive instructions during policy learning of RL
agent, are centrally characterized by an over-reliance on LLM outputs. However,
LLM outputs are susceptible to hallucinations. Evaluations show that state-of-theart LLM indicates a non-hallucination rate of only approximately 57.95% when
assessed on essential driving-related tasks. Thus, in these methods, hallucinations
from the LLM can directly jeopardize the performance of driving policies. This
paper argues that maintaining relative independence between the LLM and the RL
is vital for solving the hallucinations problem. Consequently, this paper is devoted
to propose a novel LLM-Hinted RL paradigm. The LLM is used to generate
semantic hints for state augmentation and policy optimization to assist RL agent in
motion planning, while the RL agent counteracts potential erroneous semantic indications through policy learning to achieve excellent driving performance. Based
on this paradigm, we propose the HCRMP (LLM-Hinted Contextual Reinforcement Learning Motion Planner) architecture, which is designed that includes ①
Augmented Semantic Representation Module to extend state space. ② Contextual
Stability Anchor Module enhances the reliability of multi-critic weight hints by
utilizing information from the knowledge base. ③ Semantic Cache Module is
employed to seamlessly integrate LLM low-frequency guidance with RL highfrequency control. Extensive experiments in CARLA validate its strong overall
driving performance. HCRMP achieves a task success rate of up to 80.3% under
diverse driving conditions with different traffic densities. Under safety-critical driving conditions, HCRMP significantly reduces the collision rate by 11.4%, which
effectively improves the driving performance in complex scenarios.
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

