Modality-Aware SAM:
Sharpness-Aware-Minimization Driven Gradient
Modulation for Harmonized Multimodal Learning

Hossein Rajoli
Holcombe Department of ECE
Clemson University
hrajoli@clemson.edu

Jie Ji
Holcombe Department of ECE
Clemson University
jji@clemson.edu

Xiaolong Ma
Department of ECE
University of Arizona
xiaolongma@arizona.edu

Fatemeh Afghah
Holcombe Department of ECE
Clemson University
fafghah@clemson.edu

Abstract
In multimodal learning, dominant modalities often overshadow others, limiting
generalization. We propose Modality-Aware Sharpness-Aware Minimization (MSAM), a model-agnostic framework that applies to many modalities and supports
early and late fusion scenarios. In every iteration, M-SAM in three steps optimizes
learning. First, it identifies the dominant modality based on modalities’ contribution in the accuracy using Shapley. Second, it decomposes the loss landscape,
or in another language, it modulates the loss to prioritize the robustness of the
model in favor of the dominant modality, and third, M-SAM updates the weights
by backpropagation of modulated gradients. This ensures robust learning for the
dominant modality while enhancing contributions from others, allowing the model
to explore and exploit complementary features that strengthen overall performance.
Extensive experiments on four diverse datasets show that M-SAM outperforms
the latest state-of-the-art optimization and gradient manipulation methods and
significantly balances and improves multimodal learning.

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning [27] has become the cornerstone of emerging deep neural models. These advanced models integrate diverse data types, including text, audio, images, and sensor data, mimicking
the multiplicity of sensory information that humans experience.
This capability for integration is crucial for a
range of complex tasks. This integration capability is crucial for a range of complex tasks,
enabling models to fully grasp context through
multiple viewpoints, essential in a wide spectrum of applications such as autonomous driving, human-computer interaction, and intelligent
virtual agents. By blending various sources of
information, these multi-modal approaches can
construct richer and more robust representations,
(a) AGM
(b) SAM
(c) M-SAM
potentially leading to improved performance
across various domains. However, achieving Figure 1: Loss landscape visualization of CREMA-D
the ideal balance among modalities presents a (late fusion) for AGM, SAM, and M-SAM from two
different viewpoints.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

