Novel Class Discovery for Point Cloud Segmentation
via Joint Learning of Causal Representation and
Reasoning

Yang Li1 , Aming Wu2 , Zihao Zhang1 , Yahong Han1∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China

1

liyang1389@tju.edu.cn, zhangzihao2490@tju.edu.cn, amwu@hfut.edu.cn, yahong@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on Novel Class Discovery for Point Cloud Segmentation
(3D-NCD), aiming to learn a model that can segment unlabeled (novel) 3D classes
using only the supervision from labeled (base) 3D classes. The key to this task
is to setup the exact correlations between the point representations and their base
class labels, as well as the representation correlations between the points from
base and novel classes. A coarse or statistical correlation learning may lead to
the confusion in novel class inference. lf we impose a causal relationship as a
strong correlated constraint upon the learning process, the essential point cloud
representations that accurately correspond to the classes should be uncovered. To
this end, we introduce a structural causal model (SCM) to re-formalize the 3D-NCD
problem and propose a new method, i.e., Joint Learning of Causal Representation
and Reasoning. Specifically, we first analyze hidden confounders in the base
class representations and the causal relationships between the base and novel
classes through SCM. We devise a causal representation prototype that eliminates
confounders to capture the causal representations of base classes. A graph structure
is then used to model the causal relationships between the base classes’ causal
representation prototypes and the novel class prototypes, enabling causal reasoning
from base to novel classes. Extensive experiments and visualization results on 3D
and 2D NCD semantic segmentation demonstrate the superiorities of our method.

1

Introduction

Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation is one of the key tasks in autonomous driving Landrieu and
Simonovsky (2017) and robotic perception Ghosh et al. (2017). However, traditional approaches
adopt a “closed-world” assumption, which limits their applicability in real-world scenarios. The task
of novel class discovery in point cloud semantic segmentation aims to learn a model that can segment
unlabeled (novel) 3D classes using only the supervision from labeled (base) 3D classes Riz et al.
(2023, 2024); Xu et al. (2024). The key to this task is to setup the exact correlations between the
point representations and their base class labels, as well as the representation correlations between
the points from base and novel classes. However, in practical scenarios, the base class classifier often
learns shortcut features from the point cloud Geirhos et al. (2020); Hermann and Lampinen (2020),
which are spurious correlations that hinder the learning of unbiased semantic representations for the
base class, thereby easily misleading the model into making wrong predictions. Furthermore, due to
the absence of labels and clear semantic connections with the base class, the novel class is prone to
being misclassified as a base class. To this end, we analyze the problems as follows:
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

