Do Automatic Factuality Metrics Measure Factuality?
A Critical Evaluation
Sanjana Ramprasad
Northeastern University
ramprasad.sa@northeastern.edu

Byron C. Wallace
Northeastern University
b.wallace@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Modern LLMs can now produce highly readable abstractive summaries, to the point
that traditional automated metrics for evaluating summary quality, such as ROUGE,
have saturated. However, LLMs still sometimes introduce inaccuracies into summaries, i.e., information inconsistent with or unsupported by the corresponding
source. Measuring the occurrence of these often subtle factual inconsistencies
automatically has proved challenging. This in turn has motivated development
of metrics intended to measure the factual consistency of generated summaries
against sources. But are these approaches measuring what they purport to? Or are
they mostly exploiting artifacts? In this work, we stress test a range of automatic
factuality metrics, including specialized models and LLM-based prompting methods, to probe what they actually capture. Using a shallow classifier to separate
“easy” examples for factual evaluation where surface features suffice from “hard”
cases requiring deeper reasoning, we find that all metrics show substantial performance drops on the latter. Furthermore, some metrics are more sensitive to benign,
fact-preserving edits than to factual corrections. Building on this observation,
we demonstrate that most automatic factuality metrics can be gamed, i.e., their
scores can be artificially inflated by appending innocuous, content-free sentences
to summaries. Among the metrics tested, the LLM-based ChatGPT-DA approach is
the most robust and reliable. However, this comes with a notable caveat: Prompting
LLMs to assess factuality may overly rely on their parametric knowledge rather
than the provided reference when making judgments. Taken together, our findings
call into question the reliability of current factuality metrics and prompt a broader
reflection on what these metrics are truly measuring. We conclude with concrete
recommendations for improving both benchmark design and metric robustness,
particularly in light of their vulnerability to superficial manipulations.

1

Introduction

LLMs are strong abstractive summarizers [Goyal et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2024], but they are not
infallible. Even the largest, most capable models sometimes introduce subtle “hallucinations” (or
“confabulations”) into summaries that are unsupported by or in contradiction to the corresponding
input document [Zhang et al., 2024, Tang et al., 2024b, Ramprasad et al., 2024b]. Such behavior
is especially problematic in domains such as medicine or law, where inaccurate information could
translate into meaningfully negative consequences for individuals.
However, manually evaluating model outputs’ factual consistency with respect to references is
expensive, time-consuming, and impractical to scale. This has motivated development of automated
methods that score generated summaries for consistency with respect to reference documents. Such
metrics have been operationalized using a range of techniques, including entailment (SummaC;
Laban et al. [2022]), QA models (QuestEval; Scialom et al. [2021]), specialized models explicitly
trained to score source-summary pairs (UniEval; Zhong et al. [2022], Alignscore; Zha et al. [2023],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

