Curriculum Design for Trajectory-Constrained Agent:
Compressing Chain-of-Thought Tokens in LLMs

Georgios Tzannetos
MPI-SWS
gtzannet@mpi-sws.org

Parameswaran Kamalaruban
Featurespace Innovation Lab, Visa
kaparame@visa.com

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Training agents to operate under strict constraints during deployment, such as
limited resource budgets or stringent safety requirements, presents significant challenges, especially when these constraints render the task complex. In this work, we
propose a curriculum learning strategy that gradually tightens constraints during
training, enabling the agent to incrementally master the deployment requirements.
Inspired by self-paced learning techniques in unconstrained reinforcement learning
(RL), our approach facilitates a smoother transition to challenging environments by
initially training on simplified versions of the constraints and progressively introducing the full deployment conditions. We provide a theoretical analysis using an
RL agent in a binary-tree Markov Decision Process (MDP) to demonstrate that our
curriculum strategy can accelerate training relative to a baseline approach that imposes the trajectory constraints from the outset. Moreover, we empirically validate
the effectiveness and generality of our method across both RL and large language
model (LLM) agents in diverse settings, including a binary-tree MDP, a multi-task
navigation domain, and a math reasoning task with two benchmarks. These results
highlight the potential of curriculum design in enhancing the efficiency and performance of agents operating under complex trajectory constraints during deployment.
Moreover, when applied to LLMs, our strategy enables compression of output
chain-of-thought tokens, achieving a substantial inference speedup on consumer
hardware, demonstrating its effectiveness for resource-constrained deployment.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) have enabled agents to excel in diverse applications,
including robotics, gaming, and large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. A common assumption
in these domains is that the resources available during training, such as computational power and time,
remain equally accessible during deployment. However, in many real-world scenarios, deploymenttime constraints such as limited resource budgets or strict safety requirements significantly diverge
from the training environment, posing unique challenges that standard RL methods often overlook.
Consider a robot navigating from point A to B that is expected to reach its destination, while ensuring
that travel time and energy consumption do not exceed predefined limits. Similarly, consider an
LLM being used for answering a mathematical question, where a user requires that the response
arrive at the correct answer while using no more than a specified number of chain-of-thought (CoT)
tokens. Recent works have studied how to control the length of LLM responses at test-time via
training objectives or prompting, leading to improved reasoning capabilities [6, 7, 8, 9]. We consider
it from the prospective of designing a curriculum strategy that can enable LLMs to output responses
more desirable than the initial response in terms of reduced inference time and computational cost,
while preserving the answer’s accuracy (Figure 1). Motivated by these examples, we consider the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

