A Few Moments Please: Scalable Graphon Learning
via Moment Matching

Reza Ramezanpour
Rice University
rr68@rice.edu
Antonio G. Marques
King Juan Carlos University
antonio.garcia.marques@urjc.es

Victor M. Tenorio
King Juan Carlos University
victor.tenorio@urjc.es
Ashutosh Sabharwal
Rice University
ashu@rice.edu

Santiago Segarra
Rice University
segarra@rice.edu

Abstract
Graphons, as limit objects of dense graph sequences, play a central role in the
statistical analysis of network data. However, existing graphon estimation methods often struggle with scalability to large networks and resolution-independent
approximation, due to their reliance on estimating latent variables or costly metrics
such as the Gromov-Wasserstein distance. In this work, we propose a novel, scalable graphon estimator that directly recovers the graphon via moment matching,
leveraging implicit neural representations (INRs). Our approach avoids latent
variable modeling by training an INR–mapping coordinates to graphon values–to
match empirical subgraph counts (i.e., moments) from observed graphs. This direct
estimation mechanism yields a polynomial-time solution and crucially sidesteps
the combinatorial complexity of Gromov-Wasserstein optimization. Building on
foundational results, we establish a theoretical guarantee: when the observed subgraph motifs sufficiently represent those of the true graphon (a condition met with
sufficiently large or numerous graph samples), the estimated graphon achieves
a provable upper bound in cut distance from the ground truth. Additionally, we
introduce MomentMixup, a data augmentation technique that performs mixup in
the moment space to enhance graphon-based learning. Our graphon estimation
method achieves strong empirical performance–demonstrating high accuracy on
small graphs and superior computational efficiency on large graphs–outperforming
state-of-the-art scalable estimators in 75% of benchmark settings and matching
them in the remaining cases. Furthermore, MomentMixup demonstrated improved
graph classification accuracy on the majority of our benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Networks are fundamental structures for representing complex relational data across diverse domains,
from social interactions and biological systems to technological infrastructures [10, 31]. Understanding the underlying principles governing these networks is crucial for tasks such as link prediction [26],
community detection [30], and, more broadly, node or graph classification [25]. Graphons, or graph
limits, have emerged as a powerful mathematical framework for capturing the asymptotic structure of
sequences of dense graphs [19, 18, 5, 2]. They provide a continuous, generative model for graphs,
enabling principled statistical analysis and offering a canonical representation for large networks.
Graphons have been successfully applied to derive controllers for large networks [12], to understand
network games with many actors [23], to perform data augmentation in graph settings [21, 13], and
∗

Source Code: https://github.com/rezar76/Graphon-Moment-Matching

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

