Efficient Quadratic Corrections
for Frank-Wolfe Algorithms

Jannis Halbey
Zuse Institute Berlin & TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
halbey@zib.de

Seta Rakotomandimby
École nationale des ponts et chaussées, IP Paris
Champs-sur-Marne, France
seta.rakotomandimby@enpc.fr

Mathieu Besançon
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, LIG, CNRS
Grenoble, France
mathieu.besancon@inria.fr

Sébastien Designolle
Zuse Institute Berlin
Berlin, Germany
designolle@zib.de

Sebastian Pokutta
Zuse Institute Berlin & TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
pokutta@zib.de

Abstract
We develop a Frank-Wolfe algorithm with corrective steps, generalizing previous
algorithms including Blended Conditional Gradients, Blended Pairwise Conditional
Gradients, and Fully-Corrective Frank-Wolfe. For this, we prove tight convergence
guarantees together with an optimal face identification property. Furthermore,
we propose two highly efficient corrective steps for convex quadratic objectives
based on linear optimization or linear system solving, akin to Wolfe’s MinimumNorm Point algorithm, and prove finite-time convergence under suitable conditions.
Beyond optimization problems that are directly quadratic, we revisit two algorithms,
Split Conditional Gradient and Second-Order Conditional Gradient Sliding, which
can leverage quadratic corrections to accelerate the solution of their quadratic
subproblems. We show improved convergence rates for the first and prove broader
applicability for the second. Finally, we demonstrate substantial computational
speedups for Frank-Wolfe-based algorithms with quadratic corrections across the
considered problem classes.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider convex constrained optimization problems of the form
min f (x),

x∈X

where X is a compact, convex set and f is a convex, differentiable function. A particularly interesting
family of first-order methods for this setting is the class of Conditional Gradient (CG) or Frank-Wolfe
(FW) methods [Levitin and Polyak, 1966, Frank and Wolfe, 1956]. One major advantage of these
methods is that they access X only through a Linear Minimization Oracle (LMO), which solves
linear subproblems over the set. The methods then construct solutions as convex combinations of
the vertices returned by the LMO. In particular, these methods avoid costly projection steps while
ensuring an O(1/t) convergence rate in general and linear convergence rates in specific settings.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

