HiPoNet: A Multi-View Simplicial Complex Network
for High Dimensional Point-Cloud and Single-Cell data

Siddharth Viswanath∗1
David R. Johnson2

Hiren Madhu∗1

Christopher Tape3

Michael Perlmutter2
1
∗

Dhananjay Bhaskar1

Rex Ying1

Smita Krishnaswamy1

Yale University 2 Boise State University

Equal Contribution

Ian Adelstein1

Jake Kovalic1

3

University College London

Correspondence: smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose HiPoNet, an end-to-end differentiable neural network
for regression, classification, and representation learning on high-dimensional
point clouds. Our work is motivated by single-cell data which can have very
high-dimensionality – exceeding the capabilities of existing methods for point
clouds which are mostly tailored for 3D data. Moreover, modern single-cell
and spatial experiments now yield entire cohorts of datasets (i.e., one data set
for every patient), necessitating models that can process large, high-dimensional
point-clouds at scale. Most current approaches build a single nearest-neighbor
graph, discarding important geometric and topological information. In contrast,
HiPoNet models the point-cloud as a set of higher-order simplicial complexes,
with each particular complex being created using a reweighting of features. This
method thus generates multiple constructs corresponding to different views of
high-dimensional data, which in biology offers the possibility of disentangling
distinct cellular processes. It then employs simplicial wavelet transforms to extract
multiscale features, capturing both local and global topology from each view. We
show that geometric and topological information is preserved in this framework
both theoretically and empirically. We showcase the utility of HiPoNet on pointcloud level tasks, involving classification and regression of entire point-clouds in
data cohorts. Experimentally, we find that HiPoNet outperforms other point-cloud
and graph-based models on single-cell data. We also apply HiPoNet to spatial
transcriptomics datasets using spatial coordinates as one of the views. Overall,
HiPoNet offers a robust and scalable solution for high-dimensional data analysis.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional point clouds, i.e., sets of points X = {xi }ni=1 ⊆ Rd now arise in many fields—
most prominently single-cell analysis [55, 45, 12, 34, 1, 31], where using modern technologies such
as mass cytometry or scRNA-seq, large cohorts of patients can now be measured producing several
high-dimensional data. Further, technologies like perturb-seq enable the possibility of studying
single-cell data under many conditions leading to comparable cohorts of datasets. Thus, machine
learning techniques that once reasoned about data points and classified data points, now have to
reason about collections of datasets. This serves as the motivation for HiPoNet illustrated in Figure 1.
Generally, methods like UMAP [36] or PHATE [38] reduce point clouds defined by single-cell data
into an individual graph learned from all features (often in the tens of thousands). However, this single
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

