Local-Global Associative Frames for
Symmetry-Preserving Crystal Structure Modeling

1

Haowei Hua1 , Wanyu Lin1,2∗
Department of Computing, 2 Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
haowei.hua@connect.polyu.hk, wan-yu.lin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Crystal structures are defined by the periodic arrangement of atoms in 3D space,
inherently making them equivariant to SO(3) group. A fundamental requirement
for crystal property prediction is that the model’s output should remain invariant to
arbitrary rotational transformations of the input structure. One promising strategy
to achieve this invariance is to align the given crystal structure into a canonical
orientation with appropriately computed rotations, or called frames. However,
existing work either only considers a global frame or solely relies on more advanced local frames based on atoms’ local structure. A global frame is too coarse
to capture the local structure heterogeneity of the crystal, while local frames may
inadvertently disrupt crystal symmetry, limiting their expressivity. In this work, we
revisit the frame design problem for crystalline materials and propose a novel approach to construct expressive Symmetry-Preserving Frames, dubbed as SPFrame,
for modeling crystal structures. Specifically, this local-global associative frame
constructs invariant local frames rather than equivariant ones, thereby preserving
the symmetry of the crystal. In parallel, it integrates global structural information
to construct an equivariant global frame to enforce SO(3) invariance. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that SPFrame consistently outperforms traditional
frame construction techniques and existing crystal property prediction baselines
across multiple benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Fast and accurate prediction of crystal properties is essential for accelerating the discovery of novel
materials, as it enables efficient screening of promising candidates from vast material space [38].
Traditional approaches based on high-fidelity quantum-mechanics calculations, such as density
functional theory (DFT), can provide acceptable error margin for property predictions but they require
high computational resources [58], thereby limiting their practical deployment. As an alternative,
machine learning models have shown great potential for predicting crystal material properties with
both efficiency and accuracy. These methods typically leverage 3D geometric graph representations of
crystals in conjunction with geometric graph neural networks (GGNNs) [2, 36, 3, 55] or transformerbased variants of GGNNs [57, 49, 56, 27, 51, 19] to establish mappings between crystal structural
data and their properties.
When establishing the structure-property mapping, crystal structures are defined by a periodic
arrangement of atoms in 3D space, which inherently makes them equivariant under SO(3) group
transformations (i.e., rotations). However, many crystal properties, such as formation energy, are
scalar quantities that remain invariant under such transformations. Consequently, to ensure accurate
property prediction, GGNNs must maintain invariance when input structures are subjected to SO(3)
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

