Adaptive Neighborhood-Constrained Q Learning
for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Yixiu Mao1 , Yun Qu1 , Qi Wang1 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
myx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) suffers from extrapolation errors induced by
out-of-distribution (OOD) actions. To address this, offline RL algorithms typically
impose constraints on action selection, which can be systematically categorized
into density, support, and sample constraints. However, we show that each category
has inherent limitations: density and sample constraints tend to be overly conservative in many scenarios, while the support constraint, though least restrictive, faces
challenges in accurately modeling the behavior policy. To overcome these limitations, we propose a new neighborhood constraint that restricts action selection in
the Bellman target to the union of neighborhoods of dataset actions. Theoretically,
the constraint not only bounds extrapolation errors and distribution shift under
certain conditions, but also approximates the support constraint without requiring
behavior policy modeling. Moreover, it retains substantial flexibility and enables
pointwise conservatism by adapting the neighborhood radius for each data point. In
practice, we employ data quality as the adaptation criterion and design an adaptive
neighborhood constraint. Building on an efficient bilevel optimization framework,
we develop a simple yet effective algorithm, Adaptive Neighborhood-constrained Q
learning (ANQ), to perform Q learning with target actions satisfying this constraint.
Empirically, ANQ achieves state-of-the-art performance on standard offline RL
benchmarks and exhibits strong robustness in scenarios with noisy or limited data.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) tackles sequential decision-making problems and has gained considerable attention in recent years [58, 70, 67, 14]. Despite its promise, RL faces practical challenges,
notably the high data collection costs [38] and exploration risks [24]. Offline RL offers a compelling
alternative by learning from a static dataset collected by a behavior policy [43, 44]. It enables the use
of existing large-scale datasets [33, 52, 63] and reduces the dangers of unsafe exploration. However,
it also introduces a key challenge: evaluating out-of-distribution (OOD) actions leads to extrapolation
errors [23], which further causes value overestimation and significant performance degradation [44].
To address this issue, offline RL approaches typically impose constraints on the action selection
process. A common strategy is to align the probability densities of the trained and behavior policies [83, 21], enforcing a density constraint. This is usually achieved using divergence metrics such
as reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) [83, 32], forward KL (i.e., behavior cloning) [21, 61], Fisher [39],
or the implicit CQL divergence [42]. While straightforward, these methods can be overly restrictive
both theoretically and empirically [41], in cases where the overall quality of the behavior policy
is low. To overcome this limitation, recent work has explored the most relaxed support constraint,
which only keeps the selected actions within the support of the behavior policy [82, 53, 93]. Accomplishing this generally necessitates high-fidelity estimation of the behavior policy through advanced
generative modeling techniques [26, 82, 93, 9]. However, such modeling is challenging due to the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

