System Prompt Optimization with Meta-Learning

Yumin Choi1∗ Jinheon Baek1∗ Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , DeepAuto.ai2
{yuminchoi, jinheon.baek, sungju.hwang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities, with optimizing their input prompts playing a pivotal role in maximizing their performance.
However, while LLM prompts consist of both the task-agnostic system prompts
and task-specific user prompts, existing work on prompt optimization has focused
on user prompts specific to individual queries or tasks, and largely overlooked
the system prompt that is, once optimized, applicable across different tasks and
domains. Motivated by this, we introduce the novel problem of bilevel system
prompt optimization, whose objective is to design system prompts that are robust to
diverse user prompts and transferable to unseen tasks. To tackle this problem, we
then propose a meta-learning framework, which meta-learns the system prompt by
optimizing it over various user prompts across multiple datasets, while simultaneously updating the user prompts in an iterative manner to ensure synergy between
them. We conduct experiments on 14 unseen datasets spanning 5 different domains,
on which we show that our approach produces system prompts that generalize effectively to diverse user prompts. Also, our findings reveal that the optimized system
prompt enables rapid adaptation even to unseen tasks, requiring fewer optimization
steps for test-time user prompts while achieving improved performance.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of
tasks and domains [1, 7, 23]. To effectively harness LLMs in diverse application scenarios, prompts
play a pivotal role in guiding their behavior and ensuring their outputs align with user goals, which
comprise two components: system prompts and user prompts [25]. Specifically, system prompts are
task-agnostic instructions that define the foundational behavior and constraints of the LLM (which are
also designed to be applicable to multiple tasks and domains); whereas, user prompts are task-specific
inputs designed to elicit responses tailored to solving particular queries or tasks.
Alongside the advancement of LLMs, as their performance is highly sensitive to the prompts provided,
there has been a surge of interest in designing effective prompts. Traditionally, manual prompt crafting
has been the dominant approach, which has led to the discovery of several prompts, such as Chainof-Thought, which is known for enhancing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs [39]. However, this
manual design process is labor-intensive and limited in scalability. Therefore, to overcome these
limitations, the field of automatic prompt optimization has emerged, which aims to automatically
improve prompts by utilizing LLMs directly or further integrating them with algorithms to explore
and generate more effective prompt variations [12, 14, 41, 45]. Specifically, notable methods include
textual gradients [27], which produces gradients (that criticize prompts) in text based on model
prediction results and formulates new prompts iteratively, and the approach with Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) [37], which explores and evaluates various prompt configurations through tree search.
∗

Equal contribution; Code is available at https://github.com/Dozi01/MetaSPO.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

