The Logical Expressiveness of Temporal GNNs
via Two-Dimensional Product Logics

Marco Sälzer
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau
Kaiserslautern, Germany
marco.saelzer@rptu.de

Przemysław Andrzej Wał˛ega
Queen Mary University of London, UK
University of Łódź, Poland
p.walega@qmul.ac.uk

Martin Lange
Theoretical Computer Science / Formal Methods
University of Kassel, Germany
martin.lange@uni-kassel.de

Abstract
In recent years, the expressive power of various neural architectures—including
graph neural networks (GNNs), transformers, and recurrent neural networks—has
been characterised using tools from logic and formal language theory. As the
capabilities of basic architectures are becoming well understood, increasing attention is turning to models that combine multiple architectural paradigms. Among
them particularly important, and challenging to analyse, are temporal extensions of
GNNs, which integrate both spatial (graph-structure) and temporal (evolution over
time) dimensions. In this paper, we initiate the study of logical characterisation
of temporal GNNs by connecting them to two-dimensional product logics. We
show that the expressive power of temporal GNNs depends on how graph and
temporal components are combined. In particular, temporal GNNs that apply static
GNNs recursively over time can capture all properties definable in the product
logic of (past) propositional temporal logic PTL and the modal logic K. In contrast,
architectures such as graph-and-time TGNNs and global TGNNs can only express
restricted fragments of this logic, where the interaction between temporal and
spatial operators is syntactically constrained. These provide us with the first results
on the logical expressiveness of temporal GNNs.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen significant progress in understanding the expressive power of neural architectures using tools from logic, formal language theory, and graph theory. Some of the most prominent
results concern Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), whose distinguishing power has been famously
characterised with the Weisfeiler-Leman isomorphism test [31, 46] and whose logical expressiveness
has been captured with modal and first-order logics [3, 17, 32, 5, 1]. These insights have revealed both
the limitations and strengths of GNNs, inspiring the development of more expressive variants such as
higher-order GNNs [31]. They have also opened the way for extracting logical rules from GNNs,
advancing explainability in graph-based learning [42, 43]. Consequently, the logical expressiveness
of GNNs has become a rapidly evolving research area.
As the capabilities of standard GNN architectures become relatively well understood, research interest
is shifting to more complex architectures, which combine multiple dimensions of structure. One
particularly prominent and challenging case is that of Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNNs)
[26, 40, 14], which can be seen as an extension of GNNs enabling to process temporal graphs,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

