On Epistemic Uncertainty of Visual Tokens for Object
Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models

Hoigi Seo1∗
Dong Un Kang1∗
Hyunjin Cho
Joohoon Lee2
Se Young Chun1,2,3†
1
Dept. of ECE 2 IPAI & 3 INMC, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{seohoiki3215, qkrtnskfk23, jim0228, joohoonl, sychun}@snu.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs), which integrate a vision encoder (VE)
with a large language model, have achieved remarkable success across various
tasks. However, there are still crucial challenges in LVLMs such as object hallucination, generating descriptions of objects that are not in the input image. Here, we
argue that uncertain visual tokens within the VE is a key factor that contributes
to object hallucination. Our statistical analysis found that there are positive correlations between visual tokens with high epistemic uncertainty and the occurrence
of hallucinations. Furthermore, we show theoretically and empirically that visual
tokens in early VE layers that exhibit large representation deviations under small
adversarial perturbations indicate high epistemic uncertainty. Based on these findings, we propose a simple yet effective strategy to mitigate object hallucination by
modifying the VE only. Our method comprises a proxy method with adversarial
perturbations for identifying uncertain visual tokens efficiently and a method to
mask these uncertain visual tokens during the self-attention process in the middle
layers of the VE, suppressing their influence on visual encoding and thus alleviating
hallucinations. Extensive experiments show that our method significantly reduces
object hallucinations in LVLMs and can synergistically work with other prior arts.

1

Introduction

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a range
of multi-modal tasks, including image captioning [1, 10, 30, 33, 63], visual-question answering
(VQA) [10, 43, 58], and multi-modal dialogue systems [14, 28, 35, 36, 69]. Despite these notable advancements, recent studies [19, 31, 47, 57] have reported that LVLMs are susceptible to hallucination,
generating textual descriptions that do not align with the input image. In particular, object hallucination, where the model describes objects not present in the input image, significantly undermines the
reliability and thus the practical utility of LVLMs [20, 24, 25, 27].
To mitigate object hallucination in LVLMs, recent works [2, 8, 20, 24, 25, 27, 37] have explored
training-free approaches including modifying the decoding strategy of the language model [2, 20, 27,
37], modulating attention mechanisms [24, 25, 37], or altering the input image [2] during inference.
While these methods have shown effectiveness in reducing object hallucination, they often suffer
limitations such as requiring multiple inferences of the large language model, which is the most
computationally expensive component of LVLMs, or yielding relatively small performance gains. In
contrast, approaches for object hallucination mitigation that directly target the vision encoder, a core
component responsible for visual perception, have been relatively underexplored.
* equal contribution, † corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

