Refinement Methods for Distributed Distribution
Estimation under ℓp-Losses
Deheng Yuan1 , Tao Guo2,3 , Zhongyi Huang1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University
3
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
ydh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, taoguo@seu.edu.cn,
zhongyih@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Consider the communication-constrained estimation of discrete distributions under
ℓp losses, where each distributed terminal holds multiple independent samples
and uses limited number of bits to describe the samples. We obtain the minimax
optimal rates of the problem for most parameter regimes. As a result, an elbow
effect of the optimal rates at p = 2 is clearly identified. In order to achieve the
optimal rates for different parameter regimes, we introduce refinement methods
and develop additional customized techniques in the estimation protocols. The
general idea of the refinement methods is to first generate rough estimate by partial
information and then establish refined estimate in subsequent steps guided by the
rough estimate. Then customized techniques such as successive refinement, sample
compression, thresholding and random hashing are leveraged to achieve the optimal
rates in different parameter regimes. The optimality of the estimation protocols is
shown by deriving compatible minimax lower bounds.

1

Introduction

Motivated by applications in areas such as federated learning [1–3], distributed statistical estimation
problems have recently received wide attention. In this setting, multiple distributed agents cooperate
to train a model, while each of them can only access to a subset of training data. These agents can
exchange messages but their communication budgets are constrained. The performance of the system
is often limited by the communication constraints.
One fundamental learning task is to estimate the underlying discrete distribution of the data. Under
communication constraints, the minimax optimal rates for the estimation error were studied in [4–11].
Another important constraint is the differential privacy, and the corresponding problem was similarly
considered in [5,6,12,13]. In these works, only one sample was accessed by each distributed terminal
and the most common ℓ1 and ℓ2 losses were used to measure the estimation error. However, this is an
oversimplification of the practical case, where general ℓp losses may be necessary and each terminal
can access to n > 1 samples.
On the one hand, some works [14,15] further explored the distribution estimation problem with n > 1
samples at each terminal, under the ℓ1 loss. On the other hand, later works [16, 17] considered the
problem under general ℓp losses, with a limited scope to n = 1. Even in this limited case, for the
regime p > 2 only suboptimal lower bounds were derived. In the more practical case where each
terminal can obtain n > 1 samples, the optimal rates under ℓp losses are also unclear. The problem
with n > 1 samples is much more difficult than that for n = 1, since its inherent structure is not
The first two authors contributed equally to this work. Corresponding authors: Tao Guo, Zhongyi Huang.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

