R-KV: Redundancy-aware KV Cache Compression for
Reasoning Models

Zefan Cai1B , Wen Xiao2B , Hanshi Sun3 , Cheng Luo4 , Yikai Zhang1 , Ke Wan5 , Yucheng Li6 ,
Yeyang Zhou5 , Li-Wen Chang, Jiuxiang Gu7 , Zhen Dong8 , Anima Anandkumar4 ,
Abedelkadir Asi2 , Junjie Hu1B
1
University of Wisconsin - Madison 2 Microsoft 3 Carnegie Mellon University
4
California Institute of Technology 5 University of California - San Diego 6 University of Surrey
7
Adobe 8 University of California - Berkeley
https://zefan-cai.github.io/R-KV.page/
https://github.com/Zefan-Cai/R-KV

Abstract
Reasoning models have demonstrated impressive performance in self-reflection
and chain-of-thought reasoning. However, they often produce excessively long
outputs, leading to prohibitively large key-value (KV) caches during inference.
While chain-of-thought inference significantly improves performance on complex
reasoning tasks, it can also lead to reasoning failures when deployed with existing
KV cache compression approaches. To address this, we propose Redundancyaware KV Cache Compression for Reasoning models (R-KV), a novel method
specifically targeting redundant tokens in reasoning models. Our method preserves
nearly 100% of the full KV cache performance using only 10% of the KV cache,
substantially outperforming existing KV cache baselines, which reaches only
60% of the performance. Remarkably, R-KV even achieves 105% of full KV
cache performance with 16% of the KV cache. This KV-cache reduction also
leads to a 90% memory saving and a 6.6× throughput over standard chain-ofthought reasoning inference. Experimental results show that R-KV consistently
outperforms existing KV cache compression baselines across two mathematical
reasoning datasets.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
complex reasoning and self-reflection. However, reasoning models (e.g., DeepSeek-R1 [1]) exhibit a
critical deployment challenge: their tendency to produce excessively lengthy and redundant reasoning
traces results in unsustainable memory demands [2], primarily due to the rapid growth of the keyvalue (KV) cache during autoregressive generation. For instance, a DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B
model may generate 32K tokens to solve a complex math problem, consuming 15.5GB of memory
to load the model weight and 4.1GB of memory to store the KV cache. This paradigm of long
chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning generation necessitates the development of KV cache compression.
Outputs from current reasoning models, especially during complex chain-of-thought generation,
are fundamentally marked by pervasive redundancy. This inherent characteristic means they are
often filled with superfluous content, including unnecessary reflections, iterative re-evaluations, and
verbose self-dialogue, all of which add little new semantic value while significantly inflating the
B Corresponding to Zefan Cai zefncai@gmail.com, Wen Xiao wxiao@microsoft.com and Junjie Hu
junjie.hu@wisc.edu
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

