MAESTRO : Adaptive Sparse Attention and Robust
Learning for Multimodal Dynamic Time Series

Payal Mohapatra

Yueyuan Sui Akash Pandey Stephen Xia
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, USA
{payal.mohapatra, qzhu}@northwestern.edu

Qi Zhu

Abstract
From clinical healthcare to daily living, continuous sensor monitoring across multiple modalities has shown great promise for real-world intelligent decision-making
but also faces various challenges. In this work, we introduce MAESTRO, a novel
framework that overcomes key limitations of existing multimodal learning approaches: (1) reliance on a single primary modality for alignment, (2) pairwise
modeling of modalities, and (3) assumption of complete modality observations.
These limitations hinder the applicability of these approaches in real-world multimodal time-series settings, where primary modality priors are often unclear, the
number of modalities can be large (making pairwise modeling impractical), and
sensor failures often result in arbitrary missing observations. At its core, MAESTRO
facilitates dynamic intra- and cross-modal interactions based on task relevance,
and leverages symbolic tokenization and adaptive attention budgeting to construct
long multimodal sequences, which are processed via sparse cross-modal attention.
The resulting cross-modal tokens are routed through a sparse Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) mechanism, enabling black-box specialization under varying modality combinations. We evaluate MAESTRO against 10 baselines on four diverse datasets
spanning three applications, and observe average relative improvements of 4% and
8% over the best existing multimodal and multivariate approaches, respectively, under complete observations. Under partial observations—with up to 40% of missing
modalities—MAESTRO achieves an average 9% improvement. Further analysis also
demonstrates the robustness and efficiency of MAESTRO’s sparse, modality-aware
design for learning from dynamic time series.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications—such as activity recognition [2], stress monitoring [46, 39], sleepstage detection [13], and clinical decision-making [20]—have been significantly enhanced by the
integration of wearable and inconspicuous continuous-sensing technologies. Devices such as smartwatches, smartphones, and chest straps collect time-series data that encode information about various
physiological and behavioral phenomena (e.g., Electrodermal Activity (EDA) for skin conductance,
accelerometers for motion, and Electrocardiogram (ECG) for heart activity). Given the common
temporal structure of these signals, they are often abstracted as multivariate time-series data [37].
However, this simplified representation can be suboptimal due to the inherent heterogeneity of sensing
modalities and the varied task relevance of each modality and their interactions. An alternative is
sensor fusion, but existing approaches [68, 57, 17] are often application-specific and heuristic. Even
within a single application such as estimating heart rate from multimodal sensing, studies may employ
diverse strategies, ranging from early-fusion in multi-wavelength [35] and multi-site PPG [34] to late
fusion with temperature [36], reflecting a lack of consensus on how to systematically handle modality
interactions. Hence, there is a pressing need for a general framework that can automatically learn
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

