Robust Regression of General ReLUs with Queries

Ilias Diakonikolas∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane∗
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Mingchen Ma∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
mingchen@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the task of agnostically learning general (as opposed to homogeneous)
ReLUs under the Gaussian distribution with respect to the squared loss. In the
passive learning setting, recent work gave a computationally efficient algorithm that
uses poly(d, 1/ϵ) labeled examples and outputs a hypothesis with error O(opt) + ϵ,
where opt is the squared loss of the best fit ReLU. Here we focus on the interactive
setting, where the learner has some form of query access to the labels of unlabeled
examples. Our main result is the first computationally efficient learner that uses
dpolylog(1/ϵ) + Õ(min{1/p, 1/ϵ}) black-box label queries, where p is the bias of
the target function, and achieves error O(opt) + ϵ. We complement our algorithmic
result by showing that its query complexity bound is qualitatively near-optimal,
even ignoring computational constraints. Finally, we establish that query access
is essentially necessary to improve on the label complexity of passive learning.
Specifically, for pool-based active learning, any active learner requires Ω̃(d/ϵ)
labels, unless it draws a super-polynomial number of unlabeled examples.

1

Introduction

ReLU activations play a central role in the design of modern neural networks. A ReLU function
σ(W · x − t) = max{W · x − t, 0} is specified by a pair of parameters (W, t), where W ∈ Rd and
t ∈ R. ReLU regression is the following basic problem: given some form of access to a distribution
D over Rd × R, output a ReLU with loss that can compete with opt—the loss of the best-fit ReLU
with respect to D. This fundamental task has been extensively studied in the past decades; see,
e.g., [KKSK11, FCG20, DGK+ 20, VYS21, DKTZ22b, WZDD23, ATV22, GV24] and references
therein. Prior algorithmic work has focused on learning from random examples (passive learning)
and has obtained efficient learners with error O(opt) + ϵ, under the assumption that the marginal
distribution Dx is well-behaved; in most cases, a standard Gaussian or a structured distribution with
similar properties. Such a benchmark is motivated by known computational hardness results for
this problem. On the one hand, without any assumption on Dx , it is computationally intractable to
achieve error C · opt for any constant C > 1 [DKMR22]. On the other hand, even under the standard
Gaussian, it is computationally hard to achieve loss opt + ϵ [DKZ20, DKR23].
Despite the aforementioned long line of work on this problem, the number of labeled examples
needed to achieve the desired error guarantee remains poorly understood. For the special case that the
target ReLU has negative threshold (i.e., t ≤ 0) [DKTZ22a, WZDD23] design efficient PAC learning
algorithms achieving error O(opt) + ϵ with a nearly optimal sample complexity of dpolylog(1/ϵ).
The problem becomes much more challenging for general ReLUs (with arbitrary bias t) and in
*

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

