Association-Focused Path Aggregation
for Graph Fraud Detection

Tian Qiu 1,2

Wenda Li 1,2 Zunlei Feng 1,2 Jie Lei 3 Tao Wang 4∗
Yi Gao 1 Mingli Song 1,2 Yang Gao 1,2∗

1
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology
4
Department of Planning, Ministry of Emergency Management Big Data Center

2

{tqiu,lwdup,zunleifeng,gaoyi,songml,roygao}@zju.edu.cn
jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn
hbliu@qdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Fraudulent activities have caused substantial negative social impacts and are exhibiting emerging characteristics such as intelligence and industrialization, posing
challenges of high-order interactions, intricate dependencies, and the sparse yet
concealed nature of fraudulent entities. Existing graph fraud detectors are limited
by their narrow “receptive fields”, as they focus only on the relations between
an entity and its neighbors while neglecting longer-range structural associations
hidden between entities. To address this issue, we propose a novel fraud detector
based on Graph Path Aggregation (GPA). It operates through variable-length path
sampling, semantic-associated path encoding, path interaction and aggregation,
and aggregation-enhanced fraud detection. To further facilitate interpretable association analysis, we synthesize G-Internet, the first benchmark dataset in the
field of internet fraud detection. Extensive experiments across datasets in multiple
fraud scenarios demonstrate that the proposed GPA outperforms mainstream fraud
detectors by up to +15% in Average Precision (AP). Additionally, GPA exhibits
enhanced robustness to noisy labels and provides excellent interpretability by uncovering implicit fraudulent patterns across broader contexts. Code is available at
https://github.com/horrible-dong/GPA.

1

Introduction

With the evolution of information technology, there is a pronounced spillover of risks from cyberspace
into human society and the physical world. The sharp rise in fraudulent activities has made fraud
detection [1–4] an increasingly prominent research area. Fraud encompasses various domains such
as the internet, finance, social networks, and online reviews, bringing severe negative social impacts
including economic losses, trust damage, disruption of fair competition, and infringement of consumer
rights. Therefore, combating fraud and safeguarding public interests are of utmost importance.
As fraudulent activities become increasingly intelligent and industrialized, the main challenges
in fraud detection include: (1) high-order interactions often exist between fraudulent entities, (2)
dependencies among fraudulent entities are intricate, and (3) fraudulent entities are sparse and
highly concealed. Given the complex dependencies and topological structures among fraud entities,
researchers have employed Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [5–7] for fraud detection. However,
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

