Optimism Without Regularization:
Constant Regret in Zero-Sum Games

John Lazarsfeld
SUTD∗

Georgios Piliouras
SUTD

Ryann Sim
SUTD

Stratis Skoulakis
Aarhus University

Abstract
This paper studies the optimistic variant of Fictitious Play for learning in twoplayer zero-sum games. While it is known that Optimistic FTRL – a regularized
algorithm with a bounded stepsize parameter – obtains constant regret in this
setting, we show for the first time that similar, optimal rates are also achievable
without regularization: we prove for two-strategy games that Optimistic Fictitious
Play (using any tiebreaking rule) obtains only constant regret, providing surprising
new evidence on the ability of non-no-regret algorithms for fast learning in games.
Our proof technique leverages a geometric view of Optimistic Fictitious Play in
the dual space of payoff vectors, where we show a certain energy function of the
iterates remains
√ bounded over time. Additionally, we also prove a regret lower
bound of Ω( T ) for Alternating Fictitious Play. In the unregularized
√ regime, this
separates the ability of optimism and alternation in achieving o( T ) regret.

1

Introduction

Despite the fact that regularization is essential for no-regret online learning in general adversarial
settings, unregularized algorithms are still able to obtain sublinear regret in the case of two-player
zero-sum games. Fictitious Play (FP), dating back to Brown (1951), is the canonical example of
such an unregularized algorithm, and it results from both players independently running Follow-theLeader (FTL).2 In the worst case, FTL can have Ω(T ) regret due to its sensitivity to oscillations in
adversarially-chosen reward sequences (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012). However, in zero-sum game
settings, the classic result of Robinson (1951) proved that, under Fictitious Play, the sum of the
players’ regrets (henceforth referred to as regret) is indeed sublinear (thus implying time-average
convergence to a Nash equilibrium), albeit at the very slow O(T 1−1/n ) rate for n × n games (which
was shown to be tight by Daskalakis and Pan (2014) using an adversarial tiebreaking rule).
However, the √
recent works of Abernethy et al. (2021a) and Lazarsfeld et al. (2025) have established
improved O( T ) regret guarantees for Fictitious Play on diagonal payoff matrices (using lexicographical tiebreaking) and on generalized Rock-Paper-Scissors matrices (using any tiebreaking rule),
respectively. As a result, there is growing evidence on the robustness of unregularized algorithms like
FP (not a no-regret algorithm in general) for obtaining fast, sublinear regret in zero-sum games.
On the other hand, the past decade√has seen regularized learning algorithms exhibit a remarkable
success in providing even better o( T ) regret guarantees for learning in games. In zero-sum games,
optimistic variants of FTRL (including Optimistic Multiplicative Weights and Optimistic Gradient
Descent) obtain only constant regret (with respect to the time horizon T ), implying optimal O(1/T )
time-average convergence to Nash (Rakhlin and Sridharan, 2013; Syrgkanis et al., 2015). While such
guarantees can be obtained using absolute constant stepsizes (with no dependence on T ), standard
∗
2

Correspondence to: jlazarsfeld@gmail.com
FTL is a particular instance of Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) with unbounded stepsize η → ∞.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

