Traversal Verification for Speculative Tree Decoding

Yepeng Weng1∗ Qiao Hu2∗† Xujie Chen1 Li Liu1
Dianwen Mei1 Huishi Qiu1 Jiang Tian1 Zhongchao Shi1
1
Lenovo AI Technology Center, Lenovo
2
National Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences (NCMIS), AMSS, CAS

Abstract
Speculative decoding is a promising approach for accelerating large language
models. The primary idea is to use a lightweight draft model to speculate the
output of the target model for multiple subsequent timesteps, and then verify
them in parallel to determine whether the drafted tokens should be accepted or
rejected. To enhance acceptance rates, existing frameworks typically construct
token trees containing multiple candidates in each timestep. However, their reliance
on token-level verification mechanisms introduces two critical limitations: First, the
probability distribution of a sequence differs from that of individual tokens, leading
to suboptimal acceptance length. Second, current verification schemes begin from
the root node and proceed layer by layer in a top-down manner. Once a parent
node is rejected, all its child nodes should be discarded, resulting in inefficient
utilization of speculative candidates. This paper introduces Traversal Verification,
a novel speculative decoding algorithm that fundamentally rethinks the verification
paradigm through leaf-to-root traversal. Our approach considers the acceptance
of the entire token sequence from the current node to the root, and preserves
potentially valid subsequences that would be prematurely discarded by existing
methods. We theoretically prove that the probability distribution obtained through
Traversal Verification is identical to that of the target model, guaranteeing lossless
inference while achieving substantial acceleration gains. Experimental results
on various models and multiple tasks demonstrate that our method consistently
improves acceptance length and throughput over token-level verification.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have been widely adopted due to their exceptional performance
across various natural language processing tasks [10, 25, 34] . However, the massive parameters and
the autoregressive generation scheme of transformer decoder-only [30] LLMs limit the generation
speed. Speculative decoding [19, 3] is an lossless acceleration technique which employs a lightweight
model (draft model) with fewer parameters to speculate the output tokens of the original LLM (target
model) for several future timesteps, then feed the drafted tokens into the target model in parallel.
After getting the probability distribution of the target model, speculative decoding determines the
acceptance or rejection of each token based on their probabilities in both target and draft models. If a
token is rejected, a new token will be resampled and all subsequent tokens should be discarded.
To further improve acceleration performance, existing methods [23, 4, 21, 14, 35] generate multiple
candidates at each drafting timestep, forming a tree of drafted tokens. However, these methods
generally inherit the token-level verification mechanism from vanilla speculative decoding to tree
scenarios, resulting in suboptimal acceptance lengths in tree decoding. To be more specific, firstly,
∗
†

Equal contribution. Contact: wengyp1@lenovo.com, huqiao2020@amss.ac.cn
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

