Stable Matching with Ties:
Approximation Ratios and Learning

Shiyun Lin∗
Center for Statistical Science
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
shiyunlin@stu.pku.edu.cn
Nadav Merlis
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
nmerlis@technion.ac.il

Simon Mauras
INRIA, FairPlay Joint Team
simon.mauras@inria.fr

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
Criteo AI Lab, FairPlay Joint Team
Vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
We study matching markets with ties, where workers on one side of the market
may have tied preferences over jobs, determined by their matching utilities. Unlike
classical two-sided markets with strict preferences, no single stable matching
exists that is utility-maximizing for all workers. To address this challenge, we
introduce the Optimal Stable Share (OSS)-ratio, which measures the ratio of a
worker’s maximum achievable utility in any stable matching to their utility in
a given matching. We prove that distributions over only stable matchings can
incur linear utility losses, i.e., an Ω(N ) OSS-ratio, where N is the number of
workers. To overcome this, we design an algorithm that efficiently computes a
distribution over (possibly non-stable) matchings, achieving an asymptotically tight
O(log N ) OSS-ratio. When exact utilities are unknown, our second algorithm
guarantees workers a logarithmic approximation of their optimal utility under
bounded instability. Finally, we extend our offline approximation results to a
bandit learning setting where utilities are only observed for matched pairs. In this
setting, we consider worker-optimal stable regret, design an adaptive algorithm
that smoothly interpolates between markets with strict preferences and those with
statistical ties, and establish a lower bound revealing the fundamental trade-off
between strict and tied preference regimes.

1

Introduction

Two-sided matching markets are prevalent in various contexts, such as matching students to schools
[2, 3], doctors to hospitals [50], or workers to jobs [5]. In this paper, we model the market as a
company that assigns jobs to workers. Each participant has a preference ordering over the other
side of the market. For example, jobs rank workers by ability, while workers rank jobs by personal
preference. Stability ensures a fair equilibrium where workers receive sufficiently desirable jobs
while respecting the preferences and priorities of all parties. When preferences are strict, the deferred
acceptance algorithm [23] efficiently computes a worker-optimal stable matching – no worker can
get a better job without violating stability.
In online marketplaces, for example, the online crowd-sourcing platform Amazon Mechanical
Turk, workers are usually uncertain of their preferences over jobs at the beginning, since they
do not have hands-on experience. However, there are numerous similar tasks to be delegated
∗

This work was performed when Shiyun Lin was a visiting student at CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

