On Transferring Transferability:
Towards a Theory for Size Generalization

Eitan Levin ⋄
Caltech

Yuxin Ma ⋄
Johns Hopkins University

Mateo Díaz
Johns Hopkins University

Soledad Villar
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Many modern learning tasks require models that can take inputs of varying sizes.
Consequently, dimension-independent architectures have been proposed for domains where the inputs are graphs, sets, and point clouds. Recent work on graph
neural networks has explored whether a model trained on low-dimensional data
can transfer its performance to higher-dimensional inputs. We extend this body of
work by introducing a general framework for transferability across dimensions. We
show that transferability corresponds precisely to continuity in a limit space formed
by identifying small problem instances with equivalent large ones. This identification is driven by the data and the learning task. We instantiate our framework
on existing architectures, and implement the necessary changes to ensure their
transferability. Finally, we provide design principles for designing new transferable
models. Numerical experiments support our findings.

1

Introduction

Modern learning problems often involve inputs of arbitrary size: language has text sequences of
arbitrary length, graphs encode networks with an arbitrary number of nodes, and particle systems
might have an arbitrary number of points. Although traditional models are typically limited to the
specific input dimensions they were trained on, dimension-independent architectures have been
proposed for several domains. For instance, graph neural networks (GNN) for graphs [70], DeepSet
for sets [91], and PointNet for point clouds [66]. These models have a desirable feature: they can be
trained with low-dimensional samples and, then, deployed on higher-dimensional data.
A key question in this context is whether the performance of a model trained with low-dimensional
samples transfers across dimensions. This has been thoroughly studied in the context of GNNs [70, 58,
59], where the term transferability was first coined.1 In turn, the tools used to establish transferability
of GNNs are, at first sight, problem-specific, including the concept of a graphon, and certain
convergence of homomorphism densities. Thus, the analysis does not readily extend beyond GNNs,
and so we ask
What properties of the model, data, and learning task ensure that the learning performance
transfers well across dimensions?
⋄

These authors contributed equally to this work.
The term “transferability” is not related to transfer learning or meta-learning. It specifically refers to the
phenomenon that consistency of outputs is preserved under size changes for structurally similar inputs, permitting
direct performance carryover from small to large problems.
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

