Isotropic Noise in Stochastic and Quantum Convex
Optimization

Annie Marsden∗

Liam O’Carroll†

Aaron Sidford†

Chenyi Zhang†

Abstract
We consider the problem of minimizing a d-dimensional Lipschitz convex function
using a stochastic gradient oracle. We introduce and motivate a setting where the
noise of the stochastic gradient is isotropic in that it is bounded in every direction
with high probability. We then develop an algorithm for this setting which improves
upon prior results by a factor of d in certain regimes, and as a corollary, achieves a
new state-of-the-art complexity for sub-exponential noise. We give matching lower
bounds (up to polylogarithmic factors) for both results. Additionally, we develop
an efficient quantum isotropifier, a quantum algorithm which converts a variancebounded quantum sampling oracle into one that outputs an unbiased estimate with
isotropic error. Combining our results, we obtain improved dimension-dependent
rates for quantum stochastic convex optimization.

1

Introduction

Stochastic convex optimization (SCO) [51, 47, 48, 9] is a foundational problem in optimization
and learning theory, with numerous applications in theoretical computer science [16], operations
research [50], machine learning [11], and beyond. Algorithms for SCO, most notably stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) and its many variants, are extensively studied and widely deployed in
practice. In addition, there has been increasing interest recently in its quantum analog, quantum
stochastic convex optimization, and new provably efficient quantum algorithms with have been
developed [53, 67].
In one of its simplest forms which we focus on in this paper, SCO asks to compute an -optimal point
of a differentiable3 convex L-Lipschitz function f : Rd → R, minimized at an unknown point x?
with kx? k ≤ R for the Euclidean norm k·k, given access to a bounded stochastic gradient oracle,
which we define formally in Definition 1 and Definition 2 below. Throughout, we assume that the
randomness in calls to any oracle are independent of previous calls.
Definition 1 (SGO). O(·) is a stochastic gradient oracle (SGO) for differentiable f : Rd → R if
when queried at x ∈ Rd , it outputs O(x) ∈ Rd such that EO(x) = ∇f (x).
Definition 2 (BSGO). OB (·) is a σB -bounded SGO (σB -BSGO) for differentiable f : Rd → R if it
2
is an SGO for f such that EkOB (x)k2 ≤ σB
for any query x ∈ Rd .
It is well known that SGD, in particular, iterating xt+1 ← xt − ηOB (xt ) with an appropriate choice
2
of step size η, solves SCO with O(R2 σB
/2 ) queries, which is optimal even when d = 1 [2]. In
this paper, we seek to bypass this fundamental limit by studying more fine-grained models of the
stochastic gradient. In particular, we study the following question:
∗

Google Deepmind, anniemarsden@google.com
Stanford University, {ocarroll,sidford,chenyiz}@stanford.edu
Preprint available at arXiv:2510.20745.
3
We assume all objective functions are differentiable. Following a similar argument in prior works (e.g.,
[17, 53]), our results extend to non-differentiable settings because convex functions are almost everywhere
differentiable, and our algorithms are robust to polynomially small numerical errors.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

