Prioritizing Perception-Guided Self-Supervision: A
New Paradigm for Causal Modeling in End-to-End
Autonomous Driving

Yi Huang12∗, Zhan Qu2∗, Lihui Jiang2†, Bingbing Liu2 , Hongbo Zhang2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
yihuang11@link.cuhk.edu.cn
{quzhan, jianglihui1, liu.bingbing, zhanghongbo888}@huawei.com

Abstract
End-to-end autonomous driving systems, predominantly trained through imitation
learning, have demonstrated considerable effectiveness in leveraging large-scale
expert driving data. Despite their success in open-loop evaluations, these systems
often exhibit significant performance degradation in closed-loop scenarios due
to causal confusion. This confusion is fundamentally exacerbated by the overreliance of the imitation learning paradigm on expert trajectories, which often contain
unattributable noise and interfere with the modeling of causal relationships between
environmental contexts and appropriate driving actions. To address this fundamental limitation, we propose Perception-Guided Self-Supervision (PGS)—a simple
yet effective training paradigm that leverages perception outputs as the primary
supervisory signals, explicitly modeling causal relationships in decision-making.
The proposed framework aligns both the inputs and outputs of the decision-making
module with perception results—such as lane centerlines and the predicted motions of surrounding agents—by introducing positive and negative self-supervision
for the ego trajectory. This alignment is specifically designed to mitigate causal
confusion arising from the inherent noise in expert trajectories. Equipped with
perception-driven supervision, our method—built on a standard end-to-end architecture—achieves a Driving Score of 78.08 and a mean success rate of 48.64% on
the challenging closed-loop Bench2Drive benchmark, significantly outperforming existing state-of-the-art methods, including those employing more complex
network architectures and inference pipelines. These results underscore the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed PGS framework, and point to a promising
direction for addressing causal confusion and enhancing real-world generalization
in autonomous driving.

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving, as a significant application of AI, has made impressive advancements in recent
years. End-to-end neural networks, which allow vehicles to make decisions directly from raw sensor
signals, are considered capable of overcoming the cumulative error issues inherent in traditional
modular approaches and offer the potential to scale with vast amounts of data. In mainstream systems,
perception, prediction, and planning tasks are integrated into a single network. The planning module
uses explicit or implicit representations of the environment provided by perception to plan the future
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

