Cancer Survival Analysis via Zero-shot Tumor
Microenvironment Segmentation on Low-resolution
Whole Slide Pathology Images

Jiao Tang, Wei Shao∗, Daoqiang Zhang
The College of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
The Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education
tangjiao@nuaa.edu.cn, shaowei20022005@nuaa.edu.cn, dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The whole-slide pathology images (WSIs) are widely recognized as the golden
standard for cancer survival analysis. However, due to the high-resolution of WSIs,
the existing studies require dividing WSIs into patches and identify key components before building the survival prediction system, which is time-consuming and
cannot reflect the overall spatial organization of WSIs. Inspired by the fact that the
spatial interactions among different tumor microenvironment (TME) components
in WSIs are associated with the cancer prognosis, some studies attempt to capture
the complex interactions among different TME components to improve survival
predictions. However, they require extra efforts for building the TME segmentation
model, which involves substantial annotation workloads on different TME components and is independent to the construction of the survival prediction model. To
address the above issues, we propose ZTSurv, a novel end-to-end cancer survival
analysis framework via efficient zero-shot TME segmentation on low-resolution
WSIs. Specifically, by leveraging tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) maps on the
50x down-sampled WSIs, ZTSurv enables zero-shot segmentation on other two
important TME components (i.e., tumor and stroma) that can reduce the annotation
efforts from the pathologists. Then, based on the visual and semantic information extracted from different TME components, we construct a heterogeneous
graph to capture their spatial intersections for clinical outcome prediction. We
validate ZTSurv across four cancer cohorts derived from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA), and the experimental results indicate that our method can not only
achieve superior prediction results but also significantly reduce the computational
costs in comparison with the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Histopathology image analysis is a vital technology for cancer survival analysis [1, 2]. Traditional
methods of survival analysis rely heavily on manual interpretation of these images by pathologists,
which is time-consuming and prone to inter-observer variability. To address these challenges,
computational approaches have been explored to assist the analysis process. Early computer-aided
methods focus on handcrafted features extracted from specific regions of interests (ROIs), which
are limited in scalability and generalization ability [3]. Recently, with the rapid development of the
deep learning technology, training deep learning based whole-slide pathology image (WSI) analysis
models for cancer survival prediction has gained significant attentions [4, 5]. However, the main
challenge for survival analysis from the WSIs is that a high-resolution WSI is with large size (e.g.,
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

