DataRater: Meta-Learned Dataset Curation
Dan A. Calian∗ Gregory Farquhar∗ Iurii Kemaev∗ Luisa M. Zintgraf∗
Matteo Hessel Jeremy Shar Junhyuk Oh András György Tom Schaul
Jeffrey Dean Hado van Hasselt David Silver
Google DeepMind

Abstract
The quality of foundation models depends heavily on their training data. Consequently, great efforts have been put into dataset curation. Yet most approaches rely
on manual tuning of coarse-grained mixtures of large buckets of data, or filtering
by hand-crafted heuristics. An approach that is ultimately more scalable (let alone
more satisfying) is to learn which data is actually valuable for training. This
type of meta-learning could allow more sophisticated, fine-grained, and effective
curation. Our proposed DataRater is an instance of this idea. It estimates the
value of training on any particular data point. This is done by meta-learning using
‘meta-gradients’, with the objective of improving training efficiency on held out
data. In extensive experiments across a range of model scales and datasets, we find
that using our DataRater to filter data is highly effective, resulting in significantly
improved compute efficiency.

1

Introduction

It is widely acknowledged in machine learning that the quality of a model fundamentally depends
on the data used to train it. In the era of large foundation models, an enormous quantity of data,
encompassing a wide spectrum of sources and reliability, is ingested for pre-training. Careful filtering
and curation of this data has repeatedly proven critical for efficiency and capability [Hoffmann et al.,
2022, Llama 3 Authors, 2024, Parmar et al., 2024]. Despite the vast scale of this challenge, laborious
human curation approaches are the status quo: in general, data is filtered by hand-crafted heuristics,
and final coarse-grained mixtures across sources are manually tuned.
In the near term, these data challenges will only become more acute: the next frontier is synthetic
data, which can be generated in unbounded quantity, but can be biased, redundant, or otherwise of
low quality. Hence it will be critical to employ systems able to ingest arbitrary amounts and types of
unfiltered data, while processing this merged stream of data so as to maximize learning efficiency.
Addressing this necessitates automated methods for filtering and optimising the data stream. A highly
scalable filtering method would let humans specify what they want at the end of training (e.g., in
terms of a validation loss), rather than specifying how to achieve it (i.e., in terms of manually curating
the data stream). This is precisely what meta-learning, as a solution method, offers – and is the
approach we take in our work. Instead of manually specifying the filtering process, meta-learning
enables us to automatically learn the criteria by which to filter or mix the data stream in a data-driven
way. If we let it, the data can reveal its own value.
To this end, we introduce the DataRater, a method that estimates the value of any particular piece of
data for training: the DataRater assigns a (meta-learned) preference weight to any data item, which
can be used for filtering or re-weighting. It is grounded in a very simple meta objective: improving
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to {dancalian, gregfar, iukemaev, zintgraf}@google.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

