∆Flow: An Efficient Multi-frame Scene Flow
Estimation Method
Qingwen Zhang1,B Xiaomeng Zhu1,3 Yushan Zhang2,B
Yixi Cai1 Olov Andersson1 Patric Jensfelt1
1
2
3
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Linköping University
Scania CV AB
qingwen@kth.se, yushan.zhang@liu.se

Abstract
Previous dominant methods for scene flow estimation focus mainly on input from
two consecutive frames, neglecting valuable information in the temporal domain.
While recent trends shift towards multi-frame reasoning, they suffer from rapidly
escalating computational costs as the number of frames grows. To leverage temporal information more efficiently, we propose DeltaFlow (∆Flow), a lightweight
3D framework that captures motion cues via a ∆ scheme, extracting temporal
features with minimal computational cost, regardless of the number of frames.
Additionally, scene flow estimation faces challenges such as imbalanced object
class distributions and motion inconsistency. To tackle these issues, we introduce a
Category-Balanced Loss to enhance learning across underrepresented classes and
an Instance Consistency Loss to enforce coherent object motion, improving flow
accuracy. Extensive evaluations on the Argoverse 2, Waymo and nuScenes datasets
show that ∆Flow achieves state-of-the-art performance with up to 22% lower error
and 2× faster inference compared to the next-best multi-frame supervised method,
while also demonstrating a strong cross-domain generalization ability. The code
is open-sourced at https://github.com/Kin-Zhang/DeltaFlow along
with trained model weights.

1

Introduction

Scene flow estimation determines the 3D motion of each point between consecutive point clouds,
making it an important task in computer vision and essential for autonomous driving [31, 3, 43, 41]
and motion compensation [8, 46]. While early approaches focused on per-point feature learning [49,
47, 25, 26, 48, 40] and achieve high accuracy on small-scale datasets, they become computationally
expensive when processing large-scale, high-density point clouds typical in autonomous driving.
To reduce computational costs and enable real-time inference, recent methods [15, 44, 17, 28, 18]
voxelize point features to estimate the scene flow vector field.
Meanwhile, real-world LiDAR data is acquired as a continuous stream rather than isolated frame
pairs, making it crucial to leverage temporal information from multiple frames for more accurate
motion estimation. To incorporate temporal information, existing multi-frame approaches either
concatenate voxel features along the feature dimension [15, 44, 17] (see Figure 1(a)), or introduce an
explicit temporal dimension to stack them [28, 18] (see Figure 1(b)). Both strategies lead to increased
feature size and network parameters as the number of frames increases, resulting in higher memory
consumption and slower training and inference.
To address these limitations, we propose DeltaFlow (∆Flow), a computationally efficient 3D framework for multi-frame scene flow estimation. It applies a direct ∆ scheme between voxelized frames,
as shown in Figure 1(c), avoiding the feature concatenation or 4D stacking used by prior methods in
B Corresponding authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

