Bringing SAM to new heights: Leveraging elevation
data for tree crown segmentation from drone imagery

Mélisande Teng1,2 ∗
Arthur Ouaknine1,3,4
Etienne Laliberté2
1,2
1,3
Yoshua Bengio
David Rolnick
Hugo Larochelle1
1
Mila - Québec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal 3 McGill University 4 Rubisco AI
∗
tengmeli@mila.quebec

Abstract
Information on trees at the individual level is crucial for monitoring forest ecosystems and planning forest management. Current monitoring methods involve ground
measurements, requiring extensive cost, time and labor. Advances in drone remote
sensing and computer vision offer great potential for mapping individual trees from
aerial imagery at broad-scale. Large pre-trained vision models, such as the Segment
Anything Model (SAM), represent a particularly compelling choice given limited
labeled data. In this work, we compare methods leveraging SAM for the task of
automatic tree crown instance segmentation in high resolution drone imagery in
three use cases: 1) boreal plantations, 2) temperate forests and 3) tropical forests.
We also study the integration of elevation data into models, in the form of Digital
Surface Model (DSM) information, which can readily be obtained at no additional
cost from RGB drone imagery. We present BalSAM, a model leveraging SAM and
DSM information, which shows potential over other methods, particularly in the
context of plantations. We find that methods using SAM out-of-the-box do not
outperform a custom Mask R-CNN, even with well-designed prompts. However,
efficiently tuning SAM end-to-end and integrating DSM information are both
promising avenues for tree crown instance segmentation models.

1

Introduction

Data on individual trees are important for understanding forest ecosystems and supporting sustainable
forest management. Such data are essential, for example, to answer questions about forest composition, tree growth, and tree health and mortality. They are also particularly relevant in the context
of biodiversity assessments or natural climate solutions, in measuring the carbon stored in forests
and evaluating the success of afforestation, reforestation and revegetation policies [1, 2]. Specifically,
access to species identity and individual tree crown delineation data is crucial, as different tree species
have different allometries [3, 4, 5]. Indeed, carbon stored in a tree can be recovered with allometries
using information about the crown surface area, the species and the height of the tree [6].
Individual trees are still largely monitored by conducting ground surveys [7], requiring extensive
cost, time and labour. However, recent advances in deep learning, alongside the decreasing cost of
drones with high-resolution cameras, open up possibilities for automatically performing individual
tree crown delineation. Popular deep learning methods, such as Mask R-CNN [8] and RetinaNet [9],
have been extensively used in the context of vegetation monitoring using remote sensing data, but
they most often do not focus on identifying tree species [10, 11]. Despite the success of deep learning
methods for tree mapping at scale using remote sensing imagery [12, 13], instance segmentation of
tree crowns remains understudied, in large part because of the lack of annotated data at the individual
tree level.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

