PhysCtrl: Generative Physics for Controllable and
Physics-Grounded Video Generation

Chen Wang1∗ , Chuhao Chen1∗ , Yiming Huang1 , Zhiyang Dou2
Yuan Liu3 , Jiatao Gu1 , Lingjie Liu1
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 MIT, 3 HKUST ∗ equal contribution
{chenw30,chuhaoc,ymhuang9,jgu32,lingjie.liu}@seas.upenn.edu
frankdou@mit.edu; yuanly@ust.hk
https://cwchenwang.github.io/physctrl
Generated Trajectories and Video

Input Image & Force

①

②

Plasticine

Rigid

Sand

E = 104

E = 105

E = 106

②

①

③

③

Figure 1: We propose PhysCtrl, a novel framework for physics-grounded image-to-video generation
with physical material and force control. PhysCtrl supports generating physics-plausible motion
trajectories across multiple materials as control signals (second row), and allows controls over physics
parameters (e.g., Young’s Modulus E of elastic material (third row)) and force (last row). Note that
in the bottom three rows, overlaid trajectories and frames use lighter hues for earlier time steps and
darker hues for later ones.

Abstract
Existing video generation models excel at producing photo-realistic videos from
text or images, but often lack physical plausibility and 3D controllability. To
overcome these limitations, we introduce PhysCtrl, a novel framework for physicsgrounded image-to-video generation with physical parameters and force control.
At its core is a generative physics network that learns the distribution of physical
dynamics across four materials (elastic, sand, plasticine, and rigid) via a diffusion
model conditioned on physics parameters and applied forces. We represent physical
dynamics as 3D point trajectories and train on a large-scale synthetic dataset of
550K animations generated by physics simulators. We enhance the diffusion model
with a novel spatiotemporal attention block that emulates particle interactions
and incorporates physics-based constraints during training to enforce physical
plausibility. Experiments show that PhysCtrl generates realistic, physics-grounded
motion trajectories which, when used to drive image-to-video models, yield highfidelity, controllable videos that outperform existing methods in both visual quality
and physical plausibility.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

