Partial Information Decomposition via Normalizing
Flows in Latent Gaussian Distributions
Wenyuan Zhao1

Adithya Balachandran2 Chao Tian1 Paul Pu Liang2
1
Texas A&M University
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1
{wyzhao, chao.tian}@tamu.edu, 2 {adithyab, ppliang}@mit.edu

Abstract
The study of multimodality has garnered significant interest in fields where the
analysis of interactions among multiple information sources can enhance predictive
modeling, data fusion, and interpretability. Partial information decomposition (PID)
has emerged as a useful information-theoretic framework to quantify the degree to
which individual modalities independently, redundantly, or synergistically convey
information about a target variable. However, existing PID methods depend on
optimizing over a joint distribution constrained by estimated pairwise probability
distributions, which are costly and inaccurate for continuous and high-dimensional
modalities. Our first key insight is that the problem can be solved efficiently
when the pairwise distributions are multivariate Gaussians, and we refer to this
problem as Gaussian PID (GPID). We propose a new gradient-based algorithm
that substantially improves the computational efficiency of GPID based on an
alternative formulation of the underlying optimization problem. To generalize the
applicability to non-Gaussian data, we learn information-preserving encoders to
transform random variables of arbitrary input distributions into pairwise Gaussian
random variables. Along the way, we resolved an open problem regarding the
optimality of joint Gaussian solutions for GPID. Empirical validation in diverse
synthetic examples demonstrates that our proposed method provides more accurate
and efficient PID estimates than existing baselines. We further evaluate a series of
large-scale multimodal benchmarks to show its utility in real-world applications of
quantifying PID in multimodal datasets and selecting high-performing models.

1

Introduction

Multimodal machine learning is a fast-growing subarea of artificial intelligence research that aims to
develop systems capable of integrating and fusing many heterogeneous modalities [2, 31]. In addition
to much empirical progress, there has been a recent drive toward building theoretical foundations to
understand when information in individual modalities is important and how this information becomes
contextualized in the presence of other modalities [32]. This aspect of quantifying interactions
provides valuable insights into the significance of different modalities, the necessary amount of data
required in each modality, and the methods most suitable for fusing multimodal representations [15,
18, 26, 27, 35, 61]. Partial Information Decomposition (PID), an advanced framework rooted in
information theory, has been used as a formal framework to analyze how information is distributed
among multiple data sources for a target task variable [5, 17, 55].
One fundamental challenge of PID is its high computational complexity, especially when the size and
dimensionality of the datasets are large [43]. Accurate estimation of information-theoretic measures,
such as mutual information (MI), from empirical data is non-trivial and even prohibitive, particularly
for high-dimensional or continuous distributions [38]. Estimating PID also presents a significant
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

