Right Question is Already Half the Answer:
Fully Unsupervised LLM Reasoning Incentivization

Qingyang Zhang ∗
Tianjin University

Haitao Wu
Tianjin University

Changqing Zhang †
Tianjin University

Peilin Zhao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University & Tencent AI Lab
Yatao Bian ‡
National University of Singapore & Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Existing methods to enhance the reasoning capability of large language models
predominantly rely on supervised fine-tuning (SFT) followed by reinforcement
learning (RL) on reasoning-specific data. These approaches critically depend on
external supervisions–such as labeled reasoning traces, verified golden answers,
or pre-trained reward models. In this work, we propose Entropy Minimized
Policy Optimization (EMPO), which makes an early attempt at fully unsupervised
LLM reasoning incentivization. By minimizing the semantic entropy of LLMs
on unlabeled questions, EMPO achieves competitive performance compared to
supervised counterparts. Specifically, without any external supervision, EMPO
boosts the accuracy of Qwen2.5-Math-7B Base from 33.7% to 51.6% on math
benchmarks and improves the accuracy of Qwen2.5-7B Base from 32.1% to 50.1%
on MMLU-Pro. Primary analysis are also provided to interpret the effectiveness of
EMPO. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/QingyangZhang/EMPO.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional potential in challenging tasks
such as mathematical reasoning [1, 2, 3] and code
generation [4]. A prevailing paradigm for training reasoning LLMs involves firstly performing
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and then reinforcement learning (RL), or iterative combinations of
both, applied to reasoning-specific datasets after
pretraining [5]. Unfortunately, these methods typically depend on large-scale reasoning datasets
with various forms of supervised information, Figure 1: Improvement of the proposed method on
such as human-labeled reasoning traces, verified Qwen2.5-7B and Qwen2.5-7B-Math model.
golden answers, or an additional pre-trained reward model. As a consequence, endowing LLMs with powerful reasoning capability through human
∗

Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Correspondence to Changqing Zhang <zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn>
‡
Yatao Bian is the project lead.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

