FACE: A General Framework for Mapping
Collaborative Filtering Embeddings into LLM Tokens

Chao Wang1† ∗ Yixin Song1† Jinhui Ye2 Chuan Qin3
Dazhong Shen4 Lingfeng Liu1 Xiang Wang1 Yanyong Zhang1
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
wangchaoai@ustc.edu.cn, yixinsong@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
jye624@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, {chuanqin0426,dazh.shen}@gmail.com,
lfliu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xiangwang1223@gmail.com, yanyongz@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have been explored for integration with
collaborative filtering (CF)-based recommendation systems, which are crucial for
personalizing user experiences. However, a key challenge is that LLMs struggle to
interpret the latent, non-semantic embeddings produced by CF approaches, limiting
recommendation effectiveness and further applications. To address this, we propose
FACE, a general interpretable framework that maps CF embeddings into pre-trained
LLM tokens. Specifically, we introduce a disentangled projection module to decompose CF embeddings into concept-specific vectors, followed by a quantized
autoencoder to convert continuous embeddings into LLM tokens (descriptors).
Then, we design a contrastive alignment objective to ensure that the tokens align
with corresponding textual signals. Hence, the model-agnostic FACE framework
achieves semantic alignment without fine-tuning LLMs and enhances recommendation performance by leveraging their pre-trained capabilities. Empirical results on
three real-world recommendation datasets demonstrate performance improvements
in benchmark models, with interpretability studies confirming the interpretability
of the descriptors. Code is available in https://github.com/YixinRoll/FACE.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems are crucial in modern digital platforms, achieving personalized adaptation
and driving user engagement across e-commerce, streaming services, and intelligent education [44,
39]. Collaborative filtering (CF) [8] methods, particularly those based on graph neural networks
(GNNs), excel at capturing latent user-item relationships through embeddings in recommendation [38].
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive reasoning capabilities in a wide
range of tasks [21, 25, 24, 33, 45], prompting efforts to integrate them with recommendation systems.
While some studies have explored enhancing recommendation quality with LLMs, a key challenge
remains: LLMs, designed for processing natural language, are not inherently equipped to interpret the
latent, non-semantic embeddings produced by CF methods. Bridging this gap, which allows LLMs to
directly understand and utilize latent representations from CF models, remains an unresolved and
pressing issue.
†
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

