PeRL: Permutation-Enhanced Reinforcement
Learning for Interleaved Vision-Language Reasoning

Yizhen Zhangϕπ ∗ Yang Dingϕ ∗ Shuoshuo Zhangϕπ ∗
Xinchen Zhangϕ Haoling Liϕπ Zhong-Zhi Liρπ Peijie Wangρ
Jie Wuϕπ Lei Jiπ Yeyun Gongπ † Yelong Shenπ Yujiu Yangϕ†
ϕ
Tsinghua University π Microsoft ρ CASIA
https://github.com/alchemistyzz/PeRL

Abstract
Inspired by the impressive reasoning capabilities demonstrated by reinforcement
learning approaches like DeepSeek-R1, recent emerging research has begun exploring the use of reinforcement learning (RL) to enhance vision-language models
(VLMs) for multimodal reasoning tasks. However, most existing multimodal
reinforcement learning approaches remain limited to spatial reasoning within
single-image contexts, yet still struggle to generalize to more complex and realworld scenarios involving multi-image positional reasoning, where understanding
the relationships across images is crucial. To address this challenge, we propose a
general reinforcement learning approach PeRL tailored for interleaved multimodal
tasks, and a multi-stage strategy designed to enhance the exploration-exploitation
trade-off, thereby improving learning efficiency and task performance. Specifically, we introduce permutation of image sequences to simulate varied positional
relationships to explore more spatial and positional diversity. Furthermore, we
design a rollout filtering mechanism for resampling to focus on trajectories that
contribute most to learning optimal behaviors to exploit learned policies effectively.
We evaluate our model on 5 widely-used multi-image benchmarks and 3 singleimage benchmarks. Our experiments confirm that PeRL trained model consistently
surpasses R1-related and interleaved VLM baselines by a large margin, achieving state-of-the-art performance on multi-image benchmarks, while preserving
comparable performance on single-image tasks.

1

Introduction

Real-world applications often require the ability to understand and reason over multiple images—a
capability that humans naturally possess. In response, several multi-image benchmarks (e.g., [14, 19,
35, 46]) have been introduced to support the study of such comprehensive and practically relevant
tasks within the research community. Specifically, multi-image multimodal benchmarks span a wide
range of tasks involving diverse multimodal relationships, including: 1) Low-level visual features,
such as comparing illumination, color saturation, or texture; 2) High-level semantic relationships,
such as emotional associations or conceptual similarities between objects; 3) Temporal reasoning,
involving the understanding of event sequences or changes over time; 4) 2D/3D spatial relationships,
including rotation, symmetry, and variations in camera viewpoints. Furthermore, the interleaved
format of images and text, as introduced in works like [3], provides a unified and flexible template that
∗

Equal contribution. Work done during the internship of Yizhen, Shuoshuo, Haoling, Zhong-Zhi and Jie at
Microsoft Research.B :zhangyizhen24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
†
Corresponding authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

