Learning Human Preferences without Interaction for
Cooperative AI: A Hybrid Offline-Online Approach

Haitong Ma
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Innovation Institute
Shanghai, China
mahaitong@sjtu.edu.cn
Haobo Fu
Tencent AI Lab
Shenzhen, China
haobofu@tencent.com

Haoran Yu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
harayn4@gmail.com

Shuai Li∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Innovation Institute
Shanghai, China
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) for collaborative agents capable of cooperating with
humans to accomplish tasks has long been a central goal in the RL community.
While prior approaches have made progress in adapting collaborative agents to
diverse human partners, they often focus solely on optimizing task performance
and overlook human preferences—despite the fact that such preferences often
diverge from the reward-maximization objective of the environment. Addressing
this discrepancy poses significant challenges: humans typically provide only a
small amount of offline, preference-related feedback and are unable to engage
in online interactions, resulting in a distributional mismatch between the agent’s
online learning process and the offline human data. To tackle this, we formulate
the problem as an online&of f line reinforcement learning problem that jointly
integrates online generalization and offline preference learning, entirely under an
offline training regime. We propose a simple yet effective training framework built
upon existing RL algorithms that alternates between offline preference learning
and online generalization recovery, ensuring the stability and alignment of both
learning objectives. We evaluate our approach on a benchmark built upon the
Overcooked environment—a standard environment for human-agent collaboration—and demonstrate remarkable performance across diverse preference styles
and cooperative scenarios.

1

Introduction

Humans often exhibit diverse behaviors when performing the same task, driven by individual preferences. Prior work refers to these variations as preference styles [Pugh et al., 2016, Cully and
Demiris, 2017, Mao et al., 2024]. In multi-agent cooperative settings—especially multiplayer
games—designing agents that can adapt to a wide range of human preferences has become a growing
focus in reinforcement learning (RL) [Klien et al., 2004, Yuan et al., 2023, Dafoe et al., 2021]. To
avoid the cost of human-in-the-loop training, recent research frames this challenge as an ad hoc
team play [Stone et al., 2010] or a Zero-Shot Coordination (ZSC) problem [Hu et al., 2020, Mirsky
et al., 2022]. However, ZSC methods typically optimize only for environment rewards, ignoring
∗

corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

