Online Learning in the Repeated
Mediated Newsvendor Problem
Nataša Bolić1

Tommaso Cesari1
Roberto Colomboni2,3
Christian Paravalos1
1
EECS, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
2
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy
3
Department of CS, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
{nboli039,tcesari,cpara006}@uottawa.ca roberto.colomboni@polimi.it

Abstract
Motivated by real-life supply chain management, we study a repeated newsvendor
problem in which the learner is a mediator that facilitates trades between suppliers
and retailers in a sequence of supplier/retailer interactions. At each time step, a
new supplier and retailer join the mediator’s platform with a private production
cost and utility function, respectively, and the platform proposes a unitary trading
price. The supplier accepts the proposed price if it meets or exceeds their unitary
production cost and communicates their decision to the platform; simultaneously,
the retailer decides the quantity to purchase at the proposed trading price based on
their private utility function and sends their decision to the platform. If the supplier
accepts the trading price, the transaction proceeds, and the retailer purchases their
chosen quantity of units, paying the product of this quantity and the trading price
to the supplier. The mediator’s objective is to maximize social welfare. We design
an online mediator’s pricing strategy that features sharp regret rates under some
natural assumptions, and we investigate the necessity of these assumptions, proving
that relaxing any of them leads to unlearnability.

1

Introduction

The newsvendor problem is a central topic in the analysis of supply chains. In its classical one-shot
version Arrow et al. [1951], the supplier chooses and reveals a trading price. After observing the
trading price, the retailer orders a certain quantity of the good, deciding how much to order based on
a privately held utility function that depends on their needs and wants. The repeated version studied
in Huang and Sošić [2010] and Cesa-Bianchi et al. [2023a] generalizes this problem to a sequence of
supplier/retailer interactions.
1.1

Motivations

To the best of our knowledge, the newsvendor problem has only been studied under the assumption
that the supplier determines the trading price. This assumption falls short in many real-life applications
where an independent, third-party mediator, whose goal is to serve the interests of both parties, selects
the trading prices. The following examples illustrate markets where mediator-based pricing could
naturally arise and prove to be beneficial. Digital advertising intermediaries (e.g., ad-exchange
platforms) propose clearing prices for ad impressions or clicks to publishers, and advertisers decide
how many to purchase. Cloud computing platforms (e.g., AWS, Azure, GCP) propose pay-as-you-go
rates to data centers or resource providers, and users needing computing power decide how much of
it to use. Real estate rental intermediaries (e.g., Airbnb for short-term accommodations or corporate
housing for long-term stays) propose nightly, weekly, or monthly rates to property owners, and renters
decide the duration of their stay. Online freelance marketplaces (e.g., Upwork, Fiverr) propose hourly
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

