FlexEvent: Towards Flexible Event-Frame Object
Detection at Varying Operational Frequencies

Dongyue Lu1,2 , Lingdong Kong1 , Gim Hee Lee1 , Camille Simon Chane3 , Wei Tsang Ooi1,2
1

National University of Singapore 2 IPAL, CNRS IRL 2955, Singapore
ETIS UMR 8051, CY Cergy Paris University, ENSEA, CNRS, France

2

Project Page & Code: flexevent.github.io
Event
Stream

Low Frequency

Middle Frequency

High Frequency

Figure 1: Illustrative examples of event camera object detection at varying frequencies. The
detection performance of the classic RVT detector [18] tends to drop significantly at higher event
operational frequencies. Motivated by this observation, we propose FlexEvent, a robust and flexible
event-frame detector that maintains high detection accuracy across a wide range of frequencies (low,
middle, high), ensuring strong adaptability in real-world, dynamic sensing environments.

Abstract
Event cameras offer unparalleled advantages for real-time perception in dynamic environments, thanks to the microsecond-level temporal resolution and asynchronous
operation. Existing event detectors, however, are limited by fixed-frequency
paradigms and fail to fully exploit the high-temporal resolution and adaptability of event data. To address these limitations, we propose FlexEvent, a novel
framework that enables detection at varying frequencies. Our approach consists
of two key components: FlexFuse, an adaptive event-frame fusion module that
integrates high-frequency event data with rich semantic information from RGB
frames, and FlexTune, a frequency-adaptive fine-tuning mechanism that generates
frequency-adjusted labels to enhance model generalization across varying operational frequencies. This combination allows our method to detect objects with
high accuracy in both fast-moving and static scenarios, while adapting to dynamic
environments. Extensive experiments on large-scale event camera datasets demonstrate that our approach surpasses state-of-the-art methods, achieving significant
improvements in both standard and high-frequency settings. Notably, our method
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

