REN: Fast and Efficient Region Encodings from
Patch-Based Image Encoders

Savya Khosla

Sethuraman TV

Barnett Lee

Alexander Schwing

Derek Hoiem

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{savyak2,st34,bl29,aschwing,dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We introduce the Region Encoder Network (REN), a fast and effective model
for generating region-based image representations using point prompts. Recent
methods combine class-agnostic segmenters (e.g., SAM) with patch-based image
encoders (e.g., DINO) to produce compact and effective region representations,
but they suffer from high computational cost due to the segmentation step. REN
bypasses this bottleneck using a lightweight module that directly generates region
tokens, enabling 60× faster token generation with 35× less memory, while also
improving token quality. It uses a few cross-attention blocks that take point prompts
as queries and features from a patch-based image encoder as keys and values to
produce region tokens that correspond to the prompted objects. We train REN with
three popular encoders—DINO, DINOv2, and OpenCLIP—and show that it can be
extended to other encoders without dedicated training. We evaluate REN on semantic segmentation and retrieval tasks, where it consistently outperforms the original
encoders in both performance and compactness, and matches or exceeds SAMbased region methods while being significantly faster. Notably, REN achieves
state-of-the-art results on the challenging Ego4D VQ2D benchmark and outperforms proprietary LMMs on Visual Haystacks’ single-needle challenge. The code
and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/savya08/ren.

1

Introduction

Do we really need hundreds of patch-based tokens to understand every image? Existing ViT encoders
divide images into a fixed grid of patch tokens. This approach is inefficient for two main reasons:
(1) images with few objects are represented using hundreds of tokens, leading to unnecessarily high
memory and compute costs for applications like video understanding; and (2) patch tokens do not
align with object boundaries, making tasks like retrieval and segmentation more challenging. A
more scalable and effective alternative is a region-based representation, which divides images into
object-level tokens and represents simpler images using far fewer tokens.
Recent region-based representations average-pool patch features over regions generated by classagnostic segmentation methods, such as SAM. These approaches improve semantic segmentation and
retrieval accuracy, but generating accurate segmentation masks for all objects in an image remains
computationally expensive, with high-quality segmentation models requiring up to 30× more time
and memory than patch-based image encoders. This significantly limits the practical usability of
region-based representations. Furthermore, existing SAM-based methods for region token generation
rely on simple linear aggregation of patch features within object masks, which can remove finegrained details and discard valuable context surrounding objects. Current segmentation models also
tend to produce overlapping masks or miss parts of an image, resulting in over-representation of some
regions and no representation for others.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

