Depth-Width Tradeoffs for Transformers on Graph
Tasks
Gilad Yehudai∗
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
New York University
gy2209@nyu.edu
Or Fischer
Bar-Ilan University

Clayton Sanford∗
Google Research

Maya Bechler-Speicher
Meta AI

Ran Gilad-Bachrach
Department of Bio-Medical Engineering,
Edmond J. Safra Center for Bioinformatics, Tel-Aviv University
Tel Aviv University
Amir Globerson
Google Research
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
Transformers have revolutionized the field of machine learning. In particular, they
can be used to solve complex algorithmic problems, including graph-based tasks.
In such algorithmic tasks a key question is what is the minimal size of a transformer
that can implement the task. Recent work has begun to explore this problem for
graph-based tasks, showing that for sub-linear embedding dimension (i.e., model
width) logarithmic depth suffices. However, an open question, which we address
here, is what happens if width is allowed to grow linearly, while depth is kept
fixed. Here we analyze this setting, and provide the surprising result that with
linear width, constant depth suffices for solving a host of graph-based problems.
This suggests that a moderate increase in width can allow much shallower models,
which are advantageous in terms of inference and train time. For other problems,
we show that quadratic width is required. Our results demonstrate the complex and
intriguing landscape of transformer implementations of graph-based algorithms.
We empirically investigate these trade-offs between the relative powers of depth
and width and find tasks where wider models have the same accuracy as deep
models, while having much faster train and inference time due to parallelizable
hardware.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture [Vaswani, 2017], has emerged as the state-of-the-art neural network
architecture across many fields, including language [Brown et al., 2020], computer vision [Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021] and molecular analysis [Jumper et al., 2021]. This success prompts a basic question:
which algorithms can be implemented using transformers, and how do specific architecture choices
affect this capability. Understanding these questions could enable practitioners to design more
computationally efficient models without compromising expressivity.
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

