Zero-shot World Models via Search in Memory

Ville Hautamäki
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
Joensuu, FI 80101
ville.hautamaki@uef.fi

Federico Malato
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
Joensuu, FI 80101
federico.malato@uef.fi

Abstract
World Models have vastly permeated the field of Reinforcement Learning. Their
ability to model the transition dynamics of an environment have greatly improved
sample efficiency in online RL. Among them, the most notorious example is
Dreamer, a model that learns to act in a diverse set of image-based environments.
In this paper, we leverage similarity search and stochastic representations to approximate a world model without a training procedure. We establish a comparison with
PlaNet, a well-established world model of the Dreamer family. We evaluate the
models on the quality of latent reconstruction and on the perceived similarity of the
reconstructed image, on both next-step and long horizon dynamics prediction. The
results of our study demonstrate that a search-based world model is comparable to a
training based one in both cases. Notably, our model show stronger performance in
long-horizon prediction with respect to the baseline on a range of visually different
environments.

1

Introduction

World Models (WMs) [7] have played a fundamental role in the most recent advances in reinforcement
learning (RL) [19]: their ability to predict future states of a process, along with the possibility to
enhance planning [3] have led to tremendous achievements in autonomous agents. WMs have
demonstrated their impressive capabilities in a range of tasks, from playing small scope [9] and open
ended [10] video games, to autonomous driving [4], up to robotic control [20]. Recently, WMs have
shown also to be adaptable to diverse domain [10], enlarging the pool of their potential application
even further. Moreover, recent discussions hint a possible connection between world models and
Large Language Models (LLMs) [3].
However, learning the dynamics of an environment is not a trivial task: modeling temporal dynamics
implies learning an underlying causal structure of the environment [5, 16], which in turn implies
strong generalization and adaptability skills. As such, WMs typically require massive amounts
of data to construct a solid internal model. Moreover, they are subject to hallucinations and error
accumulation in long-term prediction [3], which limit the effectiveness of the prediction. To ease this
limitation, more complex architectures are required [5, 3], which in turn require more data and more
computational resources.
In this paper, we introduce an alternative formulation of World Models derived from similarity search
and probabilistic modeling, which we refer to as zero-shot World Models due to their independency
from a standard training procedure. The contributions our study are three-fold: first, we explore
the theoretical feasibility of a memory-based world model; second, we explore the capabilities and
compare it to a well-known, learning-based model; third, we determine a range of tasks for which
such models are applicable, and clearly state situations where they are unfeasible. We remark that
our aim is to explore a valid alternative to current world models, focusing on the task of dynamics
prediction and reconstruction, rather than action selection.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

