Attention with Trained Embeddings
Provably Selects Important Tokens

Diyuan Wu1,∗ Aleksandr Shevchenko2,∗ Samet Oymak3 Marco Mondelli1
ISTA1 ETH Zürich2 University of Michigan3

Abstract
Token embeddings play a crucial role in language modeling but, despite this practical relevance, their theoretical understanding remains limited. Our paper addresses
the gap by characterizing the structure of embeddings obtained via gradient descent.
Specifically, we consider a one-layer softmax attentionPmodel with a linear head for
T
⊤
⊤
i=1 exp(p Exi )Exi v
⊤
binary classification, i.e., Softmax(p⊤ EX
)EX v = P
, where
T
⊤E
exp
p
)
(
x
j=1
j
EX = [Ex1 , . . . , ExT ]⊤ contains the embeddings of the input sequence, p is the
embedding of the ⟨cls⟩ token and v the output vector. First, we show that, already
after a single step of gradient training with the logistic loss, the embeddings EX
capture the importance of tokens in the dataset by aligning with the output vector
v proportionally to the frequency with which the corresponding tokens appear in
the dataset. Then, after training p via gradient flow until convergence, the softmax
selects the important tokens in the sentence (i.e., those that are predictive of the
label), and the resulting ⟨cls⟩ embedding maximizes the margin for such a selection.
Experiments on real-world datasets (IMDB, Yelp) exhibit a phenomenology close
to that unveiled by our theory.

1

Introduction

The introduction of the attention mechanism [5, 41] marked a paradigm shift in the design of frontier
machine learning models, leading to significant advances such as ChatGPT [2], Claude [3], AlphaFold
[18], CLIP [30] and Dall-E [31]. This success prompted a surge of interest in understanding the
structure and function of attention layers, with their optimization dynamics and inductive biases
being object of extensive theoretical research [1, 7, 10, 23, 37, 42] (see also Section 2). Embeddings
are a crucial component of the attention mechanism [45], especially for downstream adaptation
[13, 16, 19] with some works [20, 45] specifically highlighting their importance. However, despite
the importance of learning embeddings, the existing analyses of transformer-like architectures either
ignore the properties of embeddings by resorting to orthogonal structures [44], or omit embeddings
completely by considering unprocessed inputs [39].
Our paper fills this gap by studying directly the embedding training dynamics. Specifically, we aim
to provide theoretical insight to the following questions:
What is the structure learnt by the embeddings during gradient descent training?
How is this structure related to the statistical properties of the data?
In Figure 1, we investigate these questions by analyzing the embeddings of a two-layer transformer
trained on a sentiment analysis task on IMDB and Yelp reviews. The plots reveal a remarkable
simplicity in the structure of the learned embeddings, which capture the frequency of appearance of
tokens in the dataset. Specifically, the predictive mechanism (overlap with the regression coefficient
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: diyuan.wu@ist.ac.at.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

