Sample-efficient Learning of Concepts with
Theoretical Guarantees:
from Data to Concepts without Interventions

Hidde Fokkema
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics
University of Amsterdam
h.j.fokkema@uva.nl
Tim van Erven∗
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics
University of Amsterdam
tim@timvanerven.nl

Sara Magliacane∗
Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam
s.magliacane@uva.nl

Abstract
Machine learning is a vital part of many real-world systems, but concerns remain
about the lack of interpretability, explainability and robustness of black-box AI
systems. Concept Bottleneck Models (CBM) address some of these challenges by
learning interpretable concepts from high-dimensional data, e.g. images, which
are used to predict labels. An important issue in CBMs are spurious correlations
between concepts, which effectively lead to learning “wrong” concepts. Current
mitigating strategies have strong assumptions, e.g., they assume that the concepts
are statistically independent of each other, or require substantial interaction in
terms of both interventions and labels provided by annotators. In this paper, we
describe a framework that provides theoretical guarantees on the correctness of
the learned concepts and on the number of required labels, without requiring any
interventions. Our framework leverages causal representation learning (CRL)
methods to learn latent causal variables from high-dimensional observations in
a unsupervised way, and then learns to align these variables with interpretable
concepts with few concept labels. We propose a linear and a non-parametric
estimator for this mapping, providing a finite-sample high probability result in the
linear case and an asymptotic consistency result for the non-parametric estimator.
We evaluate our framework in synthetic and image benchmarks, showing that the
learned concepts have less impurities and are often more accurate than other CBMs,
even in settings with strong correlations between concepts.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is a vital part of many real-world systems, but concerns remain about the lack
of interpretability, robustness and safety of current systems [9]. These issues might be exacerbated
by the lack of guarantees in explaining the behavior of AI systems in terms of interpretable, highlevel concepts. The field of interpretable machine learning and explainable AI has developed many
techniques to interpret models and explain their predictions [44], either by extracting known concepts
from the internals of black-box models [25, 15, 16, 36], or by building the explicit use of concepts
into the internals of these systems, e.g. as in concept bottleneck models (CBM) [28, 21, 39, 57].
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

