Causality-Induced Positional Encoding for
Transformer-Based Representation Learning of
Non-Sequential Features

Kaichen Xu1∗, Yihang Du2 , Mianpeng Liu2 , Zimu Yu2 , Xiaobo Sun3∗†
1
Department of Computer Science, Emory University
2
School of Statistics and Mathematics, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law
3
School of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics, Emory University

Abstract
Positional encoding is essential for supplementing transformer with positional
information of tokens. Existing positional encoding methods demand predefined token/feature order, rendering them unsuitable for real-world data with non-sequential
yet causally-related features. To address this limitation, we propose CAPE, a novel
method that identifies underlying causal structure over non-sequential features as a
weighted directed acyclic graph (DAG) using generalized structural equation modeling. The DAG is then embedded in hyperbolic space where its geometric structure
is well-preserved using a hyperboloid model-based approach that effectively captures two important causal graph properties (causal strength & causal specificity).
This step yields causality-aware positional encodings for the features, which are
converted into their rotary form for integrating with transformer’s self-attention
mechanism. Theoretical analysis reveals that CAPE-generated rotary positional
encodings possess three valuable properties for enhanced self-attention, including
causal distance-induced attenuation, causal generality-induced attenuation, and
robustness to positional disturbances. We evaluate CAPE over both synthetic
and real-word datasets, empirically demonstrating its theoretical properties and
effectiveness in enhancing transformer for data with non-sequential features. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Catchxu/CAPE.

1

Introduction

Transformer [1] has become the cornerstone in modern deep learning models, powering advances
in natural language processing (NLP) [2–5], computer vision [6–8], speech and audio processing
[9, 10], and multimodal learning [11–13]. At the core of transformer is the self-attention mechanism,
which effectively captures dependencies among sequential elements. However, this mechanism
is inherently position-agonistic and permutation-invariant [14]. Positional information is crucial
in learning semantics because it encodes sequential dependencies analogous to directional causal
structure [3], as opposed to the undirected associations captured by self-attention. To inject positional
information into the transformer architecture, a plethora of strategies have been proposed to generate
positional encodings that are integrated with contextual embeddings. These approaches include fixed
sinusoidal functions [1], trainable absolute or relative positional encodings [2, 5, 15–17], and more
recent rotary positional encodings (RoPE) [18, 19]. Notably, these methods generally assume natural,
inherent ordering in the data, such as the sequence of words in a sentence or the spatial arrangement
of image patches.
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Correspondence: xsun28@emory.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

