Bio-Inspired Image Restoration

Yuning Cui1,2 , Wenqi Ren1,3∗, Alois Knoll2
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
Technical University of Munich
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Information Technology

Abstract
Image restoration aims to recover sharp, high-quality images from degraded, lowquality inputs. Existing methods have progressively advanced from task-specific
designs to general architectures, all-in-one frameworks, and composite degradation handling. Despite these advances, computational efficiency remains a critical
factor for practical deployment. In this work, we present BioIR, an efficient
and universal image restoration framework inspired by the human visual system.
Specifically, we design two bio-inspired modules, Peripheral-to-Foveal (P2F) and
Foveal-to-Peripheral (F2P), to emulate the perceptual processes of human vision,
with a particular focus on the functional interplay between foveal and peripheral
pathways. P2F delivers large-field contextual signals to foveal regions based on
pixel-to-region affinity, while F2P propagates fine-grained spatial details through
a static-to-dynamic two-stage integration strategy. Leveraging the biologically
motivated design, BioIR achieves state-of-the-art performance across three representative image restoration settings: single-degradation, all-in-one, and composite
degradation. Moreover, BioIR maintains high computational efficiency and fast
inference speed, making it highly suitable for real-world applications. The code
and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/c-yn/BioIR.

1

Introduction

Image restoration aims to reconstruct high-quality images from their degraded counterparts [1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8], which may suffer from quality loss due to adverse weather conditions or the limitations of
low-end imaging devices. This task plays a critical role in supporting various downstream perceptual
applications [9, 10, 11, 12], such as object detection and depth estimation. In the deep learning
era, early methods have primarily focused on addressing specific image restoration tasks using
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] and Transformer architectures [19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. Subsequently, numerous general-purpose methods have been proposed to tackle a
variety of tasks using a shared or scalable framework, albeit with separately trained instances for each
task [25, 5, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31]. Recently, the concept of all-in-one image restoration has emerged,
leading to the development of methods that incorporate degradation-aware priors to handle multiple
degradations within a single model [32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41]. The latest advancements
have further extended this direction by targeting the composite degradation problem, which involves
managing multiple degradations simultaneously [42, 43, 44, 35, 45, 46]. A detailed taxonomy of
these developments is presented in Figure 1. Despite these advances, most existing algorithms remain
tailored to specific scenarios and struggle to generalize effectively across diverse restoration settings.
In addition to generalization capability, computational efficiency is another critical factor for practicability. To this end, extensive efforts have been devoted to improving the efficiency of image
restoration models. For instance, numerous studies have sought to enhance the computational efficiency of Transformer-based architectures for high-resolution image restoration by reducing the
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

