Reinforced Context Order Recovery
for Adaptive Reasoning and Planning

Long Ma
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
Peking University, Beijing, China
malong@pku.edu.cn

Fangwei ZhongB
School of Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
fangweizhong@bnu.edu.cn

Yizhou Wang
School of Computer Science, Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Modern causal language models, followed by rapid developments in discrete diffusion models, can now produce a wide variety of interesting and useful content.
However, these families of models are predominantly trained to output tokens
with a fixed (left-to-right) or random order, which may deviate from the logical
order in which tokens are generated originally. In this paper, we observe that
current causal and diffusion models encounter difficulties in problems that require
adaptive token generation orders to solve tractably, which we characterize with
the V-information framework. Motivated by this, we propose Reinforced Context
Order Recovery (ReCOR), a reinforcement-learning-based framework to extract
adaptive, data-dependent token generation orders from text data without annotations. Self-supervised by token prediction statistics, ReCOR estimates the hardness
of predicting every unfilled token and adaptively selects the next token during
both training and inference. Experiments on challenging reasoning and planning
datasets demonstrate the superior performance of ReCOR compared with baselines,
sometimes outperforming oracle models supervised with the ground-truth order.1

1

Introduction

Text generation models have seen remarkable advancements in the past few years, with causal
language models (CLMs) trained by next-token prediction taking the lead [1, 2, 3], followed by more
recent discrete diffusion models [4, 5, 6]. These classes of models have demonstrated impressive
capabilities across a wide range of tasks, from writing code to executing tasks as agents [7, 8, 9].
Despite the developments, current models still encounter significant challenges when faced with
complex reasoning and planning problems that require a long-horizon and flexible decision-making
process. A crucial part of this challenge lies in the token generation order [10]. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
in adaptive reasoning tasks like Sudoku, some cells could be hard to predict instantly, depending on
other cells to be filled first and provide additional constraints to eliminate candidates. However, CLMs
always follow a rigid left-to-right generation paradigm, encountering many intractable tokens along
the way. In contrast, humans rarely solve complex reasoning problems in a strictly linear fashion; we
tackle the easiest parts first and use those insights to address progressively more challenging ones.
Taking note of this issue, existing works either explicitly train the model to predict the easiest next
1

Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/recor-ai

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

