Tight Lower Bounds and Improved Convergence
in Performative Prediction
Pedram Khorsandi
Mila, Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Rushil Gupta
Mila, Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Simon Lacoste-Julien∗
Mila, Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Mehrnaz Mofakhami
Mila, Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Gauthier Gidel∗
Mila, Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Performative prediction is a framework accounting for the shift in the data distribution induced by the prediction of a model deployed in the real world. Ensuring
convergence to a stable solution—one at which the post-deployment data distribution no longer changes—is crucial in settings where model predictions can
influence future data. This paper, for the first time, extends the Repeated Risk
Minimization (RRM) algorithm class by utilizing historical datasets from previous retraining snapshots, yielding a class of algorithms that we call Affine Risk
Minimizers that converges to a performatively stable point for a broader class of
problems. We introduce a new upper bound for methods that use only the final
iteration of the dataset and prove for the first time the tightness of both this new
bound and the previous existing bounds within the same regime. We also prove
that our new algorithm class can surpass the lower bound for standard RRM, thus
breaking the prior lower bound, and empirically observe faster convergence to
the stable point on various performative prediction benchmarks. We offer at the
same time the first lower bound analysis for RRM within the class of Affine Risk
Minimizers, quantifying the potential improvements in convergence speed that
could be achieved with other variants in our scheme.

1

Introduction

Decision-making systems are increasingly integral to critical judgments in sectors such as public
policy [Fire and Guestrin, 2019], healthcare [Bevan and Hood, 2006], and education [Nichols and
Berliner, 2007]. However, as these systems become more reliant on quantitative indicators, they
become vulnerable to the effects described by Goodhart’s Law: “When a measure becomes a target, it
ceases to be a good measure” [Goodhart, 1984]. This principle is particularly relevant when predictive
models not only forecast outcomes but also influence the behavior of individuals and organizations,
leading to performative effects that can subvert the original goals of these systems.
For example, in environmental regulation, companies might manipulate emissions data to meet regulatory targets without truly reducing pollution, thus distorting the intended environmental protection
efforts [Fowlie et al., 2012]. In healthcare, hospitals may modify patient care practices to improve
performance metrics, potentially prioritizing score improvements over actual patient health outcomes
[Bevan and Hood, 2006]. Similarly, in education, the emphasis on standardized test scores can lead
∗

Equal advising. Correspondence to Pedram Khorsandi: <pedram.khorsandi@mila.quebec>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

