Adversarial Attacks against Closed-Source MLLMs
via Feature Optimal Alignment

Xiaojun Jia1 , Sensen Gao2 , Simeng Qin1† , Tianyu Pang3 , Chao Du3 ,
Yihao Huang1† , Xinfeng Li1 , Yiming Li1 , Bo Li4 , Yang Liu1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
3
Sea AI Lab, Singapore 4 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
{jiaxiaojunqaq, sensen.gao2002, qinsimeng670}@gmail.com;
{tianyupang3, duchao, lxfmakeit, liyiming.tech}@gmail.com;
lbo@illinois.edu; yangliu@ntu.edu.sg;

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) remain vulnerable to transferable
adversarial examples. While existing methods typically achieve targeted attacks
by aligning global features—such as CLIP’s [CLS] token—between adversarial
and target samples, they often overlook the rich local information encoded in
patch tokens. This leads to suboptimal alignment and limited transferability,
particularly for closed-source models. To address this limitation, we propose a
targeted transferable adversarial attack method based on feature optimal alignment,
called FOA-Attack, to improve adversarial transfer capability. Specifically, at the
global level, we introduce a global feature loss based on cosine similarity to align
the coarse-grained features of adversarial samples with those of target samples. At
the local level, given the rich local representations within Transformers, we leverage
clustering techniques to extract compact local patterns to alleviate redundant local
features. We then formulate local feature alignment between adversarial and target
samples as an optimal transport (OT) problem and propose a local clustering
optimal transport loss to refine fine-grained feature alignment. Additionally, we
propose a dynamic ensemble model weighting strategy to adaptively balance
the influence of multiple models during adversarial example generation, thereby
further improving transferability. Extensive experiments across various models
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method, outperforming state-of-the-art
methods, especially in transferring to closed-source MLLMs. The code is released
at https://github.com/jiaxiaojunQAQ/FOA-Attack.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) [49, 45, 3, 9, 1, 52, 53] have showcased
extraordinary capabilities in language comprehension, reasoning, and generation. Capitalizing on
the potent capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs), a series of works [2, 30, 36, 63, 10] have
attempted to seamlessly integrate visual input into LLMs, paving the way for the development of
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Commonly, these methods adopt pre-trained vision
encoders, such as Contrastive Language Image Pre-training (CLIP) [47], to extract features from
images and subsequently align them with language embeddings. MLLMs have achieved remarkable
performance in vision-related tasks, including visual reasoning [34, 24], image captioning [32, 48],
visual question answering [41, 29], etc. Beyond open-source advancements, commercial closedsource MLLMs such as GPT-4o, Claude-3.7, and Gemini-2.0 are widely adopted.
†

Correspondence to Simeng Qin and Yihao Huang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

