DYNA ACT: Large Language Model Reasoning with
Dynamic Action Spaces

Xueliang Zhao♠⋆∗ Wei Wu⋆† Jian Guan⋆ Qintong Li♠ Lingpeng Kong♠†
♠
The University of Hong Kong ⋆ Ant Group
{xlzhao,qtli,lpk}@cs.hku.hk
{wuwei19850318, jianguanthu}@gmail.com

Abstract
In modern sequential decision-making systems, the construction of an optimal candidate action space is critical to efficient inference. However, existing approaches
either rely on manually defined action spaces that lack scalability or utilize unstructured spaces that render exhaustive search computationally prohibitive. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework named DYNA ACT for automatically
constructing a compact action space to enhance sequential reasoning in complex
problem-solving scenarios. Our method first estimates a proxy for the complete
action space by extracting general sketches observed in a corpus covering diverse
complex reasoning problems using large language models. We then formulate a
submodular function that jointly evaluates candidate actions based on their utility
to the current state and their diversity, and employ a greedy algorithm to select
an optimal candidate set. Extensive experiments on six diverse standard benchmarks demonstrate that our approach significantly improves overall performance,
while maintaining efficient inference without introducing substantial latency. The
implementation is available at https://github.com/zhaoxlpku/DynaAct.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in complex reasoning with Large Language Models (LLMs) [Achiam et al., 2023,
Jaech et al., 2024] have established a prevalent self-improvement paradigm: given a mass of problems
paired with final answers, model developers first search for correct reasoning paths from a base
model using test time scaling strategies [Snell et al., 2024], then improve it to internalize these
patterns [Guo et al., 2025] through supervised fine-tuning [Guan et al., 2025] or reinforcement
learning [Guo et al., 2025]. While LLMs have exhibited remarkable reasoning capabilities, current
approaches to long-term reasoning in these models often suffer from fundamental limitations. On the
one hand, some approaches explicitly define an action space and state space and structure reasoning
hierarchically, where action selection and state prediction are carried out iteratively [Hao et al., 2023,
Qi et al., 2024] along the reasoning path. However, because action spaces are often heuristically
designed, the resulting actions tend to either be too specific to generalize across domains or too
broad to effectively guide reasoning. On the other hand, in the absence of an explicit definition for
action spaces, other approaches impose a specific format on generation and perform reasoning in an
autoregressive manner [Lightman et al., 2023, Guo et al., 2025]. These approaches inherently search
the entire natural language space for reasoning, thereby necessitating powerful base models.
We investigate LLM reasoning within the framework of Markov Decision Process (MDP) [Hao et al.,
2023], where a reasoning trace consists of a series of actions and states. Instead of focusing on
∗
†

This work was done during an internship at Ant Group.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

