Implicit Modeling for Transferability Estimation of
Vision Foundation Models
Yaoyan Zheng
Huiqun Wang
Nan Zhou
Di Huang∗
State Key Laboratory of Complex and Critical Software Environment,
Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing, China
{yaoyanzheng,hqwangscse,zhounan0431,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Transferability estimation identifies the best pre-trained models for downstream
tasks without incurring the high computational cost of full fine-tuning. This capability facilitates deployment and advances the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm.
However, existing methods often struggle to accurately assess transferability for
emerging pre-trained models with diverse architectures, training strategies, and
task alignments. In this work, we propose Implicit Transferability Modeling (ITM),
a novel framework that implicitly models each model’s intrinsic transferability,
coupled with a Divide-and-Conquer Variational Approximation (DVA) strategy
to efficiently approximate embedding space evolution. This design enables generalization across a broader range of models and downstream tasks. Extensive
experiments on a comprehensive benchmark—spanning extensive training regimes
and a wider variety of model types—demonstrate that ITM consistently outperforms existing methods in terms of stability, effectiveness, and efficiency. Code is
available at https://github.com/BUAAHugeGun/ITM.

1

Introduction

With the success of the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, a substantial number of pre-trained
models are publicly available. However, recent studies [1] reveal that their performance varies
significantly across architectures, datasets, and pre-training strategies, posing increasing challenges
in identifying the most suitable models for downstream tasks.
Transferability Estimation (TE), which predicts the performance ranking of pre-trained models on
downstream tasks with minimal computational cost, attracts considerable research attention as an
efficient solution to model selection. Unlike the computationally prohibitive brute-force approach of
individually fine-tuning each model, TE methods aim to develop efficient metrics to quantify model
suitability. Early approaches estimate the compatibility between pre-trained models and downstream
tasks by measuring divergences in logit spaces [2, 3] or embedding spaces [4, 5], while more recent
methods improve upon static estimations by simulating the dynamic evolution of embedding spaces
during fine-tuning to enhance predictive accuracy [6, 7].
However, most existing TE techniques are primarily evaluated on models with similar architectures
and training paradigms (e.g., supervised pre-trained CNNs) and fail to generalize to models trained
with advanced pre-training strategies or novel architectural designs. When applied to ViT [8] models
developed using techniques such as Instance Discrimination (ID) [9, 10] and Masked Image Modeling
(MIM) [11, 12], the distinct convergence behaviors exhibited [11, 1] further complicate unified
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

