Distance-informed Neural Processes
Aishwarya Venkataramanan
Computer Vision Group
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
aishwarya.venkataramanan@uni-jena.de

Joachim Denzler
Computer Vision Group
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
joachim.denzler@uni-jena.de

Abstract
We propose the Distance-informed Neural Process (DNP), a novel variant of Neural
Processes that improves uncertainty estimation by combining global and distanceaware local latent structures. Standard Neural Processes (NPs) often rely on a
global latent variable and struggle with uncertainty calibration and capturing local data dependencies. DNP addresses these limitations by introducing a global
latent variable to model task-level variations and a local latent variable to capture
input similarity within a distance-preserving latent space. This is achieved through
bi-Lipschitz regularization, which bounds distortions in input relationships and
encourages the preservation of relative distances in the latent space. This modeling
approach allows DNP to produce better-calibrated uncertainty estimates and more
effectively distinguish in- from out-of-distribution data. Empirical results demonstrate that DNP achieves strong predictive performance and improved uncertainty
calibration across regression and classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in fields such as computer vision [5, 60],
natural language processing [57, 42], and reinforcement learning [9]. However, they often produce
overconfident and unreliable predictions, particularly when encountering data that fall outside the
support of the training set [23, 58, 17, 1, 59]. Stochastic models such as Gaussian Processes (GPs) [66]
address this limitation by defining a prior over functions using kernel functions, which encode the
assumption that similar inputs produce similar outputs. Kernel functions measure similarity using a
distance metric, assigning higher scores to inputs closer to the training data. Consequently, when the
model encounters data points that are far from the training set, the predictive distribution reverts to
the prior. In many cases, this prior has a high variance, indicating a high uncertainty about the output.
However, the practicality of vanilla GPs is limited by their high computational cost, scaling cubically
with the size of the training data and by their lack of flexibility in high-dimensional problems.
This paved way to the development of Neural Processes (NPs) [11, 12], that leverage meta-learning
principles [20] to learn a distribution over functions from observed data. Unlike traditional kernelbased methods, NPs employ neural encoders to infer a global latent variable that summarizes the
underlying function. The NP then conditions its predictions on the inputs and the global latent
variable, facilitating rapid adaptation to new functions. However, the reliance on a single global latent
variable limits representational expressiveness, and standard NPs often produce uncertainty estimates
that are not well calibrated [14, 25, 63].
To address these limitations, we propose the Distance-informed Neural Process (DNP), which
integrates both global and local priors for better uncertainty estimation and generalization. The
global prior functions like standard NPs, capturing task-specific patterns. The local prior models
distance relationships between observed data and test inputs through a latent space, introducing an
inductive bias similar to GPs. However, neural networks used to parameterize these latent spaces
can warp the input geometry causing similar points to be mapped far apart and unrelated points
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

