Uncertain Knowledge Graph Completion via
Semi-Supervised Confidence Distribution Learning

Tianxing Wu1,2,∗ Shutong Zhu1 Jingting Wang1 Ning Xu1,2,∗
Guilin Qi1,2 Haofen Wang3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and
its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
College of Design and Innovation, Tongji University, China
{tianxingwu, shutong_zhu, xning}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Uncertain knowledge graphs (UKGs) associate each triple with a confidence score
to provide more precise knowledge representations. Recently, since real-world
UKGs suffer from the incompleteness, uncertain knowledge graph (UKG) completion attracts more attention, aiming to complete missing triples and confidences.
Current studies attempt to learn UKG embeddings to solve this problem, but
they neglect the extremely imbalanced distributions of triple confidences. This
causes that the learnt embeddings are insufficient to high-quality UKG completion.
Thus, in this paper, to address the above issue, we propose a new semi-supervised
Confidence Distribution Learning (ssCDL) method for UKG completion, where
each triple confidence is transformed into a confidence distribution to introduce
more supervision information of different confidences to reinforce the embedding
learning process. ssCDL iteratively learns UKG embedding by relational learning
on labeled data (i.e., existing triples with confidences) and unlabeled data with
pseudo labels (i.e., unseen triples with the generated confidences), which are predicted by meta-learning to augment the training data and rebalance the distribution
of triple confidences. Experiments on two UKG datasets demonstrate that ssCDL
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in different evaluation metrics.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are usually defined as multi-relational graphs describing knowledge with
deterministic triples, each of which is in the form of (subject, predicate, object), e.g., (Michael Jordan,
Nationality, U.S.). Such a kind of structured knowledge has supported many applications, including
question answering [14], semantic search [7], decision-making systems [27], and etc. Recently,
uncertain KGs (UKGs), such as NELL [1], ConceptNet [17], and Probase [24, 10], have received
much more attention. UKGs measure the uncertainty of knowledge by associating each triple with a
confidence score, which also denotes the likelihood of that triple to be true. Such a setting benefits to
precise knowledge representation and reasoning in the real world.
Most KGs suffer from incompleteness [21] since new knowledge is always emerging over time, and
so are UKGs. Thus, various uncertain knowledge graph (UKG) embedding methods [3, 12, 5, 2,
26, 20, 22] are proposed to perform link prediction and confidence prediction for UKG completion.
UKG embedding learns the representations of entities and relations in a low-dimensional space
where graph structures and triple confidences are preserved. During the learning process, the above
methods neglect the fact that the distributions of triple confidences are extremely imbalanced in
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

