Solver-Informed RL: Grounding Large Language
Models for Authentic Optimization Modeling

Yitian Chen1∗,

Jingfan Xia2,1∗, Siyu Shao1,3 , Dongdong Ge4†, Yinyu Ye4,5
1
Cardinal Operations, China
2
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
3
The University of Hong Kong
4
Antai School of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
chenyitian@shanshu.ai, jf.xia@163.sufe.edu.cn,
siyu_shao@connect.hku.hk, ddge@sjtu.edu.cn, yyye@stanford.edu

Abstract
Optimization modeling is fundamental to decision-making in ﬁelds such as supply chain management, logistics, and ﬁnancial engineering, but its complexity
presents a major barrier to adoption. Automating model creation from natural
language is key to improving efﬁciency and access. However, while Large Language Models (LLMs) are a promising tool for this, they often produce ﬂawed or
infeasible results due to errors and hallucinations. To address this issue, we propose Solver-Informed Reinforcement Learning (SIRL), a framework that uses Reinforcement Learning with Veriﬁable Reward to improve LLMs ability to generate
accurate and executable optimization models. Speciﬁcally, SIRL automatically assesses the executable code and the instance-level mathematical model represented
by the associated .lp ﬁles. This process yields precise feedback on syntactic
validity, feasibility, and solution quality, which serves as a direct reward signal
to guide the reinforcement learning process. Furthermore, this veriﬁcation mechanism also supports our instance-enhanced self-consistency method for creating
high-quality training data. Extensive experiments on diverse public benchmarks
demonstrate that models trained with our SIRL framework achieve state-of-the-art
performance, substantially outperforming existing methods in generating accurate
and executable optimization models. Speciﬁcally, our SIRL-32B model surpasses
DeepSeek-V3 and OpenAI-o3 on the majority of these benchmarks. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/Cardinal-Operations/SIRL.

1

Introduction

Optimization modeling provides a powerful framework for decision-making across diverse ﬁelds,
from logistics and ﬁnance to engineering and machine learning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The process involves
two primary steps: ﬁrst, converting a natural language problem description into a formal mathematical model, and second, employing a solver to solve an optimization problem to get the optimal
solution. Despite the maturity and powerful capabilities of modern optimization solvers, such as
Gurobi [6], COPT [7] and CPLEX [8], formulating these intricate real-world problems into precise
mathematical models and executable codes remains a signiﬁcant bottleneck, often requiring substantial domain expertise and considerable manual effort [2, 9].
∗
†

Both authors contribute equally to this research.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

