Online Functional Tensor Decomposition via
Continual Learning for Streaming Data Completion

Xi Zhang1

Yanyi Li1 Yisi Luo1∗ Qi Xie1 Deyu Meng1,2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Canton, China
xi.zhang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yyl0605@foxmail.com
yisiluo1221@foxmail.com, xie.qi@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Online tensor decompositions are powerful and proven techniques that address
the challenges in processing high-velocity streaming tensor data, such as traffic
flow and weather system. The main aim of this work is to propose a novel online
functional tensor decomposition (OFTD) framework, which represents a spatialtemporal continuous function using the CP tensor decomposition parameterized
by coordinate-based implicit neural representations (INRs). The INRs allow for
natural characterization of continually expanded streaming data by simply adding
new coordinates into the network. Particularly, our method transforms the classical
online tensor decomposition algorithm into a more dynamic continual learning
paradigm of updating the INR weights to fit the new data without forgetting the
previous tensor knowledge. To this end, we introduce a long-tail memory replay
method that adapts to the local continuity property of INR. Extensive experiments
for streaming tensor completion using traffic, weather, user-item, and video data
verify the effectiveness of the OFTD approach for streaming data analysis. This
endeavor serves as a pivotal inspiration for future research to connect classical
online tensor tools with continual learning paradigms to better explore knowledge
underlying streaming tensor data.

1

Introduction

In real world, high-dimensional data often exist in a streaming form and are typically modeled as
tensor streams (such as traffic flow and video) Yu et al. [2015], Smith et al. [2018]. Tensor streams
can be categorized into two types: single-aspect streams and multi-aspect streams. Single-aspect
streams, such as traffic flow data represented by the triplet (location, route, and time), grow only along
the temporal dimension and are modeled as 3-mode temporal tensor streams. In contrast, multi-aspect
streams, such as recommendation system data represented by the triplet (user, movie, and actor),
grow along multiple dimensions simultaneously. With the increasing prevalence of streaming data,
there is a growing demand for real-time streaming data analysis (e.g., streaming data completion).
Online tensor decomposition Abed-Meraim et al. [2022a] is one of the foremost methods to address
the streaming data completion problem by exploiting the potential compact structures underlying
streaming data within an online optimization framework. However, decomposing tensor streams
would lead to high computational costs owing to the significant growth in their volume over time.
Also, dynamically capturing the internal latent properties of tensor streams, such as spatial-temporal
continuity, poses difficult challenges. To address these challenges, various online tensor decomposition methods have been developed to handle the streaming data completion problem. These
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

