A Hierarchy of Graphical Models
for Counterfactual Inferences
Hongshuo Yang
Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Lab
Columbia University
hy2712@columbia.edu eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Graphical models have been widely used as parsimonious encoders of assumptions
of the underlying causal system and provide a basis for causal inferences. Models
encoding stronger constraints tend to require higher expressive power, which are
also harder, and sometimes impossible to empirically falsify. In this paper, we
introduce two new collections of distributions that include counterfactual quantities which are experimentally accessible under counterfactual randomizations.
Correspondingly, we define two new classes of graphical models for encoding
empirically testable constraints in these distributions. We further present a sound
and complete calculus, based on counterfactual calculus, which licenses inferences
in these two new models with rules that are within the empirically falsifiable boundary. Finally, we formulate a hierarchy over several graphical models based on the
constraints they encode and study the fundamental trade-off between the expressive
power and empirical falsifiability of different models across the hierarchy.

1

Introduction

Causal information is fundamental across a wide range of scientific disciplines and human decisionmaking, and it is increasingly recognized as a necessary ingredient for advancing AI and machine
learning in enhancing robustness, interpretability, and generalizability [16, 1]. The Pearl Causal
Hierarchy (PCH) organizes such information into three layers: the observational, the interventional,
and the counterfactual, corresponding roughly to the ordinary human capabilities of seeing, doing,
and imagining [16, 3]. Each layer is formalized through a distinct symbolic language and encodes
causal quantities with increasingly expressive semantics. For example, consider a system with two
observed variables, X (treatment, e.g., diet) and Y (outcome, e.g., BMI). Layer 1 (L1 ) includes
observational distributions, like P (y|x), which represents the probability of observing BMI y among
those who naturally follow diet x. Layer 2 (L2 ) contains interventional distributions, like P (y|do(x)),
which represents the probability of having BMI y among those who were externally assigned to diet x.
Layer 3 (L3 ) comprises counterfactual distributions, like P (yx |x′ ), which represents the probability
of having BMI y if the diet had been set to x among those who would naturally follow diet x′ .
When the true causal mechanism underpinning a phenomenon of interest — formally represented by
a Structural Causal Model (SCM) — is known, all layers of the PCH are immediately computable.
Unfortunately, it is rare for SCMs to be known at this level of precision in most real-world scenarios.
This limitation gives rise to the field of causal inference, which seeks to understand the conditions
under which valid inferences can be made given access to limited features and data from the causal
system. The inferential process can be illustrated through the causal inference engine [1, Sec. 1.3.4],
as illustrated in Fig. 1. The engine takes three inputs: {(1) Query, (2) Data, (3) Model}, each
reflecting a different aspect of the underlying SCM. The Query specifies the causal quantity of
interest, the Data consists of data gathered through interactions with the environment like random
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

