ICLScan: Detecting Backdoors in Black-Box Large
Language Models via Targeted In-context Illumination

Xiaoyi Pang1 , Xuanyi Hao2,3 , Song Guo1,∗, Qi Luo1 , Zhibo Wang2,3
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, China
3
The Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security, China
xypang@ust.hk, xyhao@zju.edu.cn, songguo@ust.hk, csqiluo@ust.hk, zhibowang@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The widespread deployment of large language models (LLMs) allows users to
access their capabilities via black-box APIs, but backdoor attacks pose serious
security risks for API users by hijacking the model behavior. This highlights the
importance of backdoor detection technologies to help users audit LLMs before use.
However, most existing LLM backdoor defenses require white-box access or costly
reverse engineering, limiting their practicality for resource-constrained users. Moreover, they mainly target classification tasks, leaving broader generative scenarios
underexplored. To solve the problem, this paper introduces ICLScan, a lightweight
framework that exploits targeted in-context learning (ICL) as illumination for
backdoor detection in black-box LLMs, which effectively supports generative
tasks without additional training or model modifications. ICLScan is based on
our finding of backdoor susceptibility amplification: LLMs with pre-embedded
backdoors are highly susceptible to new trigger implantation via ICL. Including
only a small ratio of backdoor examples (containing ICL-triggered input and target
output) in the ICL prompt can induce ICL trigger-specific malicious behavior in
backdoored LLMs. ICLScan leverages this phenomenon to detect backdoored
LLMs by statistically analyzing whether the success rate of new trigger injection
via targeted ICL exceeds a threshold. It requires only multiple queries to estimate the backdoor success rate, overcoming black-box access and computational
resource limitations. Extensive experiments across diverse LLMs and backdoor
attacks demonstrate ICLScan’s effectiveness and efficiency, achieving near-perfect
detection performance (precision/recall/F1-score/ROC-AUC all approaching 1.000)
with minimal additional overhead across all settings.

1

Introduction

The advent of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4, Llama-2, and Qwen empowers stateof-the-art performance across diverse natural language processing tasks, from code generation to
conversational agents. To democratize access, LLM providers (e.g., OpenAI, Anthropic) often deliver
these capabilities via black-box APIs. Such an “LLM-as-a-Service” paradigm provides convenience
for enterprises and individuals to leverage the powerful capabilities of LLMs at anywhere and
any time, without the prohibitive infrastructure costs of GPU clusters or the technical burden of
maintaining billion-parameter models.
Despite their emergent capabilities, LLMs are alarmingly susceptible to backdoor attacks since
they can memorize well any kind of training data even those that carry spurious features and lead
* The corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

