PixPerfect: Seamless Latent Diffusion Local Editing
with Discriminative Pixel-Space Refinement

Haitian Zheng1∗ Yuan Yao2∗ Yongsheng Yu2
Yuqian Zhou1 Jiebo Luo2 Zhe Lin1
1
Adobe Research 2 University of Rochester
{hazheng, yuqzhou, zlin}@adobe.com,
yynobug@gmail.com, yyu90@ur.rochester.edu, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) have markedly advanced the quality of image
inpainting and local editing. However, the inherent latent compression often introduces pixel-level inconsistencies, such as chromatic shifts, texture mismatches, and
visible seams along editing boundaries. Existing remedies, including backgroundconditioned latent decoding and pixel-space harmonization, usually fail to fully
eliminate these artifacts in practice and do not generalize well across different
latent representations or tasks. We introduce PixPerfect, a pixel-level refinement
framework that delivers seamless, high-fidelity local edits across diverse LDM
architectures and tasks. PixPerfect leverages (i) a differentiable discriminative pixel
space that amplifies and suppresses subtle color and texture discrepancies, (ii) a
comprehensive artifact simulation pipeline that exposes the refiner to realistic local
editing artifacts during training, and (iii) a direct pixel-space refinement scheme
that ensures broad applicability across diverse latent representations and tasks.
Extensive experiments on inpainting, object removal, and insertion benchmarks
demonstrate that PixPerfect substantially enhances perceptual fidelity and downstream editing performance, establishing a new standard for robust and high-fidelity
localized image editing.

1

Introduction

Image inpainting [28, 13, 3] and local editing [66, 42, 55] aim to modify a specified image region
according to high-level instructions, such as a text prompt [57] or a reference image [6, 41] while
ensuring the coherence with surrounding pixels. As an atomic operation for interactive image
editing, it plays a fundamental role for applications ranging from object removal, insertion, to
creative content regeneration. Recent advances in text-to-image generation models, particularly latent
diffusion models (LDMs) [38], have driven remarkable progress in image inpainting [13, 3, 20]
and local editing [7, 41, 55]. These methods perform diffusion processes [18] in a low-dimensional
and semantically compressed latent space [12] and demonstrate impressive capacity in generating
complex and semantically coherent visual content guided by textual or structural cues.
However, latent local editing methods often struggle to maintain pixel-level consistency between
synthesized regions and their surrounding context [47]. Specifically, the latent encoding and decoding
inherent in these approaches often introduces low-level compression errors, such as color and textures
mismatch, hindering the pixel-level matching with the original background. Furthermore, when the
edited region is pasted-back into the source image, small visual differences usually become more
pronounced, producing visible mismatches at the boundaries. Such artifacts are usually hard to
eliminate. In fact, our experiment found that more expressive latent representations, such as the
16-channel VAE in FLUX [3], often exacerbate local editing artifacts due to poor generalization
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

