Predictive Coding Enhances Meta-RL To Achieve
Interpretable Bayes-Optimal Belief Representation
Under Partial Observability

Po-Chen Kuo
University of Washington
pckuo@uw.edu

Han Hou
Allen Institute for Neural Dynamics
han.hou@alleninstitute.org

Will Dabney
Google DeepMind
wdabney@gmail.com

Edgar Y. Walker
University of Washington
eywalker@uw.edu

Abstract
Learning a compact representation of history is critical for planning and generalization in partially observable environments. While meta-reinforcement learning
(RL) agents can attain near Bayes-optimal policies, they often fail to learn the compact, interpretable Bayes-optimal belief states. This representational inefficiency
potentially limits the agent’s adaptability and generalization capacity. Inspired by
predictive coding in neuroscience—which suggests that the brain predicts sensory
inputs as a neural implementation of Bayesian inference—and by auxiliary predictive objectives in deep RL, we investigate whether integrating self-supervised
predictive coding modules into meta-RL can facilitate learning of Bayes-optimal
representations. Through state machine simulation, we show that meta-RL with
predictive modules consistently generates more interpretable representations that
better approximate Bayes-optimal belief states compared to conventional meta-RL
across a wide variety of tasks, even when both achieve optimal policies. In challenging tasks requiring active information seeking, only meta-RL with predictive
modules successfully learns optimal representations and policies, whereas conventional meta-RL struggles with inadequate representation learning. Finally, we
demonstrate that better representation learning leads to improved generalization.
Our results strongly suggest the role of predictive learning as a guiding principle
for effective representation learning in agents navigating partial observability.

1

Introduction

In real-world environments, agents, biological or artificial, rarely have complete information about the
environmental states crucial for decision-making and planning, as observations are often noisy and
non-stationary. This issue is known in reinforcement learning (RL) as partial observability [1, 2, 3],
and is a major challenge in the deployment of real-world RL systems [4]. In partially observable
environments, learning optimal policies depends on the entire history of past interactions. An open
question in RL under partial observability is how to learn an efficient representation that serves as a
compact summary of the history while retaining the information crucial for policy learning.
Partially observable tasks can be formalized as partially observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs, Fig. 1A) [2, 3], allowing a Bayesian treatment by maintaining and updating a belief
state using Bayesian inference [5]. To this end, meta-RL, in particular memory-based meta-RL, has
been shown to provide powerful deep RL methods for developing agents that efficiently adapt under
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

