Gradient-Guided Epsilon Constraint Method for
Online Continual Learning

Song Lai∗ 1,2 , Changyi Ma∗ 2 , Fei Zhu2 , Zhe Zhao1
Xi Lin1 , Gaofeng Meng† 2,3,4 Qingfu Zhang† 1
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
gfmeng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Online Continual Learning (OCL) requires models to learn sequentially from
data streams with limited memory. Rehearsal-based methods, particularly Experience Replay (ER), are commonly used in OCL scenarios. This paper revisits
ER through the lens of ϵ-constraint optimization, revealing that ER implicitly employs a soft constraint on past task performance, with its weighting parameter
post-hoc defining a slack variable. While effective, ER’s implicit and fixed slack
strategy has limitations: it can inadvertently lead to updates that negatively impact generalization, and its fixed trade-off between plasticity and stability may
not optimally balance current streaming with memory retention, potentially overfitting to the memory buffer. To address these shortcomings, we propose the
Gradient-Guided Epsilon Constraint (GEC) method for online continual learning. GEC explicitly formulates the OCL update as an ϵ-constraint optimization
problem, which minimize the loss on the current task data and transform the stability objective as constraints and propose a gradient-guided method to dynamically adjusts the update direction based on whether the performance on memory
samples violates a predefined slack tolerance ε̄: if forgetting exceeds this tolerance, GEC prioritizes constraint satisfaction; otherwise, it focuses on the current
task while controlling the rate of increase in memory loss. Empirical evaluations on standard OCL benchmarks demonstrate GEC’s ability to achieve a superior trade-off, leading to improved overall performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/laisong-22004009/GEC_OCL.

1

Introduction

Continual Learning (CL) aims to develop systems that can learn sequentially from a stream of tasks,
a critical capability for real-world applications where data evolves [De Lange et al., 2021]. Online Continual Learning (OCL) presents a particularly challenging scenario where data arrives in
small batches, is typically processed in a single pass, and memory for past experiences is strictly
limited [Mai et al., 2022, Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017]. The central challenge in OCL is catastrophic forgetting [McCloskey and Cohen, 1989, French, 1999], where learning new tasks causes a
severe degradation of performance on previously learned ones. This has been a focal point of recent
research [De Lange et al., 2021, Mai et al., 2022].
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

