Beyond Pairwise Connections: Extracting High-Order
Functional Brain Network Structures under Global
Constraints
Ling Zhan1,2 , Junjie Huang1 , Xiaoyao Yu1 , Wenyu Chen1,3 , Tao Jia1,2,4∗
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
2
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Cognitive Computing
and Educational Rehabilitation for Children with Special Needs,
Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China
3
School of Science, Guangxi University of Science and Technology, Guangxi, China
4
College of Computer and Information Science, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China
zl0327@email.swu.edu.cn, junjiehuang@swu.edu.cn, xiaoyaoyu@email.swu.edu.cn,
cwy610@gxust.edu.cn, tjia@swu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Functional brain network (FBN) modeling often relies on local pairwise interactions, whose limitation in capturing high-order dependencies is theoretically
analyzed in this paper. Meanwhile, the computational burden and heuristic nature of current hypergraph modeling approaches hinder end-to-end learning of
FBN structures directly from data distributions. To address this, we propose to
extract high-order FBN structures under global constraints, and implement this
as a Global Constraints oriented Multi-resolution (GCM) FBN structure learning
framework. It incorporates 4 types of global constraint (signal synchronization,
subject identity, expected edge numbers, and data labels) to enable learning FBN
structures for 4 distinct levels (sample/subject/group/project) of modeling resolution. Experimental results demonstrate that GCM achieves up to a 30.6%
improvement in relative accuracy and a 96.3% reduction in computational time
across 5 datasets and 2 task settings, compared to 9 baselines and 10 state-ofthe-art methods. Extensive experiments validate the contributions of individual
components and highlight the interpretability of GCM. This work offers a novel
perspective on FBN structure learning and provides a foundation for interdisciplinary applications in cognitive neuroscience. Code is publicly available on
https://github.com/lzhan94swu/GCM.

1

Introduction

Functional brain networks (FBNs), which model inter-regional coordination as graphs, have become
a central approach for understanding cognition, behavior, and mental disorders [1, 2]. They are
typically inferred from multivariate time series (MTS) recorded by fMRI or EEG [3, 4], with the
goal of capturing the inter-regional dependencies embedded in neural dynamics [5, 6, 7]. However,
because these dependencies are only indirectly observable, reliable network construction remains
challenging [8, 9].
Traditional methods construct FBNs by estimating pairwise statistical interactions (e.g., correlation,
coherence) between regional signals [10, 11, 12, 13]. Recent machine learning models extract
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

