FlowRefiner: A Robust Traffic Classification
Framework against Label Noise

Mingwei Zhan1 , Ruijie Zhao2* , Xianwen Deng1 , Zhi Xue1† , Qi Li3 ,
Zhuotao Liu3 , Guang Cheng2 , Ke Xu3†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Southeast University 3 Tsinghua University
{mw.zhan,2594306528,zxue}@sjtu.edu.cn {ruijiezhao,chengguang}@seu.edu.cn
{qli01,zhuotaoliu,xuke}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Network traffic classification is essential for network management and security. In
recent years, deep learning (DL) algorithms have emerged as essential tools for
classifying complex traffic. However, they rely heavily on high-quality labeled
training data. In practice, traffic data is often noisy due to human error or inaccurate
automated labeling, which could render classification unreliable and lead to severe
consequences. Although some studies have alleviated the label noise issue in
specific scenarios, they are difficult to generalize to general traffic classification
tasks due to the inherent semantic complexity of traffic data. In this paper, we
propose F LOW R EFINER, a robust and general traffic classification framework
against label noise. F LOW R EFINER consists of three core components: a traffic
semantics-driven noise detector, a confidence-guided label correction mechanism,
and a cross-granularity robust classifier. First, the noise detector utilizes traffic
semantics extracted from a pre-trained encoder to identify mislabeled flows. Next,
the confidence-guided label correction module fine-tunes a label predictor to correct
noisy labels and construct refined flows. Finally, the cross-granularity robust
classifier learns generalized patterns of both flow-level and packet-level, improving
classification robustness against noisy labels. We evaluate our method on four
traffic datasets with various classification scenarios across varying noise ratios.
Experimental results demonstrate that F LOW R EFINER mitigates the impact of label
noise and consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by a large margin.
The code is available at https://github.com/NSSL-SJTU/FlowRefiner.

1

Introduction

Network traffic classification is a fundamental task for the management, security, and optimization of
modern networks. It enables critical capabilities such as identifying malicious behaviors (1; 2; 3),
enforcing quality-of-service (QoS) policies (4; 5; 6), and monitoring application usage (7). It can
also support user-centric analysis such as profiling in social network applications by fine-grained
inference of user actions (8; 9). As network applications and protocols continue to evolve, traffic data
have become increasingly complex, reflecting not only protocol interactions but also diverse user
behaviors and service patterns (10). These complexities make automated traffic classification both
more important and more challenging (11; 12; 13).
In recent years, deep learning (DL) algorithms have emerged as powerful tools for traffic analysis
for handling such complexity (14; 15; 16; 17; 18). By leveraging large-scale labeled raw traffic
data, DL-based models can automatically extract discriminative representations and achieve accurate
classification performance. However, the success of DL-based methods heavily relies on the quality
∗

Corresponding author.

†

Project advisors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

