Sequential Monte Carlo for
Policy Optimization in Continuous POMDPs

Hany Abdulsamad∗1,2
Sahel Iqbal∗2
Simo Särkkä2
1
2
University of Amsterdam
Aalto University
{sahel.iqbal,simo.sarkka}@aalto.fi
h.abdulsamad@uva.nl

Abstract
Optimal decision-making under partial observability requires agents to balance
reducing uncertainty (exploration) against pursuing immediate objectives (exploitation). In this paper, we introduce a novel policy optimization framework for
continuous partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) that explicitly addresses this challenge. Our method casts policy learning as probabilistic
inference in a non-Markovian Feynman–Kac model that inherently captures the
value of information gathering by anticipating future observations, without requiring suboptimal approximations or handcrafted heuristics. To optimize policies
under this model, we develop a nested sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) algorithm
that efficiently estimates a history-dependent policy gradient under samples from
the optimal trajectory distribution induced by the POMDP. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our algorithm across standard continuous POMDP benchmarks,
where existing methods struggle to act under uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Optimal decision-making under uncertainty is central to building autonomous agents capable of
operating in real-world environments. The ability to quantify and act on uncertainty enables agents
to exhibit greater autonomy and robustness, allowing them to react effectively beyond controlled
laboratory environments — a hallmark of adaptive systems [Feldbaum, 1963]. In practice, sensory
limitations or environmental factors often conceal information required for optimal decision-making.
This setting has been a long-standing challenge in the field of decision theory and the canonical
framework to deal with such scenarios is that of partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) [Åström, 1965, Aoki, 1967, Sondik, 1971].
The primary challenge of POMDPs lies in the entanglement of probabilistic inference and sequential
planning. At each step, an agent must anticipate how its actions will shape future observations, what
those observations may reveal about the latent state, and how this information can influence future
decisions. Effective decision-making in POMDPs hence necessitates an exhaustive consideration
of all possible state-action-observation trajectories over long horizons. While exact solutions exist
for discrete POMDPs with small spaces [Cassandra et al., 1997, Porta et al., 2005, Poupart et al.,
2006], continuous POMDPs pose far greater challenges, as the belief state becomes an infinitedimensional object. Tractable solutions are restricted to linear-Gaussian problems with quadratic
rewards [Aoki, 1967, Stengel, 1994], a special setting where inference and control decouple without
loss of optimality [Bar-Shalom and Tse, 1974]. In more general continuous settings, existing
methods often rely on problematic simplifications, such as an invalid decoupling of inference from
control [Tse and Bar-Shalom, 1975, Li and Todorov, 2007], assuming maximum-likelihood future
observations [Platt et al., 2010], or applying local linear-Gaussian approximations [Van Den Berg
et al., 2012, Indelman et al., 2015].
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

