Improved Confidence Regions and Optimal
Algorithms for Online and Offline Linear MNL
Bandits
Yuxuan Han
New York University
yh6061@stern.nyu.edu

Jose Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Zhengyuan Zhou
New York University
zzhou@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
In this work, we consider the data-driven assortment optimization problem under the linear multinomial logit (MNL) choice model. We first establish an improved confidence region for the maximum-likelihood-estimator (MLE) of the
d-dimensional linear MNL likelihood function that removes the explicit dependency on a problem-dependent parameter κ−1 in previous result [42], which scales
exponentially with the radius of the parameter set. Building on the confidence
region result, we investigate the data-driven assortment optimization problem in
both offline and online
In the offline setting, the previously best-known
q settings.

d
e
result scales as O
,
where
nS ⋆ denote the number of times that optimal
κnS ⋆
⋆
assortment S is observed [26]. We propose a new pessimistic-based algorithm
that, under a burn-in condition, removes the dependency on d, κ−1 in the leading
order bound and works under a more relaxed coverage condition, without requiring
the exact observation
of S ⋆ . In the online setting, we propose the first algorithm
√
to achieve e
O( dT ) regret without a multiplicative dependency on κ−1 . In both
settings, our results nearly achieve the corresponding lower bound when reduced
to the canonical N -item MNL problem, demonstrating their optimality.

1

Introduction

In modern data-driven decision-making problems, a key challenge for sellers, often managing a
large inventory, is determining a subset of products, also referred to as an assortment, to display to
customers. For instance, when customers search for "laptops" on an e-commerce platform, the system
must select an assortment from thousands of options to present. Due to space constraints or cognitive
overload, only a limited number of items—at most K—can be displayed at a time. This motivates
the study of assortment optimization with cardinality constraints, where the seller aims to identify
the optimal assortment of K items to display in order to maximize revenue.
The revenue of an assortment S depends on both the revenue of each item i ∈ S and the final choice
made by the customer after observing S. While the revenue of individual items is often known to the
seller, the customer’s choice behavior is unknown and must be estimated from data. A large body of
work has focused on modeling customer choice behavior in the context of assortment optimization
[40, 52, 41, 7, 22, 25, 6, 12]. Among these models, the multinomial logit (MNL) model and its
linearly parametrized variant stands out as a widely used approach and serves as a foundation for
understanding more complex models due to its clear mathematical structure, computational simplicity,
and ease of calibration [11].
In the linear MNL choice model with N items, each item i ∈ [N ] is associated with an d-dimensional
⋆
feature xi , and its utility, presenting its attraction to customers, is given by vi = x⊤
i θ for some
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

