Flat Channels to Infinity in Neural Loss Landscapes

Flavio Martinelli1∗ Alexander van Meegen1∗ Berfin Şimşek2
Wulfram Gerstner1 Johanni Brea1
1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Flatiron Institute, New York, USA
*equal contribution
{flavio.martinelli,alexander.vanmeegen,johanni.brea}@epfl.ch

Abstract
The loss landscapes of neural networks contain minima and saddle points that may
be connected in flat regions or appear in isolation. We identify and characterize
a special structure in the loss landscape: channels along which the loss decreases
extremely slowly, while the output weights of at least two neurons, ai and aj ,
diverge to ±infinity, and their input weight vectors, wi and wj , become equal
to each other. At convergence, the two neurons implement a gated linear unit:
ai σ(wi · x) + aj σ(wj · x) → cσ(w · x) + (v · x)σ ′ (w · x). Geometrically,
these channels to infinity are asymptotically parallel to symmetry-induced lines of
critical points. Gradient flow solvers, and related optimization methods like SGD
or ADAM, reach the channels with high probability in diverse regression settings,
but without careful inspection they look like flat local minima with finite parameter
values. Our characterization provides a comprehensive picture of these quasi-flat
regions in terms of gradient dynamics, geometry, and functional interpretation. The
emergence of gated linear units at the end of the channels highlights a surprising
aspect of the computational capabilities of fully connected layers.

Saddle
line

lin.
Channel
to infinity

Figure 1: Saddle lines à la Fukumizu & Amari [1] and channels to infinity. Left: Duplicating
a neuron in a network trained to convergence generates lines of saddle points in the loss landscape
[1]. Duplicated neurons share the input weights of the original neuron while their output weights
γa, (1 − γ)a sum to the original neuron’s output weight a. Middle: Loss landscape of duplicated
network projected along the saddle line (in red) and the eigenvector of the smallest (most negative)
eigenvalue of the loss Hessian. Parallel to the saddle line there are channels to infinity (green curve)
along which the loss decreases very slowly. Following the channel, the output weights diverge
to infinite norm and the input weights converge to a new value. Right: The solution at infinity
implements a new function consisting of a single neuron and a gated linear unit. The gating function
is the derivative of the original activation function σ.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

