Unextractable Protocol Models: Collaborative
Training and Inference without Weight Materialization

Alexander Long∗ Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage∗ Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan
Gil Avraham

Violetta Shevchenko

Hadi Mohaghegh Dolatabadi

Yan Zuo

Sameera Ramasinghe

Pluralis Research

Abstract
We consider a decentralized setup in which the participants collaboratively train and
serve a large neural network, and where each participant only processes a subset of
the model. In this setup, we explore the possibility of unmaterializable weights,
where a full weight set is never available to any one participant. We introduce
Unextractable Protocol Models (UPMs): a training and inference framework that
leverages the sharded model setup to ensure model shards (i.e., subsets) held by
participants are incompatible at different time steps. UPMs periodically inject timevarying, random, invertible transforms at participant boundaries; preserving the
overall network function yet rendering cross-time assemblies incoherent. On Qwen2.5-0.5B and Llama-3.2-1B, 10 000 transforms leave FP32 perplexity unchanged
(∆PPL< 0.01; Jensen–Shannon drift < 4 × 10−5 ), and we show how to control
growth for lower precision datatypes. Applying a transform every 30s adds 3%
latency, 0.1% bandwidth, and 10% GPU-memory overhead at inference, while
training overhead falls to 1.6% time and < 1% memory. We consider several
attacks, showing that the requirements of direct attacks are impractical and easy to
defend against, and that gradient-based fine-tuning of stitched partitions consumes
≥ 60% of the tokens required to train from scratch. By enabling models to
be collaboratively trained yet not extracted, UPMs make it practical to embed
programmatic incentive mechanisms in community-driven decentralized training.

1

Introduction

Foundation models are trained on massively distributed infrastructures [13, 35], and there is a
growing interest in scaling beyond centralized computing clusters via communication-efficient and
fault-tolerant decentralized systems [11, 28, 51, 50, 47]. Even though decentralized systems may
facilitate volunteer-based, multi-party training; without a way for contributors to recoup the hundreds
of millions in training costs [8, 23, 41], such collaborations remain economically infeasible at large
scales [1, 57]. A viable solution is to design incentivization strategies to allow value flow from model
usage to the training contributors, however, this is not possible if the model is freely accessible to
participants (as with a full weight set participants can independently capture model value).
To resolve this seeming contradiction, how can a model be collaboratively trained and hosted, while
the weight set remains private, we introduce Unextractable Protocol Models (UPMs). UPMs utilize
structural properties of the Model Parallel (MP) [17, 54] training setup, where the neural network is
sharded into small subsets and split over devices (in our case, participants), and no one device accesses
the full model at any time. This is a novel setting, where the model architecture, hyperparameters,
and datasets can be open-sourced, yet a full weight set never exists in any location at any one point.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

