Towards Reliable and Holistic Visual In-Context
Learning Prompt Selection

Wenxiao Wu1,2

Jing-Hao Xue3 Chengming Xu4B Chen Liu5 Xinwei Sun6
Changxin Gao1 Nong Sang1 Yanwei Fu6,2
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
3
University College London 4 Tencent Youtu Lab
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 6 Fudan University
{wenxiaowu, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn jinghao.xue@ucl.ac.uk
chengmingxu@tencent.com cliudh@connect.ust.hk
{sunxinwei, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual In-Context Learning (VICL) has emerged as a prominent approach for
adapting visual foundation models to novel tasks, by effectively exploiting contextual information embedded in in-context examples, which can be formulated as
a global ranking problem of potential candidates. Current VICL methods, such as
Partial2Global and VPR, are grounded in the similarity-priority assumption that
images more visually similar to a query image serve as better in-context examples.
This foundational assumption, while intuitive, lacks sufficient justification for its
efficacy in selecting optimal in-context examples. Furthermore, Partial2Global
constructs its global ranking from a series of randomly sampled pairwise preference predictions. Such a reliance on random sampling can lead to incomplete
coverage and redundant samplings of comparisons, thus further adversely impacting the final global ranking. To address these issues, this paper introduces an
enhanced variant of Partial2Global designed for reliable and holistic selection of
in-context examples in VICL. Our proposed method, dubbed RH-Partial2Global,
leverages a jackknife conformal prediction-guided strategy to construct reliable
alternative sets and a covering design-based sampling approach to ensure comprehensive and uniform coverage of pairwise preferences. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that RH-Partial2Global achieves excellent performance and outperforms Partial2Global across diverse visual tasks. The source code is available in
https://github.com/Wu-Wenxiao/RH-Partial2Global.

1

Introduction

Inspired by the success of in-context learning in natural language processing, visual in-context learning (VICL) was born on demand as a promising paradigm for leveraging Visual Foundation Models
(VFMs) in vision tasks. By conditioning VFMs on a few in-context examples, typically image-label
pairs, VICL facilitates efficient adaptation to various downstream tasks, such as segmentation and
detection [1, 2], image editing [3], cross-modal content reasoning [4] as well as low-level tasks[5].
A key challenge in VICL lies in selecting the most suitable in-context examples corresponding to
a given query image to achieve optimal performance. Given that a set of candidate examples is
typically available, recent works [2, 6] commonly formulate VICL as a global ranking problem.
Partial2Global [6], a state-of-the-art method, tackles this by first training a list-wise partial ranker
through meta-learning. This ranker is applied to randomly partitioned candidate sequences for partial rankings, from which a consistency-aware aggregator subsequently infers a global ranking.
B

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

