MoORE: SVD-based Model MoE-ization for Conflictand Oblivion-Resistant Multi-Task Adaptation

Shen Yuan1,2 Yin Zheng2 Taifeng Wang2 Binbin Liu2 Hongteng Xu1,3,4∗
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 2 ByteDance
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
4
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE

Abstract
Adapting large-scale foundation models in multi-task scenarios often suffers from
task conflict and oblivion. To mitigate such issues, we propose a novel “model MoEization” strategy that leads to a conflict- and oblivion-resistant multi-task adaptation
method. Given a weight matrix of a pre-trained model, our method applies SVD
to it and introduces a learnable router to adjust its singular values based on tasks
and samples. Accordingly, the weight matrix becomes a Mixture of Orthogonal
Rank-one Experts (MoORE), in which each expert corresponds to the outer product
of a left singular vector and the corresponding right one. We can improve the
model capacity by imposing a learnable orthogonal transform on the right singular
vectors. Unlike low-rank adaptation (LoRA) and its MoE-driven variants, MoORE
guarantees the experts’ orthogonality and maintains the column space of the original
weight matrix. These two properties make the adapted model resistant to the
conflicts among the new tasks and the oblivion of its original tasks, respectively.
Experiments on various datasets demonstrate that MoORE outperforms existing
multi-task adaptation methods consistently, showing its superiority in terms of
conflict- and oblivion-resistance. The code is available at https://github.
com/DaShenZi721/MoORE.

1

Introduction

Parameter-efficient adaptation/fine-tuning [71] plays a central role in the practical deployment of
large-scale pre-training models, especially in multi-task learning (MTL) scenarios [80, 61, 11, 62, 42].
Take large language models (LLMs) [82] in natural language processing (NLP) tasks as an example.
To increase intrinsic knowledge and maintain generalization power, a pre-trained LLM often needs to
learn multiple downstream tasks in different domains simultaneously or sequentially. To achieve multitask adaptation, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods like low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [25]
and its variants [68, 2, 60, 65, 31] have been proposed. However, the practical applications of these
methods are often limited because they often suffer from task conflict and oblivion: i) The model
adapted for one task often leads to the performance degradation in other tasks (also known as negative
transfer [70, 79] or destructive interference [11]). ii) Learning new tasks may result in catastrophic
forgetting [62] — the model performance deteriorates severely in previously learned tasks.
Essentially, task conflict and oblivion arise because the diversity of different tasks requires the models
to adapt their parameters in different directions [72, 74, 13, 26, 15]. Some recent methods [31,
30, 60] combine the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture [27, 55, 29] with PEFT, mitigating the
interferences across different tasks by activating task-specific parameters. Given a layer of a pretrained model, these methods learn multiple adapters associated with a router in multi-task scenarios.
∗

Corresponding author. Email: hongtengxu313@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

