STITCH-OPE: Trajectory Stitching with Guided
Diffusion for Off-Policy Evaluation

Hossein Goli1,2,4

Michael Gimelfarb1,2,4 Nathan De Lara1,2,4 Haruki Nishimura3
Masha Itkina3 Florian Shkurti1,2,4
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2
University of Toronto Robotics Institute, Toronto, Canada
3
Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos, California
4
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
hossein.goli@mail.utoronto.ca
mike.gimelfarb@mail.utoronto.ca
nathan.delara@mail.utoronto.ca
haruki.nishimura@tri.global
masha.itkina@tri.global
florian@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) estimates the performance of a target policy using
offline data collected from a behavior policy, and is crucial in domains such as
robotics or healthcare where direct interaction with the environment is costly or
unsafe. Existing OPE methods are ineffective for high-dimensional, long-horizon
problems, due to exponential blow-ups in variance from importance weighting or
compounding errors from learned dynamics models. To address these challenges,
we propose STITCH-OPE, a model-based generative framework that leverages
denoising diffusion for long-horizon OPE in high-dimensional state and action
spaces. Starting with a diffusion model pre-trained on the behavior data, STITCHOPE generates synthetic trajectories from the target policy by guiding the denoising
process using the score function of the target policy. STITCH-OPE proposes
two technical innovations that make it advantageous for OPE: (1) prevents overregularization by subtracting the score of the behavior policy during guidance,
and (2) generates long-horizon trajectories by stitching partial trajectories together
end-to-end. We provide a theoretical guarantee that under mild assumptions, these
modifications result in an exponential reduction in variance versus long-horizon
trajectory diffusion. Experiments on the D4RL and OpenAI Gym benchmarks show
substantial improvement in mean squared error, correlation, and regret metrics
compared to state-of-the-art OPE methods †

1

Introduction

Given the slow and risky nature of online data collection, real-world applications of reinforcement
learning often require offline data for policy learning and evaluation [23, 39]. An important problem
of working with offline data is off-policy evaluation (OPE), which aims to evaluate the performance
of target policies using offline data collected from other behavior policies. One practical advantage of
OPE is that it saves the cost of evaluation on hardware in embodied applications in the real world [28].
However, a central challenge of OPE is the presence of distribution shift induced by differences in
behavior and target policies [23, 3]. This can lead to inaccurate estimates of policy values, making it
difficult to trust or select between multiple target policies before they are deployed [44, 26].
Numerous approaches have attempted to address the distribution shift in offline policy evaluation
by reducing either the variance of the policy value or its bias, but they are typically ineffective in
†

Project website and code: stitch-ope.github.io.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

