Explainably Safe Reinforcement Learning

Stefan Pranger∗
Graz University of Technology
stefan.pranger@tugraz.at

Sabine Rieder∗
Masaryk University
Technical University of Munich
sabine.rieder@mail.muni.cz,
Debraj Chakraborty
Masaryk University
chakraborty@fi.muni.cz

Jan Křetı́nský
Masaryk University
Technical University of Munich
jan.kretinsky@fi.muni.cz,

Bettina Könighofer
Graz University of Technology
bettina.koenighofer@tugraz.at

Abstract
Trust in a decision-making system requires both safety guarantees and the ability
to interpret and understand its behavior. This is particularly important for learned
systems, whose decision-making processes are often highly opaque. Shielding is
a prominent model-based technique for enforcing safety in reinforcement learning. However, because shields are automatically synthesized using rigorous formal methods, their decisions are often similarly difficult for humans to interpret.
Recently, decision trees became customary to represent controllers and policies.
However, since shields are inherently non-deterministic, their decision tree representations become too large to be explainable in practice. To address this challenge, we propose a novel approach for explainable safe RL that enhances trust by
providing human-interpretable explanations of the shield’s decisions. Our method
represents the shielding policy as a hierarchy of decision trees, offering top-down,
case-based explanations. At design time, we use a world model to analyze the
safety risks of executing actions in given states. Based on this risk analysis, we
construct both the shield and a high-level decision tree that classifies states into
risk categories (safe, critical, dangerous, unsafe), providing an initial explanation
of why a given situation may be safety-critical. At runtime, we generate localized
decision trees that explain which actions are allowed and why others are deemed
unsafe. Altogether, our method facilitates the explainability of the safety aspect
in the safe-by-shielding reinforcement learning. Our framework requires no additional information beyond what is already used for shielding, incurs minimal
overhead, and can be readily integrated into existing shielded RL pipelines. In our
experiments, we compute explanations using decision trees that are several orders
of magnitude smaller than the original shield.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) [42] is a powerful machine learning technique for intelligent
sequential decision-making. Despite its successes, its application in safety-critical systems remains
limited due to safety concerns. RL agents learn by exploring their environment through trial and
error, a process that inherently carries the risk of taking unsafe actions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

