Predicting partially observable dynamical systems via
diffusion models with a multiscale inference scheme
Rudy Morel∗,1 , Francesco Pio Ramunno2,3 , Jeff Shen4 ,
Alberto Bietti1 , Kyunghyun Cho5 , Miles Cranmer6 , Siavash Golkar1,5 , Olexandr
Gugnin7 , Geraud Krawezik1 , Tanya Marwah1 , Michael McCabe1,5 , Lucas Meyer1 ,
Payel Mukhopadhyay6,8 , Ruben Ohana1 , Liam Parker1,8 , Helen Qu1 , François Rozet9 ,
K.D. Leka10,11 , François Lanusse1,12 , David Fouhey5 , Shirley Ho1,4,5
The Polymathic AI Collaboration
1

Flatiron Institute, 2 University of Geneva, 3 FHNW, 4 Princeton University, 5 New York
University, 6 University of Cambridge, 7 University of Kyiv, 8 University of California,
Berkeley, 9 University of Liège, 10 NorthWest Research Associates, 11 Nagoya
University, 12 Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris Cité, CEA, CNRS, AIM.

Abstract
Conditional diffusion models provide a natural framework for probabilistic prediction of dynamical systems and have been successfully applied to fluid dynamics
and weather prediction. However, in many settings, the available information at
a given time represents only a small fraction of what is needed to predict future
states, either due to measurement uncertainty or because only a small fraction of
the state can be observed. This is true for example in solar physics, where we can
observe the Sun’s surface and atmosphere, but its evolution is driven by internal
processes for which we lack direct measurements. In this paper, we tackle the
probabilistic prediction of partially observable, long-memory dynamical systems,
with applications to solar dynamics and the evolution of active regions. We show
that standard inference schemes, such as autoregressive rollouts, fail to capture
long-range dependencies in the data, largely because they do not integrate past
information effectively. To overcome this, we propose a multiscale inference
scheme for diffusion models, tailored to physical processes. Our method generates
trajectories that are temporally fine-grained near the present and coarser as we
move farther away, which enables capturing long-range temporal dependencies
without increasing computational cost. When integrated into a diffusion model,
we show that our inference scheme significantly reduces the bias of the predicted
distributions and improves rollout stability.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic prediction of dynamical systems is at the heart of many challenging tasks in science and
engineering. Diffusion models have recently shown success in probabilistic prediction for physical
systems, especially when they are applied to simulated environments [39] or to settings such as
terrestrial weather prediction [62], where laboratory settings or advanced data assimilation can recover
much of the current system state [27].
Many real systems are partially observable, meaning that data is missing, unobtainable, or sufficiently
noisy such that at any given time there is inadequate information to accurately infer the underlying
state of the system. It follows, then, that there is inadequate information to predict its exact evolution.
In these settings, the correct incorporation of past information can help predict future trajectories.
∗

Contact: rmorel@flatironinstitute.org

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

