Product distribution learning with imperfect advice

Arnab Bhattacharyya
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
arnab.bhattacharyya@warwick.ac.uk
Davin Choo
Harvard John A. Paulson School Of Engineering And Applied Sciences
Harvard University
davinchoo@seas.harvard.edu
Philips George John
CNRS@CREATE & Dept. of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
philips.george.john@u.nus.edu

Themis Gouleakis
College of Computing & Data Science
Nanyang Technological University
themis.gouleakis@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Given i.i.d. samples from an unknown distribution P , the goal of distribution
learning is to recover the parameters of a distribution that is close to P . When P
belongs to the class of product distributions on the Boolean hypercube {0, 1}d ,
it is known that Ω(d/ε2 ) samples are necessary to learn P within total variation
(TV) distance ϵ. We revisit this problem when the learner is also given as advice
the parameters of a product distribution Q. We show that there is an efficient
algorithm to learn P within TV distance ε that has sample complexity Õ(d1−η /ε2 ),
if ∥p − q∥1 < εd0.5−Ω(η) . Here, p and q are the mean vectors of P and Q
respectively, and no bound on ∥p − q∥1 is known to the algorithm a priori.

1

Introduction

Science fundamentally relies on the ability to learn models from data. In many real-world settings,
the majority of available datasets consist of unlabeled examples – sample points drawn without
corresponding labels, outputs or classifications. These unlabeled datasets are often modeled as
samples from a joint probability distribution on a large domain. The goal of distribution learning is
to output the description of a distribution that approximates the underlying distribution that generated
the observed samples. See [Dia16] for a comprehensive survey.
In practice, distribution learning rarely occurs in isolation. While a given dataset may be new, one
often has access to previously learned models from related datasets. Alternatively, the data may
arise from an evolving process, motivating the reuse of information from past learning to guide
current inference. This prior information can be viewed as a form of “advice” or “prediction” of
some kind. In the framework of algorithms with predictions, the objective is to integrate such
advice in a way that improves performance when the advice is accurate, while ensuring robustness:
performance should not degrade beyond that an advice-free baseline algorithm, even when the
predictions are inaccurate. Most previous works in this setting are in the context of online algorithms,
e.g. for the ski-rental problem [GP19, WLW20, ADJ+ 20], non-clairvoyant scheduling [PSK18],
scheduling [LLMV20, BMRS20, AJS22], augmenting classical data structures with predictions (e.g.
indexing [KBC+ 18] and Bloom filters [Mit18]), online selection and matching problems [AGKK20,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

