Find your Needle: Small Object Image Retrieval via
Multi-Object Attention Optimization

Michael Green1∗ , Matan Levy2∗ , Issar Tzachor1∗ , Dvir Samuel1,3 , Nir Darshan1 , Rami Ben-Ari1,§
1
OriginAI, Israel
2
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
3
Bar-Ilan University, Israel

Abstract
We address the challenge of Small Object Image Retrieval (SoIR), where the goal
is to retrieve images containing a specific small object, in a cluttered scene. The
key challenge in this setting is constructing a single image descriptor, for scalable
and efficient search, that effectively represents all objects in the image. In this
paper, we first analyze the limitations of existing methods on this challenging
task and then introduce new benchmarks to support SoIR evaluation. Next, we
introduce Multi-object Attention Optimization (MaO), a novel retrieval framework
which incorporates a dedicated multi-object pre-training phase. This is followed
by a refinement process that leverages attention-based feature extraction with
object masks, integrating them into a single unified image descriptor. Our MaO
approach significantly outperforms existing retrieval methods and strong baselines,
achieving notable improvements in both zero-shot and lightweight multi-object
fine-tuning. We hope this work will pave the way and inspire further research
to enhance retrieval performance for this highly practical task. Project page:
https://pihash2k.github.io/findyourneedle.github.io.
Top-1 Result (for query A)

Query A

MaO

Retrieve
Target
is
here

Top-1 Result (for query B)

Query B

MaO

Retrieve
Target
is
here

Figure 1: It is highly challenging to find an object instance that appears small
in a cluttered scene image, moreover when shuffled in a large corpus of images.
Top-1 retrieval results by our Multi-Object Attention Optimization (MaO) method
are shown, attained with a single representation per-image, allowing a scalable
search.

1

Introduction

Searching for a small object within a large image corpus is akin to finding a needle in a haystack.
The challenge arises from the object’s small size, the existence of many distracting objects in the
*
§

Equal Contribution
Corresponding author: <ramib@originai.co>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

