Rethinking Entropy in Test-Time Adaptation:
The Missing Piece from Energy Duality

1

Mincheol Park1 Heeji Won2 Won Woo Ro3˚ Suhyun Kim4˚
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, 1 Samsung Electronics,
2
Korea University, 3 Yonsei University, 4 Kyung Hee University
danimc.park@samsung.com, gmlwl1026@korea.ac.kr,
wro@yonsei.ac.kr, dr.suhyun_kim@gmail.com

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to preserve model performance under distribution
shifts. Yet, most existing methods rely on entropy minimization for confident
predictions. This paper re-examines the sufficiency of entropy minimization by analyzing its dual relationship with energy. We view energy as a proxy for likelihood,
where lower energy indicates higher observability under the learned distribution.
We uncover that entropy and energy are tightly associated, controlled by the model’s
confidence or ambiguity, and show that simultaneous reduction of both is essential.
Importantly, we reveal that entropy minimization alone neither ensures energy
reduction nor supports reliable likelihood estimation, and it requires explicit discriminative guidance to reach zero entropy. To combat these problems, we propose
a twofold solution. First, we introduce a likelihood-based objective grounded in
energy-based models, which reshape the energy landscape to favor test samples.
For stable and scalable training, we adopt sliced score matching—a sampling-free,
Hessian-insensitive approximation of Fisher divergence. Second, we enhance entropy minimization with a cross-entropy that treats the predicted class as a target
to promote discriminability. By counterbalancing entropy and energy through the
solution of multi-objective optimization, our unified TTA, ReTTA, outperforms
existing entropy- or energy-based approaches across diverse distribution shifts.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are increasingly ubiquitous in cutting-edge technologies such as autonomous
vehicles [21, 17] and biomedical science [1, 22]. A key assumption behind their success is that
test data comes from the same distribution as training data. However, this assumption is often
broken in practice. Test data can be subject to degeneration, referred to as covariate shifts, such as
changes in lighting due to weather conditions or unexpected noise caused by sensor degradation [14].
Unfortunately, the decision-making of models degrades due to the distribution shifts [13]. This poses
a substantial challenge for the practical deployment of pre-trained models.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) has been proposed to yield more reliable decision-making under distribution shifts. An early TTA method centered on minimizing the entropy of test data [34], assuming
models could separate classes well [11]. This key idea became the cornerstone of state-of-the-art
methods [9, 20, 26, 27, 40], fueling the evolution of TTA. These modern approaches adopt proxy
techniques in parallel, such as data filtering [26] or pseudo-labeling [10, 23, 35], because data streams
experience dynamic shifts [38] and high correlation (non-i.i.d.) [2] in practice. Still, the core principle
of minimizing entropy remains unchanged, even as many efforts are made to address the limitations
of optimizing entropy alone.
˚

Co-corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

