On Extending Direct Preference Optimization to
Accommodate Ties
Jinghong Chen, Guangyu Yang, Weizhe Lin, Jingbiao Mei, Chenxu Lyu, Bill Byrne
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom CB2 1PZ
{jc2124, gy266, wl356, jm2245, cl927, wjb31}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We derive and investigate two DPO variants that explicitly model the possibility
of declaring a tie in pair-wise comparisons. We replace the Bradley-Terry model
in DPO with two well-known modeling extensions, by Rao and Kupper and by
Davidson, that assign probability to ties as alternatives to clear preferences. Our
experiments in neural machine translation and summarization show that explicitly
labeled ties can be added to the datasets for these DPO variants without the degradation in task performance that is observed when the same tied pairs are presented to
DPO. We find empirically that the inclusion of ties leads to stronger regularization
with respect to the reference policy as measured by KL divergence, and we see this
even for DPO in its original form. We provide a theoretical explanation for this
regularization effect using ideal DPO policy theory. We further show performance
improvements over DPO in translation and mathematical reasoning using our DPO
variants. We find it can be beneficial to include ties in preference optimization
rather than simply discard them, as is done in common practice.

1

Introduction

The original formulation of DPO [Rafailov et al., 2023] does not allow for ties. DPO requires training
data consisting of paired options, yw ≻ yl , and each of these pairs should represent a clear preference
in judgment with no ambiguity as to which is the winner and which is the loser. From this data, the
DPO learning procedure encourages the underlying policy to prefer yw over yl . This formulation
does not allow for any ambiguity or uncertainty in the comparison of the paired examples in the
training data.
This certainty is not easy to achieve in practice. A common approach is simply to discard data. Dubey
et al. [2024, Sec. 4.2.1] apply DPO in post-training of Llama 3 models and note that for “DPO,
we use samples that are labeled as the chosen response being significantly better or better than the
rejected counterpart for training and discard samples with similar responses.” Similarly, Qwen2
developers [Yang et al., 2024a, Sec. 4.3] “sample multiple responses from the current policy model,
and the reward model selects the most and the least preferred responses, forming preference pairs that
are used for DPO.” Over-generation followed by aggressive selection is effective in producing the
strongly ordered judgments needed for DPO. However the process appears wasteful: many potentially
useful, and expensively collected, preference judgments are discarded simply because they are ties.
As Rao and Kupper [1967] note: “any model which does not allow for the possibility of ties is not
making full use of the information contained in the no-preference class.”
Motivated by this, we investigate DPO variants that can incorporate ties. We replace the Bradley-Terry
preference model at the heart of DPO by two well-known extensions by Rao and Kupper [1967]
and by Davidson [1970] that explicitly assign probability to tied judgments alongside winners and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

