Restricted Global-Aware Graph Filters Bridging
GNNs and Transformer for Node Classification
Jingyuan Zhang1,2

Xin Wang1,2
Lei Yu1,2
Zhirong Huang1,2
Li Yang1,∗ Fengjun Zhang1,∗
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhangjingyuan2023, wangxin, yulei2022, huangzhirong2022}@iscas.ac.cn
{yangli2017, fengjun}@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
Transformers have been widely regarded as a promising direction for breaking
through the performance bottlenecks of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), primarily
due to their global receptive fields. However, a recent empirical study suggests
that tuned classical GNNs can match or even outperform state-of-the-art Graph
Transformers (GTs) on standard node classification benchmarks. Motivated by this
fact, we deconstruct several representative GTs to examine how global attention
components influence node representations. We find that the global attention
module does not provide significant performance gains and may even exacerbate
test error oscillations. Consequently, we consider that the Transformer is barely
able to learn connectivity patterns that meaningfully complement the original graph
topology. Interestingly, we further observe that mitigating such oscillations enables
the Transformer to improve generalization in GNNs. In a nutshell, we reinterpret
the Transformer through the lens of graph spectrum and reformulate it as a globalaware graph filter with band-pass characteristics and linear complexity. This unique
perspective introduces multi-channel filtering constraints that effectively suppress
test error oscillations. Extensive experiments (17 homophilous, heterophilous
graphs) provide comprehensive empirical evidence for our perspective. This work
clarifies the role of Transformers in GNNs and suggests that advancing modern
GNN research may still require a return to the graph itself.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [20, 26, 57, 8, 41, 43, 64, 67] have demonstrated powerful modeling
capabilities on graph-structured data and have been widely applied to various tasks [16, 35, 33, 68,
60, 44] such as node classification. Most existing GNNs follow a message-passing paradigm [18],
where messages are exchanged between a target node and its neighbors to integrate node features with
graph topology, exhibiting strong spatial locality. Naturally, this local message exchange has raised
concerns about the lack of global awareness, which is often viewed as a performance bottleneck for
GNNs. To address this limitation, some studies [42, 40] have explored incorporating Transformers
into graph learning, giving rise to Graph Transformers (GTs). However, it is unclear to what extent
Transformers enhance GNNs.
In the literature, research on GTs has evolved through three distinct stages: (i) Expressive Power. In
the early stage, GTs primarily leveraged the attention mechanism in Transformers [56] to establish
global receptive fields, alleviating the limitations on expressive power caused by over-smoothing [30,
5] and over-squashing [1, 14]. To enhance model expressiveness, various forms of positional encoding
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

