Free-Lunch Color-Texture Disentanglement for
Stylized Image Generation
∗

Jiang Qin1, , Alexandra Gomez-Villa3,4,* , Senmao Li2,*,‡ ,
†
‡
Shiqi Yang2, , Yaxing Wang2 , Kai Wang5,6,3, , Joost van de Weijer3,4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, China 2 VCIP, CS, Nankai University, China
Computer Vision Center, Spain 4 Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
5
Program of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong (Dongguan), China
6
City University of Hong Kong, HK SAR, China
https://deepffff.github.io/sadis.github.io
3

Target Texture

"A lighthouse by the sea"

Target Content

"A traditional chinese building"
Figure 1: Stylized images
generated by our training-free method, SADis. (Up) Example of texture
(left) and color (above) conditioned text-to-image (T2I) generation. This approach offers creators
enhanced color control, including the use of color palettes as shown in the last two columns. (Down)
Example with conditioning on content image (left) and color (above), showing it extends to color-only
stylized image generation.

Abstract
Recent advances in Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models have transformed image
generation, enabling significant progress in stylized generation using only a few
style reference images. However, current diffusion-based methods struggle with
fine-grained style customization due to challenges in controlling multiple style
attributes, such as color and texture. This paper introduces the first tuning-free
approach to achieve free-lunch color-texture disentanglement in stylized T2I generation, addressing the need for independently controlled style elements for the
Disentangled Stylized Image Generation (DisIG) problem. Our approach leverages
the Image-Prompt Additivity property in the CLIP image embedding space to develop techniques for separating and extracting Color-Texture Embeddings (CTE)
from individual color and texture reference images. To ensure that the color palette
of the generated image aligns closely with the color reference, we apply a whitening
∗

Equal contribution.
Visiting researcher in Nankai University.
‡
Corresponding authors: Senmao Li, Kai Wang
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

