Fast Local Search Algorithms for Clustering with
Adaptive Sampling and Bandit Strategies

Junyu Huang1 , Zhen Zhang2,3 , Beirong Cui1 , Jianxin Wang1,4 , Qilong Feng1,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
2
School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Hunan University of Technology and Business
3
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha, China
4
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central South University,
Changsha 410083, China
junyuhuangcsu@foxmail.com, csuzz@foxmail.com
234711098@csu.edu.cn, jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Local search is a powerful clustering technique that provides high-quality solutions
with theoretical guarantees. With distance-based sampling strategies, local search
methods can achieve constant approximations for clustering with linear running
time in data size. Despite their effectiveness, existing algorithms still face scalability issues as they require scanning the entire dataset for iterative center swaps.
This typically leads to an O(ndk) running time, where n is the data size, d is the
dimension, k is the number of clusters. To further improve the efficiency of local
search algorithms, we propose new methods based on adaptive sampling and bandit
strategies. Specifically, adaptive sampling can well approximate the distance-based
sampling distribution without maintaining pairwise distances between data points
and the centers, enabling fast and accurate sampling in sublinear time after an
Õ(nd) time preprocessing step. The bandit strategy models the best swap pair
selection as a bandit problem, where a grouping strategy is proposed for fast identification of the optimal swap pair. With these techniques, our proposed algorithm
can achieve constant approximation in expected running time Õ(nd + k 4 ) under
mild assumptions on optimal clusters and swap pair distributions. Our approach
also extends naturally to the k-median objective, achieving constant approximation
√
in expected running time Õ(nd + nk 3 ) without distributional assumptions. Empirical results demonstrate that our algorithm achieves up to 1000× speedup over
existing local search methods on datasets with 100 million points, while delivering
comparable clustering quality. Compared to coreset-based approaches, it provides
up to around 80× speedup and consistently yields better clustering results.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning problem with wide applications in machine
learning. It aims to partition a dataset into clusters such that points within the same cluster can share
high similarity. Among various formulations, k-means and k-median are widely studied for their
practical effectiveness. This paper focuses on these two problems in d-dimensional Euclidean space.
Over the past few decades, numerous heuristic and approximation algorithms have been developed
for the k-means and k-median problems. Among them, the Lloyd’s algorithm [27] remains the
most widely used in practice. However, a potential issue is that Lloyd’s algorithm may require an
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

