Provably Efficient Multi-Task Meta Bandit Learning
via Shared Representations

Jiabin Lin and Shana Moothedath
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Iowa State University
jiabin@iastate.edu, mshana@iastate.edu

Abstract
Learning-to-learn or meta-learning focuses on developing algorithms that leverage
prior experience to quickly acquire new skills or adapt to novel environments. A crucial component of meta-learning is representation learning, which aims to construct
data representations capable of transferring knowledge across multiple tasks—a
critical advantage in data-scarce settings. We study how representation learning
can improve the efficiency of bandit problems. We consider T d-dimensional
linear bandits that share a common low-dimensional linear representation. We
provide provably fast, sample-efficient algorithms to address the two key problems
in meta-learning: (1) learning a common set of features from multiple related
bandit tasks and (2) transferring this knowledge to new, unseen bandit tasks. We
validated the theoretical results through numerical experiments using real-world
and synthetic datasets, comparing them against benchmark algorithms.

1

Introduction

The ability to transfer knowledge across tasks is essential for robust and sample-efficient inference
and prediction [1]. Developing methods that can learn task representations capable of generalizing to
unseen tasks has become increasingly critical in diverse applications, including deep reinforcement
learning [2], bandit learning [3, 4], and natural language processing [5, 6]. Despite considerable
advancements in transfer learning, the theoretical foundations of the underlying problem remain
underdeveloped. Transfer learning for sequential decision-making problems is still in its early stages,
requiring further exploration to address key gaps in understanding.
Meta-learning involves addressing two key challenges: (1) the upstream problem, which focuses
on learning a shared model or representation across a set of source tasks to capture transferable
knowledge, and (2) the downstream problem, which leverages this shared model to enable efficient
adaptation and learning for a new target task, often under data-scarce conditions. This paper
addresses these challenges in linear bandit problems by proposing a unified framework that learns
robust transferable representations and ensures efficient adaptation to data-scarce target tasks.
Recently, a number of emerging works [7–11] investigated representation learning for bandits
(upstream) and showed that if all tasks share a joint low-rank representation, then by leveraging
such a joint representation, it is possible to learn faster than treating each task independently. The
underlying idea is that since the tasks are related, we can efficiently extract a shared low-dimensional
representation (feature extractor) and then apply a simple function—often a linear one—on top of
this embedding [12–14]. Learning shared representations is inherently non-convex. While existing
works have shown the benefits of representation learning, theoretical analyses often rely on convex
relaxations and assume access to the optimal solution of the non-convex objective [7, 8, 10]. Moreover,
the transferability of learned representations to new target tasks remains underexplored [9].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

