Controlling the Flow: Stability and Convergence for
Stochastic Gradient Descent with Decaying
Regularization

Sebastian Kassing∗
Institute of Mathematics
Technical University of Berlin
10623 Berlin, Germany
kassing@math.tu-berlin.de

Simon Weissmann∗
Institute of Mathematics
University of Mannheim
68159 Mannheim, Germany
simon.weissmann@uni-mannheim.de

Leif Döring
Institute of Mathematics
University of Mannheim
68159 Mannheim, Germany
leif.doering@uni-mannheim.de

Abstract
The present article studies the minimization of convex, L-smooth functions defined
on a separable real Hilbert space. We analyze regularized stochastic gradient
descent (reg-SGD), a variant of stochastic gradient descent that uses a Tikhonov
regularization with time-dependent, vanishing regularization parameter. We prove
strong convergence of reg-SGD to the minimum-norm solution of the original
problem without additional boundedness assumptions. Moreover, we quantify the
rate of convergence and optimize the interplay between step-sizes and regularization
decay. Our analysis reveals how vanishing Tikhonov regularization controls the
flow of SGD and yields stable learning dynamics, offering new insights into the
design of iterative algorithms for convex problems, including those that arise in
ill-posed inverse problems. We validate our theoretical findings through numerical
experiments on image reconstruction and ODE-based inverse problems.

1

Introduction

In this work we study the unconstrained optimization problem
min f (x) ,

(1)

x∈X

where (X , ⟨·, ·⟩X ) is a separable real Hilbert space with inner product ⟨·, ·⟩X and induced norm
∥x∥2X = ⟨x, x⟩X . The objective function f : X → R will be assumed to be differentiable, convex, and
L-smooth with arg minx∈X f (x) ̸= ∅. Moreover, we will always denote by x∗ ∈ arg minx∈X f (x)
the minimum-norm solution, i.e. a minimum with ∥x∗ ∥X ≤ ∥x̂∥X for all x̂ ∈ arg minx∈X f (x).
A common strategy for finding a point close to the minimum-norm solution is to employ regularization techniques. One popular approach from the optimization literature is to include Tikhonov
regularization into (1) in the form of
min fλ (x),

x∈X
∗

fλ (x) := f (x) +

λ
∥x∥2X ,
2

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

(2)

