U-CAN: Unsupervised Point Cloud Denoising with
Consistency-Aware Noise2Noise Matching

Junsheng Zhou1∗ Xingyu Shi1∗ Haichuan Song2†
Yu-Shen Liu1† Zhizhong Han4

Yi Fang3

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 1
Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China 2
Center for AI and Robotics (CAIR), NYU Abu Dhabi, UAE 3
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA4
{zhou-js24,shixy22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn hcsong@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
yfang@nyu.edu
liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Point clouds captured by scanning sensors are often perturbed by noise, which have
a highly negative impact on downstream tasks (e.g. surface reconstruction and
shape understanding). Previous works mostly focus on training neural networks
with noisy-clean point cloud pairs for learning denoising priors, which requires
extensively manual efforts. In this work, we introduce U-CAN, an Unsupervised
framework for point cloud denoising with Consistency-Aware Noise2Noise matching. Specifically, we leverage a neural network to infer a multi-step denoising
path for each point of a shape or scene with a noise to noise matching scheme.
We achieve this by a novel loss which enables statistical reasoning on multiple
noisy point cloud observations. We further introduce a novel constraint on the
denoised geometry consistency for learning consistency-aware denoising patterns.
We justify that the proposed constraint is a general term which is not limited to 3D
domain and can also contribute to the area of 2D image denoising. Our evaluations
under the widely used benchmarks in point cloud denoising, upsampling and image
denoising show significant improvement over the state-of-the-art unsupervised
methods, where U-CAN also produces comparable results with the supervised
methods. Project page: https://gloriasze.github.io/U-CAN/.

1

Introduction

3D point clouds have been a fundamental representation in 3D computer vision and play a key role in
autonomous driving [13], augmented/virtual reality [56] and robotics [10]. While in these real world
applications, the point clouds captured with scanning sensors (e.g. LiDAR) contain unavoidable noise,
which leads to large errors in 3D perception and understanding. Recent learning-based approaches
[27, 26, 7] have shown convincing results in denoising point clouds with neural networks by learning
denoising patterns with noisy-clean point cloud pairs. However, they are limited in the amount of
clean 3D geometries which require manual efforts of human 3D CAD modelling.
A straightforward observation is that despite the limited clean models, the amount of real-captured
noisy point clouds is growing rapidly everyday with the LiDARs in self-driving cars or consumer
level digital devices in our daily life, such as iPhone. Consequently, it is desirable to learn denoising
patterns by solely using the noisy data itself. The subsequent approaches, such as TotalDenoising
[12], therefore turn to explore unsupervised point cloud denoising by leveraging a spatial prior term
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

