VLA-Cache: Efficient Vision-Language-Action
Manipulation via Adaptive Token Caching

Siyu Xu1 , Yunke Wang1 , Chenghao Xia1 , Dihao Zhu1 , Tao Huang2 , Chang Xu1∗
1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
2
John Hopcropt Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{s.xu,yunke.wang,c.xu}@sydney.edu.au,{cxia0515,dzhu0968}@uni.sydney.edu.au,
t.huang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have demonstrated strong multi-modal
reasoning capabilities, enabling direct action generation from visual perception
and language instructions in an end-to-end manner. However, their substantial
computational cost poses a challenge for real-time robotic control, where rapid
decision-making is essential. This paper introduces VLA-Cache, a training-free
inference acceleration method that reduces computational overhead by adaptively
caching and reusing static visual tokens across frames. Exploiting the temporal continuity in robotic manipulation, VLA-Cache identifies minimally changed tokens
between adjacent frames and reuses their cached key-value representations, thereby
circumventing redundant computations. Additionally, to maintain action precision,
VLA-Cache selectively re-computes task-relevant tokens that are environmentally
sensitive, ensuring the fidelity of critical visual information. To further optimize
efficiency, we introduce a layer adaptive token reusing strategy that dynamically
adjusts the reuse ratio based on attention concentration across decoder layers, prioritizing critical tokens for recomputation. Extensive experiments on two simulation
platforms (LIBERO and SIMPLER) and a real-world robotic system demonstrate
that VLA-Cache achieves up to 1.7× speedup in CUDA latency and a 15% increase in control frequency, with negligible loss on task success rate. The code and
videos can be found at our project page: https://vla-cache.github.io.

1

Introduction

Learning a robust and generalizable policy for robotic manipulation through policy learning has
long been a challenging problem [1], with traditional reinforcement learning approaches [2, 3] often
suffering from poor robustness and limited generalization. Recently, the rapid advancement of
foundational Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [4, 5] has demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
multimodal understanding and generalization. Leveraging large-scale real-world robotic datasets
[6, 7], pioneering works [8–11] have introduced Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models, which
integrate vision and language modalities to directly generate robotic actions in an end-to-end manner.
This emerging paradigm holds great promise for enhancing the adaptability and generalization of
robotic control systems, but leaves a large computational demand.
To mitigate the extensive cost of VLA models, existing works often adopt generic acceleration
techniques, such as model lightweighting [12], quantization [13], and early-exit [14]. While effective
to some extent, these methods often require architectural modifications or retraining, and more
importantly, they lack task-specific design tailored to the intrinsic characteristics of VLA tasks. As a
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

