VESSA: Video-based objEct-centric Self-Supervised
Adaptation for Visual Foundation Models

Jesimon Barreto1
1

Carlos Caetano2

André Araujo3

William Robson Schwartz1

Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG)
2
Recod.ai, Instituto de Computação, Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP)
3
Google DeepMind

{jesimonbarreto, william}@dcc.ufmg.br, caetanoc@unicamp.br, andrearaujo@google.com

Abstract
Foundation models have advanced computer vision by enabling strong performance across diverse tasks through large-scale pretraining and supervised finetuning. However, they may underperform in domains with distribution shifts and
scarce labels, where supervised fine-tuning may be infeasible. While continued
self-supervised learning for model adaptation is common for generative language
models, this strategy has not proven effective for vision-centric encoder models.
To address this challenge, we introduce a novel formulation of self-supervised
fine-tuning for vision foundation models, where the model is adapted to a new
domain without requiring annotations, leveraging only short multi-view objectcentric videos. Our method is referred to as VESSA: Video-based objEct-centric
Self-Supervised Adaptation for visual foundation models. VESSA’s training technique is based on a self-distillation paradigm, where it is critical to carefully tune
prediction heads and deploy parameter-efficient adaptation techniques – otherwise,
the model may quickly forget its pretrained knowledge and reach a degraded state.
VESSA benefits significantly from multi-view object observations sourced from
different frames in an object-centric video, efficiently learning robustness to varied capture conditions, without the need of annotations. Through comprehensive
experiments with 3 vision foundation models on 2 datasets, VESSA demonstrates consistent improvements in downstream classification tasks, compared to
the base models and previous adaptation methods. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/jesimonbarreto/VESSA.

1

Introduction

Visual foundation models (VFMs) trained with self-supervised learning on large image datasets
have become a powerful tool for a wide range of computer vision tasks [1, 2]. Techniques such as
contrastive learning and self-distillation allow these models to learn high-quality visual representations
without manual labels [3, 4]. Despite their generality, performance can suffer when applied to
specialized domains with different characteristics from the pre-training data. For this reason, after
the VFM is pre-trained, fine-tuning is commonly employed before applying it to downstream tasks.
Supervised fine-tuning, in particular, has been the dominant approach, with impressive results across
a variety of datasets and applications [2, 5] such as remote sensing [6, 7], medical imaging [8, 9] and
place recognition [10, 11]. These successes demonstrate the adaptability of pre-trained models, but
also highlight their reliance on labeled data, which can be expensive or impractical to obtain in many
real-world scenarios.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

