Cloud4D: Estimating Cloud Properties at a High
Spatial and Temporal Resolution

Jacob Lin
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
jacob.lin@cs.ox.ac.uk

Edward Gryspeerdt
Department of Physics
Imperial College London
e.gryspeerdt@imperial.ac.uk

Ronald Clark
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
ronald.clark@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
There has been great progress in improving numerical weather prediction and
climate models using machine learning. However, most global models act at a
kilometer-scale, making it challenging to model individual clouds and factors
such as extreme precipitation, wind gusts, turbulence, and surface irradiance.
Therefore, there is a need to move towards higher-resolution models, which in turn
require high-resolution real-world observations that current instruments struggle to
obtain. We present Cloud4D, the first learning-based framework that reconstructs
a physically consistent, four–dimensional cloud state using only synchronized
ground-based cameras. Leveraging a homography-guided 2D-to-3D transformer,
Cloud4D infers the full 3D distribution of liquid water content at 25 m spatial
and 5 s temporal resolution. By tracking the 3D liquid water content retrievals
over time, Cloud4D additionally estimates horizontal wind vectors. Across a
two-month deployment comprising six skyward cameras, our system delivers an
order-of-magnitude improvement in space-time resolution relative to state-of-theart satellite measurements, while retaining single-digit relative error (< 10%)
against collocated radar measurements. Code and data are available on our project
page https://cloud4d.jacob-lin.com/.

1

Introduction

Accurately estimating the state of Earth’s atmosphere is essential to all aspects of society, from
protecting food supplies to routing flights and optimizing renewable power generation. Therefore,
there has been much interest in creating machine learning weather and climate prediction systems able
to accurately model the evolution of the atmosphere. However, many processes in the atmosphere
are too detailed for current models to simulate directly. For example, shallow cumulus clouds
generally span less than a kilometer and cover as much as 40% of the Earth’s surface (Tselioudis
et al., 2021) and they play a central role in controlling the Earth’s temperature. As cumulus clouds are
small and short-lived, current weather and climate simulators can not resolve them directly. Instead,
hand-crafted "parameterizations" are used to approximate the aggregate effect of cloud properties on
variables such as temperature, moisture, and winds on a much coarser grid. These approximations
are a major source of error in both day-to-day forecasts and long-range climate projections. Modern
machine-learning systems such as GraphCast (Lam et al., 2023), Pangu-Weather (Bi et al., 2023),
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

