Learning with Statistical Equality Constraints

Aneesh Barthakur
University of Stuttgart
aneesh.barthakur@simtech.uni-stuttgart.de
Luiz F. O. Chamon
École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
luiz.chamon@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
As machine learning applications grow increasingly ubiquitous and complex, they
face an increasing set of requirements beyond accuracy. The prevalent approach
to handle this challenge is to aggregate a weighted combination of requirement
violation penalties into the training objective. To be effective, this approach
requires careful tuning of these hyperparameters (weights), involving trial-anderror and cross-validation, which becomes ineffective even for a moderate number
of requirements. These issues are exacerbated when the requirements involve
parities or equalities, as is the case in fairness and boundary value problems. An
alternative technique uses constrained optimization to formulate these learning
problems. Yet, existing approximation and generalization guarantees do not apply
to problems involving equality constraints. In this work, we derive a generalization
theory for equality-constrained statistical learning problems, showing that their
solutions can be approximated using samples and rich parametrizations. Using
these results, we propose a practical algorithm based on solving a sequence of
unconstrained, empirical learning problems. We showcase its effectiveness and
the new formulations enabled by equality constraints in fair learning, interpolating
classifiers, and boundary value problems.

1

Introduction

Across a wide range of domains, machine learning (ML) is becoming the core technology driving
entire systems rather than specific components. It therefore increasingly faces multi-faceted problems
involving not only accuracy, but also requirements such as fairness [1], robustness [2, 3], privacy [4],
and safety [5, 6]. The standard approach to handling multiple criteria is to represent them as alternate
loss functions (penalties) aggregated into a single training objective [7–9, 3]. Designing effective
penalties and aggregation weights, however, is often a time consuming process involving trial-anderror, hyperparameter search, and cross-validation data. Hence this approach becomes unwieldy even
for a moderate number of criteria.
Constrained learning offers an alternative by framing each requirement as a constraint rather than
a penalty [10–12]. While in convex settings these approaches are equivalent [13], this is not the
case for the non-convex optimization problems arising in ML. Nevertheless, recent work has shown
that such a duality still holds for rich parametrizations under mild conditions. This result has been
used to establish generalization guarantees similar to those of unconstrained learning theory and
develop practical algorithms based on (primal-)dual methods [11, 12]. Yet, these results hold only for
inequality constraints and do not account for equality-constrained learning tasks.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

