Object-X: Learning to Reconstruct
Multi-Modal 3D Object Representations

Gaia Di Lorenzo1

Federico Tombari2
1

ETH Zurich

2

Marc Pollefeys1,3

Google

3

Daniel Barath1,2

Microsoft

gdilorenzo@ethz.ch

Figure 1: Object-X learns object-centric embeddings from an input object segmentation of a 3D scene
reconstruction. The embeddings learned from multi-modal data (e.g., mesh, images, text descriptions)
enable fast 3D Gaussian Splat reconstruction via a specifically trained decoder, and other downstream
tasks operating directly in the latent space, such as localization and scene alignment. Object-X
allows for representing the scene as a set of object descriptors without having to store storage-heavy
representations like point clouds and image databases, while providing similar functionalities.

Abstract
Learning effective multi-modal 3D representations of objects is essential for numerous applications, such as augmented reality and robotics. Existing methods
often rely on task-specific embeddings that are tailored either for semantic understanding or geometric reconstruction. As a result, these embeddings typically
cannot be decoded into explicit geometry and simultaneously reused across tasks.
In this paper, we propose Object-X, a versatile multi-modal object representation framework capable of encoding rich object embeddings (e.g., images, point
cloud, text) and decoding them back into detailed geometric and visual reconstructions. Object-X operates by geometrically grounding the captured modalities in
a 3D voxel grid and learning an unstructured embedding fusing the information
from the voxels with the object attributes. The learned embedding enables 3D
Gaussian Splatting-based object reconstruction, while also supporting a range
of downstream tasks, including scene alignment, single-image 3D object reconstruction, and localization. Evaluations on two challenging real-world datasets
demonstrate that Object-X achieves high-fidelity novel-view synthesis comparable to standard 3D Gaussian Splatting, while significantly improving geometric
accuracy. Moreover, Object-X achieves competitive performance with specialized
methods in scene alignment and localization. Critically, our object-centric descriptors require 3-4 orders of magnitude less storage compared to traditional imageor point cloud-based approaches, establishing Object-X as a scalable and highly
practical solution for multi-modal 3D scene representation. The code is available
at https://github.com/gaiadilorenzo/object-x.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

