Latent Retrieval Augmented Generation of
Cross-Domain Protein Binders
Zishen Zhang1,2 Xiangzhe Kong1,2 Wenbing Huang3∗ Yang Liu1,2∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AIR, Tsinghua University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China

Abstract
Designing protein binders targeting specific sites, which requires to generate realistic and functional interaction patterns, is a fundamental challenge in drug
discovery. Current structure-based generative models are limited in generating
nterfaces with sufficient rationality and interpretability. In this paper, we propose
Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion for Aligned interface(RADiAnce), a new framework that leverages known interfaces to guide the design of novel binders. By
unifying retrieval and generation in a shared contrastive latent space, our model
efficiently identifies relevant interfaces for a given binding site and seamlessly
integrates them through a conditional latent diffusion generator, enabling crossdomain interface transfer. Extensive exeriments show that RADiAnce significantly
outperforms baseline models across multiple metrics, including binding affinity
and recovery of geometries and interactions. Additional experimental results validate cross-domain generalization, demonstrating that retrieving interfaces from
diverse domains, such as peptides, antibodies, and protein fragments, enhances
the generation performance of binders for other domains. Our work establishes a
new paradigm for protein binder design that successfully bridges retrieval-based
knowledge and generative AI, opening new possibilities for drug discovery.

1

Introduction

Designing binders that target specific sites on proteins is a fundamental problem with broad implications in drug discovery, structural biology, and beyond [54, 45]. The core challenge involves
engineering molecular interfaces that exhibit desired interaction patterns with a target surface, such
as hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic packing, and π–π stacking [45]. Traditional approaches rely on
sampling and optimizing within physical or statistical energy landscapes [3, 8, 22], while recent
advances have shifted towards direct structure-based generation of binders with deep generative
models, such as diffusion and flow matching [53, 40].
Despite these advances, current methods remain limited in rationality and interpretability due to their
inability to leverage prior knowledge from existing structurally similar interfaces. Most approaches
conduct generation solely conditional on the target binding site [30, 40], ignoring the wealth of
reusable interaction patterns present in existing protein complexes. In contrast, it is routine for human
experts (e.g. medicinal chemists or structural biologists) to rely on similar known interfaces to guide
rational design [48, 17]. We thus argue that a better generative paradigm should identify and incorporate analogous interfaces from existing databases to improve both rationality and interpretability.
However, incorporating interface retrieval into the generation process poses several challenges. First,
the retriever should identify relevant interfaces from a large database using only the binding site
as input. Existing retrieval methods typically assume a known binder structure (e.g., for inverse
∗

Correspondence to Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>, Yang Liu <liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

