Causal Discovery and Inference
through Next-Token Prediction
Eivinas Butkus1,2
eivinas.butkus@columbia.edu

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte1,2
n.kriegeskorte@columbia.edu

1

2

Columbia University
NSF AI Institute for Artificial and Natural Intelligence

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been criticized as fundamentally statistical systems that
fail to capture causal structure and perform causal reasoning. Here we demonstrate
that a GPT-style transformer trained for next-token prediction can simultaneously
discover instances of linear Gaussian structural causal models (SCMs) and learn
to answer counterfactual queries about those SCMs. First, we show that the
network generalizes to counterfactual queries about SCMs for which it has seen
interventional data but not any examples of counterfactual inference. The network
must, thus, have successfully composed discovered causal structures with a learned
counterfactual inference algorithm. Second, we decode the implicit “mental” SCM
from the network’s residual stream activations and manipulate it using gradient
descent with predictable effects on the network’s output. Our results suggest that
statistical prediction may be sufficient to drive the emergence of internal causal
models and causal inference capacities in deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

How can an AI system discover and learn to reason about causes and effects—the mechanisms
that remain invariant under local interventions [43, 35]? Pearl [36, 38] has argued that deep neural
networks (DNNs) trained using prediction objectives are intrinsically limited in their causal reasoning
capacities. His argument rests on Pearl’s Causal Hierarchy (PCH) [2], also known as the “Ladder of
Causation" [38]. PCH describes three levels of causal capabilities—associational (L1 ), interventional
(L2 ), and counterfactual (L3 )—and implies that answers to higher level queries are generally underdetermined by data or information from lower levels. According to Pearl [36], this hierarchy implies
that DNNs trained in a “statistical mode” to predict passive observations can only master associations
(L1 ) and are prevented from reasoning about actions, experiments, and explanations (L2 and L3 ).
If true, Pearl’s claim would have important theoretical and practical implications regarding the
causal abilities of large language models (LLMs) and other foundation models. Such models are
typically pretrained using statistical objectives to predict held-out portions of passive streams of
data [8, 40, 39, 6, 5]. For example, LLMs are trained to predict the next token in snippets drawn
from a diverse corpus of text. Following Pearl’s reasoning [36], at least initial pretrained versions of
foundation models should be limited to the level of associations (L1 ).
While PCH is an extremely valuable theoretical framework with wide-reaching implications, we do
not think that Pearl’s claim about DNNs directly follows from PCH. Training data for foundation
models contains rich information about the causal structure of the world. Natural language in
particular contains many descriptions of interventions and causal inferences (Fig. 1). “Passive” data,
then, is not equivalent to “observational” (L1 ) data. Notably, in a more recent interview, Pearl [37]
acknowledges that text does contain L2 /L3 information. Standard PCH logic, therefore, cannot rule
out the emergence of causal models in LLMs and other kinds of foundation models.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

