Conditional Forecasts and Proper Scoring Rules for
Reliable and Accurate Performative Predictions
Philip Boeken
University of Amsterdam

Onno Zoeter
Booking.com

Joris M. Mooij
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Performative predictions are forecasts which influence the outcomes they aim to
predict, undermining the existence of correct forecasts and standard methods of
elicitation and estimation. We show that conditioning forecasts on covariates that
separate them from the outcome renders the target distribution forecast-invariant,
guaranteeing well-posedness of the forecasting problem. However, even under this
condition, classical proper scoring rules fail to elicit correct forecasts. We prove
a general impossibility result and identify two solutions: (i) in decision-theoretic
settings, elicitation of correct and incentive-compatible forecasts is possible if
forecasts are separating; (ii) scoring with unbiased estimates of the divergence
between the forecast and the induced distribution of the target variable yields correct
forecasts. Applying these insights to parameter estimation, conditional forecasts
and proper scoring rules enable performatively stable estimation of performatively
correct parameters, resolving the issues raised by Perdomo et al. (2020). Our results
expose fundamental limits of classical forecast evaluation and offer new tools for
reliable and accurate forecasting in performative settings.

1

Introduction

In many real-world settings, predictions influence the outcomes they seek to forecast. A forecast of
high traffic may cause drivers to change routes; a grim economic outlook may shift investor behaviour
(MacKenzie et al., 2007). These performative forecasts break the classical assumption that the
target distribution is fixed — instead, the forecasts are part of the causal system. This performativity
complicates the task of correct prediction, and undermines the standard foundations of scoring rules
and statistical estimation. Moreover, correctness of a forecast doesn’t need to align with desirability
of the outcome (van Amsterdam et al., 2025).
If forecasts affect the target variable, correct forecasts need not exist: there may be no distributional
fixed point where the forecast aligns with the induced outcome, as is the case in self-defeating
prophecies. However, we show that the forecasting problem becomes well-posed when the forecaster
makes conditional predictions — in particular, predictions given observed covariates that separate the
forecast from the target: the target distribution becomes forecast-invariant, and the existence of a
correct forecast is recovered.
This paper formalizes the performative forecasting problem in a causal framework and studies conditions under which correct forecasting is possible. We prove that even under forecast-invariance,
classical proper scoring rules generally fail to elicit correct forecasts. We provide two concrete
solutions: (i) in a decision-theoretic setting, proper scoring can be recovered under structural conditions on the causal graph, producing incentive compatibility of the forecasters’ score and the agents
utility; (ii) we introduce a proper scoring approach based on unbiased estimates of the divergence
between the forecast and the induced distribution of the target variable. We also analyze how correct
forecasting parameters can be stably learned from data in performative environments, resolving the
problems raised by Perdomo et al. (2020).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

