TGA: True-to-Geometry Avatar Dynamic
Reconstruction

1

Bo Guo1
Sijia Wen1∗
Ziwei Wang1
Yifan Zhao2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
SCSE&QRI, Beihang University
{keaibb, sijiawen, wangziwei26, zhaoyf}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) have improved the visual fidelity of dynamic avatar reconstruction. However, existing methods often overlook
the inherent chromatic similarity of human skin tones, leading to poor capture of
intricate facial geometry under subtle appearance changes. This is caused by the
affine approximation of Gaussian projection, which fails to be perspective-aware to
depth-induced shear effects. To this end, we propose True-to-Geometry Avatar Dynamic Reconstruction (TGA), a perspective-aware 4D Gaussian avatar framework
that sensitively captures fine-grained facial variations for accurate 3D geometry
reconstruction. Specifically, to enable color-sensitive and geometry-consistent
Gaussian representations under dynamic conditions, we introduce the PerspectiveAware Gaussian Transformation that jointly models temporal deformations and
spatial projection by integrating Jacobian-guided adaptive deformation into the homogeneous formulation. Furthermore, we develop Incremental BVH Tree Pivoting
to enable fast frame-by-frame mesh extraction for 4D Gaussian representations. A
dynamic Gaussian Bounding Volume Hierarchy (BVH) tree is used to model the
topological relationships among points, where active ones are filtered out by BVH
pivoting and subsequently re-triangulated for surface reconstruction. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that TGA achieves superior geometric accuracy. Project
page: https://superkeaibb.github.io/TGA/.

1

Introduction

The demand for personalized, high-fidelity reconstruction of human faces and heads under complex
facial movements is fundamental to a wide range of applications, including digital twins, film production, graphics simulation, and entertainment. In particular, acquiring dynamic and geometrically
accurate 3D head reconstructions from multi-view recordings is a common requirement for generating
digital and virtual replicas of real individuals.
Despite recent advances in high-fidelity 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [1]-based avatar reconstruction, existing methods [2, 3, 4] often overlook the inherent chromatic similarity of human skin tones.
Specifically, under varying viewpoints and frame transitions, subtle and gradual facial expression
changes remain challenging for vanilla 3DGS. The root cause lies in the limited perspective-awareness
(we will discuss in Sec. 3.2) of affine approximation used in Gaussian projection, which compromises
accurate color blending. As a result, the simplistic projection model struggles to maintain chromatic
consistency and further geometric fidelity for dynamic face modeling.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

