TROV E: Discovering Error-Inducing Static Feature
Biases in Temporal Vision-Language Models

Maya Varma1 Jean-Benoit Delbrouck1,2 Sophie Ostmeier1
Akshay Chaudhari1 Curtis Langlotz1
1
Stanford University 2 HOPPR
mayavarma@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) have made great strides in addressing temporal
understanding tasks, which involve characterizing visual changes across a sequence
of images. However, recent works have suggested that when making predictions,
VLMs may rely on static feature biases, such as background or object features,
rather than dynamic visual changes. Static feature biases are a type of shortcut
and can contribute to systematic prediction errors on downstream tasks; as a
result, identifying and characterizing error-inducing static feature biases is critical
prior to real-world model deployment. Existing approaches for identifying such
systematic failure modes in trained models (i) are typically designed for nontemporal settings and (ii) are challenging to evaluate in temporal settings due to
the lack of quantitative evaluation frameworks. In this work, we address these
challenges by introducing TROV E, an automated approach for discovering errorinducing static feature biases learned by temporal VLMs. Given a trained VLM
and an annotated validation dataset associated with a downstream classification
task, TROV E extracts candidate static features from the dataset and scores each
feature by (i) the effect of the feature on classification errors as well as (ii) the
extent to which the VLM relies on the feature when making predictions. In
order to quantitatively evaluate TROV E, we introduce an evaluation framework
consisting of 101 trained temporal VLMs paired with ground-truth annotations for
learned static feature biases. We use this framework to demonstrate that TROV E
can accurately identify error-inducing static feature biases in VLMs, achieving
a 28.6% improvement over the closest baseline. Finally, we apply TROV E to
7 off-the-shelf VLMs and 2 temporal understanding tasks, surfacing previouslyunknown static feature biases and demonstrating that knowledge of learned biases
can aid in improving model performance at test time. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Stanford-AIMI/TRoVe.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) capable of jointly processing visual and textual data have been
shown to possess state-of-the-art reasoning abilities [1–7]. In particular, given an input sequence with
multiple images collected across varying timepoints, temporal VLMs can effectively characterize
visual changes over time, a capability known as temporal understanding [8–15]. For example, temporal VLMs can recognize human actions given a sequence of video frames [11–13] and characterize
disease progression given longitudinal medical images [8–10].
Models designed to perform temporal understanding tasks often demonstrate high overall performance; however, recent works have demonstrated that such models may be affected by static feature
biases, a phenomenon where models utilize static patterns (e.g. image background or a particular
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

