Understanding and Enhancing Mask-Based
Pretraining towards Universal Representations

Mingze Dong
Yale University
mingze.dong@yale.edu

Leda Wang
Yale University
leda.wang@yale.edu

Yuval Kluger
Yale University
yuval.kluger@yale.edu

Abstract
Mask-based pretraining has become a cornerstone of modern large-scale models
across language, vision, and recently biology. Despite its empirical success, its role
and limits in learning data representations have been unclear. In this work, we show
that the behavior of mask-based pretraining can be directly characterized by test
risk in high-dimensional minimum-norm ("ridge-less") linear regression, without
relying on further model specifications. Further analysis of linear models uncovers
several novel aspects of mask-based pretraining. The theoretical framework and
its implications have been validated across diverse neural architectures (including
MLPs, CNNs, and Transformers) applied to both vision and language tasks. Guided
by our theory, we propose an embarrassingly simple yet overlooked pretraining
scheme named Randomly Random Mask AutoEncoding (R2 MAE), which enforces
capturing multi-scale features from data and is able to outperform optimal fixed
mask ratio settings in our linear model framework. We implement R2 MAE in vision,
language, DNA sequence, and single-cell models, where it consistently outperforms
standard and more complicated masking schemes, leading to improvements for
state-of-the-art models. Our code is available at this URL.

1

Introduction

Mask-based pretraining has emerged as a unifying paradigm for self-supervised learning across
natural language [1–4], vision [5–13], and biological domains [14–22]. This approach is prevalent
particularly for data that cannot be presented sequentially, such as images and tabular data [23]. The
representations learned through masked-based pretraining have consistently yielded state-of-the-art
zero-shot and fine-tuning performances on diverse downstream tasks [1, 23, 24, 6, 16].
Despite the widespread success of masked autoencoding pretraining schemes, fundamental questions
remain about why and how it helps in learning meaningful data representations. Several theoretical
works [25–28] investigated its underlying mechanism using different frameworks, yet two critical
questions on the qualitative role of masking persist:
• (Universality across different contexts) The scheme proves effective across various data
domains, masking designs, and neural network architectures beyond transformers. This
suggests its underlying mechanism is fundamental and architecture-agnostic.
• (Diversity across domains and tasks) The optimal behavior of mask pretraining differs
significantly across contexts. In language modeling, BERT employs a moderate masking
ratio of 15% [1], while in vision, surprisingly high masking ratios (75%) can produce
superior representations despite removing most of the visual content [6]. Moreover, the
optimal masking ratio varies even across different downstream tasks for a single model [29].
The performance curves of models with different masking ratios have been explicitly characterized in
several works [6, 29], which serve as a foundation for several theoretical explanations [25, 28]. An
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

