Pessimistic Data Integration for Policy Evaluation

Xiangkun Wu∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China
12235031@zju.edu.cn
Gholamali Aminian
The Alan Turing Institute
London, UK
gaminian@turing.ac.uk
Hamid R. Rabiee
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
Tehran, Iran
rabiee@sharif.edu

Ting Li∗
School of Statistics and Data Science
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai, China
tingli@mail.shufe.edu.cn
Armin Behnamnia
Sharif University of Technology
Tehran, Iran
arminbehnamnia@gmail.com
Chengchun Shi †
Department of Statistics
London School of Economics and Political Science
London, UK
C.Shi7@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper studies how to integrate historical control data with experimental data
to enhance A/B testing, while addressing the distributional shift between historical and experimental datasets. We propose a pessimistic data integration method
that combines two causal effect estimators constructed based on experimental and
historical datasets. Our main idea is to conceptualize the weight function for this
combination as a policy so that existing pessimistic policy learning algorithms are
applicable to learn the optimal weight that minimizes the resulting weighted estimator’s mean squared error. Additionally, we conduct comprehensive theoretical
and empirical analyses to compare our method against various baseline estimators
across five scenarios. Both our theoretical and numerical findings demonstrate that
the proposed estimator achieves near-optimal performance across all scenarios.

1

Introduction

A/B testing is widely used by various technology companies such as Amazon, Google, Netflix, Uber,
and Didi to evaluate the performance of new products, policies or treatments compared to existing
controls. However, the effectiveness of such evaluations is often limited by short duration of online
experiments. For instance, in ridesharing, most experiments last no more than two weeks [1]. Before
conducting these experiments, companies usually have access to a substantial amount of historical
data collected under the control policy. Recent work has demonstrated that integrating these historical
control data with experimental data can largely improve the efficiency of A/B testing [2].
The primary challenge in data integration stems from the distributional shift between historical and
experimental data, which can generally be categorized into three types: (i) covariate shift – the
changes in the distribution of contextual covariates; (ii) policy shift – the changes in the behavior
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

