Vision as a Dialect: Unifying Visual Understanding
and Generation via Text-Aligned Representations

Jiaming Han12 , Hao Chen2† , Yang Zhao2 , Hanyu Wang2 , Qi Zhao2 ,
Ziyan Yang2 , Hao He12 , Xiangyu Yue1‡ , Lu Jiang2‡
1

CUHK MMLab 2 ByteDance Seed

Abstract
This paper presents a multimodal framework that attempts to unify visual understanding and generation within a shared discrete semantic representation. At its core
is the Text-Aligned Tokenizer (TA-Tok), which converts images into discrete tokens
using a text-aligned codebook projected from a large language model’s (LLM)
vocabulary. By integrating vision and text into a unified space with an expanded vocabulary, our multimodal LLM, Tar, enables cross-modal input and output through
a shared interface, without the need for modality-specific designs. Additionally,
we propose scale-adaptive encoding and decoding to balance efficiency and visual
detail, along with a generative de-tokenizer to produce high-fidelity visual outputs.
To address diverse decoding needs, we utilize two complementary de-tokenizers:
a fast autoregressive model and a diffusion-based model. To enhance modality
fusion, we investigate advanced pre-training tasks, demonstrating improvements in
both visual understanding and generation. Experiments across benchmarks show
that Tar matches or surpasses existing multimodal LLM methods, achieving faster
convergence and greater training efficiency. Code, models, and data are available
at https://tar.csuhan.com

1

Introduction

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [2, 12, 23, 40, 82] have demonstrated the ability of
LLMs to handle visual understanding tasks within an autoregressive framework. A true MLLM
is expected not only to understand images but also to generate them, laying the foundation for
perception, reasoning, and interaction with the world.
For instance, MLLMs for visual understanding typically have three components: a semantic visual
encoder (e.g., CLIP [50]), an LLM, and a vision-to-language adapter [40, 82]. With a pre-aligned
visual representation, LLaVA [40] efficiently aligns CLIP features to an LLM’s latent space using
just 0.6M image-text pairs and a simple linear adapter. However, visual generation representation
remains an open research problem, with several key design choices outlined below.
Separate vs. Shared. Visual understanding and generation often rely on features at different levels
of abstraction, leading some methods to adopt separate representations. For example, CLIP for
understanding and VQVAE for generation [10, 70]. However, this separation limits unified reasoning
and complicates tasks like interleaved generation or multi-turn editing. We therefore use a shared
representation for both tasks, which ensure understanding and generation do not conflict but instead
complement each other, as both modalities are learned within a single latent space.
Continuous vs. Discrete. Continuous visual features preserve rich information and work well for the
understanding tasks but require objectives such as regression [57] or diffusion [84] for generation,
†

Project lead. ‡ Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

