Variance-Aware Feel-Good Thompson Sampling for
Contextual Bandits
Xuheng Li
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
California, 90095
xuheng.li@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
California, 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Variance-dependent regret bounds have received increasing attention in recent
studies on contextual bandits. However, most of these studies are focused on upper
confidence bound (UCB)-based bandit algorithms, while sampling based bandit algorithms such as Thompson sampling are still understudied. The only exception is
the LinVDTS algorithm (Xu et al., 2023), which is limited to linear reward function
and its regret bound is not optimal with respect to the model dimension. In this
paper, we present FGTS-VA, a variance-aware Thompson Sampling algorithm for
contextual bandits with general reward function with optimal regret bound. At the
core of our analysis is an extension of the decoupling coefficient, a technique commonly used in the analysis of Feel-good Thompson sampling (FGTS) that reflects
the complexity of the model space. With the
coefficient denoted
qnew decoupling

PT
e
by dc, FGTS-VA achieves the regret of O dc · log |F| t=1 σt2 + dc , where
|F| is the size of the model space, T is the total number of rounds, and σt2 is the
subgaussian norm of the noise (e.g., variance when the noise is Gaussian) at round
t. In the setting of contextual linear bandits, the regret bound of FGTS-VA matches
that of UCB-based algorithms using weighted linear regression (Zhou and Gu,
2022).

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit (Langford and Zhang, 2007) is a pivotal setting in interactive decision making,
and is an important generalization of the multi-armed bandit that incorporates context-dependent
reward functions. However, the standard contextual bandit setting is unable to account for heterogeneous and context-dependent noise of the observed rewards, which can have significant impacts
on the performance of algorithms (Auer, 2002). Additionally, algorithms designed for standard
contextual bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Chu et al., 2011) are usually incompatible with
potentially benign environments, despite achieving the minimax regret
√ bound in the worst case. For
e
example, these algorithms have a worst-case regret bound of O(d
T ) for linear contextual bandits,
where T is the number of steps; however, if the reward is deterministic, then the algorithm based on
e
simple exploration can achieve the regret of O(d).
To fill this gap, a number of approaches (Zhou
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Zhou and Gu, 2022; Kim et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023; Zhao et al.,
2023; Jia et al., 2024) have been developed to account for the heterogeneous magnitudes of the noise,
and regret bounds are established depending on σt2 , i.e., the noise variance in step t. Most of these
approaches are based on the upper confidence bound (UCB). Notably,
(2022) and Zhao
qPZhou and Gu

T
2
e
et al. (2023) established the nearly optimal regret bound of O d
t=1 σt + d in linear bandits,
e
which degenerates to O(d) in the deterministic case, under the settings where σt2 are known and
agnostic to the agent, respectively.
Thompson sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933) is another technique that facilitates exploration of the
action space apart from UCB-based methods. In TS-based algorithms, an estimation of the reward
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

