Memory Mosaics at scale

Jianyu Zhang
New York University, New York
FAIR, Meta Inc., New York

Léon Bottou
FAIR, Meta Inc., New York
New York University, New York

Abstract
Memory Mosaics [Zhang et al., 2025], networks of associative memories, have
demonstrated appealing compositional and in-context learning capabilities on
medium-scale networks (GPT-2 scale) and synthetic small datasets. This work
shows that these favorable properties remain when we scale memory mosaics to
large language model sizes (llama-8B scale) and real-world datasets.
To this end, we scale memory mosaics to 10B size, we train them on one trillion
tokens, we introduce a couple architectural modifications (“memory mosaics v2”),
we assess their capabilities across three evaluation dimensions: training-knowledge
storage, new-knowledge storage, and in-context learning.
Throughout the evaluation, memory mosaics v2 match transformers on the learning
of training knowledge (first dimension) and significantly outperforms transformers
on carrying out new tasks at inference time (second and third dimensions). These
improvements cannot be easily replicated by simply increasing the training data
for transformers. A memory mosaics v2 trained on one trillion tokens still perform
better on these tasks than a transformer trained on eight trillion tokens.

1

Introduction

In Machine Learning, compositional capabilities and in-context/out-of-distribution learning capabilities have been continuously pursued but remain challenging. Early attempts to achieve these
goals include pursuing disentanglement via various statistical “independence” [Comon, 1994, Roth
et al., 2022], pursuing out-of-distribution/learning from the perspective of optimization on multiple
environments [Finn et al., 2017, Arjovsky et al., 2019, Bengio et al., 2019]. In contrast, transformerbased models demonstrate certain compositional capabilities and early in-context learning abilities.
However, we still lack a clear understanding of how current transformers achieve these capabilities,
and why earlier models were unable to.
Memory mosaics [Zhang et al., 2025], networks of simple key-value associative memories (without
position encoding), offer a comparatively transparent way to understand how composition or disentanglement occur. Trained and evaluated on medium-scale networks and synthetic datasets, memory
mosaics reveal promising superior in-context learning abilities. Therefore, we ask “To peruse a
strong and general new task learning capability, how can we scale memory mosaics to large networks
and real-world datasets?”
The contribution of this work: 1) We successfully scale up memory mosaics to llama-8B scale, using
one trillion real-world training tokens. The resulting network is named as Memory Mosaics v2.1 2
Compared to memory mosaics, memory mosaics v2 made three architectural modifications, including
an adaptive bandwidth of associative memory, a gated time-variant key feature extractor, and a 3-level
memory design. 2) We propose three evaluation dimensions to comprehensively assess model ability
(from i.i.d. to o.o.d. scenarios). 3) Our memory mosaics v2 demonstrate superior new-task learning
capabilities (with fewer examples and less priori knowledge from human designers).
1
For clarity, “Memory Mosaics” refers to the version in Zhang et al. [2025], while “Memory Mosaics v2”
refers to this scaled-up version.
2
https://github.com/facebookresearch/MemoryMosaics

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

