MIRAGE: Assessing Hallucination in Multimodal
Reasoning Chains of MLLM

Bowen Dong1,2 Minheng Ni1,2 Zitong Huang1 Guanglei Yang1 Wangmeng Zuo1 Lei Zhang2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
cndongsky@gmail.com kodenii@outlook.com cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk yangguanglei@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal hallucination in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) restricts
the correctness of MLLMs. However, multimodal hallucinations are multi-sourced
and arise from diverse causes. Existing benchmarks fail to adequately distinguish
between perception-induced hallucinations and reasoning-induced hallucinations.
This failure constitutes a significant issue and hinders the diagnosis of multimodal
reasoning failures within MLLMs. To address this, we propose the MIRAGE
benchmark, which isolates reasoning hallucinations by constructing questions
where input images are correctly perceived by MLLMs yet reasoning errors persist.
MIRAGE introduces multi-granular evaluation metrics: accuracy, factuality, and
LLMs hallucination score for hallucination quantification. Our analysis reveals
that (1) the model scale, data scale, and training stages significantly affect the
degree of logical, fabrication, and factual hallucinations; (2) current MLLMs
show no effective improvement on spatial hallucinations caused by misinterpreted
spatial relationships, indicating their limited visual reasoning capabilities; and (3)
question types correlate with distinct hallucination patterns, highlighting targeted
challenges and potential mitigation strategies. To address these challenges, we
propose Logos, a method that combines curriculum reinforcement fine-tuning
to encourage models to generate logic-consistent reasoning chains by stepwise
reducing learning difficulty, and collaborative hint inference to reduce reasoning
complexity. Logos establishes a baseline on MIRAGE, and reduces the logical
hallucinations in original base models. Link: https://bit.ly/25mirage.

1

Introduction

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [23, 56, 65] achieve advancements in multimodal
perception [38, 5, 61], as evidenced by standard benchmarks [60, 14, 45, 42, 44]. Recent studies
further enhance their reasoning capacities through post-training [57, 12, 24, 62, 86]. However, two
critical challenges remain, i.e., erroneous visual perception that fabricates non-existent content, and
defective logical reasoning yielding inconsistent conclusions. These multi-source hallucinations
(stemming from distinct perceptual and cognitive origins) fundamentally limit the practical utility.
To quantitatively measure hallucination in MLLMs, several multimodal benchmarks have been
applied to detect and measure multimodal hallucination in object recognition [14, 34, 59, 20, 30] or
academic reasoning [41] aspects. Existing benchmarks [14, 34, 59, 20, 30, 41] attempt to measure
hallucinations via object recognition or academic tasks. However, two critical gaps remain. First, current evaluations fail to distinguish between different types of hallucinations, i.e., perception-induced
hallucinations caused by inaccurate visual understanding and reasoning-induced hallucinations stemming from logical flaws, making it difficult to pinpoint errors. Second, most benchmarks focus on
validating the content of answers or intermediate steps, while lacking fine-grained evaluation of
the reasoning process in terms of perception and logic, thereby hindering the ability to trace error
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

