On Inductive Biases That Enable Generalization of
Diffusion Transformers
Jie An1,2→,

De Wang1 ,

Pengsheng Guo1 , Jiebo Luo2 , Alexander G. Schwing1
Apple, 2 University of Rochester
{jan6,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu
{de_wang,pengsheng_guo,ag_schwing}@apple.com
1

Abstract
Recent work studying the generalization of diffusion models with locally linear
UNet-based denoisers reveals inductive biases that can be expressed via geometryadaptive harmonic bases. For such locally linear UNets, these geometry-adaptive
harmonic bases can be conveniently visualized through the eigen-decomposition of
a UNet’s Jacobian matrix. In practice, however, more recent denoising networks are
often transformer-based, e.g., the diffusion transformer (DiT). Due to the presence
of nonlinear operations, similar eigen-decomposition analyses cannot be used to
reveal the inductive biases of transformer-based denoisers. This motivates our
search for alternative ways to explain the strong generalization ability observed
in DiT models. Investigating a DiT’s pivotal attention modules, we find that
locality of attention maps in a DiT’s early layers are closely associated with
generalization. To verify this finding, we modify the generalization of a DiT by
restricting its attention windows and observe an improvement in generalization.
Furthermore, we empirically find that both the placement and the effective attention
size of these local attention windows are crucial factors. Experimental results on
the CelebA, ImageNet, MSCOCO, and LSUN data show that strengthening the
inductive bias of a DiT can improve both generalization and generation quality
when less training data is available. Source code is available at https://github.
com/DiT-Generalization/DiT-Generalization.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in visual content generation. Their training
involves approximating a distribution in a high-dimensional space from a limited number of training
samples–a task that is demanding due to the curse of dimensionality. Nonetheless, recent diffusion
models (Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020) learn to generate high-quality images (Nichol et al.,
2021; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023,
2024a) and even videos/audio (Singer et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022; Girdhar et al., 2023; Blattmann
et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2024; Cheng et al., 2025) using relatively few samples when compared to
the dimensionality of the underlying space. This indicates that diffusion models exhibit powerful
inductive biases (Wilson & Izmailov, 2020; Goyal & Bengio, 2022; Griffiths et al., 2024) that promote
effective generalization. What exactly are these inductive biases? Answering this question is crucial
for understanding the behavior of diffusion models and their generalization.
Recent work by Kadkhodaie et al. (2024) on locally linear single-channel UNet-based diffusion
models reveals that the strong generalization of UNet-based denoisers is driven by inductive biases
that can be expressed via a set of geometry-adaptive harmonic bases (Mallat et al., 2020). For a UNet
that has been modified to be locally linear, such harmonic bases can be extracted via the eigenvectors
→

Work done during internship at Apple.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

