Effects of Dropout on Performance in
Long-range Graph Learning Tasks

Jasraj Singh1∗
Keyue Jiang2†
1
Nanyang Technological University

Brooks Paige2
Laura Toni2
2
University College London

Abstract
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) are a class of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that propagate information across the graph via local neighborhoods. The scheme gives rise to two key challenges: over-smoothing and
over-squashing. While several Dropout-style algorithms, such as DropEdge and
DropMessage, have successfully addressed over-smoothing, their impact on oversquashing remains largely unexplored. This represents a critical gap in the literature, as failure to mitigate over-squashing would make these methods unsuitable for long-range tasks – the intended use case of deep MPNNs. In this work,
we study the aforementioned algorithms, and closely related edge-dropping algorithms – DropNode, DropAgg and DropGNN – in the context of over-squashing.
We present theoretical results showing that DropEdge-variants reduce sensitivity between distant nodes, limiting their suitability for long-range tasks. To address this, we introduce DropSens, a sensitivity-aware variant of DropEdge, which
is developed following the message-passing scheme of GCN. DropSens explicitly controls the proportion of information lost due to edge-dropping, thereby increasing sensitivity to distant nodes despite dropping the same number of edges.
Our experiments on long-range synthetic and real-world datasets confirm the predicted limitations of existing edge-dropping and feature-dropping methods. Moreover, DropSens with GCN consistently outperforms graph rewiring techniques
designed to mitigate over-squashing, suggesting that simple, targeted modifications can substantially improve a model’s ability to capture long-range interactions. Our conclusions highlight the need to re-evaluate and re-design existing
methods for training deep GNNs, with a renewed focus on modelling long-range
interactions. The code for reproducing the results in our this work is available at
https://github.com/ignasa007/Dropout-Effects-GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [51, 73] are powerful neural models developed for modelling
graph-structured data, and have found applications in several real-world scenarios [29, 61, 84, 90–
94, 96, 101]. A popular class of GNNs, called message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) [32], recursively process neighborhood information using message-passing layers. These layers are stacked
to allow each node to aggregate information from increasingly larger neighborhoods, akin to how
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) learn hierarchical features for images [48]. However, unlike in image-based deep learning, where ultra-deep CNN architectures have led to performance
breakthroughs [38, 80], shallow GNNs often outperform deeper models on many graph learning
∗
Part of the work done as a master’s student at UCL. † Primary supervisor. Correspondence to Jasraj Singh
<jasraj.singh00150@gmail.com> and Keyue Jiang <keyue.jiang.18@ucl.ac.uk>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

