Noisy Multi-Label Learning through
Co-Occurrence-Aware Diffusion
Senyu Hou
School of Computer and Information
Technology, Shanxi University
housenyu@sxu.edu.cn

Yuru Ren
School of Computer and Information
Technology, Shanxi University
renyuru@sxu.edu.cn

Gaoxia Jiang
School of Computer and Information
Technology, Shanxi University
jianggaoxia@sxu.edu.cn

Wenjian Wang ∗
Key Laboratory of Data
Intelligence and Cognitive Computing of
Shanxi Province
wjwang@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract
Noisy labels often compel models to overfit, especially in multi-label classification
tasks. Existing methods for noisy multi-label learning (NML) primarily follow
a discriminative paradigm, which relies on noise transition matrix estimation or
small-loss strategies to correct noisy labels. However, they remain substantial
optimization difficulties compared to noisy single-label learning. In this paper,
we propose a Co-Occurrence-Aware Diffusion (CAD) model, which reformulates
NML from a generative perspective. We treat features as conditions and multilabels as diffusion targets, optimizing the diffusion model for multi-label learning
with theoretical guarantees. Benefiting from the diffusion model’s strength in
capturing multi-object semantics and structured label matrix representation, we
can effectively learn the posterior mapping from features to true multi-labels. To
mitigate the interference of noisy labels in the forward process, we guide generation
using pseudo-clean labels reconstructed from the latent neighborhood space, replacing original point-wise estimates with neighborhood-based proxies. In the reverse
process, we further incorporate label co-occurrence constraints to enhance the
model’s awareness of incorrect generation directions, thereby promoting robust optimization. Extensive experiments on both synthetic (Pascal-VOC, MS-COCO) and
real-world (NUS-WIDE) noisy datasets demonstrate that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Multi-label classification is a specialized subfield of classification tasks where each instance is
assigned multiple labels, making it inherently more complex than multi-class classification [1].
Modern multi-label classification methods typically leverage deep neural networks (DNNs) trained
iteratively on large-scale, accurately annotated datasets [2–6]. However, collecting expert-labelled
data in real-world scenarios is time-consuming and expensive. Crowd-sourcing [7] and modelgenerated labels [8] are commonly employed to mitigate annotation costs, inevitably introducing
noisy labels into datasets. Unfortunately, due to their high capacity, DNNs can fit most training data,
regardless of whether the labels are clean or noisy [9–12]. This overfitting to noisy labels prevents
∗

Corresponding author: Wenjian Wang

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

