Bilevel ZOFO: Efficient LLM Fine-Tuning and
Meta-Training

Reza Shirkavand
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland - College Park
rezashkv@cs.umd.edu

Peiran Yu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
peiran.yu@uta.edu

Qi He
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland - College Park
qhe123@cs.umd.edu

Heng Huang∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland - College Park
heng@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) for downstream tasks
using First-Order (FO) optimizers presents significant computational challenges.
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods address these by freezing most
model parameters and training only a small subset. However, PEFT often underperforms compared to full fine-tuning when high task-specific accuracy is
required. Zeroth-Order (ZO) methods fine-tune the entire pre-trained model without back-propagation, estimating gradients through forward passes only. While
memory-efficient, ZO methods suffer from slow convergence and high sensitivity
to prompt selection. We bridge these two worlds with Bilevel-ZOFO, a bilevel
optimization method that couples fast, local FO-PEFT adaptation at the inner level
with stable, memory-efficient ZO updates of the full backbone at the outer level.
The FO-PEFT inner loop performs fast, low-memory local adaptation that reduces
the variance of ZO estimates and stabilizes the search, guiding the outer ZO updates of the full backbone and reducing prompt sensitivity. In the mean time, the
outer ZO provides better generalization ability for PEFT. We provide theoretical
convergence guarantees and empirically demonstrate that Bilevel-ZOFO significantly outperforms existing ZO and FO-PEFT methods, achieving 2–4× faster
training while maintaining similar memory efficiency. Additionally, we show by
updating the backbone with ZO and adapting only a tiny FO-PEFT block per task,
Bilevel-ZOFO combines full-model capacity with few-shot efficiency, making it a
very efficient meta-learning algorithm that quickly adapts to new tasks.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning pretrained Large Language Models (LLMs) has become a standard approach for downstream tasks. Traditional First-Order (FO) optimizers like Adam [20], commonly used for this
process, rely on backpropagation. However, as highlighted in Malladi et al. [35], computing gradients
for LLMs can require up to 12 times the memory needed for inference. This scaling challenge
becomes even more pronounced as models grow larger, imposing significant memory demands and
complicating the fine-tuning process, especially in resource-constrained environments.
∗
This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 2347592, 2348169, DBI 2405416, CCF 2348306, CNS
2347617, RISE 2536663.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

