Purifying Shampoo: Investigating Shampoo’s
Heuristics by Decomposing its Preconditioner
Runa Eschenhagen∗,1 Aaron Defazio2 Tsung-Hsien Lee†
Richard E. Turner1,3 Hao-Jun Michael Shi4
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
Fundamental AI Research, Meta Superintelligence Labs, Meta Platforms, Inc.
3
The Alan Turing Institute
4
Infrastructure Optimizations, Meta Superintelligence Labs, Meta Platforms, Inc.
2

Abstract
The recent success of Shampoo in the AlgoPerf contest has sparked renewed interest in Kronecker-factorization-based optimization algorithms for training neural
networks. Despite its success, Shampoo relies heavily on several heuristics such as
learning rate grafting and stale preconditioning to achieve performance at-scale.
These heuristics increase algorithmic complexity, necessitate further hyperparameter tuning, and lack theoretical justification. This paper investigates these heuristics
from the angle of Frobenius norm approximation to full-matrix Adam and decouples the preconditioner’s eigenvalues and eigenbasis updates. We show that grafting
from Adam mitigates the staleness and mis-scaling of the preconditioner’s eigenvalues and how correcting the eigenvalues directly eliminates the need for learning
rate grafting. To manage the error induced by infrequent eigenbasis computations,
we propose an adaptive criterion for determining the eigenbasis computation frequency motivated by terminating a warm-started QR algorithm. This criterion
decouples the update frequency of different preconditioner matrices and enables us
to investigate the impact of approximation error on convergence. These practical
techniques offer a principled angle towards removing Shampoo’s heuristics and
developing improved Kronecker-factorization-based training algorithms.

1

Introduction

Structured non-diagonal, and especially Kronecker-factored, preconditioned stochastic gradient algorithms have been extensively studied for neural network training (Heskes, 2000; Martens, 2010;
Martens & Grosse, 2015; Li, 2018; Gupta et al., 2018). Despite their promise, diagonally preconditioned methods like Adam have remained the de facto methods for training neural networks over the
past decade (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2015). Recently, a distributed implementation of the
Shampoo algorithm (Gupta et al., 2018; Anil et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2023) won the external tuning
track of the AlgoPerf neural network training algorithm competition (Dahl et al., 2023; Kasimbeg
et al., 2025).1 This result has renewed interest in non-diagonally preconditioned training algorithms,
inspiring methods like Muon (Jordan et al., 2024; Bernstein, 2025) and SOAP (Vyas et al., 2025a).
Correspondence to: re393@cam.ac.uk and hjmshi@meta.com.
Work performed while an intern and external research collaborator at FAIR, Meta Platforms.
†
Work performed while employed by AI and Systems Co-Design, Meta Platforms.
1
The external tuning track requires a submission to specify a hyperparameter search space, in contrast to the
hyperparameter-tuning-free self-tuning track.
∗

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

