Spatiotemporal Consensus with Scene Prior for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Person Search

Yimin Jiang†
Dalian Maritime University
yimin_jiang@dlmu.edu.cn

Huibing Wang∗†
Dalian Maritime University
huibing.wang@dlmu.edu.cn

Jinjia Peng†
Hebei University
pengjinjia@hbu.edu.cn

Abstract
Person Search aims to locate query persons in gallery scene images, but faces
severe performance degradation under domain shifts. Unsupervised domain adaptation transfers knowledge from the labeled source domain to the unlabeled target
domain and iteratively rectifies the pseudo-labels. However, the pseudo-labels are
inevitably contaminated by the source-biased model, which misleads the training
process. This, in turn, reduces the quality of the pseudo-labels themselves and
ultimately affects the search performance. In this paper, we propose a Spatiotemporal Consensus with Scene Prior (STCSP) framework that effectively eliminates
the interference of noise on pseudo-labels, establishes positive feedback, and thus
gradually bridging the domain gap. Firstly, STCSP uses a Spatiotemporal Consensus pipeline to suppress the noise from being mixed into the pseudo-labels.
Secondly, leveraging the scene prior, STCSP employs our designed Iterative Bilateral Extremum Matching method to prevent the occurrence of some incorrect
pseudo-labels. Thirdly, we propose a Scene Prior Contrastive Learning module,
which encourages the model to directly acquire the scene prior knowledge from the
target domain, thereby mitigating the generation of noise. By suppressing noise
contamination, avoiding noise occurrence and mitigating noise generation, our
framework achieves state-of-the-art performance on two benchmark datasets, PRW
with 50.2% mAP and CUHK-SYSU with 87.0% mAP.

1

Introduction

Person search aims to localize and identify a query person from a gallery of scene images. It can be
taken as a joint task of person detection and re-identification (re-id) in an end-to-end manner, where
supervised learning has made significant advancements. However, notable performance degradation
is observed in these methods when deployed to new application scenarios, primarily attributed to
domain gaps induced by factors such as camera configuration. Additionally, the process of annotating
an adequate amount of training data for a particular domain is both arduous and costly. Consequently,
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) holds considerable promise in practical real-world scenarios
for person search.
UDA in person search aims to achieve model generalization from labeled source data to unlabeled
target deployment scenarios. DAPS [11], a pioneering work in applying UDA to person search,
employs implicit domain alignment in conjunction with a pseudo-labeling method to effectively
bridge the gap between the source and target domains. Building upon DAPS, Almansoori et al.
proposed DDAM [1], which generates a hybrid domain and learns within it to minimize the distance
between the two domains. Although these methods achieve satisfactory performance, they failed to
∗
†

Corresponding Author
Equal Contribution
Our code is available at https://github.com/whbdmu/STCSP.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

