Memory Injection Attacks on LLM Agents via
Query-Only Interaction

Shen Dong1∗ † , Shaochen Xu2∗ , Pengfei He1 , Yige Li3 , Jiliang Tang1 , Tianming Liu2 ,
Hui Liu1 , Zhen Xiang2†
1

Michigan State University

2

University of Georgia

3

Singapore Management University

Abstract
Agents powered by large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong
capabilities in a wide range of complex, real-world applications. However, LLM
agents with a compromised memory bank may easily produce harmful outputs
when the past records retrieved for demonstration are malicious. In this paper,
we propose a novel Memory INJection Attack, MINJA, without assuming that the
attacker can directly modify the memory bank of the agent. The attacker injects
malicious records into the memory bank by only interacting with the agent via
queries and output observations. These malicious records are designed to elicit
a sequence of malicious reasoning steps corresponding to a different target query
during the agent’s execution of the victim user’s query. Specifically, we introduce
a sequence of bridging steps to link victim queries to the malicious reasoning
steps. During the memory injection, we propose an indication prompt that guides
the agent to autonomously generate similar bridging steps, with a progressive
shortening strategy that gradually removes the indication prompt, such that the
malicious record will be easily retrieved when processing later victim queries.
Our extensive experiments across diverse agents demonstrate the effectiveness of
MINJA in compromising agent memory. With minimal requirements for execution,
MINJA enables any user to influence agent memory, highlighting the risk. Code
can be found on github

1

Introduction

Large language model (LLM) agents have demonstrated strong capabilities across various applications,
such as autonomous driving [8, 19, 24], finance [46, 11], healthcare [1, 29, 31], code generation
[17, 16], and web tasks [10, 54, 52]. Compared with standalone LLMs, an LLM agent is typically
equipped with a planning module, an array of tools, and a memory bank [36]. These additional
modules facilitate LLM agents in tackling intricate real-world problems via context-rich reasoning,
interaction with the environment, and learning from past experiences [50].
As one of the key features distinguishing LLM agents from LLMs, the memory of LLM agents can
be divided into short-term memory (STM) and long-term memory (LTM) [49]. STM serves as a
temporal workspace that retains an agent’s reasoning and actions while processing the current input
query. Conversely, LTM maintains records of the agent’s past interactions with the environment,
typically encapsulating both the input queries to the agent and their corresponding outputs. When
a new query is presented, the most relevant records will be retrieved from the memory bank as
demonstrations for effective task execution.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Correspondence to Shen Dong <dongshe1@msu.edu> and Zhen Xiang <zxiangaa@uga.edu>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

