SPINT: Spatial Permutation-Invariant Neural
Transformer for Consistent Intracortical Motor
Decoding

Trung Le1,4 , Hao Fang1 , Jingyuan Li1 , Tung Nguyen2 ,
Lu Mi3 , Amy Orsborn1 , Uygar Sümbül4 , Eli Shlizerman1,∗
1
University of Washington
2
University of California, Los Angeles
3
Tsinghua University
4
Allen Institute

Abstract
Intracortical Brain-Computer Interfaces (iBCI) decode behavior from neural population activity to restore motor functions and communication abilities in individuals
with motor impairments. A central challenge for long-term iBCI deployment is
the nonstationarity of neural recordings, where the composition and tuning profiles of the recorded populations are unstable across recording sessions. Existing
approaches attempt to address this issue by explicit alignment techniques; however, they rely on fixed neural identities and require test-time labels or parameter
updates, limiting their generalization across sessions and imposing additional computational burden during deployment. In this work, we address the problem of
cross-session nonstationarity in long-term iBCI systems and introduce SPINT a Spatial Permutation-Invariant Neural Transformer framework for behavioral
decoding that operates directly on unordered sets of neural units. Central to our approach is a novel context-dependent positional embedding scheme that dynamically
infers unit-specific identities, enabling flexible generalization across recording
sessions. SPINT supports inference on variable-size populations and allows fewshot, gradient-free adaptation using a small amount of unlabeled data from the test
session. We evaluate SPINT on three multi-session datasets from the FALCON
Benchmark, covering continuous motor decoding tasks in human and non-human
primates. SPINT demonstrates robust cross-session generalization, outperforming
existing zero-shot and few-shot unsupervised baselines while eliminating the need
for test-time alignment and fine-tuning. Our work contributes an initial step toward
a robust and scalable neural decoding framework for long-term iBCI applications.

1

Introduction

Motor behavior arises from the complex interplay between interconnected neurons, each possessing
distinct functional properties [1]. Deciphering the highly nonlinear mapping from the activity of these
neural populations to behavior has been a major focus of intracortical Brain-Computer Interfaces
(iBCI), whose applications have enabled individuals with motor impairments to control external
devices [2, 3], restore communication abilities through typing [4, 5], handwriting [6, 7], and speech
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Despite the remarkable capabilities, iBCI systems suffer from performance degradation over extended
periods of time, largely attributed to the nonstationarities of the recorded populations [13]. Sources of
*

Corresponding author: shlizee@uw.edu. Code is available at https://github.com/shlizee/SPINT

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

