Solving Partial Differential Equations via Radon
Neural Operator

Wenbin Lu

Yihan Chen

Junnan Xu

Wei Li

Junwei Zhu

Jianwei Zheng ∗

Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, Zhejiang

Abstract
Neural operator is considered a popular data-driven alternative to traditional partial
differential equation (PDE) solvers. However, most current solutions, whether
fulfilling computations in frequency, Laplacian, and wavelet domains, all deviate
far from the intrinsic PDE space. While with meticulous network architecture
elaborated, the deviation often leads to biased accuracy. To address the issue, we
open a new avenue that pioneers leveraging Radon transform to decompose the
input space, finalizing a novel Radon neural operator (RNO) to solve PDEs in
infinite-dimensional function space. Distinct from previous solutions, we project
the input data into the sinogram domain, shrinking the multi-dimensional transformations to a reduced-dimensional counterpart and fitting compactly with the PDE
space. Theoretically, we prove that RNO obeys a property of bilipschitz strongly
monotonicity under diffeomorphism, providing deeper insights to guarantee the desired accuracy than typical discrete invariance or continuous-discrete equivalence.
Within the sinogram domain, we further evidence that different angles contribute
unequally to the overall space, thus engineering a reweighting technique to enable
more effective PDE solutions. On that basis, a sinogram-domain convolutional
layer is crafted, which operates on a fixed θ-grid that is decoupled from the PDE
space, further enjoying a natural guarantee of discrete invariance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RNO sets new state-of-the-art (SOTA) scores across
massive standard benchmarks, with superior generalization performance enjoyed.
Code is available at https://github.com/wenbin-lu/Radon-Neural-Operator.

1

Introduction

PDE solving is considered an important field of modern mathematics. Although traditional finite
element methods (FEM) [5] and finite difference methods (FDM) [35] have been shown to yield notable outcomes, they require substantial computational resources and careful discretization, a process
necessitating specialized expertise. In addition, certain transformations have been mathematically
proven to exhibit superior performance in the realm of PDE solving, including Fourier, Wavelet, and
Laplace [16, 7, 46]. Such transformations, though useful to provide some specific merits in other
domains, often fail to preserve the intrinsic geometry of the original PDE space.
Recently, the paradigm has shifted to a data-driven pattern. Owing to the inherent capability in
discerning behaviors of diverse PDEs directly from data, newly elaborated solvers have achieved
remarkable improvements in speed, robustness, and accuracy. These methods, categorized under
operator learning framework-particularly neural operator (NO)-establish explicit mappings from input
conditions, e.g., initial/boundary configurations, to PDE solutions in infinite-dimensional function
spaces. The most pioneering work was presented in [18], which provides a mathematically rigorous
alternative to traditional numerical methods by preserving operator continuity in Banach spaces.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

