SGAR: Structural Generative Augmentation for
3D Human Motion Retrieval
Jiahang Zhang Lilang Lin Shuai Yang Jiaying Liu∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
{zjh2020, linlilang, williamyang, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
3D human motion-text retrieval is essential for accurate motion understanding,
targeted at cross-modal alignment learning. Existing methods typically align
the global motion-text concepts directly, suffering from sub-optimal generalization due to the uncertainty of correspondence learning between multiple motion
concepts coupled in a single motion/text sequence. Therefore, we study the explicit fine-grained concept decomposition for alignment learning and present a
novel framework, Structural Generative Augmentation for 3D Human Motion
Retrieval (SGAR), to enable generation-augmented retrieval. Specifically, relying on the strong priors of existing large language model (LLM) assets, we
effectively decompose human motions structurally into subtler semantic units,
i.e., body parts, for fine-grained motion modeling. Based on this, we develop
part-mixture learning to better decouple the local motion concept learning, boosting part-level alignment. Moreover, a directional relation alignment strategy
exploiting the correspondence between full-body and part motions is incorporated to regularize feature manifold for better consistency. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks, including motion-text retrieval as well as recognition and generation applications, demonstrate the superior performance and
promising transferability of our method. Our project page can be found at
https://jhang2020.github.io/Projects/SGAR/SGAR.html

1

Introduction

3D human motion understanding is a crucial topic in computer vision. To deal with the complex
nature of human motions, natural language is widely adopted as a medium to achieve fine-grained
motion modeling. Among these, motion-text retrieval is a fundamental task, which aims to search
relevant motion/text samples based on queries of another modality, with wide applications including
film production [22], health-care [43], and character animation [1].
Following the practice of the image-text [28, 3] and video-text [41, 49] retrieval, many efforts have
been made to establish a semantic-aligned latent space of 3D motions and texts. TMR [25] first
proposes the motion-text retrieval benchmark and presents a framework by jointly contrasting and
reconstructing. However, the scarcity of high-quality motion-text data heavily limits the model
performance. To this end, many works propose to leverage the pre-trained vision/language models as
priors to boost the motion-text retrieval. For instance, some methods [35, 44] render the 3D motions
into images/videos to leverage large-scale pre-trained vision-language models, e.g., CLIP [28], as
priors to bridge the motion and text modalities.
However, we argue that the above approaches can still suffer from two points. First, the significant
disparity between rendered and natural images results in sub-optimal representations for the visionbridged methods. More importantly, they neglect the characteristics of human motion data. For
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

