When Causal Dynamics Matter: Adapting Causal
Strategies through Meta-Aware Interventions

Moritz Willig
Department of Computer Science
Technical University of Darmstadt

Tim Woydt
Department of Computer Science
Technical University of Darmstadt

Devendra Singh Dhami
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Eindhoven University of Technology

Kristian Kersting
Department of Computer Science
Technical University of Darmstadt
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
German Research Center for AI (DFKI)

Abstract
Many causal inference frameworks rely on a staticity assumption, where repeated
interventions are expected to yield consistent outcomes, often summarized by
metrics like the Average Treatment Effect (ATE). This assumption, however, frequently fails in dynamic environments where interventions can alter the system’s
underlying causal structure, rendering traditional ‘static’ ATE insufficient or misleading. Recent works on meta-causal models (MCM) offer a promising avenue
by enabling qualitative reasoning over evolving relationships. In this work, we
propose a specific class of MCM with desirable properties for explicitly modeling
and predicting intervention outcomes under meta-causal dynamics, together with a
first method for meta-causal analysis. Through expository examples in high-impact
domains of medical treatment and judicial decision-making, we highlight the severe
consequences that arise when system dynamics are neglected and demonstrate the
successful application of meta-causal strategies to navigate these challenges.

1

Introduction

Exercising agency in complex, real-world scenarios such as policy making, medical treatment, or
autonomous agents carries many inherent risks and responsibilities. The consequences of actions
often extend beyond immediate effects and induce lasting changes in system dynamics. Classical
causal inference, largely based on structural causal models (SCMs) Spirtes et al. [2000], Pearl [2009],
typically assumes a static underlying causal graph. However, this assumption often proves inadequate
in dynamic settings, where causal mechanisms can evolve over time and especially under the influence
of active interventions. The challenge intensifies when interventions do not only influence variables
within a fixed causal structure but actively alter the causal relationships themselves. Relying on
traditional metrics like direct total or Average Treatment Effect (ATE; Pearl [2009], Rubin [1980]) ,
which rely on the local consistency of interventional outcomes, can be misleading.
To address this, recent formalizations of Meta-Causal Models (MCM; Willig et al. [2025]) offer
a promising way to model and analyze the qualitative nature of dynamical shifts in cause-effect
relations. Crucially, while traditional causal analysis focuses on measuring the quantitative outcome
of an intervention (e.g., average treatment effects), Meta-Causal Analysis (MCA) is also interested in
capturing changes of the underlying transition dynamics. This allows us to answer questions that
are beyond the scope of existing approaches, such as: “How likely is a system to adapt a desired
state?”, “How stable is a desired state?” or “Which transition paths lead to a particular state?” and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

