Understanding Representation Dynamics of Diffusion
Models via Low-Dimensional Modeling

Xiao Li∗
University of Michigan
xlxiao@umich.edu

Zekai Zhang∗
University of Michigan
zzekai@umich.edu

Xiang Li
University of Michigan
forkobe@umich.edu

Siyi Chen
University of Michigan
siyich@umich.edu

Zhihui Zhu
Ohio State University
zhu.3440@osu.edu

Peng Wang
University of Michigan
pengwa@umich.edu

Qing Qu
University of Michigan
qingqu@umich.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models, though originally designed for generative tasks, have demonstrated impressive self-supervised representation learning capabilities. A particularly intriguing phenomenon in these models is the emergence of unimodal representation dynamics, where the quality of learned features peaks at an intermediate
noise level. In this work, we conduct a comprehensive theoretical and empirical
investigation of this phenomenon. Leveraging the inherent low-dimensionality
structure of image data, we theoretically demonstrate that the unimodal dynamic
emerges when the diffusion model successfully captures the underlying data distribution. The unimodality arises from an interplay between denoising strength
and class confidence across noise scales. Empirically, we further show that, in
classification tasks, the presence of unimodal dynamics reliably reflects the diffusion model’s generalization: it emerges when the model generate novel images and
gradually transitions to a monotonically decreasing curve as the model begins to
memorize the training data.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models, a class of score-based generative models, have achieved great empirical success in
various tasks such as image and video generation, speech and audio synthesis, and solving inverse
problems [1–15]. In general, these models, consisting of forward and backward processes, learn
data distributions by simulating the non-equilibrium thermodynamic diffusion process [2, 16, 17].
Specifically, the forward process progressively adds Gaussian noise to training samples until they
are fully corrupted, while the backward process involves learning a score-based model to generate
samples from the noisy inputs [17, 18].
Beyond their strong generative capabilities, recent studies have revealed that diffusion models
also possess remarkable representation learning capabilities [19–24]. In particular, the internal
feature extractors of trained diffusion models have been shown to serve as powerful self-supervised
learners, achieving strong performance on downstream tasks such as classification [20, 21], semantic
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to the work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

