Target Speaker Extraction through Comparing Noisy
Positive and Negative Audio Enrollments

Shitong Xu

Yiyuan Yang

Niki Trigoni

Andrew Markham

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
shitong.xu@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Target speaker extraction focuses on isolating a specific speaker’s voice from
an audio mixture containing multiple speakers. To provide information about
the target speaker’s identity, prior works have utilized clean audio samples as
conditioning inputs. However, such clean audio examples are not always readily
available. For instance, obtaining a clean recording of a stranger’s voice at a cocktail
party without leaving the noisy environment is generally infeasible. Limited prior
research has explored extracting the target speaker’s characteristics from noisy
enrollments, which may contain overlapping speech from interfering speakers.
In this work, we explore a novel enrollment strategy that encodes target speaker
information from the noisy enrollment by comparing segments where the target
speaker is talking (Positive Enrollments) with segments where the target speaker is
silent (Negative Enrollments). Experiments show the effectiveness of our model
architecture, which achieves over 2.1 dB higher SI-SNRi compared to prior works
in extracting the monaural speech from the mixture of two speakers. Additionally,
the proposed two-stage training strategy accelerates convergence, reducing the
number of optimization steps required to reach 3 dB SNR by 60%. Overall,
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in the monaural target speaker
extraction conditioned on noisy enrollments. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/xu-shitong/TSE-through-Positive-Negative-Enroll .

1

Introduction

In the target speaker extraction task, the model is required to extract the target speaker’s voice from a
mixture of multiple speakers and ambient noise. To specify the characteristics of the target speaker,
prior works have explored using conditional information of the target speaker in multiple modalities,
including visual [1, 2], contextual [3, 4], or acoustic modality [5, 6, 7, 8]. Though prior works
using conditional information in the acoustic modality have achieved significant good extraction
performance, most of these works only considered using clean audio examples of the target speaker
[9, 10, 11, 12]. This strong assumption prevents these models from performing well when only noisy
audio examples are available. For example, consider a cocktail party, where the user meets a stranger
who has not provided an audio sample before. To extract the target stranger speaker’s voice from the
noisy environment to assist clear conversation, the user will have to ask the speaker to step outside
to record the clean audio enrollment. Enrolling target speakers in this way is often impractical in
real-world applications.
Although prior works have attempted to perform target speaker extraction using noisy enrollments,
they either still exploit the timesteps where only the target speaker is speaking in the noisy enrollment
[13, 14], or assume that the user has participated in the audio mixture recording [15, 16], limiting
extraction from arbitrary audio mixtures. In this work, we present a method for performing target
speaker extraction conditioned on noisy audio enrollments where both the target speaker and the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

