Breaking the Order Barrier: Off-Policy Evaluation for
Confounded POMDPs
Qi Kuang
School of Statistics and Data Science
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics

Jiayi Wang
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas

Fan Zhou ∗
School of Statistics and Data Science
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Zhengling Qi ∗
School of Business
George Washington University

Abstract
We consider off-policy evaluation (OPE) in Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) with unobserved confounding. Recent advances have
introduced bridge-function to circumvent unmeasured confounding and develop
estimators for the policy value, yet the statistical error bounds of them related
to the length of horizon T and the size of the state-action space |O||A| remain
largely unexplored. In this paper, we systematically investigate the finite-sample
error bounds of OPE estimators in finite-horizon tabular confounded POMDPs.
Specifically, we show that under certain rank
√ conditions, the estimation error for
policy value can achieve a rate of O(T 1.5 / n), excluding the cardinality of the observation space |O| and the action space |A|. With an additional mild condition on
the concentrability coefficients
√ in confounded POMDPs, the rate of estimation error
can be improved to O(T / n). We also show that for a fully history-dependent
√
T 
policy, the estimation error scales as O T / n(|O||A|) 2 , highlighting the exponential error dependence introduced by history-based proxies to infer hidden states.
Furthermore,p
when thetarget policy is memoryless policy, the error bound improves
√
to O T / n |O||A| , which matches the optimal rate known for tabular MDPs.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to provide a comprehensive
finite-sample analysis of OPE in confounded POMDPs.

1

Introduction

Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) (Monahan, 1982) have become a practical framework for modeling decision-making under uncertainty across a wide range of applications
(Albright, 1979; Monahan, 1982; Singh et al., 1994; Cassandra, 1998; Young et al., 2013; Bravo et al.,
2019). In POMDPs, the agent must make decisions based on partial observations rather than full
access to the underlying system state. Such partial observability often arises in real-world settings,
making standard Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) inadequate for modeling the underlying datagenerating processes. For example, in healthcare, clinical decision-making is frequently based on
∗

Corresponding authors: zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn; qizhengling@email.gwu.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

