Let a Neural Network Be Your Invariant
Mirco Giacobbe∗
University of Birmingham, UK
Zeroth Research, UK

Daniel Kroening∗
Amazon Web Services, USA

Abhinandan Pal∗
University of Birmingham, UK
National Institute of Informatics Tokyo, Japan

Michael Tautschnig∗
Amazon Web Services, USA
Queen Mary University of London, UK

Abstract
Safety verification ensures that a system avoids undesired behaviour. Liveness
complements safety, ensuring that the system also achieves its desired objectives.
A complete specification of functional correctness must combine both safety and
liveness. Proving with mathematical certainty that a system satisfies a safety
property demands presenting an appropriate inductive invariant of the system,
whereas proving liveness requires showing a measure of progress witnessed by a
ranking function. Neural model checking has recently introduced a data-driven
approach to the formal verification of reactive systems, albeit focusing on ranking
functions and thus addressing liveness properties only. In this paper, we extend and
generalise neural model checking to additionally encompass inductive invariants
and thus safety properties as well. Given a system and a linear temporal logic
specification of safety and liveness, our approach alternates a learning and a
checking component towards the construction of a provably sound neural certificate.
Our new method introduces a neural certificate architecture that jointly represents
inductive invariants as proofs of safety, and ranking functions as proofs of liveness.
Moreover, our new architecture is amenable to training using constraint solvers,
accelerating prior neural model checking work otherwise based on gradient descent.
We experimentally demonstrate that our method is orders of magnitude faster
than the state-of-the-art model checkers on pure liveness and combined safety and
liveness verification tasks written in SystemVerilog, while enabling the verification
of richer properties than was previously possible for neural model checking.

1

Introduction

Model checking addresses the question of whether a reactive system M meets a specification of
intended behaviour Φ [42]. Reactive systems are systems that continually respond to inputs and
operate over infinite executions. Exemplars include hardware designs implementing processing units,
communication and arbitration protocols, as well as digital controllers for automotive, aerospace,
or medical applications, where safety is paramount. Safety properties require that nothing bad ever
happens. A safety violation is a finite execution the last state of which falsifies Φ and the damage is
irredeemable [77]. Safety properties are dual to liveness properties, which require that something
good eventually happens. A liveness violation is evidenced by an infinite execution that falsifies Φ,
as any finite violating prefix could in principle still be extended to a compliant execution [77]. Every
linear-time specification is the composition of a safety and a liveness property [8], and linear temporal
logic (LTL) provides an expressive language for specifying linear-time properties of reactive systems.
∗

The authors are listed alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

