Information-Computation Tradeoffs for Noiseless
Linear Regression with Oblivious Contamination

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin, Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Chao Gao
University of Chicago
chaogao@uchicago.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@ucsd.edu

John Lafferty
Yale University
john.lafferty@yale.edu

Ankit Pensia∗
Carnegie Mellon University
ankitp@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the task of noiseless linear regression under Gaussian covariates in the
presence of additive oblivious contamination. Specifically, we are given i.i.d.
samples from a distribution (x, y) on Rd × R with x ∼ N (0, Id ) and y = x⊤ β + z,
where z is drawn independently of x from an unknown distribution E. Moreover,
z satisfies PE [z = 0] = α > 0. The goal is to accurately recover the regressor β to
small ℓ2 -error. Ignoring computational considerations, this problem is known to be
solvable using O(d/α) samples. On the other hand, the best known polynomialtime algorithms require Ω(d/α2 ) samples. Here we provide formal evidence that
the quadratic dependence in 1/α is inherent for efficient algorithms. Specifically,
we show that any efficient Statistical Query algorithm for this task requires VSTAT
complexity at least Ω̃(d1/2 /α2 ).

1

Introduction

Linear regression is a prototypical supervised learning task with a wide range of applications [RL87;
Die01; McD09]. In the vanilla setting, we are given labeled samples (x(i) , y (i) ), where the covariates
x(i) are drawn i.i.d. from a distribution on Rd and the labels y (i) are (potentially noisy) evaluations
of a linear function. The goal of the learner is to approximately recover the hidden regression vector.
In this standard setting, linear regression is well-understood both statistically and computationally.
Specifically, under Gaussian covariates with additive Gaussian noise, the least-squares estimator is
computationally efficient and statistically optimal.
In many real-world scenarios, the input data is subject to some form of contamination, e.g., errors due to skewed and corrupted measurements, making even simple statistical estimation tasks
algorithmically challenging. In the context of linear regression, classical computationally efficient
estimators inherently fail in the presence of data contamination. An important goal in this context is
to understand the possibilities and limitations of computationally efficient estimation in the presence
of contaminated data.
∗

The majority of this work was done while the author was at the Simons Institute, UC Berkeley.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

