Differential Privacy on Fully Dynamic Streams

Yuan Qiu
School of Cyber Science and Engineering
Southeast University
Nanjing, China 211189
yuanqiu@seu.edu.cn

Ke Yi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong SAR, China 999077
yike@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
A fundamental problem in differential privacy is to release privatized answers to
a class of linear queries with small error. This problem has been well studied
in the static case. In this paper, we consider the fully dynamic setting where
items may be inserted into or deleted from the dataset over time, and we need
to continually release query answers at every time instance. We present efficient
black-box constructions of such dynamic differentially private mechanisms from
static ones with only a polylogarithmic degradation in the utility.

1

Introduction

In the data streaming model, a stream consists of a pair of possibly infinitely long vectors (⃗
s, ⃗
x).
It defines a dynamically changing dataset Dt , which is a multiset of elements from a universe X .
Initially, D0 = ∅. At time t ∈ N+ , (st , xt ) arrives, where st ∈ {+ , − , ⊥ } indicates the operation
and xt ∈ X is the relevant element. Then Dt is defined inductively as follows:
• If st = + , then Dt := Dt−1 ⊎ {xt }, i.e., one copy of xt is inserted into the dataset.
• If st = − , then Dt := Dt−1 − {xt }, i.e., one copy of xt is deleted from the dataset (it is
required that at least one copy of xt exists in Dt−1 ).
• If st = ⊥ , then Dt := Dt−1 .
Two variants of the streaming model have been considered in the literature [25, 5]: The model above
is referred to as the fully dynamic setting (a.k.a. the turnstile model), while the case where st can
only be + or ⊥ is called the insertion-only setting (a.k.a. the cash register model).
A fundamental problem in differential privacy (DP) is how to answer a class of linear queries
on a given dataset D privately and accurately. In particular, the private multiplicative weights
mechanism
(PMW) [15, 17] can answer a set of arbitrary linear queries with maximum error1
p
Õ( |D|). Better error bounds can be achieved if the class of queries exhibit good structures. For
1
1
instance, d-dimensional half-space queries can be answered with error Õ(|D| 2 − 2d ) [26]; please
see Appendix A for a review of results on various query classes. Note that, since there can be
many queries in the class, these algorithms do not return the query answers explicitly; instead, a
privatized data structure (e.g., a histogram in the case of PMW) is often returned, and a data analyst
can subsequently extract the answer of any query from the data structure.
Combining the query-answering problem and the data streaming model naturally gives rise to the
problem of differential privacy under continual observation, first studied in the foundational work of
Dwork et al. [9]. Here, the goal is to continually release privatized query answers under the following
requirements:
1

The Õ notation suppresses dependencies on the privacy parameter ε and polylogarithmic terms.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

