Efficient Pre-Training of LLMs via Topology-Aware
Communication Alignment on More Than 9600 GPUs

Guoliang He∗†1 , Youhe Jiang∗‡1 , Wencong Xiao2 , Kaihua Jiang2 , Shuguang Wang2 ,
Jun Wang2 , Zixian Du2 , Zhuo Jiang2 , Xinlei Zhang2 , Binhang Yuan3 , Eiko Yoneki1
1
University of Cambridge, 2 ByteDance Seed, 3 HKUST
{gh512, yj367}@cam.ac.uk, biyuan@ust.hk, eiko.yoneki@cl.cam.ac.uk,
{hanli.hl, jiangkaihua, wangshuguang, wangjun.289}@bytedance.com,
{duzixian, jiangzhuo.cs, zhangxinlei.123}@bytedance.com

Abstract
The scaling law for large language models (LLMs) depicts that the path towards
machine intelligence necessitates training at large scale. Thus, companies continuously build large-scale GPU clusters, and launch training jobs that span over
thousands of computing nodes. However, LLM pre-training presents unique challenges due to its complex communication patterns, where GPUs exchange data in
sparse yet high-volume bursts within specific groups. Inefficient resource scheduling exacerbates bandwidth contention, leading to suboptimal training performance.
This paper presents Arnold, a scheduling system summarizing our experience to
effectively align LLM communication patterns with data center topology at scale.
An in-depth characteristic study is performed to identify the impact of physical
network topology to LLM pre-training jobs. Based on the insights, we develop a
scheduling algorithm to effectively align communication patterns with the physical
network topology in modern data centers. Through simulation experiments, we
show the effectiveness of our algorithm in reducing the maximum spread of communication groups by up to 1.67x. In production training, our scheduling system
improves the end-to-end performance by 10.6% when training with more than
9600 GPUs, a significant improvement for our training pipeline.

1

Introduction

Pre-training large language models (LLMs) at scale is a highly resource-intensive process that requires
vast computational infrastructure. The performance of LLM training is fundamentally dependent on
three factors: dataset size, computational power, and model parameters [19]. To meet these demands,
companies continually enhance their computing infrastructure by incorporating cutting-edge GPUs
and redesigning network architectures [14, 32, 40]. However, LLM pre-training presents unique
challenges that distinguish it from conventional deep learning tasks — in this paper, we explore
how to develop an efficient resource scheduling mechanism to support the LLM training workflow to
accommodate the resource-intensive and complex communication patterns in modern data centers.
LLM pre-training is an exceptionally resource-intensive process. Given the pressing need to commercialize LLMs swiftly, accelerating the training process is paramount. However, training these
models often spans weeks, requiring the deployment of thousands of GPU nodes per run. The ability
to efficiently schedule and allocate resources is critical for both performance optimization and cost
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done during internship at ByteDance Seed.
‡
Correspondence to: Youhe Jiang <yj367@cam.ac.uk>.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

