Rectifying Shortcut Behaviors in Preference-based
Reward Learning

Wenqian Ye
University of Virginia
wenqian@virginia.edu

Guangtao Zheng∗
Accenture
zhguangt@gmail.com

Aidong Zhang
University of Virginia
aidong@virginia.edu

Abstract
In reinforcement learning from human feedback, preference-based reward models
play a central role in aligning large language models to human-aligned behavior.
However, recent studies show that these models are prone to reward hacking and
often fail to generalize well due to over-optimization. They achieve high reward
scores by exploiting shortcuts, that is, exploiting spurious features (e.g., response
verbosity, agreeable tone, or sycophancy) that correlate with human preference
labels in the training data rather than genuinely reflecting the intended objectives.
In this paper, instead of probing these issues one at a time, we take a broader view
of the reward hacking problem as shortcut behaviors and introduce a principled
yet flexible approach to mitigate shortcut behaviors in preference-based reward
learning. Inspired by the invariant theory in the kernel perspective, we propose
Preference-based Reward Invariance for Shortcut Mitigation (PRISM), which
learns group-invariant kernels with feature maps in a closed-form learning objective.
Experimental results in several benchmarks show that our method consistently
improves the accuracy of the reward model on diverse out-of-distribution tasks and
reduces the dependency on shortcuts in downstream policy models, establishing a
robust framework for preference-based alignment.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [1] has emerged as a cornerstone for the
alignment of large language models (LLMs), enabling them to generate helpful, honest, and harmless
responses that align well with human preferences [2]. RLHF aims to optimize a language model
(the policy model) to provide responses that maximize the outputs of a reward model which serves
as a proxy for human preferences. Standard RLHF algorithms require an explicit reward model
fitted to human preference data and optimize a policy model using policy gradient methods [3, 4, 5].
Alternatively, direct alignment algorithms [6, 7, 8] optimize a policy model with an implicit reward
model reparameterized via the RLHF objective. The success of RLHF is evident in various popular
AI systems, such as Gemini [9], Claude [10], and ChatGPT [11].
Despite its promises, RLHF highly depends on the quality of reward models, which is vulnerable to a
key problem known as reward hacking [12] or over-optimization [13]. This problem occurs when
reward models are inadvertently optimized to use spurious attributes of the preference data, instead of
their desired traits that align with human intents, as shortcuts in reward learning. As a result, the policy
induced by hacked or over-optimized reward models misaligns with human preferences. As illustrated
in Figure 1, since the chosen responses in the training data predominantly agree with users’ prompts,
the reward model learns to prefer responses with sycophancy [14, 15, 16], leading to a misalignment
with the chosen response in the test data which does not exhibit sycophancy. The most well-studied
∗

Work done at University of Virginia.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

