Force Prompting: Video Generation Models Can
Learn and Generalize Physics-based Control Signals

Nate Gillman
Brown University
Daksh Aggarwal
Brown University

Charles Herrmann∗
Google DeepMind
Evan Luo
Brown University

Deqing Sun
Google DeepMind

Michael Freeman
Brown University
Chen Sun∗
Brown University

Abstract
Recent advances in video generation models have sparked interest in world models
capable of simulating realistic environments. While navigation has been wellexplored, physically meaningful interactions that mimic real-world forces remain
largely understudied. In this work, we investigate using physical forces as a control
signal for video generation and propose force prompts which enable users to interact
with images through both localized point forces, such as poking a plant, and global
wind force fields, such as wind blowing on fabric. We demonstrate that these force
prompts can enable videos to respond realistically to physical control signals by
leveraging the visual and motion prior in the original pretrained model, without
using any 3D asset or physics simulator at inference. The primary challenge
of force prompting is the difficulty in obtaining high quality paired force-video
training data, both in the real world due to the difficulty of obtaining force signals,
and in synthetic data due to limitations in the visual quality and domain diversity of
physics simulators. Our key finding is that video generation models can generalize
remarkably well when adapted to follow physical force conditioning from videos
synthesized by Blender, even with limited demonstrations of few objects (e.g.,
flying flags, rolling balls). Our method can generate videos which simulate forces
across diverse geometries, settings, and materials. We also try to understand the
source of this generalization and perform ablations on the training data that reveal
two key elements: visual diversity and the use of specific text keywords during
training. Our approach is trained on only around 15k training examples for a single
day on four A100 GPUs, and outperforms existing methods on force adherence and
physics realism, bringing world models closer to real-world physics interactions.
We release all datasets, code, model weights, and interactive video demos at our
project page, https://force-prompting.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Humans develop an intuitive understanding of how objects respond to forces since infancy (Wilkening
and Cacchione, 2010; Ullman et al., 2017): a gentle poke causes a plant to sway, while a breeze
creates rippling patterns across fabric. Do video generation models, which encode powerful visual
and motion priors through internet-scale pretraining, possess a similar level of intuitive physics
understanding? And if so, how to elicit their capabilities to interact with force inputs? A positive
answer to these questions would provide a more flexible and expressive interface for video content
creation, enable interactive video generation with user input (e.g., generating a video game), and
eventually lead to an intuitive world model for intelligent agents to plan and make decisions with.
∗

Equal advising. Correspondence to: nate_gillman@brown.edu, chensun@brown.edu. 39th Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

