HyperET: Efficient Training in Hyperbolic Space for
Multi-modal Large Language Models

Zelin Peng1 , Zhengqin Xu2 , Qingyang Liu1 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Wei Shen1 (B)
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, School of Computer Science, SJTU
2
State Key Laboratory of Infrared Physics, Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics, CAS
{zelin.peng, fate311, narumimaria, xkyang, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have emerged as a transformative
approach for aligning visual and textual understanding. They typically require
extremely high computational resources (e.g., thousands of GPUs) for training to
achieve cross-modal alignment at multi-granularity levels. We argue that a key
source of this inefficiency lies in the vision encoders they widely equip with, e.g.,
CLIP and SAM, which lack the alignment with language at multi-granularity levels.
To address this issue, in this paper, we leverage hyperbolic space, which inherently
models hierarchical levels and thus provides a principled framework for bridging
the granularity gap between visual and textual modalities at an arbitrary granularity
level. Concretely, we propose an efficient training paradigm for MLLMs, dubbed
as HyperET, which can optimize visual representations to align with their textual
counterparts at an arbitrary granularity level through dynamic hyperbolic radius
adjustment in hyperbolic space. HyperET employs learnable matrices with Möbius
multiplication operations, implemented via three effective configurations: diagonal
scaling matrices, block-diagonal matrices, and banded matrices, providing a flexible
yet efficient parametrization strategy. Comprehensive experiments across multiple
MLLM benchmarks demonstrate that HyperET consistently improves both existing
pre-training and fine-tuning MLLMs clearly with less than 1% additional parameters. Code is available at https://github.com/godlin-sjtu/HyperET.

1

Introduction

Thanks to advancements in pre-trained foundation models in both computer vision and natural
language processing [60, 61, 58, 1, 29, 50, 14, 18, 50, 15], researchers have been inspired to explore
the alignment of visual and language models, leading to the development of multi-modal large
language models (MLLMs). This alignment is often achieved through adapters, e.g., Q-former [16].
As a result, MLLMs [2, 10, 16, 40, 49, 4, 9, 65] rapidly develop in recent years, demonstrating strong
performance in tasks that require both visual and textual understanding, e.g., image captioning and
visual question answering (VQA).
Although modern multimodal large language models (MLLMs), e.g., Qwen-VL series [5, 64, 4] and
Intern-VL series [13, 12, 11], achieve cross-modal alignment across a wide range of MLLM tasks that
inherently involve multi-granularity levels, their success heavily depends on extensive data scaling
and massive computational resources. For example, InternVL [13] requires training on hundreds
of millions of image-text pairs using up to 640 GPUs. Such a resource-intensive training scheme
raises serious concerns about efficiency, reproducibility, and long-term sustainability in the MLLM
B

Corresponding Author: wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

