Preference Optimization by Estimating the
Ratio of the Data Distribution

1

Yeongmin Kim1 Heesun Bae1 Byeonghu Na1 Il-Chul Moon1,2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 2 summary.ai
{alsdudrla10, cat2507, byeonghu.na, icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Direct preference optimization (DPO) is widely used as a simple and stable method
for aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences. This paper
investigates a generalized DPO loss that enables a policy model to match the
target policy from a likelihood ratio estimation perspective. The ratio of the target
policy provides a unique identification of the policy distribution without relying
on reward models or partition functions. This allows the generalized loss to retain
both simplicity and theoretical guarantees, which prior work such as f -PO fails
to achieve simultaneously. We propose Bregman preference optimization (BPO),
a generalized framework for ratio matching that provides a family of objective
functions achieving target policy optimality. BPO subsumes DPO as a special
case and offers tractable forms for all instances, allowing implementation with a
few lines of code. We further develop scaled Basu’s power divergence (SBA), a
gradient scaling method that can be used for BPO instances. The BPO framework
complements other DPO variants and is applicable to target policies defined by
these variants. In experiments, unlike other probabilistic loss extensions such as
f -DPO or f -PO, which exhibit a trade-off between generation fidelity and diversity,
instances of BPO improve both win rate and entropy compared with DPO. When
applied to Llama-3-8B-Instruct, BPO achieves state-of-the-art performance among
Llama-3-8B backbones, with a 55.9% length-controlled win rate on AlpacaEval2.
Project page: https://github.com/aailab-kaist/BPO.

1

Introduction

Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human feedback has emerged as a promising finetuning paradigm to better reflect human preferences [1, 18, 56]. Reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) [13, 47] is a widely adopted alignment method that bridges implicit human
preferences and model behaviors. This method typically involves two stages after supervised finetuning: (1) training a reward model that captures implicit human preferences, and (2) optimizing
LLMs through a reinforcement learning pipeline guided by the learned reward model. This multistage RLHF pipeline is computationally intensive and prone to instability, motivating the development
of direct preference optimization (DPO) [49] as an alternative approach.
DPO is an alignment method that does not require an auxiliary reward model, thereby improving
training efficiency and stability. DPO training reduces to logistic regression on offline preference
datasets, following the Bradley–Terry model [9]. Subsequent studies have proposed extensions of
the DPO loss functions [55, 62, 67]. From the perspective of distribution matching, f -PO [27, 67]
reformulates the alignment objective as matching the policy model to the optimal policy defined by
DPO, extending the loss using f -divergence. While this reformulation retains the target optimality,
f -PO introduces additional complexity since it relies on a learned reward model and requires Monte
Carlo estimation of partition functions. Importantly, its optimality cannot be guaranteed without
incurring additional computational cost, as summarized in the third and fourth rows of Table 1.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

