Learning Dense Hand Contact Estimation from
Imbalanced Data

1

Daniel Sungho Jung1
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
IPAI, Dept. of ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2

{dqj5182, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Hands are essential to human interaction, and exploring contact between hands and
the world can promote comprehensive understanding of their function. Recently,
there have been growing number of hand interaction datasets that cover interaction
with object, other hand, scene, and body. Despite the significance of the task and
increasing high-quality data, how to effectively learn dense hand contact estimation
remains largely underexplored. There are two major challenges for learning dense
hand contact estimation. First, there exists class imbalance issue from hand contact
datasets where majority of regions are not in contact. Second, hand contact datasets
contain spatial imbalance issue with most of hand contact exhibited in finger
tips, resulting in challenges for generalization towards contacts in other hand
regions. To tackle these issues, we present a framework that learns dense HAnd
COntact estimation (HACO) from imbalanced data. To resolve the class imbalance
issue, we introduce balanced contact sampling, which builds and samples from
multiple sampling groups that fairly represent diverse contact statistics for both
contact and non-contact vertices. Moreover, to address the spatial imbalance issue,
we propose vertex-level class-balanced (VCB) loss, which incorporates spatially
varying contact distribution by separately reweighting loss contribution of each
vertex based on its contact frequency across dataset. As a result, we effectively
learn to predict dense hand contact estimation with large-scale hand contact data
without suffering from class and spatial imbalance issue. The codes are available
at https://github.com/dqj5182/HACO_RELEASE.

1

Introduction

From infancy, humans rely on physical contact to perceive and interact with the surrounding environment. Among the various mediums of contact, hands play a predominant role, facilitating essential
tasks and enabling effective communication. Consequently, developing a robust hand contact estimation model is crucial for advancing our understanding of hand interactions and addressing various
challenges [14, 35] that require accurate hand contact estimation.
Over the recent years, we have witnessed significant advances in large-scale interaction datasets
involving hands. Hand-object interaction datasets [19, 5, 4, 15, 16, 12, 36, 24] focused on capturing
hand grasps of objects. Hand-hand interaction datasets [59, 41] considered two hand interaction from
a single person. Hand-face interaction dataset [55] investigated on interaction between hand and
deformable face. Hand-scene interaction datasets [18, 22, 58] extended the scope of interaction to
include environments featuring the ground, walls, and large-scale objects. Hand-body interaction
dataset [65] covered broad range of interaction with human body as part of human-human interaction.
Despite the wide range of diversity in the hand interaction datasets with contact annotations [19, 5, 4,
15, 16, 12, 36, 24, 41, 59, 55, 17, 22, 65, 62], to the best of our knowledge, there has been no attempt
to build hand contact estimation model trained on such diverse hand contact. Based on such diverse
sets of hand contact data, we aim to build an effective dense hand contact estimation model.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

