Learning in Compact Spaces with
Approximately Normalized Transformer

Jörg K.H. Franke1,2,3,4
Jenia Jitsev3,4,5

Urs Spiegelhalter1

Marianna Nezhurina3,4,5

Frank Hutter1,2,6

Michael Hefenbrock7

1
4

University of Freiburg 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen 3 Open-Sci Collective
LAION 5 Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) 6 Prior Labs 7 Perspix.ai

Abstract
The successful training of deep neural networks requires addressing challenges
such as overfitting, numerical instabilities leading to divergence, and increasing
variance in the residual stream. A common solution is to apply regularization and
normalization techniques that usually require tuning additional hyperparameters.
An alternative is to force all parameters and representations to lie on a hypersphere.
This removes the need for regularization and increases convergence speed, but
comes with additional costs. In this work, we propose a more holistic, approximate
normalization via simple scalar multiplications motivated by the tight concentration of the norms of high-dimensional random vectors. Additionally, instead of
applying strict normalization for the parameters, we constrain their norms. These
modifications remove the need for weight decay and learning rate warm-up as well,
but do not increase the total number of normalization layers. Our experiments with
transformer architectures show up to 40% faster convergence compared to GPT
models with QK normalization, with only 3% additional runtime cost. When deriving scaling laws, we found that our method enables training with larger batch sizes
while preserving the favorable scaling characteristics of classic GPT architectures.

1

Introduction

Normalization techniques, such as LayerNorm, are fundamental for stable and efficient Transformer
training [1–4]. Loshchilov et al. [5] extends the concept and proposes the normalized Transformer
(nGPT), where all latent residual representations and all parameters in the direction of the residual
are normalized to lie on a hypersphere. We argue that the benefits of normalization come from two
effects. Normalization prevents the representations on the residual stream from blowing up and
requiring deeper layers to significantly amplify their output magnitudes. An effect observed by Sun
et al. [6] and termed the “Curse of Depth” (see Figure 1). Additionally, normalization ensures a
consistent input scale, which allows for the selection of a more suitable (global) learning rate.
These benefits drive us toward architectures that consistently apply normalization throughout the network, potentially normalizing all representations. Unfortunately, such excessive use of normalization
increases training and, more importantly, inference times. To combat this problem, we introduce an
approximate normalization technique for normalizing a vector x via normalizing factors ν satisfying
ν ≈ (∥x∥2 )−1

so that

∥ν · x∥2 ≈ 1.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

