Improving Energy Natural Gradient Descent through
Woodbury, Momentum, and Randomization

Andrés Guzmán-Cordero
Vector Institute, Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal
andres.guzman-cordero@mila.quebec
Felix Dangel
Vector Institute
f.dangel@vectorinstitute.ai

Gil Goldshlager
UC Berkeley
ggoldsh@berkeley.edu

Marius Zeinhofer
ETH Zurich
marius.zeinhofer@sam.math.ethz.ch

Abstract
Natural gradient methods significantly accelerate the training of Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs), but are often prohibitively costly. We introduce a suite
of techniques to improve the accuracy and efficiency of energy natural gradient
descent (ENGD) for PINNs. First, we leverage the Woodbury formula to dramatically reduce the computational complexity of ENGD. Second, we adapt the Subsampled Projected-Increment Natural Gradient Descent algorithm from the variational Monte Carlo literature to accelerate the convergence. Third, we explore the
use of randomized algorithms to further reduce the computational cost in the case
of large batch sizes. We find that randomization accelerates progress in the early
stages of training for low-dimensional problems, and we identify key barriers to
attaining acceleration in other scenarios. Our numerical experiments demonstrate
that our methods outperform previous approaches, achieving the same L2 error as
the original ENGD up to 75× faster.

1

Introduction

Using neural networks to solve partial differential equations (PDEs) is a promising and highly active
research direction at the intersection of machine learning and scientific computing. While the idea
is not new [7, 20], it has gained traction with the advent of Physics Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) [33]. Compared to traditional methods, neural networks avoid the need for sophisticated,
problem-dependent discretization schemes and promise to scale better to high-dimensional problems
[33]. However, it is very challenging to attain the accuracy levels of traditional solvers with neural
networks. This is in large part due to the loss landscape’s non-convexity and ill-conditioning [44].
To address this problem, second-order methods such as energy natural gradient descent [ENGD, 27]
and Kronecker-factored approximate curvature [KFAC, 24, 6] have been proposed. These methods
greatly improve upon the accuracies attainable by first-order optimizers like SGD or Adam [6], but
they suffer from either a high per-iteration cost or a high implementation complexity. As a result,
there remains a significant need for more accurate and efficient methods to train PINNs.
In parallel to the PINN community, neural networks have also been leveraged in conjunction with the
variational Monte Carlo method [VMC, 9] to simulate quantum many-body systems [3, 14, 21, 32].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

