Revisiting Agnostic Boosting

Arthur da Cunha
Aarhus University
dac@cs.au.dk

Mikael Møller Høgsgaard
Aarhus University
hogsgaard@cs.au.dk

Andrea Paudice
Aarhus University
apaudice@cs.au.dk

Yuxin Sun
Aarhus University
yxsau@cs.au.dk

Abstract
Boosting is a key method in statistical learning, allowing for converting weak
learners into strong ones. While well studied in the realizable case, the statistical
properties of weak-to-strong learning remain less understood in the agnostic setting,
where there are no assumptions on the distribution of the labels. In this work, we
propose a new agnostic boosting algorithm with substantially improved sample
complexity compared to prior works under very general assumptions. Our approach
is based on a reduction to the realizable case, followed by a margin-based filtering
of high-quality hypotheses. Furthermore, we show a nearly-matching lower bound,
settling the sample complexity of agnostic boosting up to logarithmic factors.

1

Introduction

Binary classification under the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning model is perhaps the
most fundamental paradigm of statistical learning theory.
In the realizable version of the problem, we consider an input space X , a known hypothesis class F ⊆ {±1}X , an unknown
target classifier f ∈ F, and a training sequence S =

(x1 , f (x1 )), . . . , (xm , f (xm )) ∈ (X × {±1})m of independent samples drawn from an unknown
but fixed distribution D and each labeled according to f . The objective is to ensure that, for any
desired accuracy and confidence parameters, ε, δ > 0, the algorithm can, with probability at least
1 − δ, learn from a training sequence of size m(ε, δ) and find a classifier h with an expected error,
Px∼D [h(x) ̸= f (x)], less than ε. A learning algorithm achieving such is called a strong learner and
the amount of training data m(ε, δ) necessary to reach this goal is called its sample complexity.
It is known that in the realizable setting the Empirical RiskPMinimization procedure (ERM) of
choosing any hypothesis h ∈ F minimizing the empirical loss (x,y)∈S 1{h(x) ̸= y}, which is 0 in
the realizable case, yields a strong learner—as long as F has bounded VC dimension.
An interesting question posed by Kearns and Valiant is whether it is possible to obtain a strong learner
starting from humbler requirements [Kearns, 1988, Kearns and Valiant, 1989]. Namely, the authors
consider γ–weak learners that are only guaranteed to produce classifiers w from a base class H with
error lower than 1/2 − γ for some γ > 0. More precisely, for any distribution Q over X , the weak
learner produces, with probability at least 1 − δ0 , hypothesis w such that
Px∼Q [w(x) ̸= f (x)] < 1/2 − γ,
(1)
thus having γ advantage over random guessing. Answering whether such simple learners could be
boosted to achieve arbitrarily good generalization led to intense research and, eventually, to many
such weak-to-strong learning algorithms, including the celebrated A DA B OOST [Freund and Schapire,
1997].
Realizability can, however, be too strong of a hypothesis. To capture a broader scenario, we consider
the agnostic learning model [Haussler, 1992, Kearns et al., 1994], where the samples are generated
by an arbitrary distribution D over X × Y. Thus, obtaining a learner with arbitrarily small error
errD (h) := P(x,y)∼D [h(x) ̸= y]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

