Unifying Reconstruction and Density Estimation via
Invertible Contraction Mapping in One-Class
Classification
Xiaolei Wang1,2

Tianhong Dai4 Huihui Bai3 Yao Zhao3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool
3
Beijing Jiaotong University
4
Applied Computing Technologies

Jimin Xiao1∗

Abstract
Due to the difficulty in collecting all unexpected abnormal patterns, One-Class
Classification (OCC) has become the most popular approach to anomaly detection
(AD). Reconstruction-based AD method relies on the discrepancy between inputs
and reconstructed results to identify unobserved anomalies. However, recent
methods trained only on normal samples may generalize to certain abnormal inputs,
leading to well-reconstructed anomalies and degraded performance. To address
this, we constrain reconstructions to remain on the normal manifold using a novel
AD framework based on contraction mapping. This mapping guarantees that any
input converges to a fixed point through iterations of this mapping. Based on this
property, training the contraction mapping using only normal data ensures that
its fixed point lies within the normal manifold. As a result, abnormal inputs are
iteratively transformed toward the normal manifold, increasing the reconstruction
error. In addition, the inherent invertibility of contraction mapping enables flowbased density estimation, where a prior distribution learned from the previous
reconstruction is used to estimate the input likelihood for anomaly detection, further
improving the performance. Using both mechanisms, we propose a bidirectional
structure with forward reconstruction and backward density estimation. Extensive
experiments on tabular data, natural image, and industrial image data demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method. Code is available at URD.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD) focuses on identifying unexpected patterns that deviate from the known
normal ones. Due to difficulty of collecting abnormal samples, One-Class Classification (OCC)
paradigm [38, 10, 4, 34, 41, 43, 45, 18, 49] has become the primary solution for unsupervised
anomaly detection (UAD) tasks. In the OCC paradigm, only normal data is provided during training,
and the model is expected to detect previously unseen anomalies during inference. Therefore, the
key challenge of the OCC paradigm involves in effectively modeling the normality of the training
data to recognize the abnormal pattern. Recently, reconstruction-based [12, 14, 54, 19, 30, 21, 48]
and density-estimation-based [39, 26, 55, 10, 58] methods are the two most widely used OCC AD
methods. The former relies on the assumption that a model trained solely on normal data will be
unable to accurately reconstruct anomalies. In contrast, the latter focuses on fitting a probability
distribution over normal data to estimate the likelihood of previously unseen inputs.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

