An Efficient Orlicz-Sobolev Approach for
Transporting Unbalanced Measures on a Graph

Tam Le∗
Institute of Statistical Mathematics
tam@ism.ac.jp
Hideitsu Hino
Institute of Statistical Mathematics
hino@ism.ac.jp

Truyen Nguyen∗
University of Akron
truyennguyen@meta.com
Kenji Fukumizu
Institute of Statistical Mathematics
fukumizu@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
We investigate optimal transport (OT) for measures on graph metric spaces with
different total masses. To mitigate the limitations of traditional Lp geometry,
Orlicz-Wasserstein (OW) and generalized Sobolev transport (GST) employ Orlicz
geometric structure, leveraging convex functions to capture nuanced geometric
relationships and remarkably contribute to advance certain machine learning approaches. However, both OW and GST are restricted to measures with equal total
mass, limiting their applicability to real-world scenarios where mass variation is
common, and input measures may have noisy supports, or outliers. To address
unbalanced measures, OW can either incorporate mass constraints or marginal
discrepancy penalization, but this leads to a more complex two-level optimization problem. Additionally, GST provides a scalable yet rigid framework, which
poses significant challenges to extend GST to accommodate nonnegative measures.
To tackle these challenges, in this work we revisit the entropy partial transport
(EPT) problem. By exploiting Caffarelli & McCann [12]’s insights, we develop a
novel variant of EPT endowed with Orlicz geometric structure, called Orlicz-EPT.
We establish theoretical background to solve Orlicz-EPT using a binary search
algorithmic approach. Especially, by leveraging the dual EPT and the underlying
graph structure, we formulate a novel regularization approach that leads to the
proposed Orlicz-Sobolev transport (OST). Notably, we demonstrate that OST can
be efficiently computed by simply solving a univariate optimization problem, in
stark contrast to the intensive computation needed for Orlicz-EPT. Building on
this, we derive geometric structures for OST and draw its connections to other
transport distances. We empirically illustrate that OST is several-order faster than
Orlicz-EPT. Furthermore, we show initial evidence on the advantages of OST for
measures on a graph in document classification and topological data analysis.

1

Introduction

Orlicz-Wasserstein (OW) extends Lp geometry by leveraging a specific class of convex functions
for Orlicz geometric structure. Intuitively, OW is an instance of optimal transport (OT), which
utilizes Orlicz metric as its ground cost [67, 32, 28, 3, 41]. Building on this foundation, OW has
proven instrumental in advancing certain machine learning approaches. For example, recent works
have leveraged OW to tackle challenging problems: Altschuler & Chewi [3] use OW as a metric
∗

: equal contribution. Correspondence to: Tam Le <tam@ism.ac.jp>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

