SymMaP: Improving Computational Efficiency
in Linear Solvers through Symbolic Preconditioning

Hong Wang1,2,3 , Jie Wang1,2,3∗, Minghao Ma1 , Haoran Shao1 , Haoyang Liu1,2,3
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
wanghong1700@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Matrix preconditioning is a critical technique to accelerate the solution of linear
systems, where performance heavily depends on the selection of preconditioning
parameters. Traditional parameter selection approaches often define fixed constants
for specific scenarios. However, they rely on domain expertise and fail to consider
the instance-wise features for individual problems, limiting their performance.
In contrast, machine learning (ML) approaches, though promising, are hindered
by high inference costs and limited interpretability. To combine the strengths of
both approaches, we propose a symbolic discovery framework-namely, Symbolic
Matrix Preconditioning (SymMaP)-to learn efficient symbolic expressions for
preconditioning parameters. Specifically, we employ a neural network to search
the high-dimensional discrete space for expressions that can accurately predict the
optimal parameters. The learned expression allows for high inference efficiency
and excellent interpretability (expressed in concise symbolic formulas), making
it simple and reliable for deployment. Experimental results show that SymMaP
consistently outperforms traditional strategies across various benchmarks 1 .

1

Introduction

Linear systems are foundational in machine learning, physics, engineering, and other scientific
fields [31, 32, 15, 16]. Since analytical solutions are often unavailable, efficient numerical algorithms
become essential [11]. Matrix preconditioning, a key technique in this domain, accelerates iterative
solvers and improves computational stability [59, 7]. For instance, the successive over-relaxation
(SOR) method optimizes convergence by integrating Gauss-Seidel iterations with a weighted update
scheme governed by the over-relaxation factor ω [18].
The effectiveness of matrix preconditioning depends on key parameters, such as ω in SOR. Selecting
ω > 1 can accelerate convergence, while ω < 1 may stabilize the process. This trade-off makes ω a
critical parameter, directly influencing the performance of preconditioning.
Traditional parameter selection strategies often rely on domain expertise to define fixed constants
for specific scenarios. However, (challenge 1) different problem parameters often require distinct
optimal preconditioning parameters. Traditional strategies ignore instance-wise features—specific
characteristics of individual problems, such as equation coefficients. This limits their adaptability to
varying problem instances and tasks.
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Minghaom2/SymMaP.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

