Enhancing Safety in Reinforcement Learning with
Human Feedback via Rectified Policy Optimization

Xiyue Peng1 , Hengquan Guo1 , Jiawei Zhang2 , Dongqing Zou3 ,
Ziyu Shao1 , Honghao Wei4 , Xin Liu1∗
1

ShanghaiTech University, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 PBVR, 4 Washington State University
{pengxy2024, guohq, shaozy, liuxin7}@shanghaitech.edu.cn,
{zhjw1988, dqzou.lhi}@gmail.com, honghao.wei@wsu.edu

Abstract
Balancing helpfulness and safety (harmlessness) is a critical challenge in aligning
large language models (LLMs). Current approaches often decouple these two
objectives, training separate preference models for helpfulness and safety, while
framing safety as a constraint within a constrained Markov Decision Process
(CMDP) framework. This paper identifies a potential issue when using the widely
adopted expected safety constraints for LLM safety alignment, termed “safety
compensation”, where the constraints are satisfied on expectation, but individual
prompts may trade off safety, resulting in some responses being overly restrictive
while others remain unsafe. To address this issue, we propose Rectified Policy
Optimization (RePO), which replaces the expected safety constraint with critical
safety constraints imposed on every prompt. At the core of RePO is a policy update
mechanism driven by rectified policy gradients, which penalizes the strict safety
violation of every prompt, thereby enhancing safety across nearly all prompts.
Our experiments demonstrate that RePO outperforms strong baseline methods
and significantly enhances LLM safety alignment. Code is available at https:
//github.com/pxyWaterMoon/RePO.
Warning: This paper contains content that may be offensive or harmful.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have advanced rapidly, demonstrating remarkable capabilities across
a wide range of practical applications including translation [55], programming [49, 11], medicine
[54, 41], law [20], and robotics [35]. These advancements significantly enhance human productivity
and quality of life. However, LLMs can occasionally exhibit unexpected behaviors that pose risks to
productivity and daily life. These risks often include generating content that violates social ethics,
displays bias or discrimination, spreads misinformation, or leads to privacy breaches [45, 18, 56, 36,
15, 25, 5, 12]. A notable example is Microsoft’s chatbot Tay, which, under the influence of hostile
users, sent over 50,000 tweets containing racial slurs and sexually explicit content, ultimately leading
to its removal. Additionally, studies have shown that language models can generate misinformation,
leak confidential information [22], and compromise personal data [5]. This serves as a warning that
only by ensuring the safety and helpfulness of large language models can we allow them to serve
humanity better.
Improving the helpfulness of language models (LMs) often conflicts with minimizing their harmfulness [7, 1]. This tension results in several challenges for the safe alignment of language models. First,
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

