Beyond Attention or Similarity: Maximizing
Conditional Diversity for Token Pruning in MLLMs

Qizhe Zhang1∗ Mengzhen Liu1 Lichen Li1 Ming Lu1†
Yuan Zhang1 Junwen Pan2 Qi She2 † Shanghang Zhang1 B
1
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 ByteDance
{theia, shanghang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In multimodal large language models (MLLMs), the length of input visual tokens
is often significantly greater than that of their textual counterparts, leading to a high
inference cost. Many works aim to address this issue by removing redundant visual
tokens. However, current approaches either rely on attention-based pruning, which
retains numerous duplicate tokens, or use similarity-based pruning, overlooking
the instruction relevance, consequently causing suboptimal performance. In this
paper, we go beyond attention or similarity by proposing a novel visual token
pruning method named CDPruner, which maximizes the conditional diversity of
retained tokens. We first define the conditional similarity between visual tokens
conditioned on the instruction, and then reformulate the token pruning problem
with determinantal point process (DPP) to maximize the conditional diversity of
the selected subset. The proposed CDPruner is training-free and model-agnostic,
allowing easy application to various MLLMs. Extensive experiments across diverse
MLLMs show that CDPruner establishes new state-of-the-art on various visionlanguage benchmarks. By maximizing conditional diversity through DPP, the
selected subset better represents the input images while closely adhering to user
instructions, thereby preserving strong performance even with high reduction ratios.
When applied to LLaVA, CDPruner reduces FLOPs by 95% and CUDA latency
by 78%, while maintaining 94% of the original accuracy. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Theia-4869/CDPruner.

1

Introduction

Benefiting from the remarkable success of large language models (LLMs) [Touvron et al., 2023a,b,
Jiang et al., 2023, Bai et al., 2023, Yang et al., 2024a, Cai et al., 2024b], multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) [Liu et al., 2023, 2024a, Wang et al., 2024, Chen et al., 2024d,c, An et al., 2025]
have extended their powerful reasoning capabilities to more modalities, such as images or videos. To
fully leverage the strengths of LLMs, MLLMs typically encode visual inputs into a form that language
models can understand, known as tokens. Within the input sequence, the length of visual tokens
often numbers in the hundreds, exceeding their textual counterparts by tens of times. And in video
streams [Zhang et al., 2023, Lin et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2024c] or high-resolution [Liu et al., 2024b,
Luo et al., 2024, Guo et al., 2024] scenarios, this number can grow even larger. Since attention-based
models [Vaswani et al., 2017] exhibit computational complexity that scales quadratically with token
length, an excessive number of visual tokens makes the use of MLLMs costly and impractical for
low-latency or resource-constrained applications. [Team et al., 2024, Hu et al., 2024a].
∗
†

Work done during an internship at ByteDance.
Project lead. B Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

