Constructing an Optimal Behavior Basis for the
Option Keyboard

Lucas N. Alegre
Institute of Informatics
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
lnalegre@inf.ufrgs.br

Ana L. C. Bazzan
Institute of Informatics
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
bazzan@inf.ufrgs.br

André Barreto
Google DeepMind
London, UK
andrebarreto@google.com

Bruno C. da Silva
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA, USA
bsilva@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Multi-task reinforcement learning aims to quickly identify solutions for new tasks
with minimal or no additional interaction with the environment. Generalized
Policy Improvement (GPI) addresses this by combining a set of base policies to
produce a new one that is at least as good—though not necessarily optimal—as
any individual base policy. Optimality can be ensured, particularly in the linearreward case, via techniques that compute a Convex Coverage Set (CCS). However,
these are computationally expensive and do not scale to complex domains. The
Option Keyboard (OK) improves upon GPI by producing policies that are at least
as good—and often better. It achieves this through a learned meta-policy that
dynamically combines base policies. However, its performance critically depends
on the choice of base policies. This raises a key question: is there an optimal set of
base policies—an optimal behavior basis—that enables zero-shot identification of
optimal solutions for any linear tasks? We solve this open problem by introducing
a novel method that efficiently constructs such an optimal behavior basis. We show
that it significantly reduces the number of base policies needed to ensure optimality
in new tasks. We also prove that it is strictly more expressive than a CCS, enabling
particular classes of non-linear tasks to be solved optimally. We empirically
evaluate our technique in challenging domains and show that it outperforms stateof-the-art approaches, increasingly so as task complexity increases.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) methods have been successfully used to solve complex sequential
decision-making problems (Silver et al., 2017; Bellemare et al., 2020). However, traditional RL
algorithms typically require thousands or millions of interactions with the environment to learn a
single policy for a single task. Multi-task RL methods address this limitation by enabling agents to
quickly identify solutions for new tasks with minimal or no additional interactions. Such methods
often achieve this by learning a set of specialized policies (or behavior basis) designed for specific
tasks and subsequently combining them to more rapidly solve novel tasks.
A powerful approach for combining policies to solve new tasks in a zero-shot manner leverages successor features (SFs) and generalized policy improvement (Barreto et al., 2018, 2020). GPI can combine
base policies to solve a new task, producing a policy that is at least as good as any individual base pol39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

