Reinforcement Learning for Reasoning in Large
Language Models with One Training Example

Yiping Wang1 † ∗
Baolin Peng3
Weizhu Chen3
1

Qing Yang2
Hao Cheng3

Zhiyuan Zeng1
Xuehai He4

Shuohang Wang3 †

Liliang Ren3

Liyuan Liu3

Kuan Wang5

Jianfeng Gao3

Simon Shaolei Du1 †

Yelong Shen3 †

University of Washington 2 University of Southern California 3 Microsoft
4
University of California, Santa Cruz 5 Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
We show that reinforcement learning with verifiable reward using one training
example (1-shot RLVR) is effective in incentivizing the mathematical reasoning
capabilities of large language models (LLMs). Applying RLVR to the base model
Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B, we identify a single example that elevates model performance
on MATH500 from 36.0% to 73.6% (8.6% improvement beyond format correction), and improves the average performance across six common mathematical
reasoning benchmarks from 17.6% to 35.7% (7.0% non-format gain). This result
matches the performance obtained using the 1.2k DeepScaleR subset (MATH500:
73.6%, average: 35.9%), which contains the aforementioned example. Furthermore,
RLVR with only two examples even slightly exceeds these results (MATH500:
74.8%, average: 36.6%). Similar substantial improvements are observed across
various models (Qwen2.5-Math-7B, Llama3.2-3B-Instruct, DeepSeek-R1-DistillQwen-1.5B), RL algorithms (GRPO and PPO), and different math examples. In
addition, we identify some interesting phenomena during 1-shot RLVR, including
cross-category generalization, increased frequency of self-reflection, and sustained
test performance improvement even after the training accuracy has saturated, a
phenomenon we term post-saturation generalization. Moreover, we verify that
the effectiveness of 1-shot RLVR primarily arises from the policy gradient loss,
distinguishing it from the "grokking" phenomenon. We also show the critical role
of promoting exploration (e.g., by incorporating entropy loss with an appropriate
coefficient) in 1-shot RLVR training. We also further discuss related observations
about format correction, label robustness and prompt modification. These findings
can inspire future work on RLVR efficiency and encourage a re-examination of
recent progress and the underlying mechanisms in RLVR. Our code, models, and
data are open source at https://github.com/ypwang61/One-Shot-RLVR.

1

Introduction

Recently, significant progress has been achieved in enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large
language models (LLMs), including OpenAI-o1 [1], DeepSeek-R1 [2], and Kimi-1.5 [3], particularly
for complex mathematical tasks. A key method contributing to these advancements is Reinforcement
Learning with Verifiable Reward (RLVR) [4, 5, 2, 3], which commonly employs reinforcement learning on an LLM with a rule-based outcome reward, such as a binary reward indicating the correctness
∗
: This work was done during Yiping’s internship at Microsoft. †: Corresponding authors. Correspondence email: {ypwang61, ssdu}@cs.washington.edu, {shuowa, yeshe}@microsoft.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

