Unified all-atom molecule generation with neural fields

Matthieu Kirchmeyer1,† Pedro O. Pinheiro1,† Emma Willett1 Karolis Martinkus1,‡
Joseph Kleinhenz1 Emily K. Makowski2 Andrew M. Watkins1
Vladimir Gligorijevic1 Richard Bonneau1 Saeed Saremi1
1

Prescient Design, Genentech

2

Antibody Engineering, Genentech

Abstract
Generative models for structure-based drug design are often limited to a specific
modality, restricting their broader applicability. To address this challenge, we
introduce FuncBind, a framework based on computer vision to generate targetconditioned, all-atom molecules across atomic systems. FuncBind uses neural
fields to represent molecules as continuous atomic densities and employs scorebased generative models with modern architectures adapted from the computer
vision literature. This modality-agnostic representation allows a single unified
model to be trained on diverse atomic systems, from small to large molecules,
and handle variable atom/residue counts, including non-canonical amino acids.
FuncBind achieves competitive in silico performance in generating small molecules,
macrocyclic peptides, and antibody complementarity-determining region loops,
conditioned on target structures. FuncBind also generated in vitro novel antibody
binders via de novo redesign of the complementarity-determining region H3 loop
of two chosen co-crystal structures. As a final contribution, we introduce a new
dataset and benchmark for structure-conditioned macrocyclic peptide generation* .

1

Introduction

A central challenge in drug discovery is designing molecules that bind specifically to a target
protein [1]. This task involves navigating a diverse landscape of molecular modalities, from small
organic compounds to large biomolecules, each with unique chemical properties. Structure-based
approaches are frequently employed to meet this challenge, utilizing the 3D structure of a target site
(often an accessible protein region) to generate novel molecules with high affinity. Generative models
are emerging as a powerful data-driven alternative to established traditional techniques such as virtual
screening and physics-based simulations. These newer models can explore vast chemical spaces
more effectively to identify molecules with desired binding properties [2].
Most structure-based generative models specialize on a single molecule modality to better account
for specific physicochemical properties. Focusing on a single molecular modality also simplifies
data gathering and augmentation, training, representation choice, and metrics used for validation.
Generative models of small molecules typically represent molecules as point cloud of atoms [3, 4, 5]
or discretized atomic densities [6, 7]. Most protein generative models leverage the fact that proteins
are sequences of amino acids to represent them with point clouds of residues, where each residue
contains multiple atoms [8], recovering their sequences with, e.g., co-generation [9] or inverse
folding [10]. Many protein-centric models also rely on large sequence databases and self-supervised
generative models for sequence that can help in scoring and generating/proposing mutations.
* The code is available at https://github.com/prescient-design/funcbind. The checkpoints at
https://huggingface.co/mkirchmeyer/funcbind/.
†
Equal contribution, ‡work done at Genentech. Correspondence to matthieu.kirchmeyer@gmail.com,
pedro@opinheiro.com, saremi.saeed@gene.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

