CVGL: Causal Learning and Geometric Topology

Songsong Ouyang Yingying Zhu∗
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Shenzhen University
2400101027@mails.szu.edu.cn, zhuyy@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-view geo-localization (CVGL) aims to estimate the geographic location of a
street image by matching it with a corresponding aerial image. This is critical for
autonomous navigation and mapping in complex real-world scenarios. However,
the task remains challenging due to significant viewpoint differences and the
influence of confounding factors. To tackle these issues, we propose the Causal
Learning and Geometric Topology (CLGT) framework, which integrates two key
components: a Causal Feature Extractor (CFE) that mitigates the influence of
confounding factors by leveraging causal intervention to encourage the model
to focus on stable, task-relevant semantics; and a Geometric Topology Fusion
(GT Fusion) module that injects Bird’s Eye View (BEV) road topology into street
features to alleviate cross-view inconsistencies caused by extreme perspective
changes. Additionally, we introduce a Data-Adaptive Pooling (DA Pooling) module
to enhance the representation of semantically rich regions. Extensive experiments
on CVUSA, CVACT, and their robustness-enhanced variants (CVUSA-C-ALL and
CVACT-C-ALL) demonstrate that CLGT achieves state-of-the-art performance,
particularly under challenging real-world corruptions. Our codes are available at
CLGT.

1

Introduction

Cross-view geo-localization (CVGL) aims to estimate the geographic location of a street image
Z
feature space
D
street space
domain
Y
labels
by matching it to a corresponding aerial image.
C
D
C
𝑭
causal features
content
This task plays a crucial role in applications such
Z
𝑿
𝑭
non-causal features
𝑭
𝑭
as autonomous driving, robotic navigation, and
street image
𝑿
aerial space
urban mapping [24; 2; 27]. However, it remains
aerial image
𝑓(∙)
𝑿
𝑿
highly challenging due to the extreme differences
𝑓(𝑋)
𝑓(𝑋)
Y
network
in perspective, scale, appearance, confounders and
occlusion between street and aerial views. Previ- Figure 1: Structural Causal Model (SCM) for
ous studies have mainly explored three directions cross-view geo-localization. Nodes represent
to improve cross-view matching: viewpoint mod- variables and arrows denote dependencies.
eling [28], spatial alignment [21], and hard negative mining [1]. Despite these efforts, cross-view
geo-localization remains challenging due to weather changes, misalignment, and occlusions, all
of which demand stronger generalization and discriminative feature learning. To address these
limitations, Mi et al.[13] introduced feature consistency constraints to enhance robustness to orientation and field-of-view variations. To better reflect real-world conditions, Zhang et al.[32] proposed
corruption-rich benchmarks for robust evaluation, while Ye et al.[28] leveraged a Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) representation as an intermediate domain to bridge the large cross-view gap.
𝒄

𝒔

𝒏

𝒄

𝒏

𝒂

𝒂

∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

𝒔

