Predictive Preference Learning from Human
Interventions
Haoyuan Cai, Zhenghao Peng, Bolei Zhou
Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Learning from human involvement aims to incorporate the human subject to monitor and correct agent behavior errors. Although most interactive imitation learning
methods focus on correcting the agent’s action at the current state, they do not adjust
its actions in future states, which may be potentially more hazardous. To address
this, we introduce Predictive Preference Learning from Human Interventions (PPL),
which leverages the implicit preference signals contained in human interventions
to inform predictions of future rollouts. The key idea of PPL is to bootstrap each
human intervention into L future time steps, called the preference horizon, with the
assumption that the agent follows the same action and the human makes the same
intervention in the preference horizon. By applying preference optimization on
these future states, expert corrections are propagated into the safety-critical regions
where the agent is expected to explore, significantly improving learning efficiency
and reducing human demonstrations needed. We evaluate our approach with experiments on both autonomous driving and robotic manipulation benchmarks and
demonstrate its efficiency and generality. Our theoretical analysis further shows
that selecting an appropriate preference horizon L balances coverage of risky states
with label correctness, thereby bounding the algorithmic optimality gap. Demo and
code are available at: https://metadriverse.github.io/ppl.

1

Introduction

Effectively leveraging human demonstrations to teach and align autonomous agents remains a central
challenge in both Reinforcement Learning (RL) [46] and Imitation Learning (IL) [17]. In the literature
of RL and more recent RL from Human Feedback (RLHF), the agent explores the environment
through trial and error or under human feedback guidance, and the learning process hinges on a
carefully crafted reward function that reflects human preferences. However, RL algorithms often
require a large number of environment interactions to learn stable policies, and their exploration
can lead agents to dangerous or task-irrelevant states [40, 27]. In contrast, IL methods train agents
to emulate human behavior using offline demonstrations from experts. Nevertheless, IL agents
are susceptible to distributional shift because the offline dataset may lack corrective samples in
safety-critical or out-of-distribution states [35, 32, 3, 47].
Interactive Imitation Learning (IIL) [2, 34, 15, 42, 28, 41, 19, 20] incorporates human participants to
intervene in the training process and provide online demonstrations. Such methods have improved
alignment and learning efficiency in a wide variety of tasks, including robot manipulation [7, 8],
autonomous driving [27, 28], and even the strategy game StarCraft II [39]. One line of research
on confidence-based IIL designs various task-specific criteria to request human help, including
uncertainty estimation [23] and confidence in completing the task [4, 38]. In contrast, an increasing
body of work focuses on learning from active human involvement, where human subjects actively
intervene and provide demonstrations during training when the agent makes mistakes [15, 42, 22, 17,
28]. Compared to confidence-based IIL, active human involvement can ensure training safety [27]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

