WorldWeaver: Generating Long-Horizon Video
Worlds via Rich Perception

Zhiheng Liu1,2 , Xueqing Deng2 , Shoufa Chen1 , Angtian Wang2 , Qiushan Guo2 ,
Mingfei Han2 , Zeyue Xue1 , Mengzhao Chen1 , Ping Luo1† , Linjie Yang2†
1

The University of Hong Kong, 2 ByteDance Seed

Abstract
Generative video modeling has made significant strides, yet ensuring structural
and temporal consistency over long sequences remains a challenge. Current
methods predominantly rely on RGB signals, leading to accumulated errors in
object structure and motion over extended durations. To address these issues, we
introduce WorldWeaver, a robust framework for long video generation that jointly
models RGB frames and perceptual conditions within a unified long-horizon
modeling scheme. Our training framework offers three key advantages. First,
by jointly predicting perceptual conditions and color information from a unified
representation, it significantly enhances temporal consistency and motion dynamics.
Second, by leveraging depth cues, which we observe to be more resistant to
drift than RGB, we construct a memory bank that preserves clearer contextual
information, improving quality in long-horizon video generation. Third, we employ
segmented noise scheduling for training prediction groups, which further mitigates
drift and reduces computational cost. Extensive experiments on both diffusionand rectified flow-based models demonstrate the effectiveness of WorldWeaver in
reducing temporal drift and improving the fidelity of generated videos. Page could
be found here.

1

Introduction

Long-horizon video prediction [10, 76, 11, 77, 17, 45, 46] is a fundamental challenge for world
modeling, as it requires models to internalize and reproduce the causal laws that govern scene
dynamics over time. Although generative video modeling [65, 34, 34, 1, 48, 47, 49], has made rapid
progress and shows impressive performance on short sequences less than 10 seconds, preserving
realism and coherence over longer durations remains a significant challenge. Current approaches
often struggle to depict correct motion and shape in long-horizon predictions, resulting in severe
degradation including objects warp, motions drift, and violations of physical constraints as time
progresses. These challenges highlight the difficulty of preserving both dynamics and temporal
consistency in long video generation, which is critical for structured and predictive understanding of
the world.
Most generative video models nowadays rely exclusively on RGB information as training signals,
optimizing pixel-level reconstruction objectives. This causes them to favor color and texture
over structural and dynamical attributes, such as motion trajectories, object geometry, and scale
relationships [9, 40, 18]. In other words, training solely on RGB information can lead to the
aforementioned instabilities. Such instabilities can be magnified over long sequences as small
frame-wise errors accumulate and compound, resulting in pronounced temporal drift and structural
degradation.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

