Learning-Augmented Facility Location Mechanisms
for Envy Ratio

Haris Aziz
UNSW Sydney
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au

Yuhang Guo
UNSW Sydney
yuhang.guo2@unsw.edu.au

Alexander Lam
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
alexander-a.lam@polyu.edu.hk

Houyu Zhou∗
UNSW Sydney
houyu.zhou@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
The augmentation of algorithms with predictions of the optimal solution, such as
from a machine-learning algorithm, has garnered significant attention in recent
years, particularly in facility location problems. Moving beyond the traditional
focus on utilitarian and egalitarian objectives, we design learning-augmented
facility location mechanisms on a line for the envy ratio objective, a fairness
metric defined as the maximum ratio between the utilities of any two agents. For
the deterministic setting, we propose a mechanism which utilizes predictions to
α
achieve α-consistency and α−1
-robustness for a selected parameter α ∈ [1, 2], and
prove its optimality. We also resolve open questions raised by Ding et al. [2020],
devising a randomized mechanism without predictions to improve upon the bestknown approximation ratio from 2 to 1.8944. Building upon these advancements,
we construct a novel randomized mechanism which incorporates predictions to
achieve improved performance guarantees.

1

Introduction

In the uni-dimensional facility location problem, we are given a set of agents who are located along an
interval, and are tasked with finding an ideal location to place a facility. Each agent has single-peaked
preferences, preferring the facility to be located as close to them as possible. Due to its simplicity as
a continuous, single-peaked preference aggregation problem, the facility location problem has many
industrial and societal applications, such as school/library/hospital placement [Schummer and Vohra,
2002], social/economic policy selection [Dragu and Laver, 2019] and budget aggregation [Freeman
et al., 2021]. Among these applications, it is particularly important to achieve a fair solution, in
which no agent (or subset of agents) is excessively distant from the facility. As a result, this problem
has been widely studied in operations research, microeconomics, and theoretical computer science,
with numerous papers proposing various solution concepts.
In social choice problems, a common egalitarian fairness concept is to maximize the utility/well-being
of the worst-off agent, and when translated to the facility location problem, this is equivalent to the
minimizing the worst-off agent’s distance from the facility. This is achieved by placing the facility at
the midpoint of the left- and right-most agents, but as Mulligan [1991] remarks, this solution is prone
to perturbations of the extreme agent locations. Accordingly, numerous papers (e.g. [McAllister,
1976, Marsh and Schilling, 1994]) have proposed alternative fairness objectives which provide an
improved measure of the inequality within an instance.
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

