Smoothed Differentiation Efficiently Mitigates
Shattered Gradients in Explanations

Adrian Hill1 2 Neal McKee3 4 Johannes Maeß1 2
Stefan Blücher1 2 Klaus-Robert Müller1 2 5 6
1

BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Berlin, Germany
2Machine Learning Group, TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
3Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Berlin, Germany
4TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
5Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
6Max Planck Institut für Informatik, Saarbrücken, Germany
hill@tu-berlin.de neal@bccn-berlin.de maess@tu-berlin.de
bluecher@tu-berlin.de klaus-robert.mueller@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Explaining complex machine learning models is a fundamental challenge when
developing safe and trustworthy deep learning applications. To date, a broad selec
tion of explainable AI (XAI) algorithms exist. One popular choice is SmoothGrad,
which has been conceived to alleviate the well known shattered gradient problem
by smoothing gradients through convolution. SmoothGrad proposes to solve this
high dimensional convolution integral by sampling – typically approximating the
convolution with limited precision. Higher numbers of samples would amount to
higher precision in approximating the convolution but also to higher computing
demand, therefore in practice only few samples are used in SmoothGrad. In this
work we propose a well founded novel method SmoothDiff to resolve this tradeoff
yielding a speedup of over two orders of magnitude. Specifically, SmoothDiff
leverages automatic differentiation to decompose the expected values of Jacobians
across a network architecture, directly targeting only the non linearities respon
sible for shattered gradients and making it easy to implement. We demonstrate
SmoothDiff’s excellent speed and performance in a number of experiments and
benchmarks. Thus, SmoothDiff greatly enhances the usability (quality and speed)
of SmoothGrad – a popular workhorse of XAI.

1

Introduction

XAI has in the past years become a popular resource to further a user’s understanding of various
machine learning models such as neural networks, kernel methods, LSTMs and transformers, see e.g.
[1]. Among others, XAI allows to debug models, scrutinize data sets and find Clever Hans effects in
supervised and unsupervised models [2, 3]. Post hoc explanation methods, see [1], can e.g. be based
on gradients [4, 5, 6], first and higher order Taylor expansions around meaningful root points [7, 8,
9, 10], and Shapley values [11, 12].
In this work we will place our focus on the inner workings of a classifier by inspecting the gradient
of its prediction with respect to its input features. Usually, the focus is on the gradient ∇𝑓𝑐 (𝒙) of the
maximally activated output logit, however any other logit can be inspected as well, resulting in an
explanation for that respective class (see Appendix A for notation). We limit ourselves to the fixed
model regime, in which the model cannot be retrained for the purpose of interpretability.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

