OMiSO: Adaptive optimization of state-dependent
brain stimulation to shape neural population states

Yuki Minai1,2,3 , Joana Soldado-Magraner1,3,4 , Byron M. Yu1,3,4,5∗ , Matthew A. Smith1,3,5∗
1
Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
5
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
{yminai,jsoldado,byronyu,msmith}@andrew.cmu.edu
*Denotes equal contribution.

Abstract
The coordinated activity of neural populations underlies myriad brain functions.
Manipulating this activity using brain stimulation techniques has great potential for
scientific and clinical applications, as they causally influence the nervous system.
To improve the accuracy by which one can manipulate neural activity, it is important to (1) take into account the pre-stimulation brain state, which can influence the
brain’s response to stimulation, and (2) adaptively update stimulation parameters
over time to compensate for changes in the brain’s response to stimulation. In
this work, we propose Online MicroStimulation Optimization (OMiSO), a brain
stimulation framework that leverages brain state information to find stimulation
parameters that can drive neural population activity toward specified states. OMiSO
includes two key advances: i) training a stimulation-response model that leverages
the pre-stimulation brain state, and inverting this model to choose the stimulation
parameters, and ii) updating this inverse model online using newly-observed responses to stimulation. We tested OMiSO using intracortical microstimulation
with a “Utah” array and found that it outperformed competing methods that do
not incorporate these advances. Taken together, OMiSO provides greater accuracy in achieving specified activity states, thereby advancing neuromodulation
technologies for understanding the brain and for treating brain disorders.

1

Introduction

Most brain functions are realized through the coordinated activity of neural populations [1–4]. Causal
perturbations of the brain, for example with electrical stimulation, can influence brain function by
modulating neural population activity [5]. This activity is variable from moment to moment, and
such variability in part reflects the current state of the brain [1, 6]. The brain’s state can influence
how neural populations respond to incoming sensory stimuli [7, 8], and is therefore also important
for understanding how the brain responds to causal perturbations.
Closed-loop brain stimulation tools iteratively test and adjust stimulation parameters based on
observed neural responses to induce desired brain activity and/or behavior. Prior studies proposed
closed-loop brain stimulation tools to drive neural population activity toward specific states [9, 10].
These methods learn and update the mapping between a wide range of potential brain stimulation
parameters and brain responses during an experiment, but they do not take into account the state
of the brain when choosing the stimulation parameters (but see [11] for a study testing this idea
in simulation). Deep brain stimulation (DBS) approaches have leveraged brain state information
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

