Learning Reconfigurable Representations for
Multimodal Federated Learning with Missing Data

Duong M. Nguyen†
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, US
nmduongg@illinois.edu
Thanh Trung Huynh
VinUniversity, Vietnam
trung.ht@vinuni.edu.vn

Trong Nghia Hoang†
Washington State University, US
trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu

Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen
Griffin University, Australia
henry.nguyen@griffith.edu.au

Phi Le Nguyen†
Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Vietnam
lenp@soict.hust.edu.vn

Abstract
Multimodal federated learning in real-world settings often encounters incomplete
and heterogeneous data across clients. This results in misaligned local feature
representations that limit the effectiveness of model aggregation. Unlike prior
work that assumes either differing modality sets without missing input features or a
shared modality set with missing features across clients, we consider a more general
and realistic setting where each client observes a different subset of modalities
and might also have missing input features within each modality. To address the
resulting misalignment in learned representations, we propose a new federated
learning framework featuring locally adaptive representations based on learnable
client-side embedding controls that encode each client’s data-missing patterns.
These embeddings serve as reconfiguration signals that align the globally aggregated representation with each client’s local context, enabling more effective use of
shared information. Furthermore, the embedding controls can be algorithmically
aggregated across clients with similar data-missing patterns to enhance the robustness of reconfiguration signals in adapting the global representation. Empirical
results on multiple federated multimodal benchmarks with diverse data-missing
patterns across clients demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method, achieving
up to 36.45% performance improvement under severe data incompleteness. The
method is also supported by a theoretical analysis with an explicit performance
bound that matches our empirical observations. Our source codes are provided at
https://github.com/nmduonggg/PEPSY

1

Introduction

Due to the rapid advances in IoT technologies [4, 23] and growing concerns over privacy protection [52], there are now numerous emerging multimodal federated learning (MMFL) scenarios in which clients observe different subsets of input modalities and must collaborate to train
a common model without sharing data. These scenarios introduce two interrelated data-missing
events: (1) clients may have access to only a subset of feature modalities [8, 45] (e.g., one device
collects audio while another collects physiological signals), and (2) inputs within each modality
†

Corresponding authors: Duong M. Nguyen, Trong Nghia Hoang, Phi Le Nguyen.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

