RigAnyFace: Scaling Neural Facial Mesh
Auto-Rigging with Unlabeled Data

Wenchao Ma1∗† Dario Kneubuehler2∗ Maurice Chu2
Haomiao Jiang2 Sharon X. Huang1
1
Penn State University 2 Roblox

Ian Sachs2

Figure 1: We present RigAnyFace (RAF), an auto-rigging framework that supports facial meshes of
diverse topologies with multiple disconnected components such as eyeballs. These meshes are drawn
from diverse sources and cover both humanoid and non-humanoid heads. Given only a neutral facial
mesh and explicitly controllable FACS parameters specifying activated action units, RAF accurately
deforms the input mesh into corresponding FACS poses, creating an expressive blendshape rig.

Abstract
In this paper, we present RigAnyFace (RAF), a scalable neural auto-rigging framework for facial meshes of diverse topologies, including those with multiple disconnected components. RAF deforms a static neutral facial mesh into industry-standard
FACS poses to form an expressive blendshape rig. Deformations are predicted
by a triangulation-agnostic surface learning network augmented with our tailored
architecture design to condition on FACS parameters and efficiently process disconnected components. For training, we curated a dataset of facial meshes, with a
subset meticulously rigged by professional artists to serve as accurate 3D ground
truth for deformation supervision. Due to the high cost of manual rigging, this
subset is limited in size, constraining the generalization ability of models trained
exclusively on it. To address this, we design a 2D supervision strategy for unlabeled neutral meshes without rigs. This strategy increases data diversity and
allows for scaled training, thereby enhancing the generalization ability of models
trained on this augmented data. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RAF is
able to rig meshes of diverse topologies on not only our artist-crafted assets but
also in-the-wild samples, outperforming previous works in accuracy and generalizability. Moreover, our method advances beyond prior work by supporting multiple
disconnected components, such as eyeballs, for more detailed expression animation.
Project page: https://wenchao-m.github.io/RigAnyFace.github.io
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Work partially completed during an internship at Roblox.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

