SpatialReasoner: Towards Explicit
and Generalizable 3D Spatial Reasoning

Wufei Ma∗ Yu-Cheng Chou∗ Qihao Liu∗
Xingrui Wang Celso M de Melo† Jianwen Xieo Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University, † DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, o Lambda Inc

Abstract
Despite recent advances on multi-modal models, 3D spatial reasoning remains a
challenging task for state-of-the-art open-source and proprietary models. Recent
studies explore data-driven approaches and achieve enhanced spatial reasoning
performance by fine-tuning models on 3D-related visual question-answering data.
However, these methods typically perform spatial reasoning in an implicit manner
and often fail on questions that are trivial to humans, even with long chain-ofthought reasoning. In this work, we introduce SpatialReasoner, a novel large visionlanguage model (LVLM) that addresses 3D spatial reasoning with explicit 3D
representations shared between multiple stages–3D perception, computation, and
reasoning. Explicit 3D representations provide a coherent interface that supports
advanced 3D spatial reasoning and improves the generalization ability to novel
question types. Furthermore, by analyzing the explicit 3D representations in multistep reasoning traces of SpatialReasoner, we study the factual errors and identify
key shortcomings of current LVLMs. Results show that our SpatialReasoner
achieves improved performance on a variety of spatial reasoning benchmarks,
outperforming Gemini 2.0 by 9.2% on 3DSRBench, and generalizes better when
evaluating on novel 3D spatial reasoning questions. Our study bridges the 3D
parsing capabilities of prior visual foundation models with the powerful reasoning
abilities of large language models, opening new directions for 3D spatial reasoning.
Our project page is available here.

1

Introduction

3D spatial reasoning studies how models perceive, understand, and reason about 3D object properties
and spatial relationships. It is not only a fundamental task for vision-language models to achieve
human-level intelligence, but also crucial to a range of downstream applications in robotics [14, 18]
and embodied AI [10]. Despite the recent advancements of large multi-modal models, such as GPT-4o
and Qwen2.5-VL, their 3D spatial reasoning capabilities remain limited and fall far behind humanlevel performance [9, 31, 51]. Recent 3D-aware large vision-language models (LVLMs) injected
3D knowledge by fine-tuning the model on synthetic 3D-related question-answer pairs [9, 33] and
achieved improved performance on spatial reasoning benchmarks [31, 45, 51]. On the other hand,
large proprietary models such as Gemini 2.0 [15] have advanced 3D parsing by directly predicting
3D object bounding boxes, enabling the development of powerful generalist robotics models [43].
We identify two key challenges in 3D spatial reasoning: (1) 3D thinking–the ability to decompose a
complex 3D spatial reasoning question into small, manageable steps, and (2) 3D computation–the
ability to solve these thinking steps in a consistent and accurate manner. As shown in Figure 1,
prior reasoning methods adopt long chain-of-thought reasoning to tackle the problem but do not
∗

Equal first author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

