REP: Resource-Efficient Prompting for
Rehearsal-Free Continual Learning

Sungho Jeon, Xinyue Ma, Kwang In Kim, Myeongjae Jeon
POSTECH
{sunghojeon,xinyuema,kimkin,mj.jeon}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent rehearsal-free continual learning (CL) methods guided by prompts achieve
strong performance on vision tasks with non-stationary data but remain resourceintensive, hindering real-world edge deployment. We introduce resource-efficient
prompting (REP), which improves the computational and memory efficiency of
prompt-based rehearsal-free continual learning methods while minimizing accuracy
trade-offs. Our approach employs swift prompt selection to refine input data using
a carefully provisioned model and introduces adaptive token merging (AToM) and
adaptive layer dropping (ALD) for efficient prompt updates. AToM and ALD selectively skip data and model layers while preserving task-specific features during
the learning of new tasks. Extensive experiments on multiple image classification datasets demonstrate REP’s superior resource efficiency over state-of-the-art
rehearsal-free CL methods.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) trains neural network models on multiple sequential tasks, where each task
may include data distributions that diverge from previously encountered data. A crucial challenge
for any CL algorithm is to effectively address catastrophic forgetting [23]. Severe forgetting occurs
when a model rapidly loses previously learned knowledge while adapting to new tasks, significantly
affecting the model’s reliability and accuracy on earlier tasks.
Moreover, many of today’s AI services are designed for on-device scenarios to securely learn tasks
locally [19, 10, 42]. In on-device CL, improving computational efficiency is crucial, as it directly
reduces energy usage and enhances the durability of edge devices. Meanwhile, since device memory
capacity often acts as a hard constraint, CL tasks that exhaust all available memory can cause system
crashes due to out-of-memory errors [9]. Given typically limited memory sizes (1–8GB), achieving
high memory efficiency is essential to enable diverse on-device deployment scenarios in practice.
In this paper, we propose REP (Fig. 1), a framework for resource efficiency in prompt-based rehearsalfree CL methods on frozen, pre-trained vision transformers (ViTs) [37, 38, 35, 31, 14, 13, 30, 33].
Prompts are a small set of parameters that progressively learn incoming tasks to combat forgetting.
Updates to these compact prompts incur minimum data writes without significantly harming the
lifespan of device storage, which typically sustains up to 10K of writes per location. This makes
prompt-based rehearsal-free methods well-suited for on-device continual learning.
REP is built upon our analysis of cost-accuracy trade-offs throughout the end-to-end learning process,
with two key design insights. (1) The prompt selection stage, which constructs a prompt subset to
augment input or intermediate data is highly amenable to numerous promising options with fast
approximations. (2) In contrast, the prompt update stage, which involves forward-backward passes
over the backbone model, presents a range of optimizations with vastly different cost-accuracy
trade-offs. Based on these insights, we develop three complementary techniques for both stages that
trade negligible accuracy drop for high resource efficiency: (1) random projection-based lightweight
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

