HumanCrafter: Synergizing Generalizable Human
Reconstruction and Semantic 3D Segmentation

Panwang Pan1∗‡ , Tingting Shen2∗ , Chenxin Li3∗ , Yunlong Lin2 ,
Kairun Wen2 , Jingjing Zhao1 , Yixuan Yuan3‡
∗
Equal contribution ‡ Corresponding author
1
ByteDance, 2 Xiamen University, 3 CUHK
https://paulpanwang.github.io/HumanCrafter

Abstract
Recent advances in generative models have achieved high-fidelity in 3D human
reconstruction, yet their utility for specific tasks (e.g., human 3D segmentation)
remains constrained. We propose H UMAN C RAFTER, a unified framework that
enables the joint modeling of appearance and human-part semantics from a single
image in a feed-forward manner. Specifically, we integrate human geometric priors
in the reconstruction stage and self-supervised semantic priors in the segmentation stage. To address labeled 3D human datasets scarcity, we further develop
an interactive annotation procedure for generating high-quality data-label pairs.
Our pixel-aligned aggregation enables cross-task synergy, while the multi-task
objective simultaneously optimizes texture modeling fidelity and semantic consistency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that H UMAN C RAFTER surpasses
existing state-of-the-art methods in both 3D human-part segmentation and 3D
human reconstruction from a single image.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing high-fidelity 3D human representations and understanding human body and clothing
attributes are a fundamental challenge in the 3D vision realm. The philosophy can unlock many novel
and practical downstream applications, such as semantic-guided 3D reasoning, context-aware human
behavior analysis, and interactive semantic editing. This capability further facilitates immersive
augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR), character stylization, and cinematic production.
In light of advances in Neural Radiance Fields [1], previous attempts [2, 3, 4] have synthesized
high-quality human novel views. Nevertheless, implicit representations are typically computationally
intensive, as they rely on dense point querying in 3D space. Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [5] have provided real-time rendering for reconstructing high-quality explicit human models,
which however rely on dense multi-view images [6, 7] or monocular video input [8, 9, 10] and timeconsuming per-subject optimization processes, limiting their stability and feasibility in downstream
applications. With the emergence of large reconstruction models [11], recent advances can directly
generalize the regression of 3D representations [12, 13, 14, 15] thanks to the prevalence of large-scale
3D object datasets [16]. However, in the specific task of human reconstruction, these works collapse
and fail to produce faithful and consistent novel views, primarily due to the scarcity of 3D human
datasets and a lack of human prior knowledge as inductive bias in model design. Recent pioneering
studies on human reconstruction [17, 18] enable generalizable and robust synthesis under sparse-view
settings. However, the crucial requirement for semantic 3D segmentation is currently hindered by
the lack of expansive, well-labeled 3D human downstream task datasets. One workaround is to first
reconstruct and then leverage recent advances in 2D human visual foundation models [19]. This
paradigm can result in extensive processing times and substantial engineering efforts. Furthermore,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

