Neural Mutual Information Estimation
with Vector Copulas

1

Yanzhi Chen1 , Zijing Ou2 , Adrian Weller1,3 , Michael U. Gutmann4
University of Cambridge, 2 Imperial College London, 3 Alan Turing Institute, 4 University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Estimating mutual information (MI) is a fundamental task in data science and
machine learning. Existing estimators mainly rely on either highly flexible models
(e.g., neural networks), which require large amounts of data, or overly simplified models (e.g., Gaussian copula), which fail to capture complex distributions.
Drawing upon recent vector copula theory, we propose a principled interpolation
between these two extremes to achieve a better trade-off between complexity and
capacity. Experiments on state-of-the-art synthetic benchmarks and real-world data
with diverse modalities demonstrate the advantages of the proposed estimator.

1

Introduction

Mutual information (MI) is a fundamental measure of the statistical dependence between random
variables (RVs). Compared to other dependence measures, MI stands out due to its equitability and
generality [1, 2]: it can capture non-linear dependence of any form and can handle RVs with any
dimensionalities, rendering it a powerful measure for quantifying statistical dependence. In data
science, MI is widely used to analyze the relationships between protein sequences [3] and gene
profiles [4, 5], as well as to assess feature importance and redundancy [6]. In machine learning, MI
broadly serves as a learning objective and regularizer [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], with diverse applications to
representation learning [7, 8, 9, 13, 14], generative modeling [10], fairness and privacy [15, 16], etc.
A wide range of powerful, neural MI estimators have been developed [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. Most
of these estimators rely on a single, unconstrained network to approximate certain quantities—such
as the joint density p(x, y) or the density ratios p(x, y)/p(x)p(y)—during MI estimation. While
neural networks as universal functional approximators can, in theory, approximate arbitrary functions
given sufficient data [24, 25], in practice we often only have a small set of data. Indeed, theoretical
studies have shown that such distribution-free treatment of MI estimation will inevitably suffer from
requiring an exponential sample size [26, 27, 28, 29]. A straightforward remedy is to restrict the
model to simpler classes—for instance, assuming that the data is approximately Gaussian. However,
these assumptions are often overly simplistic to capture complex distributions in reality.
Recent advances in vector copula theory [30] offer a promising avenue for addressing this dilemma.
Vector copula theory extends classical copula theory [31] by generalizing it from univariate to
vector marginals. It reveals that the multivariate marginals and the dependence structure (i.e., the
vector copula) of a joint distribution are fully disentangled. This disentanglement motivates a
more fine-grained way for making assumption in MI estimation, where we impose lightweight yet
reasonable assumptions solely on the vector copula rather than on the entire distribution. Crucially,
the complexity of the vector copula can be adaptively adjusted through efficient vector copula
selection, allowing for an optimal trade-off between capacity and complexity. Experiments on stateof-the-art synthetic benchmarks and real-world data demonstrate the competitiveness of our estimator
against state-of-the-art estimators. In summary, the main contributions of this work are three-fold:
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

