Interaction-Centric Knowledge Infusion and Transfer
for Open-Vocabulary Scene Graph Generation

Lin Li1,2 , Chuhan Zhang1,2 , Dong Zhang1,2 , Chong Sun3 , Chen Li3 , Long Chen1∗
1

HKUST 2 AI Chip Center for Emerging Smart Systems 3 Tencent
{lllidy, chuhanzhang, dongz, longchen}@ust.hk, {waynecsun, chaselli}@tencent.com

https://github.com/HKUST-LongGroup/ACC

Abstract
Open-vocabulary scene graph generation (OVSGG) extends traditional SGG by
recognizing novel objects and relationships beyond predefined categories, leveraging the knowledge from pre-trained large-scale models. Existing OVSGG methods
always adopt a two-stage pipeline: 1) Infusing knowledge into large-scale models
via pre-training on large datasets; 2) Transferring knowledge from pre-trained
models with fully annotated scene graphs during supervised fine-tuning. However,
due to a lack of explicit interaction modeling, these methods struggle to distinguish
between interacting and non-interacting instances of the same object category.
This limitation induces critical issues in both stages of OVSGG: it generates noisy
pseudo-supervision from mismatched objects during knowledge infusion, and
causes ambiguous query matching during knowledge transfer. To this end, in this
paper, we propose an interACtion-Centric end-to-end OVSGG framework (ACC)
in an interaction-driven paradigm to minimize these mismatches. For interactioncentric knowledge infusion, ACC employs a bidirectional interaction prompt for
robust pseudo-supervision generation to enhance the model’s interaction knowledge.
For interaction-centric knowledge transfer, ACC first adopts interaction-guided
query selection that prioritizes pairing interacting objects to reduce interference
from non-interacting ones. Then, it integrates interaction-consistent knowledge
distillation to bolster robustness by pushing relational foreground away from the
background while retaining general knowledge. Extensive experimental results on
three benchmarks show that ACC achieves state-of-the-art performance, demonstrating the potential of interaction-centric paradigms for real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Scene graph generation (SGG) [55] aims to map an image into a structured semantic representation,
where objects are expressed as nodes and their relationships are as edges within the graph. Recently,
with the burgeoning of large-scale models, e.g., vision-language models (VLMs) and multimodal large
language models (MLLMs), OVSGG [14, 29, 9] has emerged as a promising area. It pushes beyond
predefined categories to support the recognition and generation of novel objects and relationships,
holding great potential for real-world applications.
Generally, an end-to-end VLM-based2 OVSGG pipeline consists of two phases: Knowledge Infusion
and Knowledge Transfer. The former infuses knowledge from large-scale datasets into VLMs via
pre-training. This process aims to achieve visual-concept alignment via caption-region comparison.
Specifically, due to the lack of region-level information (e.g., bounding box annotations), recent
work [14, 63, 9] adopts a weakly-supervised strategy to generate ⟨subject, predicate, object⟩
∗
2

Long Chen is the corresponding author.
We primarily discuss VLM-based models due to the high resource demands of MLLM-based approaches.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

