Learning to Solve Complex Problems
via Dataset Decomposition

Wanru Zhao𝑎,𝑏

Lucas Caccia𝑏

Weijia Xu𝑏
𝑎

University of Cambridge

Zhengyan Shi𝑏

Minseon Kim𝑏

Alessandro Sordoni𝑏,𝑐
𝑏

Microsoft Research

𝑐

Mila - Quebec AI Institute

Abstract
Curriculum learning is a class of training strategies that organizes the data being
exposed to a model by difficulty, gradually from simpler to more complex examples.
This research explores a reverse curriculum generation approach that recursively decomposes complex datasets into simpler, more learnable components. We propose
a teacher-student framework where the teacher is equipped with the ability to reason
step-by-step, which is used to recursively generate easier versions of examples,
enabling the student model to progressively master difficult tasks. We propose a
novel scoring system to measure data difficulty based on its structural complexity
and conceptual depth, allowing curriculum construction over decomposed data.
Experiments on math datasets (MATH and AIME) and code generation datasets
demonstrate that models trained with curricula generated by our approach exhibit
superior performance compared to standard training on original datasets.

1

Introduction

When teaching language models (LMs) to solve mathematical problems, one common solution is to
apply supervised learning on a dataset of problems with worked-out solution steps. This is, to some
extent, in stark contrast to how humans are educated and generally taught to solve problems, e.g. with
a curriculum, where a teacher presents simpler concepts first, to build a foundation for later tackling
more challenging tasks.
Transposing this strategy to train machine learning models, e.g. via curriculum learning [Elman,
1993, Bengio et al., 2009], has historically yielded mixed results. We speculate that one of the reasons
is that approaches largely relied on ranking by difficulty examples within a dataset [Wu et al., 2020,
Lalor and Yu, 2020]. Not only is accurately estimating difficulty challenging, but datasets may also
lack the diversity or granularity needed to isolate and teach the fundamental “skills” required for
complex problem-solving. Recent studies suggest that curriculum learning is more effective when
“decomposed” datasets that isolate atomic skills are available to the learner [Lee et al., 2024].
We build upon this intuition and, assuming access to a teacher model that can reason step-by-step, we
propose a way of “decomposing” a dataset of mathematical problems into a hierarchy of problems
with different difficulty levels. Our approach, D ECOMPX, enables smaller LMs to progressively
acquire elemental skills before tackling more intricate ones. Although we focus on mathematical
datasets such as MATH [Hendrycks et al., 2021] and AIME [of America, 2024], as well as code
generation datasets such as [Chen et al., 2021], we think the approach might be applied to a broader
range of domains in the future.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

