StruDiCO: Structured Denoising Diffusion with
Gradient-free Inference-stage Boosting for Memory
and Time Efficient Combinatorial Optimization

Yu Wang1 , Yang Li2 , Junchi Yan2* , Yi Chang1,3,4*
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
International Center of Future Science, Jilin University
4
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, China
{yu_w,yichang}@jlu.edu.cn {yanglily,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently emerged as powerful neural solvers for combinatorial optimization (CO). However, existing approaches fail to reveal how variables
are progressively determined during inference, making the final solution opaque
until the last step. To address this limitation, we propose a structured denoising
diffusion model, StruDiCO, which incrementally constructs solutions through
step-wise variable selection. This is achieved via a variable-absorption noising
model, wherein the forward process simulates gradual variable deactivation, converging to an empty solution, while the reverse process incrementally selects
variables to reconstruct the final solution. This design induces structural continuity across intermediate states, enabling interpretable and trajectory-consistent
partial solutions throughout inference. To further improve the reliability of reverse inference, we introduce a constrained consistency sampling strategy, which
suppresses low-confidence variable selection at each step to stabilize the reverse
process. Leveraging the structure-preserving reverse process, we further propose a
lightweight, gradient-free, objective-aware refinement framework, which iteratively
improves solution quality by applying structure-aware perturbations to the current
solution, performing reverse inference through the constraint consistency model,
and decoding with an objective-guided scoring scheme. Extensive experiments
on two canonical CO tasks, the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and Maximal
Independent Set (MIS), show that StruDiCO outperforms state-of-the-art diffusionbased solvers, achieving up to 3.5× faster inference, 70% lower GPU memory
usage, and significantly improved solution quality, with up to 37.7% drop reduction on TSP and an average 38.1% improvement on MIS. The codes are publicly
available at https://github.com/yuuuuwang/StruDiCO.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization (CO) entails optimizing discrete decision variables toward specified
objectives and serves as a cornerstone for numerous practical applications requiring efficient decisionmaking [1, 2, 3]. However, the inherent NP-hardness of CO problems renders large-scale CO instances
particularly challenging to solve efficiently, traditionally necessitating the design of handcrafted
* Corresponding authors: Junchi Yan and Yi Chang (yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn; yichang@jlu.edu.cn). This
work was partly supported by MOST of China (Grant 2023YFF0905400), NSFC (Grant U2341229, 92370201),
and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Fellowship (Grant GZC20230947).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

