Mitigating Reward Over-optimization in Direct
Alignment Algorithms with Importance Sampling

Phuc Minh Nguyen1 , Ngoc-Hieu Nguyen1 , Duy H. M. Nguyen3,7,9 , Anji Liu3,4 , An Mai5 ,
Binh T. Nguyen6 , Daniel Sonntag7,8 , Khoa D. Doan1,2
1
College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity
2
VinUni-Illinois Smart Health Center, VinUniversity
3
University of Stuttgart, 4 National University of Singapore
5
International University - VNUHCM, 6 University of Science - VNUHCM
7
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), 8 Oldenburg University
9
Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS)

Abstract
Direct Alignment Algorithms (DAAs) such as Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO) have emerged as alternatives to the standard Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) for aligning large language models (LLMs) with human
values. However, these methods are more susceptible to over-optimization, in which
the model drifts away from the reference policy, leading to degraded performance as
training progresses. This paper proposes a novel importance-sampling approach to
mitigate the over-optimization problem of offline DAAs. This approach, called (ISDAAs), multiplies the DAA objective with an importance ratio that accounts for the
reference policy distribution. IS-DAAs additionally avoid the high variance issue associated with importance sampling by clipping the importance ratio to a maximum
value. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that IS-DAAs can effectively mitigate over-optimization, especially under low regularization strength, and achieve
better performance than other methods designed to address this problem. Our code
is available at https://github.com/mail-research/AIS-Sampling4DAAs.

1

Introduction

Preference learning has emerged as an important part of the fine-tuning process to align large
language models (LLMs) with human preferences. There are two predominant flavors of preference
learning for LLMs. The first approach is online reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
[Ouyang et al., 2022, Christiano et al., 2017]. RLHF typically involves a multi-stage procedure:
fine-tuning a reward model to capture human preference and fine-tuning the LM policy to maximize
the expected reward using online RL algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization [Schulman
et al., 2017]. While empirically exhibiting good performance, this multi-stage procedure is complex
and computationally intensive, requiring repeated queries of the reward model and sampling from
the current policy. A set of alternative methods called direct alignment algorithms (DAAs) [Rafailov
et al., 2024, Tang et al., 2024c] avoids fitting separate reward models and instead simply trains the
policy directly on the offline preference dataset. The most well-known examples are Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO) [Rafailov et al., 2023], and Identity Preference Optimization (IPO) [Tang et al.,
2024b]. Since DAAs typically do not sample new responses from the LLM’s policy during training,
they are characterized as offline preference learning.
These methods are often preferred when aligning LLMs thanks to their simple training pipeline.
However, recent studies find that DAAs are more susceptible to over-optimization—a phenomenon in
which performance degrades as training progresses—and underperform online methods [Rafailov
et al., 2024, Park et al., 2024a, Liu et al., 2024b, Tang et al., 2024a]. More specifically, Rafailov
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

