Training Robust Graph Neural Networks by Modeling
Noise Dependencies

Yeonjun In1 , Kanghoon Yoon1 , Sukwon Yun2 , Kibum Kim1 , Sungchul Kim3
Chanyoung Park1∗
1
KAIST 2 UNC Chapel Hill 3 Adobe Research
{yeonjun.in, ykhoon08, kb.kim, cy.park}@kaist.ac.kr
swyun@cs.unc.edu
sukim@adobe.com

Abstract
In real-world applications, node features in graphs often contain noise from various
sources, leading to significant performance degradation in GNNs. Although several
methods have been developed to enhance robustness, they rely on the unrealistic
assumption that noise in node features is independent of the graph structure and
node labels, thereby limiting their applicability. To this end, we introduce a more
realistic noise scenario, dependency-aware noise on graphs (DANG), where noise
in node features create a chain of noise dependencies that propagates to the graph
structure and node labels. We propose a novel robust GNN, DA-GNN, which captures the causal relationships among variables in the data generating process (DGP)
of DANG using variational inference. In addition, we present new benchmark
datasets that simulate DANG in real-world applications, enabling more practical
research on robust GNNs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DA-GNN consistently outperforms existing baselines across various noise scenarios, including
both DANG and conventional noise models commonly considered in this field. Our
code is available at https://github.com/yeonjun-in/torch-DA-GNN.

1

Introduction

In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable achievements in graph
representation learning and have been extensively applied in numerous downstream tasks [1, 2, 3, 4].
However, in the majority of real-world scenarios, node features frequently exhibit noise due to various
factors, leading to the creation of inaccurate graph representations [5, 6]. For instance, in user-item
graphs, users may create fake profiles or posts, and fraudsters and malicious users may write fake
reviews or content on items, resulting in noisy node features. Recent studies have revealed the
vulnerability of GNNs to such scenarios, highlighting the necessity to design robust GNN models
against noisy node features.
To this end, various methods have been proposed to make a huge success in terms of model robustness
[5, 6]. These methods are founded on the independent node feature noise (IFN) assumption, which
posits that noise in node features does not impact the graph structure or node labels. Under the
IFN assumption (Fig. 1(b)), for example, Bob’s fake profile does not influence other nodes, which
is also explained by the data generating process (DGP) of IFN (See Fig. 2(a)) in which no causal
relationships exist among the noisy node features X, graph structure A, and node labels Y .
However, we should rethink: In real-world applications, can noise in node features truly be
isolated from influencing the graph structure or node labels? Let us explore this through
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

