Understanding the Evolution of the Neural Tangent
Kernel at the Edge of Stability

Kaiqi Jiang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
kaiqij@princeton.edu

Jeremy Cohen
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jeremycohen@cmu.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
The study of Neural Tangent Kernels (NTKs) in deep learning has drawn increasing
attention in recent years. NTKs typically actively change during training and are
related to feature learning. In parallel, recent work on Gradient Descent (GD)
has found a phenomenon called Edge of Stability (EoS), in which the largest
eigenvalue of the NTK oscillates around a value inversely proportional to the step
size. However, although follow-up works have explored the underlying mechanism
of such eigenvalue behavior in depth, the understanding of the behavior of the NTK
eigenvectors during EoS is still missing. This paper examines the dynamics of
NTK eigenvectors during EoS in detail. Across different architectures, we observe
that larger learning rates cause the leading eigenvectors of the final NTK, as well
as the full NTK matrix, to have greater alignment with the training target. We then
study the underlying mechanism of this phenomenon and provide a theoretical
analysis for a two-layer linear network. Our study enhances the understanding of
GD training dynamics in deep learning.

1

Introduction

Gradient Descent (GD) is a canonical minimization algorithm widely used in optimization and
machine learning problems. While its behavior and guarantee in convex settings has been fully
studied, there are still enormous challenges when understanding its dynamics in non-convex settings,
especially for deep learning, where we usually encounter high-dimensional and highly non-convex
losses. In recent years, the study on Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) proposed in [JGH18] has been more
and more popular when understanding the learning mechanism of GD, for example, [DZPS18] first
proved the convergence of GD in the so-called lazy regime, where NTK remains unchanged during
training. More and more follow-up studies point out the limitation of this lazy regime and advocate
for the analysis in the rich regime where the NTK actively evolves during training. They argue
that neural networks can learn more efficiently than kernel methods [GMMM20, WGL+ 20, DLS22].
These results motivate us to track the learning dynamics and the evolution of NTK more carefully.
There has also been a line of research on the behavior of NTK eigenvalues when training neural
networks using GD. [CKL+ 21] observed a phenomenon called Edge of Stability (EoS) where the
largest eigenvalue of loss Hessian first increases and then hovers around a value inversely proportional
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

