Foundation Cures Personalization: Improving
Personalized Models’ Prompt Consistency via Hidden
Foundation Knowledge

Yiyang Cai1 , Zhengkai Jiang2 , Yulong Liu1 , Chunyang Jiang1
Wei Xue1 , Yike Guo1 , Wenhan Luo1∗
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
2
Tencent Hunyuan
https://yiyangcai.github.io/freecure-aigc.github.io/

Abstract
Facial personalization faces challenges to maintain identity fidelity without disrupting the foundation model’s prompt consistency. The mainstream personalization
models employ identity embedding to integrate identity information within the
attention mechanisms. However, our preliminary findings reveal that identity embeddings compromise the effectiveness of other tokens in the prompt, thereby
limiting high prompt consistency and attribute-level controllability. Moreover,
by deactivating identity embedding, personalization models still demonstrate the
underlying foundation models’ ability to control facial attributes precisely. It
suggests that such foundation models’ knowledge can be leveraged to cure the
ill-aligned prompt consistency of personalization models. Building upon these
insights, we propose FreeCure, a framework that improves the prompt consistency
of personalization models with their latent foundation models’ knowledge. First,
by setting a dual inference paradigm with/without identity embedding, we identify
attributes (e.g., hair, accessories, etc.) for enhancements. Second, we introduce
a novel foundation-aware self-attention module, coupled with an inversion-based
process to bring well-aligned attribute information to the personalization process.
Our approach is training-free, and can effectively enhance a wide array of facial
attributes; and it can be seamlessly integrated into existing popular personalization
models based on both Stable Diffusion and FLUX. FreeCure has consistently shown
significant improvements in prompt consistency across these facial personalization
models while maintaining the integrity of their original identity fidelity.

1

Introduction

Human face-centric personalization represents compelling downstream applications of art creation,
advertising, and entertainment in the realm of text-to-image synthesis [23, 50]. Given a limited
number of images that depict particular identities, facial personalization models generate novel content
that reflects these identities through diverse conditions [14, 46, 69, 38]. However, this aspiration
is hindered by a persistent challenge: the necessity to maintain high fidelity to the identity while
ensuring the controllability of the generated content, also referred to as prompt consistency [72, 26].
This challenge is pronounced in facial personalization since any imperfections or misalignment
in the generated faces are particularly salient to humans. Therefore, compared to common object
personalization, human face-centric personalization mandates dedicated attention and research efforts.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

