A Geometric Analysis of PCA

Ayoub El Hanchi
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
aelhan@cs.toronto.edu

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Chris J. Maddison
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
What property of the data distribution determines the excess risk of principal component analysis? In this paper, we provide a precise answer to this question. We
establish a central limit theorem for the error of the principal subspace estimated by
PCA, and derive the asymptotic distribution of its excess risk under the reconstruction loss. We obtain a non-asymptotic upper bound on the excess risk of PCA that
recovers, in the large sample limit, our asymptotic characterization. Underlying our
contributions is the following result: we prove that the negative block Rayleigh quotient, defined on the Grassmannian, is generalized self-concordant along geodesics
emanating from its minimizer of maximum rotation less than π/4.

1

Introduction

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a core method of machine learning and statistics, prized
for its simplicity and consistently strong empirical performance across diverse tasks. In contrast,
analyzing its theoretical performance is challenging: an explicit characterization of its asymptotic
excess risk is known for the special case of Gaussian data [RW20], while non-asymptotic results on
the excess risk are in general limited to upper bounds [Sha+05; BBZ07; Nad08; RW20].
Traditionally, two main approaches have been adopted to analyze PCA. In the first, it is treated as a
plug-in estimator: the empirical covariance replaces the population one, and its principal components
estimate the true ones. Matrix perturbation bounds [SS90], most famously the Davis-Kahan theorem
[DK70; YWS15], are then used to control the error of PCA by the deviation of the empirical
covariance from the population one. In the second approach, adopted in [Sha+05; BBZ07], PCA is
viewed as an instance of empirical risk minimization, for which variants of the uniform convergence
analysis apply. Unfortunately, neither of these approaches leads to provably accurate bounds.
The recent work of Reiss and Wahl [RW20] takes a different approach and analyzes the projector
found by PCA directly, building on earlier work of Dauxois et al. [DPR82] who established its
asymptotic normality. The excess risk bounds obtained therein are powerful enough that under
Gaussian data and certain eigenvalue decay assumptions, they recover the leading term in the exact
asymptotic expansion of the excess risk. In the general case, however, asymptotically tight bounds do
not appear to be available in the existing literature.
In this paper, we take a different approach that allows us, among other things, to obtain such bounds:
we view PCA as an M-estimator, and use tools from the theory of asymptotic statistics [Van00], and
its accompanying non-asymptotic theory [e.g. OB21], to analyze its performance. From this point of
view, PCA is similar to linear regression with ordinary least squares. A significant difference, and a
major source of difficulty, resides in the nature of their respective search spaces: for linear regression,
it is Rd , whereas for PCA, it is the manifold of k-dimensional subspaces of Rd - the Grassmannian
[e.g. EAS98]. We build extensively on the accessible expositions in [Bou23; BZA24] to overcome
this difficulty.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

