Unifying Proportional Fairness in
Centroid and Non-Centroid Clustering

Benjamin Cookson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
bcookson@cs.toronto.edu

Nisarg Shah
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Ziqi Yu
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
ziqiyu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Proportional fairness criteria inspired by democratic ideals of proportional representation have received growing attention in the clustering literature. Prior work has
investigated them in two separate paradigms. Chen et al. [1] study centroid clustering, in which each data point’s loss is determined by its distance to a representative
point (centroid) chosen in its cluster. Caragiannis et al. [2] study non-centroid
clustering, in which each data point’s loss is determined by its maximum distance
to any other data point in its cluster.
We generalize both paradigms to introduce semi-centroid clustering, in which
each data point’s loss is a combination of its centroid and non-centroid losses,
and study two proportional fairness criteria—the core, and its relaxation, fully
justified representation (FJR). Our main result is a novel algorithm which achieves
a constant approximation to the core, in polynomial time, even when the distance
metrics used for centroid and non-centroid loss measurements are different. We
also derive improved results for more restricted loss functions and the weaker FJR
criterion, and establish lower bounds in each case.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a central task in AI, in which the goal is to either partition a set of n data points into k
clusters C1 , . . . , Ck , or return k centroids x1 , . . . , xk , or perhaps return both the clusters and their
assigned centroids. In many cases, partitioning the data points and choosing centroids are viewed as
interchangeable. For example, in the traditional clustering setting, the popular k-means loss function
(to be minimized) can be written in two equivalent forms:
k X
k
X
X
1 X
2
min
d(i, j) ≡
min
d(i, xt )2 .
C1 ,...,Ck
C1 ,...,Ck ,x1 ,...,xk
|Ct |
t=1
t=1
i,j∈Ct

i∈Ct

This is because for a given partition (C1 , . . . , Ck ), the optimal choice of the centroid xt for each
cluster Ct is the average of its points (this can be generalized to non-Euclidean metrics too) and
plugging in these optimal choices yields the formulation on the left.
An emerging line of research at the intersection of economics and AI focuses on applications in which
every data point represents an agent, and studies facets such as dealing with strategic manipulations
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

