Agnostic Learning under Targeted Poisoning:
Optimal Rates and the Role of Randomness

Bogdan Chornomaz∗
Department of Mathematics
Technion Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
markyz.karabas@gmail.com

Yonatan Koren
Department of Mathematics
Technion Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
yonatankoren@campus.technion.ac.il

Shay Moran †
Departments of Mathematics, Computer Science, and Data and Decision Sciences
Technion Israel Institute of Technology and Google Research
Haifa, Israel
smoran@technion.ac.il
Tom Waknine‡
Department of Mathematics
Technion Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
tom.waknine@campus.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We study the problem of learning in the presence of an adversary that can corrupt
an η fraction of the training examples with the goal of causing failure on a specific
test point. In the realizable setting, prior work established that the optimal error
under such instance-targeted poisoning attacks scales as Θ(dη), where d is the VC
dimension of the hypothesis class [Hanneke, Karbasi, Mahmoody, Mehalel, and
Moran (NeurIPS 2022)]. In this work, we resolve the corresponding question in
√
Θ( dη), answering
the agnostic setting. We show that the optimal excess error is e
one of the main open problems left by Hanneke et al. To achieve this rate, it is
necessary to use randomized learners: Hanneke et al. showed that deterministic
learners can be forced to suffer error close to 1 even under small amounts of
poisoning. Perhaps surprisingly, our upper bound remains valid even when the
learner’s random bits are fully visible to the adversary. In the other direction, our
lower bound is stronger than standard PAC-style bounds: instead of tailoring a hard
distribution separately for each sample size, we exhibit a single
√ fixed distribution
under which the adversary can enforce an excess error of Ω( dη) infinitely often.

∗

Bogdan Chornomaz is supported by the European Union (ERC, GENERALIZATION, 101039692).
Robert J. Shillman Fellow; supported by ISF grant 1225/20, by BSF grant 2018385, by Israel PBC-VATAT,
by the Technion Center for Machine Learning and Intelligent Systems (MLIS), and by the European Union
(ERC, GENERALIZATION, 101039692). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s)
only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive
Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
‡
Tom Waknine is supported by the European Union (ERC, GENERALIZATION, 101039692) and by the
ISF grant.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

