LuxDiT: Lighting Estimation with Video Diffusion
Transformer
Ruofan Liang1,2,3∗

Kai He1,2,3

Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1

NVIDIA

Zan Gojcic1

Igor Gilitschenski2,3

Nandita Vijaykumar2,3†
2

University of Toronto

3

Zian Wang1,2,3†

Vector Institute

Abstract
Estimating scene lighting from a single image or video remains a longstanding challenge in computer vision and graphics. Learning-based approaches are
constrained by the scarcity of ground-truth HDR environment maps, which are
expensive to capture and limited in diversity. While recent generative models
offer strong priors for image synthesis, lighting estimation remains difficult due
to its reliance on indirect visual cues, the need to infer global (non-local) context, and the recovery of high-dynamic-range outputs. We propose LuxDiT, a
novel data-driven approach that fine-tunes a video diffusion transformer to generate HDR environment maps conditioned on visual input. Trained on a large
synthetic dataset with diverse lighting conditions, our model learns to infer illumination from indirect visual cues and generalizes effectively to real-world
scenes. To improve semantic alignment between the input and the predicted environment map, we introduce a low-rank adaptation finetuning strategy using a
collected dataset of HDR panoramas. Our method produces accurate lighting
predictions with realistic angular high-frequency details, outperforming existing
state-of-the-art techniques in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations. Project
page: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/LuxDiT/

1

Introduction

In physically-based rendering, lighting plays a central role in shaping the appearance—how objects
cast shadows, reflect, and appear integrated within a scene. From virtual object insertion and
augmented reality to synthetic data generation, many downstream tasks rely on estimating scene
illumination. Yet inferring lighting from casually captured images or video remains an open challenge.
A common representation of the scene illumination is the high-dynamic-range (HDR) environment
map, which describes incoming light intensity from all directions. HDR maps can be acquired by
using light probes or multi-exposure panoramas, requiring specialized setups that are impractical for
everyday use [9]. To overcome this, several learning-based methods that estimate environment maps
directly from casually captured LDR images or videos have been proposed [15, 16, 33, 74]. However,
these methods typically depend on paired datasets of input images or videos and HDR environment
maps, leading to a chicken-and-egg problem: a large collection of HDR environment maps is needed
to train a model that aims to alleviate the need for acquiring such expensive data in the first place.
Recently, generative diffusion models have demonstrated strong capabilities in modeling complex
image distributions. DiffusionLight [45] demonstrated that pretrained text-to-image models encode
implicit knowledge of illumination, which can be cleverly extracted by inpainting a virtual chrome
ball into an image, generating plausible appearances under varying exposure settings. However,
∗

Work done during internship at Nvidia
† Joint Advising
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

