PLEIADES: Building Temporal Kernels with
Orthogonal Polynomials

Yan Ru Pei∗
NVIDIA Corporation
Santa Clara, CA 95051
yanrpei@gmail.com

Olivier Coenen∗
Independent Researcher
Encinitas, CA 92024
olivier@oliviercoenen.com

Abstract
We introduce a class of neural networks named PLEIADES (PoLynomial Expansion In Adaptive Distributed Event-based Systems), which contains temporal
convolution kernels generated from orthogonal polynomial basis functions. We
focus on interfacing these networks with event-based data to perform online spatiotemporal classification and detection with low latency. By virtue of using
structured temporal kernels and event-based data, we have the freedom to vary
the sample rate of the data along with the discretization step-size of the network
without additional finetuning. We experimented with three event-based benchmarks
and obtained state-of-the-art results on all three by large margins with significantly
smaller memory and compute costs. We achieved: 1) 99.59% accuracy with 192K
parameters on the DVS128 hand gesture recognition dataset and 100% with a
small additional output filter; 2) 99.58% test accuracy with 277K parameters on
the AIS 2024 eye tracking challenge; and 3) 0.556 mAP with 576k parameters on
the PROPHESEE 1 Megapixel Automotive Detection Dataset.

1

Introduction

Temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) [Lea et al., 2016] have been a staple for processing time
series data from speech enhancement [Pandey and Wang, 2019] to action segmentation [Lea et al.,
2017]. However, in most cases, the temporal kernel is very short (usually size of 3), making it difficult
for the network to capture long-range temporal correlations. The temporal kernels are intentionally
kept short, because keeping a long temporal kernel with a large number of trainable kernel values
usually leads to unstable training. In addition, they require a large amount of memory to store the
weights during inference. One popular solution for this has been to parameterize the temporal kernel
function with a simple multilayer perceptron (MLP), which promotes stability [Romero et al., 2021]
and more compressed parameters, but often significantly increases computational load.
Here, we introduce a method of parameterization of temporal kernels, named PLEIADES (PoLynomial Expansion In Adaptive Distributed Event-based Systems), that can in many cases reduce the
memory and computational costs compared to explicit convolutions. The design is fairly modular, and
can be used as a drop-in replacement for any 1D-like convolutional layers, allowing them to perform
long temporal convolutions effectively. In fact, we augment a previously proposed (1+2)D causal
spatiotemporal network [Pei et al., 2024] by replacing its temporal kernels with this new polynomial
parameterization. This new network architecture serves as the backbone for a wide range of online
spatiotemporal tasks ranging from action recognition to object detection.
Even though our network can be used for any spatiotemporal data (e.g. videos captured with
conventional cameras), we investigate in this work the performance of our network on event-based
∗

Work done while at Brainchip Inc.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

