AUTO D ISCOVERY:
Open-ended Scientific Discovery via Bayesian Surprise

Dhruv Agarwal∗α Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder∗β
Reece Adamson∗α Megha Chakravorty∗α Satvika Reddy Gavireddy∗α
Aditya Parasharγ Harshit Suranaβ Bhavana Dalvi Mishraβ
Andrew McCallumα
α

Ashish Sabharwalβ

Peter Clarkβ

University of Massachusetts Amherst β Allen Institute for AI γ Capital One
dagarwal@cs.umass.edu, bodhisattwam@allenai.org
∗

equal contributions

https://github.com/allenai/autodiscovery

Abstract
The promise of autonomous scientific discovery (ASD) hinges not only on answering questions, but also on knowing which questions to ask. Most recent works
in ASD explore the use of large language models (LLMs) in goal-driven settings,
relying on human-specified research questions to guide hypothesis generation.
However, scientific discovery may be accelerated further by allowing the AI system
to drive exploration by its own criteria. The few existing approaches in openended ASD select hypotheses based on diversity heuristics or subjective proxies
for human interestingness, but the former struggles to meaningfully navigate the
typically vast hypothesis space, and the latter suffers from imprecise definitions.
This paper presents AUTO D ISCOVERY—a method for open-ended ASD that instead drives scientific exploration using Bayesian surprise. Here, we quantify the
epistemic shift from the LLM’s prior beliefs about a hypothesis to its posterior
beliefs after gathering experimental results. To efficiently explore the space of
nested hypotheses, our method employs a Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) strategy
with progressive widening using surprisal as the reward function. We evaluate AU TO D ISCOVERY in the setting of data-driven discovery across 21 real-world datasets
spanning domains such as biology, economics, finance, and behavioral science.
Our results demonstrate that under a fixed budget, AUTO D ISCOVERY substantially
outperforms competitors by producing 5-29% more discoveries deemed surprising
by the LLM. Our human evaluation further reveals that two-thirds of discoveries
made by our system are surprising to domain experts as well, suggesting this is an
important step towards building open-ended ASD systems.

1

Introduction

There has been a surge of recent progress in using large language models (LLMs) for autonomous
scientific discovery (ASD) [Majumder et al., 2024b, Wang et al., 2024, Lu et al., 2024, Skarlinski
et al., 2024, Majumder et al., 2025, Gottweis et al., 2025, Huang et al., 2025]. Most prior works
operate within a “goal-driven” setting: given some data1 , the user is required to provide a research
1

A collection of datasets (data-driven discovery) or related papers (literature-driven discovery).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

