OSTAR: Optimized Statistical Text-classifier with
Adversarial Resistance
Yuhan Yao1,2 , Feifei Kou1,2∗ , Lei Shi3 , Xiao Yang1 , Zhongbao Zhang1 , Suguo Zhu4
Jiwei Zhang1 , Lirong Qiu1,2 , Haisheng Li5
1
School of Computer Science (National Pilot School of Software Engineering), BUPT
2
Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service, BUPT, Ministry of Education
3
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, CUC
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, HDU
5
School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, BTBU
*Correspondence: koufeifei000@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
The advancements in generative models and the real-world attack of machinegenerated text(MGT) create a demand for more robust detection methods. The
existing MGT detection methods for adversarial environments primarily consist
of manually designed statistical-based methods and fine-tuned classifier-based
approaches. Statistical-based methods extract intrinsic features but suffer from
rigid decision boundaries vulnerable to adaptive attacks, while fine-tuned classifiers
achieve outstanding performance at the cost of overfitting to superficial textual
feature. We argue that the key to detection in current adversarial environments
lies in how to extract intrinsic invariant features and ensure that the classifier
possesses dynamic adaptability. In that case, we propose OSTAR, a novel MGT
detection framework designed for adversarial environments which composed of a
statistical enhanced classifier and a Multi-Faceted Contrastive Learning(MFCL). In
the classifier aspect, our Multi-Dimensional Statistical Profiling (MDSP) module
extracts intrinsic difference between human and machine texts, complementing
classifiers with useful stable features. In the model optimization aspect, the MFCL
strategy enhances robustness by contrasting feature variations before and after
text attacks, jointly optimizing statistical feature mapping and baseline pre-trained
models. Experimental results on three public datasets under various adversarial
scenarios demonstrate that our framework outperforms existing MGT detection
methods, achieving state-of-the-art performance and robust against attacks.The
code is available at https://github.com/BUPT-SN/OSTAR.

1

Introduction

With the remarkable and rapid progress in Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2], the quality of
machine-generated text has gradually achieved a level that is increasingly comparable to humanauthored content. However, the widespread proliferation of such text substantially risks amplifying
the dissemination of unreliable or misleading information and diminishing [3, 4, 5] the creative
motivation of human authors. As clearly shown in Figure 1(a), which illustrates a real-world detection
scenario, MGT texts are often attacked to evade detection, critically challenging the robustness of
existing detection methods [6, 7, 8].Therefore, developing reliable detection methods that can robustly
distinguish MGT from human-authored content has become a crucial task in societal research.
As shown in Figure 1(b1) and Figure 1(b2), the current MGT detection methods for adversarial
environments can be categorized into two approaches: statistical-based methods and classifier-based
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

