Alignment of Large Language Models with
Constrained Learning

Botong Zhang
University of Pennsylvania
bzhang16@seas.upenn.edu

Shuo Li
Amazon
lishuo1@seas.upenn.edu

Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania
obastani@seas.upenn.edu

Ignacio Hounie
University of Pennsylvania
ihounie@seas.upenn.edu

Dongsheng Ding∗
University of Tennessee, Knoxville
dongshed@utk.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of computing an optimal large language model (LLM)
policy for the constrained alignment problem, where the goal is to maximize
a primary reward objective while satisfying constraints on secondary utilities.
Despite the popularity of Lagrangian-based LLM policy search in constrained
alignment, iterative primal-dual methods often fail to converge, and non-iterative
dual-based methods do not achieve optimality in the LLM parameter space. To
address these challenges, we employ Lagrangian duality to develop an iterative
dual-based alignment method that alternates between updating the LLM policy via
Lagrangian maximization and updating the dual variable via dual descent. In theory,
we characterize the primal-dual gap between the primal value in the distribution
space and the dual value in the LLM parameter space. We further quantify the
optimality gap of the learned LLM policies at near-optimal dual variables with
respect to both the objective and the constraint functions. These results prove that
dual-based alignment methods can find an optimal constrained LLM policy, up to
an LLM parametrization gap. We demonstrate the effectiveness and merits of our
approach through extensive experiments conducted on the PKU-SafeRLHF and
Anthropic HH-RLHF datasets.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), built upon the transformer architecture [43], have become a core
tool for a wide range of natural language processing tasks (e.g., code generation [17], translation [50],
robotics [37]). Central to these remarkable capabilities is the alignment problem, a critical challenge in
ensuring that LLMs reflect human expectations and values, such as truthfulness [25], honesty [48], and
unbiasedness [24]. Given the multidimensionality of human preferences [46, 45, 36], it has become
paramount to develop principled alignment methods that promote positive values while inhibiting
harmful content such as discrimination, misinformation, and violations of social morals [22, 9, 41].
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is a well-established approach to aligning
LLMs. RLHF aims to maximize a single reward model that is pretrained over a human preference
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

