metaTextGrad: Automatically optimizing language
model optimizers

Guowei Xu
Tsinghua University

Mert Yuksekgonul
Stanford University

Carlos Guestrin
Stanford University

James Zou
Stanford University

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used in learning algorithms, evaluations, and optimization tasks. Recent studies have shown that using LLM-based
optimizers to automatically optimize model prompts, demonstrations, predictions
themselves, or other components can significantly enhance the performance of AI
systems, as demonstrated by frameworks such as DSPy and TextGrad. However,
optimizers built on language models themselves are usually designed by humans
with manual design choices; optimizers themselves are not optimized. Moreover,
these optimizers are general purpose by design, to be useful to a broad audience,
and are not tailored for specific tasks. To address these challenges, we propose
metaTextGrad, which focuses on designing a meta-optimizer to further enhance
existing optimizers and align them to be good optimizers for a given task. Our
approach consists of two key components: a meta prompt optimizer and a meta
structure optimizer. The combination of these two significantly improves performance across multiple benchmarks, achieving an average absolute performance
improvement of up to 6% compared to the best baseline.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used in learning algorithms, optimization, and
evaluation tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, algorithms that incorporate LLMs often face significant
challenges. Firstly, many of these algorithms are still hand-crafted to a considerable extent, requiring
substantial human expertise and effort to design and implement effectively. Second, LLMs are notably
sensitive to the specific wording and structure of their instructions [6], making it tedious to improve
them effectively to be used in learning algorithms.
Many studies have explored prompt optimization approaches to automatically design better prompts
and enhance the performance of LLMs. For example, algorithms such as OPRO [3], MIPRO [7], and
TextGrad [1] have introduced optimizers based on LLMs that support automatic prompt optimization.
However, these optimizers are often fixed, applying the same optimization strategies with the
same optimizer prompts independent of the task, lacking a process to align with the specific task.
Importantly, these optimizers are general purpose by design, to be useful to many different downstream
tasks and be used by large user bases. Furthermore, different optimizers likely excel at different types
of optimization tasks; thus, achieving the best of all optimizers introduces either a choice to be made
among them or a strategy to ensemble them. There is no method to automatically design and improve
the optimizers to call based on the characteristics of a task.
In this work, we explore how to automatically optimize both the structure and the prompt of optimizers.
Specifically, we assume that all LLM calls are black-box calls, where the internal states of the LLM,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

