Adv-BMT: Bidirectional Motion Transformer for
Safety-Critical Traffic Scenario Generation

Yuxin Liu∗ Zhenghao Peng∗ Xuanhao Cui Bolei Zhou
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Scenario-based testing is essential for validating the performance of autonomous
driving (AD) systems. However, such testing is limited by the scarcity of longtailed, safety-critical scenarios in existing datasets collected in the real world. To
tackle the data issue, we propose the Adv-BMT framework, which augments realworld scenarios with diverse and realistic adversarial traffic interactions. The core
component of Adv-BMT is a bidirectional motion transformer (BMT) model to
perform inverse traffic motion predictions, which takes agent information in the
last time step of the scenario as input, and reconstruct the traffic in the inverse of
chronological order until the initial time step. The Adv-BMT framework is a twostaged pipeline: it first conducts adversarial initializations and then inverse motion
predictions. Different from previous work, we do not need any collision data for
pretraining, and are able to generate realistic and diverse collision interactions.
Our experimental results validate the quality of generated collision scenarios by
Adv-BMT: training in our augmented dataset would reduce episode collision rates
by 20%. Demo and code are available at https://metadriverse.github.io/
adv-bmt/.

1

Introduction

In recent years, autonomous driving (AD) agents have achieved unprecedented performance in
simulations [3, 9, 23]. However, handling corner traffic situations, especially collision scenarios,
remains a major challenge. A major cause is that safety-critical scenarios are missing from real-world
driving datasets due to high costs and risks of data collections. Without enough collision training
data, it is hard for the autonomous driving (AD) planners and prediction models to learn safe driving
in challenging and risky scenarios. This motivates the need for simulating different real-world
accidents. To generate realistic collision trajectories, previous works [15, 27, 18] leveraged learned
real-world traffic priors, and optimized predictions on collision-encouraging objectives. However,
our evaluations of these baselines reveal that the generated behaviors are insufficiently diverse and
yield a low collision generation rate.
We tackle this challenge by rethinking the motion prediction architecture itself. We introduce the
Bidirectional Motion Transformer (BMT), a new model that learns to predict both future and history
trajectories for all agents, conditioned on their current states. Similar to recent autoregressive traffic
forecasting models [24, 16, 30], BMT tokenizes continuous trajectories into discrete control actions.
Distinct from prior work, BMT employs a temporally reversible tokenization scheme that enables
unified forward (future) and reverse (history) motion prediction within the same framework.
We utilize BMT model into our Adv-BMT framework for realistic and diverse collision traffic generations from real-world driving data. While existing works follow a standard paradigm, which selects
a convenient neighbor agent and modifies the behavior to attack the ego agent, Adv-BMT inserts new
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

