HELM: Hyperbolic Large Language Models
via Mixture-of-Curvature Experts

Neil He⋆

Rishabh Anand⋆

Smita Krishnaswamy

Hiren Madhu

Leandros Tassiulas

Yale University, USA

⋆

Ali Maatouk

Menglin Yang† Rex Ying

Equal Contribution

Open-source code: github.com/Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/helm

Abstract
Frontier large language models (LLMs) have shown great success in text modeling
and generation tasks across domains. However, natural language exhibits inherent
semantic hierarchies and nuanced geometric structure, which current LLMs do not
capture completely owing to their reliance on Euclidean operations such as dotproducts and norms. Furthermore, recent studies have shown that not respecting
the underlying geometry of token embeddings leads to training instabilities and
degradation of generative capabilities. These findings suggest that shifting to
non-Euclidean geometries can better align language models with the underlying
geometry of text. We thus propose to operate fully in Hyperbolic space, known for
its expansive, scale-free, and low-distortion properties. To this end, we introduce
HELM, a family of HypErbolic Large Language Models, offering a geometric
rethinking of the Transformer-based LLM that addresses the representational
inflexibility, missing set of necessary operations, and poor scalability of existing
hyperbolic LMs. We additionally introduce a Mixture-of-Curvature Experts model,
HELM-M I CE, where each expert operates in a distinct curvature space to encode
more fine-grained geometric structure from text, as well as a dense model, HELMD. For HELM-M I CE, we further develop hyperbolic Multi-Head Latent Attention
(HMLA) for efficient, reduced-KV-cache training and inference. For both models,
we further develop essential hyperbolic equivalents of rotary positional encodings
and root mean square normalization. We are the first to train fully hyperbolic
LLMs at billion-parameter scale, and evaluate them on well-known benchmarks
such as MMLU and ARC, spanning STEM problem-solving, general knowledge,
and commonsense reasoning. Our results show consistent gains from our HELM
architectures – up to 4% – over popular Euclidean architectures used in LLaMA
and DeepSeek with superior semantic hierarchy modeling capabilities, highlighting
the efficacy and enhanced reasoning afforded by hyperbolic geometry in large-scale
language model pretraining.

1

Introduction

Contemporary Large Language Models (LLMs) [18, 42, 9, 1] fundamentally operate within Euclidean
space. This manifests in their reliance on Euclidean operations such as dot products and norms
applied to token embeddings. However, this architecture presents a potential mismatch with the
intrinsic structure of natural language data. Existing works have shown that textual data, particularly
token inputs to LLMs, exhibit an inherent semantic hierarchy [48, 47, 21, 35], thus requiring a
†

Correspondence Author; work done while at Yale University, USA.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

