REGen: Multimodal Retrieval-Embedded Generation
for Long-to-Short Video Editing

Weihan Xu1 Yimeng Ma1 Jingyue Huang2 Yang Li1
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick2 Julian McAuley2 Paul Pu Liang4
1

Wenye Ma3
Hao-Wen Dong5

Duke University 2 University of California San Diego 3 MBZUAI
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 5 University of Michigan
weihan.xu@duke.edu

Abstract
Short videos are an effective tool for promoting contents and improving knowledge
accessibility. While existing extractive video summarization methods struggle to
produce a coherent narrative, existing abstractive methods cannot ‘quote’ from
the input videos, i.e., inserting short video clips in their outputs. In this work, we
explore new video editing models for generating shorts that feature a coherent
narrative with embedded video insertions extracted from a long input video. We
propose a novel retrieval-embedded generation (REG) framework that allows a
large language model to quote multimodal resources while maintaining a coherent
narrative. Our proposed REGen system first generates the output story script
with quote placeholders using a finetuned large language model, and then uses a
multimodal retrieval model to replace the quote placeholders by selecting a video
clip that best supports the narrative from a pool of candidate quotable video clips.
We examine the proposed method on the task of documentary teaser generation,
where short interview insertions are commonly used to support the narrative of
a documentary. Our objective evaluations show that the proposed method can
effectively insert short video clips while maintaining a coherent narrative. In
a subjective survey, we show that our proposed method outperforms existing
abstractive and extractive approaches in terms of coherence, alignment, and realism
in documentary teaser generation.

1

Introduction

Generating shorts from long videos allows audiences to digest information in a more engaging way
and helps content creators promote their original contents. Unlike text or visual-only summaries,
short videos with visuals and audio are more engaging [1], accelerate comprehension [2], and improve
recommendation and search [3]. Existing approaches for producing shorts from long videos can be
categorized into extractive or abstractive methods. Extractive methods stitch together video clips
extracted from the input video [4–10], yet this may produce disjointed videos that do not together
convey a coherent story. In contrast, abstractive approaches synthesize new narratives [11] and even
new scenes [12], but these methods cannot insert extracted video clips from the input video to support
the generated narrative. Moreover, while recent retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) methods
can augment a large language model (LLM) with additional knowledge at inference time, these
methods cannot quote multimodal materials from external sources and embed the exact quotes into
their outputs, and they sometimes fabricate or misattribute content when faced with extended contexts
[13–15].
Crafting effective short videos requires both creating a coherent narrative and grounding it with
raw material extracts, especially for domains that necessitate strong factualness and reliability such
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

