Foresight: Adaptive Layer Reuse for Accelerated and
High-Quality Text-to-Video Generation

Muhammad Adnan∗
The University of British Columbia
adnan@ece.ubc.ca
Akhil Arunkumar
d-Matrix
aarunkumar@d-matrix.ai

Nithesh Kurella
d-Matrix
nitheshk@d-matrix.ai
Prashant J. Nair
The University of British Columbia
prashantnair@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) achieve state-of-the-art results in text-to-image,
text-to-video generation, and editing. However, their large model size and the
quadratic cost of spatial-temporal attention over multiple denoising steps make
video generation computationally expensive. Static caching mitigates this by
reusing features across fixed steps but fails to adapt to generation dynamics, leading
to suboptimal trade-offs between speed and quality.
We propose Foresight, an adaptive layer-reuse technique that reduces computational
redundancy across denoising steps while preserving baseline performance. Foresight dynamically identifies and reuses DiT block outputs for all layers across steps,
adapting to generation parameters such as resolution and denoising schedules to optimize efficiency. Applied to OpenSora, Latte, and CogVideoX, Foresight achieves
up to 1.63× end-to-end speedup, while maintaining video quality. The source code
of Foresight is available at https://github.com/STAR-Laboratory/foresight.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) [Bao et al., 2023, Peebles and Xie, 2023] are the state-of-the-art
architecture for text-to-image [Chen et al., 2024a] and text-to-video [Brooks et al., 2024, Genmo,
2024, Ma et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2024c] generation. By leveraging the scaling properties of selfattention [Vaswani et al., 2017], DiTs enable high-fidelity video synthesis. However, this comes at a
high computational cost. Self-attention has quadratic complexity O(L2 ) in the token length L, which
increases with both spatial resolution (more patches per frame) and temporal extent (more frames).
Combined with the tens of denoising steps in typical diffusion pipelines, this leads to prohibitive
inference latency for high-resolution or long-duration videos.
Inference latency in diffusion models is further increased by classifier-free guidance (CFG) [Ho and
Salimans, 2022] and full-precision weights. Techniques like pruning [Ma et al., 2023b], quantization [Lin et al., 2024b], distillation [Hsieh et al., 2023], and architectural optimizations [Li et al.,
2023b, Zhao et al., 2024c,a, Fang et al., 2023, Bolya and Hoffman, 2023] can reduce model size
and compute cost. However, they often require retraining or hardware-specific tuning, making them
impractical for deploying large, pretrained DiTs across diverse hardware environments.
Feature caching offers a complementary strategy for accelerating diffusion by reusing intermediate
activations across adjacent denoising steps. Early methods for U-Net models cache skip-connection
∗

A large part of this work was done while the author was interning with d-Matrix.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

