MLLM-For3D: Adapting Multimodal Large Language
Model for 3D Reasoning Segmentation

Jiaxin Huang1
1

Runnan Chen2,† Ziwen Li1
Mingming Gong1,3

MBZUAI

2

The University of Sydney

3

Zhengqing Gao1 Xiao He4
Tongliang Liu1,2,†
The University of Melbourne

4

Yandong Guo4

AI2Robotic

Abstract
Reasoning segmentation aims to segment target objects in complex scenes based
on human intent and spatial reasoning. While recent multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive 2D image reasoning segmentation,
adapting these capabilities to 3D scenes remains underexplored. In this paper,
we introduce MLLM-For3D, a simple yet effective framework that transfers
knowledge from 2D MLLMs to 3D scene understanding. Specifically, we utilize
MLLMs to generate multi-view pseudo-segmentation masks and corresponding
text embeddings, then unproject 2D masks into 3D space and align them with the
text embeddings. The primary challenge lies in the absence of 3D context and
spatial consistency across multiple views, causing the model to hallucinate objects
that do not exist and fail to target objects consistently. Training the 3D model with
such irrelevant objects leads to performance degradation. To address this, we first
filter irrelevant views using token attention. With these reliable pseudo-labels, we
develop a token-for-Query approach for multimodal semantic alignment, enabling
consistent identification of the same object across different views. Moreover, we
introduce a spatial consistency strategy to enforce that segmentation masks remain
coherent in the 3D space, effectively capturing the geometry of the scene. Extensive
evaluations of various challenging indoor scene benchmarks demonstrate that,
even without labeled 3D training data, MLLM-For3D outperforms existing 3D
reasoning segmentation methods, effectively interpreting user intent, understanding
3D scenes, and reasoning about spatial relationships.

1

Introduction

Understanding user intent and reasoning about the 3D spatial context are crucial for real-world vision
applications [38, 39, 31, 43, 58], including embodied AI, autonomous driving, and augmented/virtual
reality. Recent advances in 3D scene understanding, particularly in multimodal learning [20, 69, 22,
7, 21, 46, 9, 16], have spurred the development of 3D point cloud-based Large Language Models
(3D-LLMs). These methods allow systems to infer implicit goals, localize objects in complex
environments, and interact seamlessly with users. Compared to conventional segmentation, reasoning
segmentation poses a more complex challenge, requiring deeper levels of semantic understanding
and the ability to handle underspecified or context-dependent queries.
The concept of reasoning segmentation was first introduced in the 2D domain by LISA [36], which
employed the mask-as-embedding paradigm to fine-tune large language models using abundant
⟨2D, 3D⟩ paired data. Based on its success in 2D domains, initial attempts have been made to adapt
this paradigm to 3D tasks [19, 23, 30]. However, these approaches have the prohibitive cost of
generating high-quality pairs ⟨3D, text⟩, which often involve labor intensive manual annotation or
†
‡

Corresponding authors
Code available at: https://github.com/tmllab/2025_NeurIPS_MLLM-For3D

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

