SATURN: SAT-based Reinforcement Learning to
Unleash Language Model Reasoning

Huanyu Liu
Peking University
huanyuliu@stu.pku.edu.cn

Hao Zhu
Peking University
zhuhao@stu.pku.edu.cn

Ge Li∗
Peking University
lige@pku.edu.cn

Kechi Zhang
Peking University
zhangkechi@pku.edu.cn

Jia Li
Tsinghua University
jia_li@mail
.tsinghua.edu.cn
Yihong Dong
Peking University
dongyh@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
How to design reinforcement learning (RL) tasks that effectively unleash the
reasoning capability of large language models (LLMs) remains an open question.
Existing RL tasks (e.g., math, programming, and constructing reasoning tasks)
face three key limitations: ❶ Scalability. They rely heavily on human annotation
or expensive LLM synthesis to generate sufficient training data. ❷ Verifiability.
LLMs’ outputs are hard to verify automatically and reliably. ❸ Controllable
Difficulty. Most tasks lack fine-grained difficulty control, making it challenging to
train LLMs from easy to hard and progressively develop reasoning capability.
To address these limitations, we propose SATURN, a SAT-based RL framework
that uses Boolean Satisfiability (SAT) problems to train and evaluate LLM reasoning. SATURN enables scalable task construction, rule-based verification, and
precise difficulty control. SATURN designs a curriculum learning pipeline that
continuously improves LLMs’ reasoning capability by constructing SAT tasks
of increasing difficulty and training LLMs from easy to hard. To ensure stable
training, we design a principled mechanism to control difficulty transitions.
We introduce SATURN-2.6k, a dataset of 2,660 SAT problems with varying
difficulty. It supports the evaluation of how LLM reasoning changes with problem
difficulty. We apply SATURN to DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen and obtain SATURN1.5B and SATURN-7B. We achieve several notable results: ❶ On SAT problems,
SATURN-1.5B and SATURN-7B achieve average pass@3 improvements of +14.0
and +28.1, respectively. ❷ On math and programming tasks, SATURN-1.5B
and SATURN-7B improve average scores by +4.9 and +1.8 on benchmarks (e.g.,
AIME, LiveCodeBench). ❸ Compared to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) approach in
constructing RL tasks, SATURN achieves further improvements of +8.8%. We
release the source code, data, and models to support future research at https:
//github.com/gtxygyzb/Saturn-code.

1

Introduction

Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has become a promising paradigm for unleashing the reasoning
capability of large language models (LLMs), particularly in math, programming, and logical reasoning
(e.g., OpenAI-o1 [21], DeepSeek-R1 [11], Kimi-k1.5 [37]). During the RL training process, the
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

