Diffusion-Guided Graph Data Augmentation

Maria Marrium1 , Arif Mahmood1 , Muhmmad Haris Khan2 ,
Muhammad Saad Shakeel3 , Wenxiong Kang3
1

Information Technology Univeristy, Lahore, Pakistan
2
MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
South China University of Technology, Guangdong, China
{phdcs22002, arif.mahmood}@itu.edu.pk, muhammad.haris@mbzuai.ac.ae,
{saadshakeel, auwxkang}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success in a wide range
of applications. However, when trained on limited or low-diversity datasets, GNNs
are prone to overfitting and memorization, which impacts their generalization. To
address this, graph data augmentation (GDA) has become a crucial task to enhance
the performance and generalization of GNNs. Traditional GDA methods employ
simple transformations that result in limited performance gains. Although recent
diffusion-based augmentation methods offer improved results, they are sparse,
task-specific, and constrained by class labels. In this work, we propose a more
general and effective diffusion-based GDA framework that is task-agnostic and
label-free. For better training stability and reduced computational cost, we employ a graph variational auto-encoder (GVAE) to learn a compact latent graph
representation. A diffusion model is used in the learned latent space to generate
both consistent and diverse augmentations. For a fixed augmentation budget, our
algorithm selects a subset of samples that would benefit the most from the augmentation. To further improve performance, we also perform test-time augmentation,
leveraged by the label-free nature of our method. Thanks to the efficient utilization of GVAE and latent diffusion, our algorithm significantly enhances machine
learning safety measures, including calibration, robustness to corruptions, and
prediction consistency. Moreover, our method has shown improved robustness
against four types of adversarial attacks and achieves better generalization performance. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we compare
it with 30 existing methods on 12 benchmark datasets across node classification,
link prediction, and graph classification in various learning settings, including
semi-supervised, supervised, and long-tailed data distributions. Code is available
at https://github.com/MariaMarrium/D-GDA.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success across diverse domains, such as
social networks [29, 16], recommendation systems [77, 57], and molecular property prediction [4, 53].
However, their expressive power makes them prone to overfitting and memorization, particularly
when trained on limited, imbalanced, or low-diversity graph datasets [54, 90, 36, 7, 87]. These
limitations undermine their generalization to diverse test scenarios, posing a significant challenge
for real-world applications [92]. To address this challenge, Graph Data Augmentation (GDA) has
emerged as a promising strategy to enhance the generalization of GNNs by improving the diversity
of training data [88, 45]. Traditional GDA methods are based on static transformations, such as
edge modifications [7, 17], node feature alterations [31, 84], or subgraph manipulations [2, 72].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

