GUI Exploration Lab: Enhancing Screen
Navigation in Agents via
Multi-Turn Reinforcement Learning

Haolong Yan1∗ Yeqing Shen2∗ Xin Huang3 Jia Wang2 Kaijun Tan2
Zhixuan Liang3 Hongxin Li4 Zheng Ge2 Osamu Yoshie3
Si Li1† Xiangyu Zhang2 Daxin Jiang2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
StepFun 3 Waseda University
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
With the rapid development of Large Vision Language Models, the focus of Graphical User Interface (GUI) agent tasks shifts from single-screen tasks to complex
screen navigation challenges. However, real-world GUI environments, such as PC
software and mobile Apps, are often complex and proprietary, making it difficult
to obtain the comprehensive environment information needed for agent training
and evaluation. This limitation hinders systematic investigation and benchmarking
of agent navigation capabilities. To address this limitation, we introduce GUI Exploration Lab, a simulation environment engine for GUI agent navigation research
that enables flexible definition and composition of screens, icons, and navigation
graphs, while providing full access to environment information for comprehensive agent training and evaluation. Through extensive experiments, we find that
supervised fine-tuning enables effective memorization of fundamental knowledge,
serving as a crucial foundation for subsequent training. Building on this, singleturn reinforcement learning further enhances generalization to unseen scenarios.
Finally, multi-turn reinforcement learning encourages the development of exploration strategies through interactive trial and error, leading to further improvements
in screen navigation performance. We validate our methods on both static and
interactive benchmarks, demonstrating that our findings generalize effectively to
real-world scenarios. These findings demonstrate the advantages of reinforcement
learning approaches in GUI navigation and offer practical guidance for building
more capable and generalizable GUI agents.

1

Introduction

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [2, 29, 1, 38] drives significant advances in the development
of GUI agents [31, 44, 28]. At a high level, GUI agent tasks [35, 34, 12, 45, 46] fall into two main
categories: single-screen task and screen navigation. For example, the task “Order an iPad from
the Apple website with GUI-Agent engraving” can be decomposed into subtasks such as singlescreen task (e.g., entering the required information to place an order) and screen navigation (e.g.,
navigating to the iPad purchase page). As the grounding capabilities of current mainstream LVLMs
[13, 43, 31, 28, 18] continue to improve, tasks such as form completion and target icon selection no
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

