Knowledge Distillation Detection
for Open-weights Models

Qin Shi∗1 , Amber Yijia Zheng∗2 , Qifan Song1 , Raymond A. Yeh2
1

Department of Statistics, Purdue University
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
{shi622, zheng709, qfsong, rayyeh}@purdue.edu
∗
Equal contribution.
2

Abstract
We propose the task of knowledge distillation detection, which aims to determine
whether a student model has been distilled from a given teacher, under a practical setting where only the student’s weights and the teacher’s API are available.
This problem is motivated by growing concerns about model provenance and
unauthorized replication through distillation. To address this task, we introduce a
model-agnostic framework that combines data-free input synthesis and statistical
score computation for detecting distillation. Our approach is applicable to both
classification and generative models. Experiments on diverse architectures for
image classification and text-to-image generation show that our method improves
detection accuracy over the strongest baselines by 59.6% on CIFAR-10, 71.2%
on ImageNet, and 20.0% for text-to-image generation. The code is available
at https://github.com/shqii1j/distillation_detection.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation [20] transfers learned knowledge from a larger teacher model to a smaller
student model to reduce the computational and storage requirements. As opposed to directly training
the smaller model from scratch alone, knowledge distillation leads to improved generalization of the
student model and has found success in several areas, including image classification [8, 20, 35, 43, 63],
large language models [16, 40, 49], and text-to-image generation [23, 28, 45, 56].
While the original intent of knowledge distillation is to build efficient models, distillation techniques
lead to an unintended consequence that one could potentially clone proprietary teacher models
without permission. This raises concerns about the violation of intellectual property and how to
attribute the source of machine learning models [33, 41, 50]. In this work, we aim to study whether it
is possible to detect if a model has been distilled from a given teacher model, in short, knowledge
distillation detection. Specifically, we consider the realistic scenario of detecting distillation for
open-weight student models, without making any assumptions about the distillation method, training
data, or requiring the weights of the teacher model.
We also consider formulating the problem in a multiple-choice setting: given a student model and
a set of candidate teachers, predict which teacher was used for distillation. This setting has two
advantages for the ease of experiment setup. First, it avoids the need to calibrate an absolute threshold,
as the decision is based on comparing across candidates, which is more common in real-world cases.
Second, it produces results that are easier to interpret, as one can directly identify the most likely
teacher. Note, the detection (binary) setting can be recovered from this formulation by applying a
calibrated score function and threshold.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

