Scaling Diffusion Transformers Efficiently via µP

Chenyu Zheng1,2,3∗, Xinyu Zhang4 , Rongzhen Wang1,2,3 , Wei Huang5 , Zhi Tian4 ,
Weilin Huang4 , Jun Zhu6 , Chongxuan Li1,2,3†
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
3
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE
4
ByteDance Seed 5 RIKEN AIP 6 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers have emerged as the foundation for vision generative models, but their scalability is limited by the high cost of hyperparameter (HP) tuning
at large scales. Recently, Maximal Update Parametrization (µP) was proposed for
vanilla Transformers, which enables stable HP transfer from small to large language models, and dramatically reduces tuning costs. However, it remains unclear
whether µP of vanilla Transformers extends to diffusion Transformers, which differ
architecturally and objectively. In this work, we generalize standard µP to diffusion
Transformers and validate its effectiveness through large-scale experiments. First,
we rigorously prove that µP of mainstream diffusion Transformers, including DiT,
U-ViT, PixArt-α, and MMDiT, aligns with that of the vanilla Transformer, enabling
the direct application of existing µP methodologies. Leveraging this result, we
systematically demonstrate that DiT-µP enjoys robust HP transferability. Notably,
DiT-XL-2-µP with transferred learning rate achieves 2.9× faster convergence than
the original DiT-XL-2. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of µP on text-to-image
generation by scaling PixArt-α from 0.04B to 0.61B and MMDiT from 0.18B to
18B. In both cases, models under µP outperform their respective baselines while
requiring small tuning cost—only 5.5% of one training run for PixArt-α and 3%
of consumption by human experts for MMDiT-18B. These results establish µP as
a principled and efficient framework for scaling diffusion Transformers.

1

Introduction

Owing to its generality and scalability, diffusion Transformers [52; 1] have become the backbone
of modern vision generation models, with widespread applications in various tasks such as image
generation [55; 3; 16; 35; 20] and video generation [6; 81; 62; 2; 77]. As datasets grow and
task complexity increases, further scaling of diffusion Transformers has become inevitable and
is attracting increasing attention [41; 40; 29; 17; 75]. However, as model sizes reach billions of
parameters, hyperparameter (HP) tuning becomes prohibitively expensive, often hindering the model
from achieving its full potential. This underscores the urgent need for a principled approach to
efficiently identify the optimal HPs when scaling diffusion Transformers.
Maximal Update Parametrization (µP) [73; 70; 72] was recently proposed as a promising solution to
the HP selection problem for large-scale vanilla Transformer [61]. It stabilizes optimal HPs across
different model widths, enabling direct transfer of HPs searched from small models to large models
(a.k.a., µTransfer) and significantly reducing tuning costs at scale. Due to its strong transferability,
µP has been applied to the pretraining of large language models (LLMs) [73; 14; 28; 43; 42; 82].
∗
†

Work done during an internship at ByteDance Seed.
Correspondence to Chongxuan Li <chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

