Train with Perturbation, Infer after Merging:
A Two-Stage Framework for Continual Learning

Haomiao Qiu1,2 , Miao Zhang1∗ , Ziyue Qiao2∗ , Liqiang Nie1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
Great Bay University
24B951058@stu.hit.edu.cn, zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn, zyqiao@gbu.edu.cn,
nieliqiang@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) aims to enable models to continuously acquire new
knowledge from a sequence of tasks with avoiding the forgetting of learned information. However, existing CL methods only rely on the parameters of the most
recent task for inference, which makes them susceptible to catastrophic forgetting.
Inspired by the recent success of model merging techniques, we propose Perturband-Merge (P&M), a novel continual learning framework that integrates model
merging into the CL paradigm to mitigate forgetting. Specifically, after training
on each task, P&M constructs a new model by forming a convex combination
of the previous model and the newly trained task-specific model. Through theoretical analysis, We minimize the total loss increase across all tasks and derive a
closed-form solution for the merging coefficient under mild assumptions. To further
improve the performance of the merged model, we observe that the degradation
introduced during merging can be alleviated by a regularization term composed
of the task vector and the Hessian matrix of the loss function. Interestingly, we
show that this term can be efficiently approximated using second-order symmetric finite differences, and a stochastic perturbation strategy along the task vector
direction is accordingly devised which incurs no additional forward or backward
passes while providing an effective approximation of the regularization term. Finally, we combine P&M with LoRA, a parameter-efficient fine-tuning method, to
reduce memory overhead. Our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on several continual learning benchmark datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/qhmiao/P-M-for-Continual-Learning.

1

Introduction

Continual Learning (CL) aims to enable models to continuously acquire new knowledge from a
sequence of tasks while retaining previously learned information [1]. In many real-world applications,
data arrives in a streaming fashion, and due to constraints such as privacy, storage, or computational
resources, models are typically unable to retain or revisit earlier task data. This setting poses a
fundamental challenge: how can a model continually adapt to new tasks while maintaining good
performance on previous ones? Although considerable progress has been made through methods
such as parameter isolation [2, 3, 4], regularization [5, 6, 7, 8], and experience replay [9, 10, 11, 12],
catastrophic forgetting remains a core issue in CL.
In parallel, the rise of large-scale pretrained models has spurred interest in model merging as a simple
yet effective strategy for post-training enhancement. Prior studies have shown that independently
∗

Co-corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

