Optimal Control for Transformer Architectures:
Enhancing Generalization, Robustness and Efficiency

Kelvin Kan
Department of Mathematics
UCLA
kelvin.kan@math.ucla.edu
Benjamin J. Zhang
School of Data Science and Society
UNC Chapel Hill
bjz@unc.edu

Xingjian Li
Oden Institute
University of Texas at Austin
xingjian.li@austin.utexas.edu
Tuhin Sahai
SRI International
tuhin.sahai@sri.com

Stanley Osher
Department of Mathematics
UCLA
sjo@math.ucla.edu

Markos A. Katsoulakis
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Massachusetts Amherst
markos@umass.edu

Abstract
We study Transformers through the perspective of optimal control theory, using
tools from continuous-time formulations to derive actionable insights into training
and architecture design. This framework improves the performance of existing
Transformer models while providing desirable theoretical guarantees, including
generalization and robustness. Our framework is designed to be plug-and-play,
enabling seamless integration with established Transformer models and requiring
only slight changes to the implementation. We conduct seven extensive experiments
on tasks motivated by text generation, sentiment analysis, image classification, and
point cloud classification. Experimental results show that the framework improves
the test performance of the baselines, while being more parameter-efficient. On
character-level text generation with nanoGPT, our framework achieves a 46%
reduction in final test loss while using 42% fewer parameters. On GPT-2, our
framework achieves a 9.3% reduction in final test loss, demonstrating scalability
to larger models. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that applies
optimal control theory to both the training and architecture of Transformers. It
offers a new foundation for systematic, theory-driven improvements and moves
beyond costly trial-and-error approaches.

1

Introduction

Transformers have achieved state-of-the-art performance in various applications, including natural
language processing [69, 83], computer vision [22], program synthesis [14], computational biology [43], speech processing [4], reinforcement learning [13, 57], operator learning [56, 96] and
climate modeling [31, 60, 61].
The popularity of Transformers has led to myriad architectural variants [17, 19, 87], each developed to
exhibit certain advantages. Practitioners, however, often discover effective Transformer architectures
through a trial-and-error approach. The objective function used to train Transformers admits a natural
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

