Blameless Users in a Clean Room:
Defining Copyright Protection for Generative Models

Aloni Cohen
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
aloni@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Are there any conditions under which a generative model’s outputs are guaranteed
not to infringe the copyrights of its training data? This is the question of “provable
copyright protection” first posed in [VKB23]. They define near access-freeness
(NAF) and propose it as sufficient for protection. This paper revisits the question
and establishes new foundations for provable copyright protection—foundations
that are firmer both technically and legally. First, we show that NAF alone does
not prevent infringement. In fact, NAF models can enable verbatim copying, a
blatant failure of copy protection that we dub being tainted. Then, we introduce
our blameless copy protection framework for defining meaningful guarantees, and
instantiate it with clean-room copy protection. Clean-room copy protection allows
a user to control their risk of copying by behaving in a way that is unlikely to copy
in a counterfactual “clean-room setting.” Finally, we formalize a common intuition
about differential privacy and copyright by proving that DP implies clean-room
copy protection when the dataset is golden, a copyright deduplication requirement.

1

Introduction

A user of a generative model is worried about unwitting copyright infringement. She is worried that
the model’s outputs might resemble copyrighted works in the training data through no fault of her
own, exposing her to legal liability. The user would like some assurance that this won’t happen. We
ask: What assurances can the model provider give, and under what conditions?
Ideally, the generative model would never reproduce copyrighted work. That’s unrealistic. Typical
models can be prompted to generate copyrighted output: print the following
[VKB23,
LCG24]. It’s also unnecessary. In the example, copying is clearly the user’s fault. Instead, we should
protect blameless users from inadvertent infringement. If the model reproduces copyrighted work,
it should be because the user induced it to (or was very unlucky). This guarantee should satisfy a
careful, honest user. As long as the user’s use of the model does not itself cause the infringement,
consciously or subconsciously, then the result is unlikely to infringe.
Our goal is to formalize such a guarantee—in a mathematically and legally rigorous way—and to
study its feasibility. We’re after “provable copyright protection” at deployment time, first studied by
Vyas, Kakade, and Barak [VKB23]. They propose near access-freeness (NAF) as an answer.
Our contributions This paper establishes new foundations for provable copyright protection—
foundations that are firmer both mathematically and legally than prior work.
1. We prove that near access-free (NAF) models can enable verbatim copying. NAF is the first
(and only other) attempt at a mathematical definition intended to offer “provable copyright protection”
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

