Better Estimation of the Kullback–Leibler Divergence
Between Language Models

Afra Amini

Tim Vieira
Ryan Cotterell
ETH Zürich
{afra.amini, ryan.cotterell}@inf.ethz.ch
tim.f.vieira@gmail.com

Abstract
Estimating the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between language models has
many applications, e.g., reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF),
interpretability, and knowledge distillation. However, computing the exact
KL divergence between two arbitrary language models is intractable. Thus,
practitioners often resort to sampling-based estimators. While it is easy to fashion
a simple Monte Carlo (MC) estimator that provides an unbiased estimate of the
KL divergence between language models, this estimator notoriously suffers from
high variance and can even result in a negative estimate of the KL divergence, a
non-negative quantity. In this paper, we introduce a Rao–Blackwellized estimator
that is unbiased and provably has variance less than or equal to that of the standard
Monte Carlo estimator. In an empirical study on sentiment-controlled fine-tuning,
we show that our estimator provides more stable KL estimates and reduces
variance substantially. Additionally, we derive an analogous Rao–Blackwellized
estimator of the gradient of the KL divergence, which leads to more stable training
and produces models that more frequently appear on the Pareto frontier of reward
vs. KL compared to the ones trained with the MC estimator of the gradient.
https://github.com/rycolab/kl-rb

1

Introduction

The Kullback–Leibler [KL; 19] divergence is a statistical divergence that quantifies how one probability distribution differs from another. Measuring the KL divergence between probability distributions
is a well-established problem that has been studied extensively in the statistics literature [7, 12, inter
alia]. In some special cases, e.g., in the case that we wish to measure the KL divergence between two
Gaussian measures, the KL divergence has an analytical solution. However, in the general case, exact
computation of the KL divergence is not analytically tractable or approximable with an efficient algorithm [14]. This paper treats the case of computing the KL divergence between two language models
(LMs), a fundamental task in natural language processing with numerous practical applications.
The KL divergence plays a central role across multiple applications. In reinforcement learning from
human feedback [RLHF; 6, 26, 35], it is used as a regularization term to constrain the fine-tuned
model from drifting too far from a reference model, preserving fluency and preventing reward overoptimization. In interpretability research, KL divergence quantifies how a specific prompt shifts the
model distribution by comparing the model’s distributions before and after controlled interventions
[9, 27, 36]. As an evaluation metric, KL divergence is used to assess how well language models
approximate target distributions [4, 37]. In knowledge distillation, KL divergence is minimized to
align a student model with a teacher model [1].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

