A Minimalistic Unified Framework for Incremental
Learning across Image Restoration Tasks

Xiaoxuan Gong
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, HUST
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan, China
gongxiaoxuan286@gmail.com
Jie Ma*
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, HUST
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan, China
majie@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing research in low-level vision has shifted its focus from "one-by-one"
task-specific methods to "all-in-one" multi-task unified architectures. However,
current all-in-one image restoration approaches primarily aim to improve overall
performance across a limited number of tasks. In contrast, how to incrementally
add new image restoration capabilities on top of an existing model — that is, taskincremental learning — has been largely unexplored. To fill this research gap, we
propose a minimalistic and universal paradigm for task-incremental learning called
MINI. It addresses the problem of parameter interference across different tasks
through a simple yet effective mechanism, enabling nearly forgetting-free taskincremental learning. Specifically, we design a special meta-convolution called
MINIconv, which generates parameters solely through lightweight embeddings
instead of complex convolutional networks or MLPs. This not only significantly
reduces the number of parameters and computational overhead but also achieves
complete parameter isolation across different tasks. Moreover, MINIconv can
be seamlessly integrated as a plug-and-play replacement for any convolutional
layer within existing backbone networks, endowing them with incremental learning
capabilities and boosting their multi-task overall performance. Therefore, our
method is highly generalizable. Finally, we demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance compared to existing incremental learning approaches
across five common image restoration tasks. Moreover, the near forgetting-free
nature of our method makes it highly competitive even against all-in-one image
restoration methods trained under joint learning. Our code is available at https:
//github.com.

1

Introduction

The core challenge of all-in-one(AIO) image restoration lies in the need to accomplish diverse feature
extraction and image manipulation tasks using a single set of fixed parameters, which inevitably leads
to parameter conflicts between different tasks. To alleviate this issue, most existing methods introduce
additional information (prompts) to guide the model in handling different types of degradations (as
Figure 1a), such as [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Alternatively, a more recent trend is to leverage the priors from large39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

