3D Gaussian Splatting based Scene-independent
Camera Relocalization with Unidirectional and
Bidirectional Feature Fusion
Junyi Wang1,2
junyiwang@sdu.edu.cn

Yuze Wang2
wangyuze19980709@163.com

Meng Wang2
wangm05@buaa.edu.cn

Wantong Duan2
wantongd@buaa.edu.cn

Yue Qi2,3∗
qy@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual localization is a critical component across various domains. The recent
emergence of novel scene representations, such as 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D GS),
introduces new opportunities for advancing localization pipelines. In this paper,
we propose a novel 3D GS-based framework for RGB based, scene-independent
camera relocalization, with three main contributions. First, we design a two-stage
pipeline with fully exploiting 3D GS. The pipeline consists of an initial stage,
which utilizes 2D-3D correspondences between image pixels and 3D Gaussians,
followed by pose refinement using the rendered image by 3D GS. Second, we
introduce a 3D GS based Relocalization Network, termed GS-RelocNet, to establish
correspondences for initial camera pose estimation. Additionally, we present a
refinement network that further optimizes the camera pose. Third, we propose a
unidirectional 2D-3D feature fusion module and a bidirectional image feature fusion
module, integrated into GS-RelocNet and the refinement network, respectively,
to enhance feature sharing across the two stages. Experimental results on public
7 Scenes, Cambridge Landmarks, TUM RGB-D and Bonn demonstrate state-ofthe-art performance. Furthermore, the beneficial effects of the two feature fusion
modules and pose refinement are also highlighted. In summary, we believe that
the proposed framework can be a novel universal localization pipeline for further
research.

1

Introduction

Visual localization is considered a fundamental research problem in computer vision and is applied
across a variety of scenarios, including Augmented Reality (AR), Mixed Reality (MR), robotics, and
autonomous driving Wang et al. (2024c); Jia et al. (2024); Zhu et al. (2024). The primary function of
a localization algorithm is to estimate the 6-DoF (Degrees of Freedom) camera pose within a target
environment.
As current works cover, two main types of methods are investigated to achieve robust localization
performance, including feature matching and geometry regression. Specially, feature matching
methods employ either hand-crafted Liu et al. (2017) or learned features Sun et al. (2021) to establish
pixel correspondences for localization, while geometry regression approaches train the deep network
∗
1. School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, Shandong, China.
2. State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China.
3. Qingdao Research Institute of Beihang University, Qingdao, Shandong, China.
Corresponding Author: Yue Qi.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

