Mechanistic Interpretability of RNNs emulating
Hidden Markov Models
Elia Torre

Michele Viscione

Lucas Pompe

Benjamin F. Grewe

Valerio Mante

Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich & ETH Zurich

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) provide a powerful approach in neuroscience
to infer latent dynamics in neural populations and to generate hypotheses about
the neural computations underlying behavior. However, past work has focused on
relatively simple, input-driven, and largely deterministic behaviors - little is known
about the mechanisms that would allow RNNs to generate the richer, spontaneous,
and potentially stochastic behaviors observed in natural settings. Modeling with
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) has revealed a segmentation of natural behaviors into discrete latent states with stochastic transitions between them, a type of
dynamics that may appear at odds with the continuous state spaces implemented
by RNNs. Here we first show that RNNs can replicate HMM emission statistics
and then reverse-engineer the trained networks to uncover the mechanisms they
implement. In the absence of inputs, the activity of trained RNNs collapses towards
a single fixed point. When driven by stochastic input, trajectories instead exhibit
noise-sustained dynamics along closed orbits. Rotation along these orbits modulates the emission probabilities and is governed by transitions between regions
of slow, noise-driven dynamics connected by fast, deterministic transitions. The
trained RNNs develop highly structured connectivity, with a small set of “kick
neurons” initiating transitions between these regions. This mechanism emerges
during training as the network shifts into a regime of stochastic resonance, enabling
it to perform probabilistic computations. Analyses across multiple HMM architectures — fully connected, cyclic, and linear-chain — reveal that this solution
generalizes through the modular reuse of the same dynamical motif, suggesting
a compositional principle by which RNNs can emulate complex discrete latent
dynamics. Code available at https://github.com/EliaTorre/hmmrnn.

1

Introduction

Modern large-scale electrophysiology and imaging techniques provide access to the simultaneous
activity of thousands of neurons in freely behaving animals, revealing the population-level dynamics
underlying perception, cognition, and movement [39, 18, 4, 3, 19, 40]. In parallel to advances in
neural recordings, it has become possible to obtain quantitative descriptions of unconstrained, natural
behaviors across many timescales [45]. The combination of these techniques holds great promise in
unlocking the neural computations underlying behavior [7].
Machine learning is critical to interpret and link the high-dimensional neural and behavioral data
produced by modern neuroscience experiments. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) can capture
unconstrained, natural behaviors and decompose them into sequences of elemental motifs [45].
However, their discrete state representation may oversimplify the potentially continuous nature of
neural processes. On the other hand, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) provide a powerful approach
to model the dynamics of large neural populations and to generate hypotheses about the underlying
computations [10, 47] . Despite this potential, RNNs are primarily used to model highly constrained
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

