Last Iterate Convergence
in Monotone Mean Field Games
Noboru Isobe
RIKEN AIP
Tokyo, Japan
noboru.isobe@riken.jp

Kenshi Abe
CyberAgent
Tokyo, Japan
abe_kenshi@cyberagent.co.jp

Kaito Ariu
CyberAgent
Tokyo, Japan
kaito_ariu@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract
In the Lasry–Lions framework, Mean-Field Games (MFGs) model interactions
among an infinite number of agents. However, existing algorithms either require
strict monotonicity or only guarantee the convergence of averaged iterates, as
in Fictitious Play in continuous time. We address this gap with the following
theoretical result. First, we prove that the last-iterated policy of a proximal-point
(PP) update with KL regularization converges to an equilibrium of MFG under
non-strict monotonicity. Second, we see that each PP update is equivalent to finding
the equilibria of a KL-regularized MFG. We then prove that this equilibrium can
be found using Mirror Descent (MD) with an exponential last-iterate convergence
rate. Building on these insights, we propose the Approximate Proximal-Point (APP)
algorithm, which approximately implements the PP update via a small number of
MD steps. Numerical experiments on standard benchmarks confirm that the APP
algorithm reliably converges to the unregularized mean-field equilibrium without
time-averaging.

1

Introduction

Mean Field Games (MFGs) provide a simple and powerful framework for approximating the behavior
of large populations of interacting agents. Formulated initially by Lasry and Lions (2007) and M.
Huang et al. (2006), MFGs model the collective behavior of homogeneous agents in continuous time
and state settings using partial differential equations (Cardaliaguet and Hadikhanloo 2017; Lavigne
and Pfeiffer 2023; Inoue et al. 2023). The formulation of MFGs using Markov decision processes
(MDPs) in Bertsekas and Shreve (1978) and Puterman (1994) has enabled the study of discrete-time
and discrete-state models (Gomes et al. 2010).
In this context, a player’s policy π, i.e., a probability distribution over actions, induces the so-called
mean field µ. This mean field µ—namely, the distribution of all players’ states—then affects both
the state-transition dynamics and the rewards received by every agent. This simple formulation has
broadened the applicability of MFGs to Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) (Yang et al.
2018; Guo et al. 2019; Angiuli et al. 2022; Zeman et al. 2023; Angiuli et al. 2024). Moreover, it has
become possible to capture interactions among heterogeneous agents (Gao and Caines 2017; Caines
and M. Huang 2019).
The applicability of MFGs to MARL drives research into the theoretical aspects of numerical
algorithms for MFGs. Under fairly general assumptions, the problem of finding an equilibrium
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

