Precise Diffusion Inversion: Towards Novel Samples
and Few-Step Models

Jing Zuo Luoping Cui Chuang Zhu Yonggang Qi #
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
zuoj0723@gmail.com, {lpcui,czhu,qiyg}@bupt.edu.cn
# Corresponding author

Abstract
The diffusion inversion problem seeks to recover the latent generative trajectory
of a diffusion model given a real image. Faithful inversion is critical for ensuring
consistency in diffusion-based image editing. Prior works formulate this task as
a fixed-point problem and solve it using numerical methods. However, achieving
both accuracy and efficiency remains challenging, especially for few-step models
and novel samples. In this paper, we propose PreciseInv, a general-purpose testtime optimization framework that enables fast and faithful inversion in as few as
two inference steps. Unlike root-finding methods, we reformulate inversion as
a learning problem and introduce a dynamic programming-inspired strategy to
recursively estimate a parameterized sequence of noise embeddings. This design
leverages the smoothness of the diffusion latent space for accurate gradient-based
optimization and ensures memory efficiency via recursive subproblem construction.
We further provide a theoretical analysis of PreciseInv’s convergence and derive a
provable upper bound on its reconstruction error. Extensive experiments on COCO
2017, DarkFace, and a stylized cartoon dataset show that PreciseInv achieves
state-of-the-art performance in both reconstruction quality and inference speed.
Improvements are especially notable for few-step models and under distribution
shifts. Moreover, precise inversion yields substantial gains in editing consistency
for text-driven image manipulation tasks. Code is available at https://github.
com/panda7777777/PreciseInv

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained diffusion models [10, 17, 32, 33] have demonstrated strong generative
capabilities in producing high-quality and diverse images. Built upon these models, many recent
methods enable a wide range of image editing operations by guiding the generative process with
user inputs, such as text prompts [4, 9, 16, 21, 22, 29], reference images [1, 6, 23, 25], and spatial
masks [8, 28]. To ensure consistency and controllability in such edits, faithful inversion of real images
into the diffusion process is essential [13].
Since the sampling process of diffusion models is inherently irreversible, mapping a real image back
into the model domain remains a fundamental challenge. Existing methods on diffusion inversion can
be divided into three major categories: forward optimization, backward optimization, and invertible
samplers. Invertible samplers, such as EDICT [38], BDIA [43], and BELM [39], introduce explicit
constraints into the sampling procedure to enable bidirectional generation. Backward optimization
methods [21, 22, 29] fix the forward noising trajectory of a real image and optimize the reverse
diffusion process to match this trajectory. Both types of methods improve reconstruction quality by
modifying the denoising path, but often weaken the generative ability of the diffusion model. To
address this issue, forward optimization methods estimate a noising trajectory that can be faithfully
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

