Sample Complexity of Distributionally Robust
Average-Reward Reinforcement Learning

Zijun Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
zchendg@connect.ust.hk
Shengbo Wang
Daniel J. Epstein Department of
Industrial and Systems Engineering
University of Southern California
shengbow@usc.edu

Nian Si∗
Department of Industrial Engineering
and Decision Analytics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
niansi@ust.hk

Abstract
Motivated by practical applications where stable long-term performance is critical—such as robotics, operations research, and healthcare—we study the problem
of distributionally robust (DR) average-reward reinforcement learning. We propose
two algorithms that achieve near-optimal sample complexity. The first reduces the
problem to a DR discounted Markov decision process (MDP), while the second,
Anchored DR Average-Reward MDP, introduces an anchoring state to stabilize
the controlled transition kernels within the uncertainty set. Assuming the nominal
MDP is uniformly ergodic,
 we prove that both algorithms attain a sample complexe |S||A|t2 ε−2 for estimating the optimal policy as well as the robust
ity of O
mix
average reward under KL and fk -divergence-based uncertainty sets, provided the
uncertainty radius is sufficiently small. Here, ε is the target accuracy, |S| and |A|
denote the sizes of the state and action spaces, and tmix is the mixing time of the
nominal MDP. This represents the first finite-sample convergence guarantee for
DR average-reward reinforcement learning. We further validate the convergence
rates of our algorithms through numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [35] is a core machine learning framework in which agents learn to
make decisions by interacting with their environments to maximize long-term rewards. RL has
been successfully applied across a wide range of domains—from classic applications in robotics and
control systems [19, 13] to more recent advances in game playing [21, 6, 8] and large language model
(LLM)-driven reasoning tasks [47, 14].
A central assumption in RL is that the training environment (e.g. a simulator) faithfully represents
the real-world deployment setting. In practice, however, this assumption rarely holds, leading
to fragile policies underperform when exposed to mismatches between training and deployment
environments. This remains a major obstacle to translating RL’s successes in simulated settings to
reliable performance in real-world applications.
To address this challenge, Zhou et al. [56] built upon the distributionally robust Markov decision
process (DR-MDP) framework [16, 27, 48] to propose a distributionally robust reinforcement learning
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

