Anytime-valid, Bayes-assisted,
Prediction-Powered Inference
Valentin Kilian∗
Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford
kilian@stats.ox.ac.uk

Stefano Cortinovis∗
Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford
cortinovis@stats.ox.ac.uk

François Caron
Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford
caron@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Given a large pool of unlabelled data and a smaller amount of labels, predictionpowered inference (PPI) leverages machine learning predictions to increase the
statistical efficiency of confidence interval procedures based solely on labelled data,
while preserving fixed-time validity. In this paper, we extend the PPI framework
to the sequential setting, where labelled and unlabelled datasets grow over time.
Exploiting Ville’s inequality and the method of mixtures, we propose predictionpowered confidence sequence procedures that are asymptotically valid uniformly
over time and naturally accommodate prior knowledge on the quality of the predictions to further boost efficiency. We carefully illustrate the design choices behind
our method and demonstrate its effectiveness in real and synthetic examples.

1

Introduction

Increasing the sample size of an experiment is arguably the single simplest way to improve the precision of the statistical conclusions drawn from it. However, in many fields – such as healthcare, finance,
and social sciences – obtaining labelled data is often costly and time-consuming. In these settings,
using machine learning (ML) models to impute additional labels represents a tempting alternative to
expensive data collection, albeit at the risk of introducing bias. Prediction-powered inference (PPI) [1]
is a recently introduced framework for valid statistical inference in the presence of a small labelled
dataset and a large number of unlabelled examples paired with predictions from a black-box model.
Formally, given an input/output pair (X, Y ) ∼ P = PX × PY |X , consider the goal of estimating
θ⋆ = arg min E[ℓθ (X, Y )],

(1)

θ∈R

where ℓθ (x, y) is a convex loss function parameterised by θ ∈ R. As an example, the mean θ⋆ = E[Y ]
is the estimand induced by the squared loss ℓθ (x, y) = (θ − y)2 /2. For t = 1, 2, . . ., we observe a
sequence of independent random variables Zt , either drawn from P (labelled sample) or from PX
(unlabelled sample), and we are provided with a black-box prediction rule f that maps any input x to
a prediction f (x).
ej )j≥1 denote the subsequences of labelled and unlabelled samples,
Let (Xi , Yi )i≥1 and (X
respectively. For n = 1, 2, . . ., let Nn denote the number of unlabelled samples observed before
the nth labelled one, and assume that Nn ≥ n, with Nn ≫ n in typical settings. PPI constructs
pp
an (asymptotic) 1 − α confidence interval (CI) Cα,n
for θ⋆ , that exploits the auxiliary information
⋆
encoded in f . To this end, under mild assumptions, θ can be expressed as the solution to
gθ⋆ := E[ℓ′θ⋆ (X, Y )] = 0,
∗

Equal contribution. Order decided by coin toss.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

(2)

