Scaling can lead to compositional generalization

Florian Redhardt∗
ETH Zurich

Yassir Akram∗
ETH Zurich

Simon Schug†
Princeton University

Abstract
Can neural networks systematically capture discrete, compositional task structure
despite their continuous, distributed nature? The impressive capabilities of largescale neural networks suggest that the answer to this question is yes. However,
even for the most capable models, there are still frequent failure cases that raise
doubts about their compositionality. Here, we seek to understand what it takes
for a standard neural network to generalize over tasks that share compositional
structure. We find that simply scaling data and model size leads to compositional
generalization. We show that this holds across different task encodings as long as
the training distribution sufficiently covers the task space. In line with this finding,
we prove that standard multilayer perceptrons can approximate a general class of
compositional task families to arbitrary precision using only a linear number of
neurons with respect to the number of task modules. Finally, we uncover that if
networks successfully compositionally generalize, the constituents of a task can be
linearly decoded from their hidden activations. We show that this metric correlates
with failures of text-to-image generation models to compose known concepts.
Code available at https://github.com/smonsays/scale-compositionality

1

Introduction

The ability to understand and produce novel combinations from familiar constituents is a key faculty
of intelligence. It has been debated for decades whether neural networks are ever able to truly achieve
such compositional generalization [1]. Regardless of these theoretical considerations, scaling neural
networks continues to result in increasingly capable models [2–4]. Naturally, as models are scaled
up, their capacity to memorize grows, and it is perhaps unsurprising that as a result of training on
ever larger datasets their ability to recall more information grows too [5]. However, the nature of
compositionality is an exponential growth and ultimately any attempt to exhaustively capture this
breadth by scaling the training data will be confronted with physical constraints.
Many works therefore advocate that neural network architectures should be explicitly endowed
with compositional structure [e.g., 6–9] to allow making infinite use of their finite means [10, 11].
Capturing the underlying compositional procedure of the data is a more efficient pathway to generalize.
In particular, the algorithmic complexity of this generalizing solution is much smaller than the
complexity of the memorizing solution [12]. But does this mean that architectures need to explicitly
factorize according to the data’s underlying compositional mechanisms [9]? For instance, monolithic
networks have been shown to discover modular subnetworks which may enable compositionality
without specialized symbolic mechanisms [13]. Maybe simply scaling the data and size of neural
networks is then enough to achieve compositionality. Here, we attempt to answer this question:
Do neural networks compositionally generalize at scale?

∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to sschug@princeton.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

