GenIR: Generative Visual Feedback for Mental Image
Retrieval
Diji Yang1∗

Minghao Liu13∗
Chung-Hsiang Lo2
Yi Zhang1
James Davis1
1
University of California Santa Cruz
2
Northeastern University 3 Accenture
{dyang39, mliu40, yiz, davisje}@ucsc.edu
lo.chun@northeastern.edu
Project Page: https://visual-generative-ir.github.io

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) have shown strong performance on text-to-image
retrieval benchmarks. However, bridging this success to real-world applications
remains a challenge. In practice, human search behavior is rarely a one-shot action.
Instead, it is often a multi-round process guided by clues in mind. That is, a mental
image ranging from vague recollections to vivid mental representations of the
target image. Motivated by this gap, we study the task of Mental Image Retrieval
(MIR), which targets the realistic yet underexplored setting where users refine their
search for a mentally envisioned image through multi-round interactions with an
image search engine. Central to successful interactive retrieval is the capability
of machines to provide users with clear, actionable feedback; however, existing
methods rely on indirect or abstract verbal feedback, which can be ambiguous, misleading, or ineffective for users to refine the query. To overcome this, we propose
GenIR, a generative multi-round retrieval paradigm leveraging diffusion-based
image generation to explicitly reify the AI system’s understanding at each round.
These synthetic visual representations provide clear, interpretable feedback, enabling users to refine their queries intuitively and effectively. We further introduce
a fully automated pipeline to generate a high-quality multi-round MIR dataset.
Experimental results demonstrate that GenIR significantly outperforms existing
interactive methods in the MIR scenario. This work establishes a new task with
a dataset and an effective generative retrieval method, providing a foundation for
future research in this direction 1 .

1

Introduction

Recent Vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved decent results on standard text-to-image
retrieval benchmarks [29, 13]. Despite this progress, transferring these capabilities into real-world
applications remains challenging. One key limitation is that real human search behavior is often not
one-shot or static; it unfolds through a sequence of actions, highlighting the necessity for interactive
information retrieval (IIR) systems [24, 32, 1, 35]. Another limitation is that users frequently initiate
a search to re-find the information they have seen before, which could be partial memory, vague
clues, or vivid recall of the target images [3, 38, 5]. To address this scenario, we define Mental Image
Retrieval (MIR) 2 , where users iteratively refine their queries based on mental image (i.e., an image
in mind) to retrieve an intended image from an image database.
∗

Equal contribution.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/mikelmh025/generative_ir.
2
The term is inspired by the Mental Image Reconstruction task [9] and shares the definition of “mental
image”, though their study purely from Neuroscience side which is different problem from ours.
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

