Procurement Auctions with Predictions:
Improved Frugality for Facility Location
Eric Balkanski
Columbia University
eb3224@columbia.edu

Nicholas DeFilippis
New York University
nad9961@nyu.edu

Vasilis Gkatzelis
Drexel University,
Archimedes, Athena R.C., Greece
gkatz@drexel.edu

Xizhi Tan∗
Stanford University
xizhi@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of designing procurement auctions for the strategic uncapacitated facility location problem: a company needs to procure a set of facility
locations in order to serve its customers and each facility location is owned by
a strategic agent. Each owner has a private cost for providing access to their facility (e.g., renting it or selling it to the company) and needs to be compensated
accordingly. The goal is to design truthful auctions that decide which facilities
the company should procure and how much to pay the corresponding owners,
aiming to minimize the total cost, i.e., the monetary cost paid to the owners and the
connection cost suffered by the customers (their distance to the nearest facility).
We evaluate the performance of these auctions using the frugality ratio.
We first analyze the performance of the classic VCG auction in this context and
prove that its frugality ratio is exactly 3. We then leverage the learning-augmented
framework and design auctions that are augmented with predictions regarding the
owners’ private costs. Specifically, we propose a family of learning-augmented
auctions that achieve significant payment reductions when the predictions are
accurate, leading to much better frugality ratios. At the same time, we demonstrate
that these auctions remain robust even if the predictions are arbitrarily inaccurate,
and maintain reasonable frugality ratios even under adversarially chosen predictions.
We finally provide a family of “error-tolerant” auctions that maintain improved
frugality ratios even if the predictions are only approximately accurate, and we
provide upper bounds on their frugality ratio as a function of the prediction error.

1

Introduction

When government agencies, retail chains, or banking institutions need to open new facilities or
branches to better serve their customers, they face a challenging optimization problem: they want
customers to be as close as possible to a facility, but opening new facilities can be very costly, and the
cost can vary significantly by location. Deciding which locations to open therefore requires balancing
the customers’ connection costs (their distance to the nearest facility) against the facilities’ opening
costs. This optimization problem is known as the uncapacitated facility location (UFL) problem and
it has received a lot of attention in prior work (e.g., [14, 21, 29, 36, 36, 40, 47]).
However, the vast majority of this prior work assumes that the designer has full information regarding
both the connection and the opening costs, which is often unrealistic in practice. For example, each
location may be owned by a different strategic agent who would need to be appropriately compensated
∗

This work was done while the author was a PhD student at Drexel University

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

