Exploiting Dynamic Sparsity in Einsum

Christoph Staudt∗, Mark Blacher, Tim Hoffmann,
Kaspar Kasche, Olaf Beyersdorff, Joachim Giesen
Friedrich Schiller University Jena

Abstract
Einsum expressions specify an output tensor in terms of several input tensors.
They offer a simple yet expressive abstraction for many computational tasks in
artificial intelligence and beyond. However, evaluating einsum expressions poses
hard algorithmic problems that depend on the representation of the tensors. Two
popular representations are multidimensional arrays and coordinate lists. The
latter is a more compact representation for sparse tensors, that is, tensors where a
significant proportion of the entries are zero. So far, however, most of the popular
einsum implementations use the multidimensional array representation for tensors.
Here, we show on a non-trivial example that, when evaluating einsum expressions,
coordinate lists can be exponentially more efficient than multidimensional arrays.
In practice, however, coordinate lists can also be significantly less efficient than
multidimensional arrays, but it is hard to decide from the input tensors whether
this will be the case. Sparsity evolves dynamically in intermediate tensors during
the evaluation of an einsum expression. Therefore, we introduce a hybrid solution
where the representation is switched on the fly from multidimensional arrays to coordinate lists depending on the sparsity of the remaining tensors. In our experiments
on established benchmark einsum expressions, the hybrid solution is consistently
competitive with or outperforms the better of the two static representations.

1

Introduction

Einsum was introduced in NumPy [19] in 2011 and has since become the quasi-standard for specifying
pure tensor expressions, meaning expressions that involve no non-linear operations on tensor entries.
It is now an integral part of machine learning frameworks such as TensorFlow [1], PyTorch [25], and
Nvidia’s cuQuantum [5] library for quantum information science. So far, these frameworks support
only dense tensor formats in einsum. While dense formats are widely used, sparse tensor formats such
as coordinate lists offer potential advantages when many tensor entries are zero. They can reduce
the number of floating-point operations (flops) compared to dense formats and, as we demonstrate
in this paper, may even yield exponential improvements in specific cases. However, sparse formats
also have drawbacks. They may require more memory when tensors are not particularly sparse, and
while in theory their space usage grows at most linearly, in practice the memory overhead can be
considerable. Moreover, they often use a less favorable data layout for computation, which can lead
to significantly slower execution. Thus, choosing the appropriate tensor format is critical for efficient
execution of einsum expressions.
Sparse tensor formats in einsum are supported in the Python package sparse [26] and also in SQL [8].
These implementations, however, rely on static format choices. In our experiments, we show that
sparsity can evolve dynamically in intermediate tensors during the evaluation of an einsum expression,
especially for tensor expressions that involve a large number of input tensors. Such expressions
∗

Corresponding author: christoph.staudt@uni-jena.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

