Leveraging Importance Sampling to Detach Alignment
Modules from Large Language Models

Yi Liu1

Dianqing Liu1,2 Mingye Zhu2 Junbo Guo1
Yongdong Zhang1,2 Zhendong Mao2∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, People’s Daily Online
2
University of Science and Technology of China
{liuyi2023, guojunbo, liudianqing}@people.cn
{mingyezhu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhyd73, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The widespread adoption of large language models (LLMs) across industries
has increased the demand for high-quality and customizable outputs. However,
traditional alignment methods often require retraining large pretrained models,
making it difficult to quickly adapt and optimize LLMs for diverse applications.
To address this limitation, we propose a novel Residual Alignment Model (RAM)
that formalizes the alignment process as a type of importance sampling. In this
framework, the unaligned upstream model serves as the proposal distribution, while
the alignment process is framed as secondary sampling based on an autoregressive
alignment module that acts as an estimator of the importance weights. This design
enables a natural detachment of the alignment module from the target aligned
model, improving flexibility and scalability. Based on this model, we derive an
efficient sequence-level training strategy for the alignment module, which operates
independently of the proposal module. Additionally, we develop a resampling
algorithm with iterative token-level decoding to address the common first-token
latency issue in comparable methods. Experimental evaluations on two leading
open-source LLMs across diverse tasks, including instruction following, domain
adaptation, and preference optimization, demonstrate that our approach consistently
outperforms baseline models.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) has led to their widespread
adoption across various industries[6, 35, 1]. Efforts to align LLM outputs with domain requirements
and human values enhance their utility and content safety[30, 11, 24, 29, 2, 17, 45, 23]. Techniques
such as supervised learning[37, 42, 43], preference optimization[30, 24, 11] and reinforcement
learning[46, 33, 44, 41] are crucial for achieving model alignment.
According to the scaling laws of LLMs[19], increasing model size typically enhances their performance. However, research indicates that effective domain adaptation and value alignment can be
achieved even with smaller models[10]. This difference in size requirements necessitates a balance
between utility performance and alignment flexibility with respect to model size[38, 31]. Moreover,
training large models for specific domains is resource-intensive and requires the deployment of
separate models, increasing resource costs and hindering traffic sharing across domains. Thus, there
is an urgent need for more efficient and economical model solutions.
∗

Corresponding author: Zhendong Mao

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

