Red-Teaming Text-to-Image Systems by Rule-based
Preference Modeling

Yichuan Cao1,2⋆ , Yibo Miao1,2⋆† , Xiao-Shan Gao1,2 , Yinpeng Dong3,4†
State Key Laboratory of Math. Sci., Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
College of AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
1

Warning: This paper contains data and model outputs which are offensive in nature.

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) models raise ethical and safety concerns due to their potential
to generate inappropriate or harmful images. Evaluating these models’ security
through red-teaming is vital, yet white-box approaches are limited by their need
for internal access, complicating their use with closed-source models. Moreover,
existing black-box methods often assume knowledge about the model’s specific
defense mechanisms, limiting their utility in real-world commercial API scenarios.
A significant challenge is how to evade unknown and diverse defense mechanisms.
To overcome this difficulty, we propose a novel Rule-based Preference modeling Guided Red-Teaming (RPG-RT), which iteratively employs LLM to modify
prompts to query and leverages feedback from T2I systems for fine-tuning the
LLM. RPG-RT treats the feedback from each iteration as a prior, enabling the LLM
to dynamically adapt to unknown defense mechanisms. Given that the feedback is
often labeled and coarse-grained, making it difficult to utilize directly, we further
propose rule-based preference modeling, which employs a set of rules to evaluate
desired or undesired feedback, facilitating finer-grained control over the LLM’s
dynamic adaptation process. Extensive experiments on nineteen T2I systems with
varied safety mechanisms, three online commercial API services, and T2V models
verify the superiority and practicality of our approach. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/caosip/RPG-RT.

1

Introduction

The state-of-the-art text-to-image (T2I) models such as Midjourney [42], Stable Diffusion [56], and
DALL-E [47] have garnered widespread attention for their ability to create high-quality images across
a variety of concepts and styles from natural language input [13, 45, 56]. Millions of users have started
harnessing these generative models to increase productivity [51], including applications designed
for children [54]. However, there is growing concern about the ethical and safety implications of
these technologies [54, 58]. Malicious users can exploit the powerful generative capabilities of T2I
models to create images containing pornography, violence, and politically sensitive content [64], or
to produce copyright-infringing materials [63]. In fact, Google’s Gemini has generated numerous
biased and historically inaccurate images, causing the service to be taken offline [43]. The misuse of
T2I models poses risks of violating legal standards and regulations [10], potentially impacting model
developers, researchers, users, and regulatory bodies in terms of legal and reputational consequences.
Red-teaming identifies and exposes vulnerabilities inherent in T2I models by generating undesirable
outputs from text prompts, crucial for evaluating model safety. Although some existing red-team
⋆

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: miaoyibo@amss.ac.cn, dongyinpeng@tsinghua.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

