SALMONN-omni: A Standalone Speech LLM without
Codec Injection for Full-duplex Conversation

Wenyi Yu1,2∗ Siyin Wang1,2∗ Xiaoyu Yang3 Xianzhao Chen2 Xiaohai Tian2
Jun Zhang2 Guangzhi Sun3 Lu Lu2 Yuxuan Wang2 Chao Zhang1†
1
Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance 3 University of Cambridge
{ywy22,wangsiyi23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn cz277@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In order to enable fluid and natural human-machine speech interaction, existing
full-duplex conversational systems often adopt modular architectures with auxiliary
components such as voice activity detectors, interrupters, conversation state predictors, or multiple LLMs. These systems, however, suffer from error accumulation
across modules and struggle with key challenges such as context-dependent bargein and echo cancellation. Recent approaches, most notably Moshi, simplify the
pipeline by injecting audio codecs into the token space of a single LLM. However,
such methods still incur significant performance degradation when operating on the
speech rather than text modality. In this paper, we introduce SALMONN-omni, the
first single, standalone full-duplex speech LLM that operates without audio codecs
in its token space. It features a novel dynamic thinking mechanism within the
LLM backbone, enabling the model to learn when to transition between speaking
and listening states. Experiments on widely used benchmarks for spoken question answering and open-domain dialogue show that SALMONN-omni achieves
at least 30% relative performance improvement over existing open-source fullduplex models and performs highly competitively to half-duplex and turn-based
systems, despite using substantially less training data. Moreover, SALMONN-omni
demonstrates strong performance in complex conversational scenarios, including
turn-taking, backchanneling, echo cancellation and context-dependent barge-in,
with further improvements achieved through reinforcement learning. Some demo
conversations between user and SALMONN-omni are provided in the following
repository https://github.com/bytedance/SALMONN.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3] have revolutionized problem-solving and task execution
through text-based interaction. However, speech, being a more natural and intuitive modality, offers a
smoother and more human-centric interface for human-machine communication. As a result, there is
increasing interest in extending text-based LLMs with speech-processing capabilities. These efforts
span a range of tasks, including advanced speech and audio understanding [4, 5, 6], text-driven speech
synthesis [7, 8, 9] and interactive spoken dialogue systems [10, 11, 12].
While turn-based speech LLMs [10, 12, 13, 14, 15] support conversational artificial intelligence (AI)
in a half-duplex manner, human conversation is inherently full-duplex, requiring the ability to listen,
think, and speak simultaneously. This dynamic is evident in natural conversational behaviours such
as frequent turn-taking, backchanneling, overlapping speech and barge-ins, all of which contribute to
more fluid and engaging interactions. These rich, interactive communication patterns have spurred
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

