SpiderSolver: A Geometry-Aware Transformer for
Solving PDEs on Complex Geometries

Kai Qi1,* , Fan Wang1,* , Zhewen Dong1 , Jian Sun1,2 (B)
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
State Industry-Education Integration Center for Medical Innovations at Xi’an Jiaotong University
{qikai1218,wangfan525,dongzhewen}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Transformers have demonstrated effectiveness in solving partial differential equations (PDEs). However, extending them to solve PDEs on complex geometries
remains a challenge. In this work, we propose SpiderSolver, a geometry-aware
transformer that introduces spiderweb tokenization for handling complex domain
geometry and irregularly discretized points. Our method partitions the irregular
spatial domain into spiderweb-like patches, guided by the domain boundary geometry. SpiderSolver leverages a coarse-grained attention mechanism to capture
global interactions across spiderweb tokens and a fine-grained attention mechanism
to refine feature interactions between the domain boundary and its neighboring
interior points. We evaluate SpiderSolver on PDEs with diverse domain geometries
across seven datasets, including cars, airfoils, blood flow in the human thoracic
aorta, as well as canonical cases governed by the Navier-Stokes, Darcy flow, elasticity, and plasticity equations. Experimental results demonstrate that SpiderSolver
consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance across different datasets and
metrics, with better generalization ability in the OOD setting. The code is available
at https://github.com/Kai-Qi/SpiderSolver.

1

Introduction

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) is fundamental to many computational problems in
science and engineering. Classical numerical methods involve discretizing computational domains and
solving the resulting algebraic systems. However, for domains with complex boundary geometries and
irregular discretization, these methods require complex mesh generation and incur high computational
costs. For example, computing the drag force on a car (Figure 1) requires solving the Navier-Stokes
equations with a car-shaped boundary. Classical methods discretize the computational domain into
irregular meshes or points (e.g., over 30,000 points for the Shape-Net Car dataset), leading to high
computational complexity and cost.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in applying deep learning methods to solve PDEs,
such as PINNs [1], neural operators [2, 3, 4], etc. However, most of the current methods deal with
regular computational domains. For example, the well-established FNO [3] solves PDE in rectangular
domains with uniform grids due to its implementation via the Fast Fourier Transform. To efficiently
solve PDEs with irregularly shaped domains, Geometry-Informed Neural Operator (GINO) [5] and
Geo-FNO [6] are proposed based on deforming the irregularly shaped domain into a uniform latent
mesh. Such approaches encounter difficulties with mesh transformations for complex geometries
of the computational domains. The Graph Neural Operator (GNO) [2] adopts the Graph Neural
Network [7] as a backbone by formulating the kernel integral operator as message passing on graphs,
* Equal contribution.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

