Constrained Linear Thompson Sampling

Aditya Gangrade
Boston University
gangrade@bu.edu

Venkatesh Saligrama
Boston University
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
We study safe linear bandits (SLBs), where an agent selects actions from a convex
set to maximize an unknown linear objective subject to unknown linear constraints
in each round. Existing methods for SLBs provide strong regret guarantees, but
require solving expensive optimization problems. To address this, we propose
Constrained Linear Thompson Sampling (COLTS), a sampling-based framework
that selects actions by solving perturbed linear programs, which significantly
reduces computational costs while matching the regret and risk of prior methods.
√
e d3 T )
We develop two main variants: S - COLTS, which ensures zero
√ risk and O(
regret given a safe action, and R - COLTS, which achieves e
O( d3 T ) regret and risk
with no instance information. In simulations, these methods match or outperform
state of the art SLB approaches while substantially improving scalability. On the
technical front, we introduce a novel coupled noise design that ensures frequent
‘local optimism’ about the true optimum, and a scaling-based analysis to handle
the per-round variability of constraints.

1

Introduction

Stochastic bandit problems are a fundamental model for optimising unknown objectives through
repeated trials. While single-objective bandit theory is well-developed, real-world learners must also
deal with unknown constraints at every round of interaction. For instance, in dose-finding [AKR21],
micro-grid control [FLZY22], and fair recommendation [Cho+24], a learner must choose actions that
maximise reward while never crossing unknown toxicity, voltage, or exposure limits (see §B).
The safe linear bandit (SLB) problem models these scenarios in a linear programming (LP) setting:
a learner selects actions {at } from a convex domain A to optimize an unknown objective vector
θ∗ ∈ Rd subject to unknown constraints of the form Φ∗ a ≤ α, where Φ∗ ∈ Rm×d . After each action,
the learner observes noisy feedback of the objective θ∗⊤ a + noise and the constraints Φ∗ a + noise,
thus acquiring information to guide future actions. Performance in SLBs is measured via the
X
X

i 
regret, RT :=
θ∗⊤ (a∗ − at ) + , and risk, ST :=
max Φ∗ at − α
,
(1)
t≤T

t≤T

i

+

where a∗ is the optimal action under the true (but unknown) constraints, and (·)+ := max(·, 0).
There are two main notions of safety in SLBs:
• Hard constraint enforcement, which requires that with high probability, ST = 0 for all T . This
is only achievable if the learner has prior access to a known safe action asafe .
• Soft constraint enforcement, which requires ST = o(T ) with high probability (whp). This is a
weaker requirement, but does not need prior information.
A series of recent work [e.g. GCS24; PGB24; AAT19; MAAT21] offers OFUL-style algorithms for
SLBs with strong theoretical guarantees. However, these often require the solution of nontrivial
optimisation problems (second-order conic programs, and sometimes NP-hard problems) in each
round. Our motivation lies in improving this computational cost.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

