FraPPE: Fast and Efficient
Preference-based Pure Exploration

Udvas Das
Univ. Lille, Inria
CNRS, Centrale Lille
UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, Lille, France
udvas.das@inria.fr

Apurv Shukla
Department of EECS, University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
apurv.shukla@umich.edu

Debabrota Basu
Univ. Lille, Inria
CNRS, Centrale Lille
UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, Lille, France
debabrota.basu@inria.fr

Abstract
Preference-based Pure Exploration (PrePEx) aims to identify with a given confidence level the set of Pareto optimal arms in a vector-valued (aka multi-objective)
bandit, where the reward vectors are ordered via a (given) preference cone C.
Though PrePEx and its variants are well-studied, there does not exist a computationally efficient algorithm that can optimally track the existing lower bound (Shukla
and Basu, 2024) for arbitrary preference cones. We successfully fill this gap by
efficiently solving the minimisation and maximisation problems in the lower bound.
First, we derive three structural properties of the lower bound that yield a computationally tractable reduction of the minimisation problem. Then, we deploy a
Frank-Wolfe optimiser to accelerate the maximisation problem in the lower bound.
Together, these techniques solve the maxmin optimisation problem in O(KL2 )
time for a bandit instance with K arms and L dimensional reward, which is a
significant acceleration over the literature. We further prove that our proposed
PrePEx algorithm, FraPPE, asymptotically achieves the optimal sample complexity. Finally, we perform numerical experiments across synthetic and real datasets
demonstrating that FraPPE achieves the lowest sample complexities to identify
the exact Pareto set among the existing algorithms.

1

Introduction

Randomised experiments are at the core of statistically sound evaluation and selection of public
policies (Banerjee et al., 2020), clinical trials (Altman and Dore, 1990), material discovery (Raccuglia
et al., 2016), and advertising strategies (Kohavi and Longbotham, 2015). They allocate a set of
participants to different available choices, observe corresponding outcomes, and choose the optimal
one with statistical significance. As these static and randomised experimental designs demand high
number of samples, it has invoked a rich line of research in adaptive experiment design (Hu and
Rosenberger, 2006; Foster et al., 2021), also known as active (sequential) testing (Yu et al., 2006;
Naghshvar and Javidi, 2013; Kossen et al., 2021) or pure exploration problem (Even-Dar et al.,
2006; Bubeck et al., 2009; Carlsson et al., 2024). Pure exploration problems sequentially allocate
participants to different available choices while looking into past allocations and outcomes. The aim
is to leverage the previous information gain and structure of the experiments and observations to
identify the optimal choice with as few number of interactions as possible. Even in this age of data,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

