When Data Can’t Meet: Estimating
Correlation Across Privacy Barriers

Abhinav Chakraborty
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
ac4662@columbia.edu

Arnab Auddy
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
arnab.auddy@columbia.edu

T. Tony Cai
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
tcai@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating the correlation of two random variables X and Y , where the pairs (X, Y ) are not observed together, but are
instead separated co-ordinate-wise at two servers: server 1 contains all the
X observations, and server 2 contains the corresponding Y observations.
In this vertically distributed setting, we assume that each server has its
own privacy constraints, owing to which they can only share suitably privatized statistics of their own component observations. We consider differing
privacy budgets (ε1 , δ1 ) and (ε2 , δ2 ) for the two servers and determine the
minimax optimal rates for correlation estimation allowing for both noninteractive and interactive mechanisms. We also provide correlation estimators that achieve these rates and further develop inference procedures,
namely, confidence intervals, for the estimated correlations. Our results are
characterized by an interesting rate in terms of the sample size n, ε1 , ε2 ,
which is strictly slower than the usual central privacy estimation rates. More
interestingly, we find that the interactive mechanism is always better than
its non-interactive counterpart whenever the two privacy budgets are different. Results from extensive numerical experiments support our theoretical
findings.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a popular and extensively studied framework in modern machine learning. In traditional federated learning, due to privacy concerns, the servers are not allowed
to pool raw data, but are restricted to sharing only sufficiently privatized statistics derived
from the local observations. This method is particularly beneficial when training on sensitive
data, such as healthcare or finance. The federated scenario is very systematically studied
when the separation occurs horizontally, i.e. observations of the same set of features are
binned separately into different servers. See, for example, Kairouz et al. [2021], Li et al.
[2020a,b], Zhang et al. [2021] and the references therein.
To encourage collaboration on proprietary data across different organizations, however, it is
often more reasonable to assume that the federation occurs “vertically”, or across features.
For example, in healthcare data, a hospital and a pharmaceutical company might have
different pieces of information on the same patient: the hospital does not share private
clinical information such as patient demographics or test results with the company, which
instead has its own private information on the same patient’s response to certain drugs. This
new framework called vertical federated learning has recently seen studied in Chen et al.
[2020], Liu et al. [2024], Wu et al. [2020], Wei et al. [2022], Yang et al. [2019], but a theoretical
understanding of estimation and inference has largely been missing. This motivates the
current work. We study the correlation of bivariate data from n pairs of samples (Xi , Yi )
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

