Language Model Behavioral Phases are Consistent
Across Architecture, Training Data, and Scale

1

James A. Michaelov1,2,3 , Roger P. Levy1 , Benjamin K. Bergen3
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT 2 MIT Libraries CREOS
3
Deparmtent of Cognitive Science, UCSD
{jamic,rplevy}@mit.edu, bkbergen@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We show that across architecture (Transformer vs. Mamba vs. RWKV), training
dataset (OpenWebText vs. The Pile), and scale (14 million parameters to 12 billion
parameters), autoregressive language models exhibit highly consistent patterns of
change in their behavior over the course of pretraining. Based on our analysis of
over 1,400 language model checkpoints on over 110,000 tokens of English, we find
that up to 98% of the variance in language model behavior at the word level can be
explained by three simple heuristics: the unigram probability (frequency) of a given
word, the n-gram probability of the word, and the semantic similarity between
the word and its context. Furthermore, we see consistent behavioral phases in all
language models, with their predicted probabilities for words overfitting to those
words’ n-gram probabilities for increasing n over the course of training. Taken
together, these results suggest that learning in neural language models may follow
a similar trajectory irrespective of model details.

1

Introduction

Language models are complex systems that ostensibly exhibit emergent behaviors (Anderson, 1972;
Nicolis and Prigogine, 1977; Laughlin and Pines, 2000; O’Connor, 2021; Wei et al., 2022a). Trained
only to predict the next word in a sequence given a context, language models learn to generate
grammatical sentences, make predictions in line with real-world knowledge, and—given the right
prompt—answer questions and exhibit reasoning-like behavior, even without finetuning (Linzen et al.,
2016; Wei et al., 2022b,a; Biderman et al., 2023b; Hu and Frank, 2024; OLMo Team et al., 2025).
How do they get there?
While language model learning involves gradual change by some metrics (Schaeffer et al., 2023),
researchers have identified sudden shifts in model behavior (Du et al., 2024), as well as precipitous
changes in model subnetworks that can drastically alter behavior (Olsson et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2024a). However, these analyses generally focus on specific, targeted behaviors or sub-networks.
We focus more broadly on whether it is possible to characterize the overall behavior of models and
how this changes over the course of training. We draw on two main lines of research. The first
demonstrates that language model predictions are often sensitive to superficial properties of their
input and output, such as training data, frequency of tokens, token co-occurrences, grammatical
structures, tasks, and specific facts about the world; the baseline probability of input and output
sequences and subsequences; and the degree of semantic similarity between an output word and its
context (Forbes et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2021; Michaelov and Bergen, 2022; McCoy et al., 2024;
Chang and Bergen, 2024). The second is previous work suggesting that language models overfit
to n-grams of increasing n over the course of training (Karpathy et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2024).
These two lines converge to suggest that much of language model behavior can be characterized by
relatively simple heuristics.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

