Non-Rectangular Robust MDPs with Normed
Uncertainty Sets

Navdeep Kumar∗
Technion

Giorgia Ramponi
University of Zurich

Adarsh Gupta
Finsynth.ai

Maxence Mohamed Elfatihi
École Polytechnique

Kfir Levy
Technion

Shie Mannor
Technion

Abstract
Robust policy evaluation for non-rectangular uncertainty set is generally NP-hard,
even in approximation. Consequently, existing approaches suffer from either exponential iteration complexity or significant accuracy gaps. Interestingly, we identify
a powerful class of Lp -bounded uncertainty sets that avoid these complexity barriers due to their structural simplicity. We further show that this class can be
decomposed into infinitely many sa-rectangular Lp -bounded sets and leverage
its structural properties to derive a novel dual formulation for Lp robust Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs). This formulation reveals key insights into the adversary’s strategy and leads to the first polynomial-time robust policy evaluation
algorithm for L1 -normed non-rectangular robust MDPs.

1

Introduction

Robust Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) effectively handle uncertainties in environmental parameters, making them indispensable for high-stakes domains such as robotics, finance, healthcare,
and autonomous driving, where failures can have catastrophic consequences [24, 12, 30, 25, 16].
They also outperform standard MDPs in terms of generalization, ensuring robust performance across
diverse scenarios [37, 38, 26]. Consequently, extensive research has been conducted on robust
MDPs [23, 10, 36, 17, 3, 25, 16, 14, 34, 35, 33, 7, 20, 18, 39, 31, 1, 15], primarily focusing on
rectangular uncertainty sets that leverage the contractive robust Bellman operator. However, practical
robust MDPs often feature non-rectangular uncertainty sets, where rectangular relaxations can result
in overly suboptimal solutions [21, 8, 36]. Intuitively, non-rectangular uncertainty set could be
thought of as an n-dimensional sphere of unit radius, and its rectangular relaxation is the smallest
n-dimensional cube encapsulating the sphere. The ratio between the sphere and the encapsulating
cube is exponential in the dimension (O(2−n )) [28]). This suggests that the rectangular relaxation
of the non-rectangular uncertainty set, contains many additional environments. Moreover, most of
the additional environments would lie near the corners representing big differences from the center
in many coordinates – scenarios unlikely to occur in the real world, as aptly captured by the paper
titled "Lightening doesn’t strike twice, robust MDPs [22]". These improbable, highly perturbed
environments can lead to a significant gap between the solutions of non-rectangular robust MDPs and
their rectangular relaxations.
While non-rectangular robust MDPs capture much better interdependencies across the states, they
lack the existence of contractive robust Bellman operators, which makes the problem very difficult
to solve with standard dynamic programming techniques [8]. This makes non-rectangular robust
∗

corrosponding author email navdeep.kumar@zohomail.in

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

