Recurrent Memory for Online Interdomain
Gaussian Processes
Wenlong Chen1,∗ , Naoki Kiyohara1,2,∗ , Harrison Bo Hua Zhu3,1,∗ ,
Jacob Curran-Sebastian3 , Samir Bhatt3,1 , Yingzhen Li1 ,
1
Imperial College London 2 Canon Inc. 3 University of Copenhagen
wenlong.chen21@imperial.ac.uk n.kiyohara23@imperial.ac.uk
harrison.zhu@sund.ku.dk yingzhen.li@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel online Gaussian process (GP) model that is capable of capturing
long-term memory in sequential data in an online learning setting. Our model, Online HiPPO Sparse Variational Gaussian Process (OHSVGP), leverages the HiPPO
(High-order Polynomial Projection Operators) framework, which is popularized in
the RNN domain due to its long-range memory modeling capabilities. We interpret
the HiPPO time-varying orthogonal projections as inducing variables with timedependent orthogonal polynomial basis functions, which allows the SVGP inducing
variables to memorize the process history. We show that the HiPPO framework fits
naturally into the interdomain GP framework and demonstrate that the kernel matrices can also be updated online in a recurrence form based on the ODE evolution of
HiPPO. We evaluate OHSVGP with online prediction for 1D time series, continual
learning in discriminative GP model for data with multidimensional inputs, and
deep generative modeling with sparse Gaussian process variational autoencoder,
showing that it outperforms existing online GP methods in terms of predictive
performance, long-term memory preservation, and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are popular choices for modeling time series due to their functional
expressiveness and uncertainty quantification abilities [Roberts et al., 2013, Fortuin et al., 2020].
However, GPs are computationally expensive and memory intensive, with cubic and quadratic
complexities, respectively. In online regression settings, such as weather modeling, the number of
time steps can be very large, quickly making GPs infeasible. Although variational approximations,
such as utilizing sparse inducing points (SGPR [Titsias, 2009]; SVGP [Hensman et al., 2013, 2015a])
and Markovian GPs [Särkkä and Solin, 2019, Wilkinson et al., 2021], have been proposed to address
the computational complexity, it would still be prohibitive to re-fit the GP model from scratch every
time new data arrives. Bui et al. [2017] proposed an online sparse variational GP (OSVGP) learning
method that sequentially updates the GP posterior distribution only based on the newly arrived data.
However, as indicated in their paper, their models may not maintain the memory of the previous data,
as the inducing points will inevitably shift as new data arrive. This is a major drawback, as their
models may not model long-term memory unless using a growing number of inducing points.
In deep learning, as an alternative to Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017], significant works on
state space models (SSMs) have been proposed to model long-term memory in sequential data.
Originally proposed to instill long-term memory in recurrent neural networks, the HiPPO (High-order
Polynomial Projection Operators) framework [Gu et al., 2020] provides mathematical foundations for
*Equal contribution.
Source Code: https://github.com/harrisonzhu508/HIPPOSVGP.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

