Escaping Collapse: The Strength of Weak Data for
Large Language Model Training∗

Kareem Amin
Weiwei Kong

Sara Babakniya†
Umar Syed

Alex Bie
Sergei Vassilvitskii

Google Research

Abstract
Synthetically-generated data plays an increasingly larger role in training large
language models. However, while synthetic data has been found to be useful,
studies have also shown that without proper curation it can cause LLM performance
to plateau, or even “collapse”, after many training iterations. In this paper, we
formalize this question and develop a theoretical framework to investigate how
much curation is needed in order to ensure that LLM performance continually
improves. Our analysis is inspired by boosting, a classic machine learning technique
that leverages a very weak learning algorithm to produce an arbitrarily good
classifier. The approach we analyze subsumes many recently proposed methods
for training LLMs on synthetic data, and thus our analysis sheds light on why they
are successful, and also suggests opportunities for future improvement. We present
experiments that validate our theory, and show that dynamically focusing labeling
resources on the most challenging examples — in much the same way that boosting
focuses the efforts of the weak learner — leads to improved performance.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) represent the frontier of artificial intelligence, and are trained on
vast amounts of human-generated data. However, much of the high-quality publicly available data on
the Internet has been exhausted, and limits on generating new tokens threaten to slow progress on
LLM training.
As a consequence, synthetically-generated datasets are playing an important role in the training
of LLMs. Synthetic data have been shown to improve the performance of real large models on a
range of tasks [BKK+ 22, ZWMG22, GPS+ 23, SCA+ 24]. On the other hand, the circuitous nature
of training new LLMs on data generated by previous generations of LLMs has caused concerns of
model collapse [SSZ+ 24, ACRL+ 24].
What makes synthetic data beneficial or harmful? The answer depends on the precise elements of
the synthetic data recipe, and one of our main contributions is a theoretical framework that unifies
existing elements of synthetic data approaches, facilitating reasoning about when they might succeed
or fail.
∗
Authors ordered alphabetically. Author contributions are listed at the end of the paper. Correspondence to
{kamin,babakniya,alexbie,weiweikong,usyed,sergeiv}@google.com.
†
Work done while the author was a student at the University of Southern California.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

