Once Upon an Input: Reasoning via Per-Instance
Program Synthesis

Adam Stein∗
Neelay Velingker∗
Mayur Naik
Eric Wong
{steinad, neelay, mhnaik, exwong}@seas.upenn.edu
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) excel at zero-shot inference but continue to struggle with complex, multi-step reasoning. Recent methods that augment LLMs
with intermediate reasoning steps such as Chain of Thought (CoT) and Program
of Thought (PoT) improve performance but often produce undesirable solutions,
especially in algorithmic domains. We introduce Per-Instance Program Synthesis (PIPS), a method that generates and refines programs at the instance-level
using structural feedback without relying on task-specific guidance or explicit test
cases. To further improve performance, PIPS incorporates a confidence metric
that dynamically chooses between direct inference and program synthesis on a
per-instance basis. Experiments across three frontier LLMs and 30 benchmarks
including all tasks of Big Bench Extra Hard (BBEH), visual question answering
tasks, relational reasoning tasks, and mathematical reasoning tasks show that PIPS
improves the absolute harmonic mean accuracy by up to 8.6% and 9.4% compared
to PoT and CoT respectively, and reduces undesirable program generations by
65.1% on the algorithmic tasks compared to PoT with Gemini-2.0-Flash. 2

1

Introduction

Large-scale pretraining endows LLMs with the ability to recognize common concepts and perform
many tasks in a zero-shot fashion but they still struggle with multi-step reasoning [1–3]. Recent
advances in inference-time reasoning strategies such as Chain of Thought (CoT) and related work
[4–6] have significantly improved LLMs’ reasoning abilities. However, they remain unreliable [7–10]
and unfaithful, meaning the final answer is correct for the wrong reasons [11–13].
Unlike LLM inference, program execution enforces precise, verifiable computation. Combining
LLMs with program execution offers a promising reasoning method: the LLM handles perceptual
inference, mapping raw input to structured form, while algorithmic reasoning is offloaded to an
executable program [2, 14, 15]. Existing work on neuro-symbolic learning as well as methods such
as Faithful Chain of Thought (FCoT) [16] and Program Aided Language Models (PAL) [17] adopts
this approach, however, they use a single fixed program per task which causes problems when task
instances are varied [18]. On the other hand, methods such as Program of Thought (PoT) [19] aim to
enable LLMs to generate these programs in a zero-shot manner on an instance-level.
While flexible, these methods often produce undesirable programs, due to three challenges in instancelevel program synthesis: (1) open domain: determining for a given instance if program synthesis is
preferable to direct inference (via CoT) remains an open question, (2) no task specifications: there
are no general specifications for how the correct program should behave to guide program search,
∗
2

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Code for experiments and a demo is open-sourced at https://github.com/adaminsky/pips.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

