Learn and Ensemble Bridge Adapters for
Multi-domain Task Incremental Learning

1

Ziqi Gu1 , Chunyan Xu1,∗, Wenxuan Fang1 , Xin Liu2 , Yide Qiu1 , Zhen Cui3,∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Nanjing Seetacloud Technology
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University

Abstract
Multi-domain task incremental learning (MTIL) demands models to master domainspecific expertise while preserving generalization capabilities. Inspired by human
lifelong learning [1, 2], which relies on revisiting, aligning, and integrating past
experiences, we propose a Learning and Ensembling Bridge Adapters (LEBA)
framework. To facilitate cohesive knowledge transfer across domains, specifically,
we propose a continuous-domain bridge adaptation module, leveraging the distribution transfer capabilities of Schrödinger bridge for stable progressive learning.
To strengthen memory consolidation, we further propose a progressive knowledge
ensemble strategy that revisits past task representations via a diffusion model and
dynamically integrates historical adapters. For efficiency, LEBA maintains a compact adapter pool through similarity-based selection and employs learnable weights
to align replayed samples with current task semantics. Together, these components
effectively mitigate catastrophic forgetting and enhance generalization across tasks.
Extensive experiments across multiple benchmarks validate the effectiveness and
superiority of LEBA over state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has made strides [3, 4, 5], particularly in the realm of large-scale foundation models [6,
7], with recent research further validating these advancements. However, traditional fully-supervised
training methods struggle to address this challenge due to the high computational cost involved in
integrating new-coming data with historical datasets. Incremental learning [8, 9], also known as
continual learning, provides an effective method by incrementally learning classes, with each training
task focusing solely on new-coming samples. Many methods [10, 11, 12] have actively addressed
the challenges of continual learning, such as knowledge graph preservation [13], self-supervised
learning [14], and replay data [15]. While these methods demonstrate potential in memorization and
scalability, they mainly focus on incremental learning from batched data of a homogeneous domain.
In contrast, multi-domain task incremental learning (MTIL)—the focus of this work—aims to learn
from a sequence of heterogeneous domains. The paradigm requires an effective transfer and adaptation
across diverse domains while incrementally learning new ones, where catastrophic forgetting may be
even more severe. Specifically, the model should not only maintain stability in retaining knowledge
from previously learned domains, but also develop generalization capabilities for unseen domains,
referring to the problem of zero-shot. Recently, vision-language models as well as knowledge
distillation have been used for zero-shot MTIL. For instance, incorporating zero-shot generalization
into CLIP has proven effective in mitigating knowledge degradation [16]. Further, MoE-Adapters [17]
designs task-specific and task-independent components and leverages Mixture-of-Experts [18] for
adaptive task learning. These methods offer promising advancements for zero-shot MTIL.
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

