Chain-of-Retrieval Augmented Generation

Liang Wang†∗ Haonan Chen‡ Nan Yang† Xiaolong Huang† Zhicheng Dou‡ Furu Wei†
†
Microsoft Research ‡ Renmin University of China
https://aka.ms/GeneralAI

Abstract
This paper introduces an approach for training o1-like RAG models that retrieve and
reason over relevant information step by step before generating the final answer.
Conventional RAG methods usually perform a single retrieval step before the
generation process, which limits their effectiveness in addressing complex queries
due to imperfect retrieval results. In contrast, our proposed method, CoRAG
(Chain-of-Retrieval Augmented Generation), allows the model to dynamically
reformulate the query based on the evolving state. To train CoRAG effectively, we
utilize rejection sampling to automatically generate intermediate retrieval chains,
thereby augmenting existing RAG datasets that only provide the correct final
answer. At test time, we propose various decoding strategies to scale the model’s
test-time compute by controlling the length and number of sampled retrieval chains.
Experimental results across multiple benchmarks validate the efficacy of CoRAG,
particularly in multi-hop question answering tasks, where we observe more than
10 points improvement in EM score compared to strong baselines. On the KILT
benchmark, CoRAG establishes a new state-of-the-art performance across a diverse
range of knowledge-intensive tasks. Furthermore, we offer comprehensive analyses
to understand the scaling behavior of CoRAG, laying the groundwork for future
research aimed at developing factual and grounded foundation models.

CoRAG on MuSiQue
30

What was the name of the star of Dark Hazard?
decomposition
Edward G. Robinson

28

EM

26

Where did Edward G. Robinson go to college?
No relevant information found. retrieval failure

24
22
20
18

Where did the star of Dark Hazard study?

4k

8k

16k

Ours
Previous SoTA
Pareto frontier
32k
64k 128k

What college did Edward G. Robinson attend?
reformulation
City College of New York.
City College of New York

# Avg. Tokens
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Test-time scaling behavior of CoRAG. Increased token budget leads to consistent
performance improvements. (b) An example of CoRAG on the MuSiQue dataset. It learns to
decompose the complex query and conduct query reformulation when encountering a retrieval failure.

∗

Correspondence to wangliang@microsoft.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

