Faithful Dynamic Imitation Learning from Human
Intervention with Dynamic Regret Minimization

Bo Ling
Southeast University
bo_ling@seu.edu.cn

Zhengyu Gan
Southeast University
zhengyugan@seu.edu.cn

Guanyu Gao
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
gygao@njust.edu.cn

Wanyuan Wang
Southeast University
wywang@seu.edu.cn
Weiwei Wu
Southeast University
weiweiwu@seu.edu.cn

Yan Lyu∗
Southeast University
lvyanly@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human-in-the-loop (HIL) imitation learning enables agents to learn complex behaviors safely through real-time human intervention. However, existing methods
struggle to efficiently leverage agent-generated data due to dynamically evolving
trajectory distributions and imperfections caused by human intervention delays,
often failing to faithfully imitate the human expert policy. In this work, we propose
Faithful Dynamic Imitation Learning (FaithDaIL) to address these challenges. We
formulate learning from human intervention as an online non-convex problem
and employ dynamic regret minimization to adapt to the shifting data distribution
and track high-quality policy trajectories. To ensure faithful imitation of human
expert despite training on mixed agent and human data, we introduce an unbiased
imitation objective and achieve it by weighting the behavior distribution relative
to the human expert’s as a proxy reward. Extensive experiments on MetaDrive
and CARLA driving benchmarks demonstrate that FaithDaIL achieves state-ofthe-art performance in safety and task success with significantly reduced human
intervention data compared to prior HIL baselines. The corresponding source code
is available at https://github.com/William-island/FaithDaIL.

1

Introduction

Human-in-the-loop (HIL) imitation learning is a promising approach to address key limitations
of traditional reinforcement learning, such as misalignment with human intent and poor sample
efficiency. By incorporating human feedback and interventions into the learning process, HIL enables
agents to better align with human preferences, even when reward functions are difficult to design or
prone to unintended biases [1, 2, 3]. While early HIL methods relied on passive human feedback –
such as preference on behavior trajectories [4, 5, 6, 7] – these methods are unsuitable for safety-critical
domains like autonomous driving, where unacceptable risks can arise during data collection [8, 9].
In contrast, active human intervention (see Figure 1a), where humans provide real-time corrections
and demonstrations during agent execution, directly enhances training-time safety. While some early
methods like Human-Gated DAgger (HG-DAgger) [8] focus solely on human-provided data, this data
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

