LaM-SLidE: Latent Space Modeling of Spatial
Dynamical Systems via Linked Entities

Florian Sestak1
Günter Klambauer∗,1,4

Artur P. Toshev2
Andreas Fürst1
∗,1
Andreas Mayr
Johannes Brandstetter∗,1,3
* Equal contribution
1
ELLIS Unit, LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz, Austria
2
Department of Engineering Physics and Computation, TUM, Germany
3
Emmi AI GmbH, Linz, Austria, 4 Clinical Research Institute for Medical AI, JKU Linz, Austria
{klambauer,mayr,brandstetter}@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Generative models are spearheading recent progress in deep learning, showcasing
strong promise for trajectory sampling in dynamical systems as well. However,
whereas latent space modeling paradigms have transformed image and video generation, similar approaches are more difficult for most dynamical systems. Such
systems – from chemical molecule structures to collective human behavior – are
described by interactions of entities, making them inherently linked to connectivity
patterns, entity conservation, and the traceability of entities over time. Our approach, L A M-SL ID E (Latent Space Modeling of Spatial Dynamical Systems via
Linked Entities), bridges the gap between: (1) keeping the traceability of individual
entities in a latent system representation, and (2) leveraging the efficiency and scalability of recent advances in image and video generation, where pre-trained encoder
and decoder enable generative modeling directly in latent space. The core idea of
L A M-SL ID E is the introduction of identifier representations (IDs) that enable the
retrieval of entity properties and entity composition from latent system representations, thus fostering traceability. Experimentally, across different domains, we
show that L A M-SL ID E performs favorably in terms of speed, accuracy, and generalizability. Code is available at https://github.com/ml-jku/LaM-SLidE.

1

Introduction

Understanding dynamical systems represents a fundamental challenge across numerous scientific and
engineering domains [47, 46, 73]. In this work, we address spatial dynamical systems, characterized
by scenes of distinguishable entities at defined spatial coordinates. Modeling temporal trajectories
of such entities quickly becomes challenging, especially when stochasticity is involved. A prime
example is molecular dynamics [47], where trajectories of individual atoms are modeled via Langevin
dynamics, which accounts for omitted degrees of freedom by using stochastic differential equations.
Consequently, the trajectories of the atoms themselves become non-deterministic.
A conventional approach to predict spatial trajectories of entities is to represent scenes as neighborhood graphs and to subsequently process these graphs with graph neural networks (GNNs). When
using GNNs [83, 64, 32, 11, 86], each entity is usually represented by a node, and the spatial entities
nearby are connected by an edge in the neighborhood graph. Neighborhood graphs have extensively
been used for trajectory prediction tasks [51], especially for problems with a large number of indistinguishable entities, [e.g., 81, 63]. Recently, GNNs have been integrated into generative modeling
frameworks to effectively capture the behavior of stochastic systems [98, 22].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

