ADMN: A Layer-Wise Adaptive Multimodal Network for
Dynamic Input Noise and Compute Resources

Jason Wu
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
jaysunwu@g.ucla.edu

Yuyang Yuan
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
yuanyuyang@g.ucla.edu

Kang Yang
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
kyang73@g.ucla.edu

Lance Kaplan
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
US Army
lance.m.kaplan.civ@army.mil

Mani Srivastava∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
mbs@ucla.edu

Abstract
Multimodal deep learning systems are deployed in dynamic scenarios due to the robustness afforded by multiple sensing modalities. Nevertheless, they struggle with
varying compute resource availability (due to multi-tenancy, device heterogeneity,
etc.) and fluctuating quality of inputs (from sensor feed corruption, environmental
noise, etc.). Statically provisioned multimodal systems cannot adapt when compute
resources change over time, while existing dynamic networks struggle with strict
compute budgets. Additionally, both systems often neglect the impact of variations
in modality quality. Consequently, modalities suffering substantial corruption may
needlessly consume resources better allocated towards other modalities. We propose ADMN, a layer-wise Adaptive Depth Multimodal Network capable of tackling
both challenges - it adjusts the total number of active layers across all modalities to
meet strict compute resource constraints, and continually reallocates layers across
input modalities according to their modality quality. Our evaluations showcase
ADMN can match the accuracy of state-of-the-art networks while reducing up to 75%
of their floating-point operations.

1

Introduction

Background: Multimodal deep learning systems fusing sensory data from various modalities are the
standard for accurate, robust sensing [1, 2]. Accordingly, these multimodal systems are invaluable
in highly dynamic environments, where a given input modality’s quality-of-information (QoI) can
vary drastically across samples. Low QoI data is corrupted, noisy, or otherwise degraded in a manner
reducing its informativeness. Fluctuations in a modality’s QoI can occur slowly (e.g., lighting
conditions over the day) or rapidly (e.g., battlefield settings or unstable sensor feeds).
∗

Mani Srivastava holds concurrent appointments as a Professor of ECE and CS (joint) at the University of
California, Los Angeles, and as an Amazon Scholar at Amazon. This paper describes work performed at UCLA
and is not associated with Amazon.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

