AutoData: A Multi-Agent System
for Open Web Data Collection

Tianyi Ma1† , Yiyue Qian3†∗ , Zheyuan Zhang1 , Zehong Wang1 , Xiaoye Qian3∗ , Feifan Bai4 ,
Yifan Ding3†∗ , Xuwei Luo5 , Shinan Zhang3∗ , Keerthiram Murugesan6 ,
Chuxu Zhang2 , and Yanfang Ye1‡
tma2@nd.edu, yyqian5@gmail.com, {zzhang42, zwang43}@nd.edu,
qianxiaoye1993@hotmail.com, xiaobai@uw.edu
dyf0125@gmail.com, luo446@purdue.edu, zhangshinan@gmail.com,
Keerthiram.Murugesan@ibm.com, chuxu.zhang@uconn.edu, yye7@nd.edu
1
University of Notre Dame, 2 University of Connecticut, 3 Amazon,
4
University of Washington, 5 Purdue University, 6 IBM Research

Abstract
The exponential growth of data-driven systems and AI technologies has intensified
the demand for high-quality web-sourced datasets. While existing datasets have
proven valuable, conventional web data collection approaches face significant limitations in terms of human effort and scalability. Current data-collecting solutions
fall into two categories: wrapper-based methods that struggle with adaptability and
reproducibility, and large language model (LLM)-based approaches that incur substantial computational and financial costs. To address these challenges, we propose
AutoData, a novel multi-agent system for Automated web Data collection, that
requires minimal human intervention, i.e., only necessitating a natural language
instruction specifying the desired dataset. In addition, AutoData is designed with
a robust multi-agent architecture, featuring a novel oriented message hypergraph
coordinated by a central task manager, to efficiently organize agents across research
and development squads. Besides, we introduce a novel hypergraph cache system
to advance the multi-agent collaboration process that enables efficient automated
data collection and mitigates the token cost issues prevalent in existing LLM-based
systems. Moreover, we introduce Instruct2DS, a new benchmark dataset supporting
live data collection from web sources across three domains: academic, finance,
and sports. Comprehensive evaluations over Instruct2DS and three existing benchmark datasets demonstrate AutoData’s superior performance compared to baseline
methods. Case studies on challenging tasks such as picture book collection and
paper extraction from surveys further validate its applicability. Our source code
and dataset are available at here.

1

Introduction

Data is the fuel that powers modern data-centric intelligence systems [1, 2]. State-of-the-art AI models
rely heavily on high-quality data to learn patterns, forecast trends, and self-optimize. As the World
Wide Web hosts an unparalleled breadth of real-world signals, it has become the default reservoir for
large-scale data acquisition. Landmark web-sourced data [3–10] have already accelerated research in
various domains, such as natural language processing and computer vision.
†

Both authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
∗
The work is not related to the position at the corresponding institution.
‡

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

