Simplicity Prevails: Rethinking Negative Preference
Optimization for LLM Unlearning

Chongyu Fan†,⋆ Jiancheng Liu†,⋆ Licong Lin‡,⋆
Jinghan Jia† Ruiqi Zhang‡ Song Mei‡ Sijia Liu†,§
†
Michigan State University
‡
University of California, Berkeley
§
IBM Research
⋆
Equal contributions

Abstract
This work studies the problem of large language model (LLM) unlearning, aiming to remove unwanted data influences (e.g., copyrighted or harmful content)
while preserving model utility. Despite the increasing demand for unlearning, a
technically-grounded optimization framework is lacking. Gradient ascent (GA)type methods, though widely used, are suboptimal as they reverse the learning
process without controlling optimization divergence (i.e., deviation from the pretrained state), leading to risks of model collapse. Negative preference optimization
(NPO) has been proposed to address this issue and is considered one of the stateof-the-art LLM unlearning approaches. In this work, we revisit NPO and identify
another critical issue: reference model bias. This bias arises from using the reference model (i.e., the model prior to unlearning) to assess unlearning success,
which can lead to a misleading impression of the true data-wise unlearning effectiveness. Specifically, it could cause (a) uneven allocation of optimization power
across forget data with varying difficulty levels and (b) ineffective gradient weight
smoothing during the early stages of unlearning optimization. To overcome these
challenges, we propose a simple yet effective unlearning optimization framework,
called SimNPO, showing that ‘simplicity’ in removing the reliance on a reference
model (through the lens of simple preference optimization) benefits unlearning.
We provide deeper insights into SimNPO’s advantages, including an analysis
based on mixtures of Markov chains. Extensive experiments further validate its
efficacy on benchmarks like TOFU, MUSE and WMDP. Codes are available at
https://github.com/OPTML-Group/Unlearn-Simple.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of LLMs has raised security and safety concerns, including issues related to
copyright violations and sociotechnical harms [1–4]. However, retraining these models to remove
undesirable data influences is often impractical due to the substantial costs and time required for such
processes. This gives rise to the problem of LLM unlearning [5]. To trace its origins, the concept of
machine unlearning was initially developed for data removal to comply with privacy regulations such
as the “right to be forgotten” [6, 7], with early studies focusing on vision models [8–15]. However, it
is soon adapted to LLMs to remove unwanted data and knowledge [4, 5, 16–20].
The current optimization foundation for LLM unlearning often relies on optimization divergence1
from the pre-trained state, which refers to the deviation from the converged pre-trained model
1

Here, we use “divergence” as opposed to “convergence” in model training, aiming to reverse learning for
unlearning.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

