Conformal prediction for causal effects of continuous
treatments
Maresa Schröder
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
maresa.schroeder@lmu.de

Dennis Frauen
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
frauen@lmu.de

Jonas Schweisthal
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
jonas.schweisthal@lmu.de

Konstantin Hess
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
k.hess@lmu.de

Valentyn Melnychuk
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
melnychuk@lmu.de

Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
feuerriegel@lmu.de

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification of causal effects is crucial for safety-critical applications such as personalized medicine. A powerful approach for this is conformal
prediction, which has several practical benefits due to model-agnostic finite-sample
guarantees. Yet, existing methods for conformal prediction of causal effects are
limited to binary/discrete treatments and make highly restrictive assumptions, such
as known propensity scores. In this work, we provide a novel conformal prediction method for potential outcomes of continuous treatments. We account for
the additional uncertainty introduced through propensity estimation so that our
conformal prediction intervals are valid even if the propensity score is unknown.
Our contributions are three-fold: (1) We derive finite-sample validity guarantees
for prediction intervals of potential outcomes of continuous treatments. (2) We
provide an algorithm for calculating the derived intervals. (3) We demonstrate the
effectiveness of the conformal prediction intervals in experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose conformal prediction for continuous treatments when the propensity score is unknown
and must be estimated from data.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) for estimating causal quantities such as causal effects and the potential
outcomes of treatments is nowadays widely used in real-world applications such as personalized
medicine [12]. However, existing methods from causal ML typically focus on point estimates [e.g.,
38, 40], which means that the uncertainty in the predictions is neglected and hinders the use of
causal ML in safety-critical applications [12, 31]. As the following example shows, uncertainty
quantification (UQ) of causal quantities is crucial for reliable decision-making.
Motivating example: Let us consider a doctor who seeks to determine the dosage of chemotherapy in
cancer care. This requires estimating the tumor size in response to the dosage for a specific patient
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

