ϵ-Seg: Sparsely Supervised Semantic Segmentation
of Microscopy Data

Sheida Rahnamai Kordasiabi1,2 , Damian Dalle Nogare1 , Florian Jug1
1
Human Technopole, Milan, Italy
2
Technical University of Dresden, Germany

Abstract
Semantic segmentation of electron microscopy (EM) images of biological samples
remains a challenge in the life sciences. EM data captures details of biological
structures, sometimes with such complexity that even human observers can find
it overwhelming. We introduce ϵ-Seg, a method based on hierarchical variational
autoencoders (HVAE S), employing center-region masking, sparse label contrastive
learning (CL), a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) prior, and clustering-free label
prediction. Center-region masking and the inpainting loss encourage the model to
learn robust and representative embeddings to distinguish the desired classes, even
if training labels are sparse (0.05% of the total image data or less). For optimal
performance, we employ CL and a GMM prior to shape the latent space of the
HVAE such that encoded input patches tend to cluster w.r.t. the semantic classes
we wish to distinguish. Finally, instead of clustering latent embeddings for semantic
segmentation, we propose a MLP semantic segmentation head to directly predict
class labels from latent embeddings. We show empirical results of ϵ-Seg and
baseline methods on 2 dense EM datasets of biological tissues and demonstrate the
applicability of our method also on fluorescence microscopy data. Our results show
that ϵ-Seg is capable of achieving competitive sparsely-supervised segmentation
results on complex biological image data, even if only limited amounts of training
labels are available. Code available at https://github.com/juglab/eps-Seg.

1

Introduction

Electron Microscopy (EM) comes in multiple flavors and is without doubt the tool of choice for
high-resolution investigations of biological samples [12]. Today, microscopists can capture fine
cellular structures at nanometer resolution [22, 3]. Although this opens unprecedented possibilities
for studying the very fabric of life, it also means that such microscopes are producing an unfathomable
amount of raw image data that then are available to be analyzed [36].
A key module of nearly every analysis pipeline is the segmentation step, where specific structures of
interest must be found in the entire body of captured image data. Performing this step manually, is
typically not feasible as it takes an impossibly long time [16, 36, 22]. Unfortunately, even semantic
segmentation of EM data of biological samples remains a challenge [3, 31].
Ideally, methods for segmenting EM data should (i) lead to sufficiently good segmentation results for
the downstream analysis tasks at hand with as few training labels as possible, (ii) generalize well to
different imaging conditions and image tissue types and/or be able to fine-tune on moderate amounts
of new training data [9], (iii) be able to benefit from sparse labeled data via supervised contrastive
learning approaches, and if possible (iv) operate on a hierarchy of spatial scales to distinguish objects
not only by either detailed textures or larger scale shapes, but both.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

