ProtoPairNet: Interpretable Regression through
Prototypical Pair Reasoning

Rose Gurung
University of Maine
rose.gurung@maine.edu

Ronilo Ragodos
University of New Hampshire
Ronilo.Ragodos@unh.edu

Tong Wang
Yale University
tong.wang.tw687@yale.edu

Chiyu Ma
Dartmouth College
chiyu.ma.gr@dartmouth.edu

Chaofan Chen
University of Maine
chaofan.chen@maine.edu

Abstract
We present Prototypical Pair Network (ProtoPairNet), a novel interpretable architecture that combines deep learning with case-based reasoning to predict continuous
targets. While prototype-based models have primarily addressed image classification with discrete outputs, extending these methods to continuous targets, such as
regression, poses significant challenges. Existing architectures which rely heavily
on one-to-one comparison with prototypes lack the directional information necessary for continuous predictions. Our method redefines the role of prototypes in such
tasks by incorporating prototypical pairs into the reasoning process. Predictions
are derived based on the input’s relative dissimilarities to these pairs, leveraging
an intuitive geometric interpretation. Our method further reduces the complexity
of the reasoning process by relying on the single most relevant pair of prototypes,
rather than all prototypes in the model as was done in prior works. Our model
is versatile enough to be used in both vision-based regression and continuous
control in reinforcement learning. Our experiments demonstrate that ProtoPairNet
achieves performance on par with its black-box counterparts across these tasks.
Comprehensive analyses confirm the meaningfulness of prototypical pairs and the
faithfulness of our model’s interpretations, and extensive user studies highlight our
model’s improved interpretability over existing methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success across various domains, from advancing
autonomous vehicles [31] to supporting critical decisions in healthcare [5, 46, 39] and criminal justice
[6]. As these applications expand into increasingly sensitive and high-stakes areas, the demand for
models with transparent and interpretable decision-making processes has become crucial. Prototypebased models [11, 44, 33, 26, 12, 43, 28, 23], which are inherently interpretable by design, address
this challenge through case-based reasoning [1], a natural form of human reasoning. These models
generally perform one-to-one comparisons between an input image and prototypical cases learned
during training. They then aggregate evidence of similarity to these prototypes, using a linear layer to
arrive at the final classification decision.
Despite recent advances in prototype-based models for image classifications with discrete targets, extending these models to tasks with continuous targets, such as regression [24, 16, 21]
face two primary issues: First, one-to-one comparisons between an input image and individual prototypes only tell us that the input image is similar to some prototypes and thus should
have a label similar to the labels of those prototypes. This is insufficient for regression, where
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

