Restage4D: Reanimating Deformable 3D
Reconstruction from a Single Video

1

Jixuan He1 , Chieh Hubert Lin2 , Lu Qi3∗, Ming-Hsuan Yang2
Cornell Tech, 2 University of California, Merced, 3 Wuhan University
jh2926@cornell.edu

Abstract
Creating deformable 3D content has gained increasing attention with the rise of
text-to-image and image-to-video generative models. While these models provide
rich semantic priors for appearance, they struggle to capture the physical realism
and motion dynamics needed for authentic 4D scene synthesis. In contrast, realworld videos can provide physically grounded geometry and articulation cues that
are difficult to hallucinate. One question is raised: Can we generate physically
consistent 4D content by leveraging the motion priors of the real-world video? In
this work, we explore the task of reanimating deformable 3D scenes from a single
video, using the original sequence as a supervisory signal to correct artifacts from
synthetic motion. We introduce Restage4D, a geometry-preserving pipeline for
video-conditioned 4D restaging. Our approach uses a video-rewinding training
strategy to temporally bridge a real base video and a synthetic driving video via a
shared motion representation. We further incorporate an occlusion-aware rigidity
loss and a disocclusion backtracing mechanism to improve structural and geometry
consistency under challenging motion. We validate Restage4D on DAVIS and
PointOdyssey, demonstrating improved geometry consistency, motion quality, and
3D tracking performance. Our method not only preserves deformable structure
under novel motion, but also automatically corrects errors introduced by generative
models, revealing the potential of video prior in 4D restaging task. Source code
and trained models will be released.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in foundational generative models in images [1, 2], videos [3], and 3D scenes [4, 5]
drive growing interest in the creation of 4D content, which brings time-varying dynamics to 3D. In
practical applications, controllability remains a valuable and continuing challenge in all generative
frameworks. Inspired by video generative models, early controllable 4D generative frameworks
condition on text prompts [6] or an image [7]. This intrigues us to explore other conditioning sources
that are beneficial and intuitive for 4D content creation. In particular, we are interested in video
conditioning, which is easily accessible on the Internet, exhibits physical properties of objects, and
maintains visible regions that are broader than a single image. Meanwhile, existing works in 4D
synthesis [8] mostly source the dynamics from video foundation models. Despite these models being
able to synthesize visually appealing results with seemingly correct dynamics, they struggle to ensure
physical plausibility, such as inconsistent appearance (e.g., geometry modified after occlusion or
out-of-view) and infeasible deformation (e.g., limbs swapping during intersection). In Section 4.3,
we show that extracting explicit 3D deformation from infeasible physics leads to floaters and broken
geometry. These observations motivate us to develop a new paradigm for creating 4D content,
∗

Corresponding author: Lu Qi

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

