When Additive Noise Meets Unobserved Mediators:
Bivariate Denoising Diffusion for Causal Discovery

Dominik Meier∗
Cornell Tech
dm954@cornell.edu

Sujai Hiremath∗
Cornell Tech
sh2583@cornell.edu

Promit Ghosal
University of Chicago
promit@uchicago.edu

Kyra Gan
Cornell Tech
kyragan@cornell.edu

Abstract
Distinguishing cause and effect from bivariate observational data is a foundational
problem in many disciplines, but challenging without additional assumptions. Additive noise models (ANMs) are widely used to enable sample-efficient bivariate
causal discovery. However, conventional ANM-based methods fail when unobserved mediators corrupt the causal relationship between variables. This paper
makes three key contributions: first, we rigorously characterize why standard ANM
approaches break down in the presence of unmeasured mediators. Second, we
demonstrate that prior solutions for hidden mediation are brittle in finite sample
settings, limiting their practical utility. To address these gaps, we propose Bivariate Denoising Diffusion (BiDD) for causal discovery, a method designed to
handle latent noise introduced by unmeasured mediators. Unlike prior methods
that infer directionality through mean squared error loss comparisons, our approach
introduces a novel independence test statistic: during the noising and denoising
processes for each variable, we condition on the other variable as input and evaluate
the independence of the predicted noise relative to this input. We prove asymptotic
consistency of BiDD under the ANM, and conjecture that it performs well under
hidden mediation. Experiments on synthetic and real-world data demonstrate
consistent performance, outperforming existing methods in mediator-corrupted
settings while maintaining strong performance in mediator-free settings.

1

Introduction

Determining the causal direction between two variables (X→Y) is fundamental to scientific domains
ranging from genomics to economics. However, traditional discovery methods, such as constraintbased [61, 60] and scoring-based methods [8, 27, 17] can only identify causal graphs up to an
equivalence class, leaving them unable to distinguish the causal direction between a variable pair.
Additional assumptions are necessary to enable bivariate discovery [46], and they mostly fall under
three categories: (1) the location scale noise model (LSNMs), (2) the principle of independent
mechanisms (ICM), and (3) the additive noise model (ANM).
LSNMs express the outcome Y with heteroskedastic, multiplicative noise relative to the treatment X,
i.e. Y = f (X) + g(X)ε, where ε ⊥
⊥ X. While LSNMs allow for increased flexibility, existing approaches require additional parametric assumptions for identifiability [62, 64, 18, 7]. ICM approaches
assume that the marginal distribution of the cause and the conditional mechanism generating the effect
∗

Shared first co-author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

