Efficient Parametric SVD of Koopman Operator
for Stochastic Dynamical Systems

1

Minchan Jeong1∗, J. Jon Ryu2∗ , Se-Young Yun1 , Gregory W. Wornell2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon 34141, South Korea
2
Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
{mcjeong,yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr, {jongha,gww}@mit.edu

Abstract
The Koopman operator provides a principled framework for analyzing nonlinear
dynamical systems through linear operator theory. Recent advances in dynamic
mode decomposition (DMD) have shown that trajectory data can be used to identify
dominant modes of a system in a data-driven manner. Building on this idea, deep
learning methods such as VAMPnet and DPNet have been proposed to learn the
leading singular subspaces of the Koopman operator. However, these methods
require backpropagation through potentially numerically unstable operations on
empirical second moment matrices, such as singular value decomposition and
matrix inversion, during objective computation, which can introduce biased gradient estimates and hinder scalability to large systems. In this work, we propose a
scalable and conceptually simple method for learning the top-k singular functions
of the Koopman operator for stochastic dynamical systems based on the idea of lowrank approximation. Our approach eliminates the need for unstable linear-algebraic
operations and integrates easily into modern deep learning pipelines. Empirical results demonstrate that the learned singular subspaces are both reliable and effective
for downstream tasks such as eigen-analysis and multi-step prediction.

1

Introduction

The Koopman operator theory offers a powerful framework for analyzing nonlinear dynamical
systems by lifting them into an infinite-dimensional function space, where spectral techniques from
linear operator theory can be applied. Recent advances in dynamic mode decomposition (DMD)
have shown that trajectory data can be effectively used to identify dominant eigen-modes in a
data-driven manner [40, 46, 47, 18, 4]. Inspired by the success of deep learning, recent methods
such as VAMPnet [48, 24] and DPNet [16] employ neural networks to approximate the leading
singular subspaces of the Koopman operator. While shown effective for some benchmark tasks, these
approaches often rely on numerically unstable operations such as singular value decomposition (SVD)
or matrix inversion during objective computation. These operations present practical challenges,
particularly in computing unbiased gradients and thus scaling to high-dimensional systems.
In this work, we propose a conceptually simple and scalable method for learning the top-k singular
functions of the Koopman operator for stochastic dynamical systems. Our approach builds on the
idea of low-rank approximation, which has recently received increasing attention in the literature
due to its favorable optimization structure that aligns well with modern optimization practices; see,
e.g., [21, 45] in the numerical optimization literature, and [42, 39, 8, 32, 49, 17] in the machine
learning literature. Our method avoids unstable linear-algebraic computations and is easy to integrate
into modern deep learning pipelines. We demonstrate that it reliably recovers dominant Koopman
eigen-subspaces and supports downstream tasks such as prediction and eigen-analysis.
∗

The two authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

