ReID5o: Achieving Omni Multi-modal Person
Re-identification in a Single Model

Jialong Zuo 1

Yongtai Deng 1
Mengdan Tan 1
Rui Jin 1
Dongyue Wu 1
1
2
1∗
Nong Sang
Liang Pan
Changxin Gao

1

National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory.
{jlongzuo, cgao}@hust.edu.cn

Code & Dataset: https://github.com/Zplusdragon/ReID5o_ORBench

Abstract
In real-word scenarios, person re-identification (ReID) expects to identify a personof-interest via the descriptive query, regardless of whether the query is a single
modality or a combination of multiple modalities. However, existing methods and
datasets remain constrained to limited modalities, failing to meet this requirement.
Therefore, we investigate a new challenging problem called Omni Multi-modal
Person Re-identification (OM-ReID), which aims to achieve effective retrieval with
varying multi-modal queries. To address dataset scarcity, we construct ORBench,
the first high-quality multi-modal dataset comprising 1,000 unique identities across
five modalities: RGB, infrared, color pencil, sketch, and textual description. This
dataset also has significant superiority in terms of diversity, such as the painting
perspectives and textual information. It could serve as an ideal platform for followup investigations in OM-ReID. Moreover, we propose ReID5o, a novel multi-modal
learning framework for person ReID. It enables synergistic fusion and cross-modal
alignment of arbitrary modality combinations in a single model, with a unified
encoding and multi-expert routing mechanism proposed. Extensive experiments
verify the advancement and practicality of our ORBench. A range of models have
been compared on it, and our proposed ReID5o gives the best performance.

1

Introduction

Person re-identification (ReID), as a fine-grained retrieval task, aims to search for person images of
the target identity based on a given descriptive query [51]. Due to the broad applications of ReID
in fields such as urban security, many researchers have conducted in-depth studies on it. It can be
classified into single-modal retrieval [58, 45] and cross-modal retrieval [26, 46, 34]. The former
involves the mutual search of RGB images, while the latter usually use queries from other modalities
to retrieve RGB images. Considering the frequent lack of original RGB queries in real scenarios, the
latter has increasingly drawn attention in recent years.
However, despite the considerable progress in this technology [61, 62, 24, 13], a challenging and
practical problem, which aims to achieve effective retrieval with varying multi-modal queries and
their combinations in the ReID model, remains largely unexplored in previous researches.
We propose that exploring such a challenging problem, termed Omni Multi-modal Person Reidentification (OM-ReID), is of great significance. On the one hand, due to the diversity of information
acquisition, there is often a need for multi-modal queries in practical applications [50]. Users expect
the model to be able to effectively process multi-modal information and provide comprehensive
and accurate retrieval results. If the model can handle these varying modalities, it will significantly
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

