Solving Inverse Problems with FLAIR

Julius Erbach1,2
Bernt Schiele2
1

ETH Zürich

2

Dominik Narnhofer1 Andreas Dombos1
Jan Eric Lenssen2 Konrad Schindler1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
Flow-based latent generative models such as Stable Diffusion 3 are able to generate images with remarkable quality, even enabling photorealistic text-to-image
generation. Their impressive performance suggests that these models should also
constitute powerful priors for inverse imaging problems, but that approach has
not yet led to comparable fidelity. There are several key obstacles: (i) the data
likelihood term is usually intractable; (ii) learned generative models cannot be
directly conditioned on the distorted observations, leading to conflicting objectives
between data likelihood and prior; and (iii) the reconstructions can deviate from the
observed data. We present FLAIR, a novel, training-free variational framework that
leverages flow-based generative models as prior for inverse problems. To that end,
we introduce a variational objective for flow matching that is agnostic to the type
of degradation, and combine it with deterministic trajectory adjustments to guide
the prior towards regions which are more likely under the posterior. To enforce
exact consistency with the observed data, we decouple the optimization of the data
fidelity and regularization terms. Moreover, we introduce a time-dependent calibration scheme in which the strength of the regularization is modulated according to
off-line accuracy estimates. Results on standard imaging benchmarks demonstrate
that FLAIR consistently outperforms existing diffusion- and flow-based methods
in terms of reconstruction quality and sample diversity. Source code is available at
https://inverseflair.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Flow-based generative models are at the core of modern image generators like Stable Diffusion or
FLUX [14]. Beyond image generation based on text prompts, these models have emerged as powerful
data-driven priors for a whole range of visual computing tasks. Their comprehensive representation
of the visual world, learned from internet-scale training datasets, makes them an attractive alternative
to traditional handcrafted image priors. Often, they can be used without any task-specific retraining.
While it is evident that a model capable of generating photorealistic images should be suitable as prior
(a.k.a. regularizer) for inverse imaging problems, a practical implementation faces several challenges.
On the one hand, flow-based models normally operate in the lower-dimensional latent space of a
variational autoencoder (VAE), which means that the forward operator (the relationship between
the observed, degraded image and the desired, clean target image) is no longer linear. On the other
hand, the iterative nature of the generative process means that intermediate stages are corrupted
with (time-dependent) random noise. Hence, one cannot explicitly evaluate their data likelihood,
which renders the data term intractable. Moreover, learned generative models tend to overly favor
regions of the training distribution that have a high sample density. For test samples that fall in
low-density regions, the prior will have a too strong tendency to pull towards outputs with higher
a-priori likelihood, compromising fidelity to the input observations.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

