Self-Improving Embodied Foundation Models

Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour ∗

Generalist AI
kamyar@generalistai.com
Ayzaan Wahid & Jonathan Tompson & Pannag Sanketi† & Igor Mordatch†
Google DeepMind
{ayzaan, tompson, psanketi, imordatch}@google.com

Abstract
Foundation models trained on web-scale data have revolutionized robotics, but
their application to low-level control remains largely limited to behavioral cloning.
Drawing inspiration from the success of the reinforcement learning stage in finetuning large language models, we propose a two-stage post-training approach for
robotics. The first stage, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), fine-tunes pretrained
foundation models using both: a) behavioral cloning, and b) steps-to-go prediction
objectives. In the second stage, Self-Improvement, steps-to-go prediction enables
the extraction of a well-shaped reward function and a robust success detector,
enabling a fleet of robots to autonomously practice downstream tasks with minimal
human supervision. Through extensive experiments on real-world and simulated
robot embodiments, our novel post-training recipe unveils significant results on
Embodied Foundation Models. First, we demonstrate that the combination of
SFT and Self-Improvement is significantly more sample-efficient than scaling
imitation data collection for supervised learning, and that it leads to policies with
significantly higher success rates. Further ablations highlight that the combination
of web-scale pretraining and Self-Improvement is the key to this sample-efficiency.
Next, we demonstrate that our proposed combination uniquely unlocks a capability
that current methods cannot achieve: autonomously practicing and acquiring novel
skills that generalize far beyond the behaviors observed in the imitation learning
datasets used during training. These findings highlight the transformative potential
of combining pretrained foundation models with online Self-Improvement to enable
autonomous skill acquisition in robotics.

1

Introduction

Recent works have demonstrated that foundation models can be effectively fine-tuned to directly act
as low-level robot policies [9, 41, 45, 39, 31, 21, 7], and that they inherit significant generalization
and robustness capabilities due to the web-scale pretraining of the foundation models from which
they were derived. Thus far the training regime for Embodied Foundation Models (EFMs) has been
limited to behavioral cloning (i.e. supervised learning) [9, 41, 45, 39, 31, 21, 7]. In contrast, from the
literature on large language models (LLMs) we observe that after the initial pretraining, post-training
for downstream tasks is typically divided into two stages: 1) Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), followed
by 2) Reinforcement Learning (RL). RL-tuning of LLMs has been shown to markedly, and rapidly,
improve downstream task performance beyond SFT [47, 40], and has become a critical stage in the
training recipe of foundation models [25, 1, 50, 20].
∗
†

Founding Member of Technical Staff at Generalist AI. Project completed April 2024 at Google DeepMind.
Equal supervision.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

