Deep Tree Tensor Networks

Chang Nie
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
Nanjing, China
changnie@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Originating in quantum physics, tensor networks (TNs) have been widely adopted
as exponential machines and parametric decomposers for recognition tasks. Typical TN models, such as Matrix Product States (MPS), have not yet achieved
successful application in natural image recognition. When employed, they primarily serve to compress parameters within pre-existing networks, thereby losing
their distinctive capability to capture exponential-order feature interactions. This
paper introduces a novel architecture named Deep Tree Tensor Network (DTTN),
which captures 2L -order multiplicative interactions across features through multilinear operations, while essentially unfolding into a tree-like TN topology with
the parameter-sharing property. DTTN is stacked with multiple antisymmetric interaction modules (AIMs), and this design facilitates efficient implementation. Furthermore, our theoretical analysis demonstrates the equivalence between quantum-inspired TN models and polynomial/multilinear networks under
specific conditions. We posit that the DTTN could catalyze more interpretable
research within this field. The proposed model is evaluated across multiple
benchmarks and domains, demonstrating superior performance compared to both
peer methods and state-of-the-art architectures. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/NieCha/deep_tree_tensor_network.

1

Introduction

“Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.” — Leonardo da Vinci
The wavefunction of a quantum many-body system typically resides in an extremely high-dimensional
Hilbert space, with its complexity increasing exponentially as the particle count grows [27, 60]. For
example, consider a system consisting of N spin- 12 particles; the dimensionality of the corresponding
Hilbert space would be 2N . Tensor networks (TNs) offer powerful numerical techniques for tackling
the “Curse of Dimensionality” [12]. By leveraging the local entanglement properties of quantum states,
TNs represent complex wavefunctions into multilinear representations of multiple low-dimensional
cores, thereby significantly reducing computational and storage requirements [11, 44]1 . This class of
methods allows for an accurate representation of quantum states while mitigating the exponential
growth in complexity, making it feasible to simulate large-scale quantum systems [26, 44].
Recently, TN-based interpretable and quantum-inspired white-box machine learning has attracted the
attention of researchers. It holds the potential to generate novel schemes that can run on quantum
hardware [25, 43]. Typical TN models, including Matrix Product States [13] (MPS2 ), Tree Tensor
Network (TTN) [5], and Multi-Scale Entanglement Renormalization Ansatz (MERA) [45] are
1
In tensor network theory, states that satisfy the area law for entanglement entropy can be efficiently
approximated using TNs with finite bond dimensions.
2
The MPS is also referred to as Tensor Train [41], or Tensor Ring [61] with the periodic condition in classical
machine learning.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

