Better NTK Conditioning: A Free Lunch from
(ReLU) Nonlinear Activation in Wide Neural Networks

Chaoyue Liu
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
cyliu@purdue.edu
Han Bi
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Purdue University
bi53@purdue.edu

Like Hui
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California San Diego
lhui@ucsd.edu

Xiao Liu
Rosen Center For Advanced Computing
Purdue University
liu4201@purdue.edu

Abstract
Nonlinear activation functions are widely recognized for enhancing the expressivity
of neural networks, which is the primary reason for their widespread implementation. In this work, we focus on ReLU activation and reveal a novel and intriguing
property of nonlinear activations. By comparing enabling and disabling the nonlinear activations in the neural network, we demonstrate their specific effects on wide
neural networks: (a) better feature separation, i.e., a larger angle separation for
similar data in the feature space of model gradient, and (b) better NTK conditioning, i.e., a smaller condition number of neural tangent kernel (NTK). Furthermore,
we show that the network depth (i.e., with more nonlinear activation operations)
further amplifies these effects; in addition, in the infinite-width-then-depth limit,
all data are equally separated with a fixed angle in the model gradient feature space,
regardless of how similar they are originally in the input space. Note that, without
the nonlinear activation, i.e., in a linear neural network, the data separation remains
the same as for the original inputs and NTK condition number is equivalent to
the Gram matrix, regardless of the network depth. Due to the close connection
between NTK condition number and convergence theories, our results imply that
nonlinear activation helps to improve the worst-case convergence rates of gradient
based methods.

1

Introduction

It is well known that nonlinear activation functions increase the expressivity of neural networks, which
is the primary reason of their widespread implementation. A nonlinearly activated neural network
can approximate any continuous function to arbitrary precision, as long as there are enough neurons
in the hidden layers [13, 7, 12], while without it – as in a linear neural network, the network reduces
to linear models of the input. In addition, deeper neural networks, which have more nonlinearly
activated layers, have exponentially greater expressivity than shallower ones [32, 28, 29, 22, 34],
indicating that the network depth promotes the power of nonlinear activation functions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

