Distributional Adversarial Attacks and Training in
Deep Hedging

Guangyi He
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
g.he23@imperial.ac.uk

Tobias Sutter
Department of Economics
University of St. Gallen
tobias.sutter@unisg.ch

Lukas Gonon
School of Computer Science
University of St. Gallen
lukas.gonon@unisg.ch
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
l.gonon@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the robustness of classical deep hedging strategies under
distributional shifts by leveraging the concept of adversarial attacks. We first
demonstrate that standard deep hedging models are highly vulnerable to small
perturbations in the input distribution, resulting in significant performance degradation. Motivated by this, we propose an adversarial training framework tailored to
increase the robustness of deep hedging strategies. Our approach extends pointwise
adversarial attacks to the distributional setting and introduces a computationally
tractable reformulation of the adversarial optimization problem over a Wasserstein
ball. This enables the efficient training of hedging strategies that are resilient to
distributional perturbations. Through extensive numerical experiments, we show
that adversarially trained deep hedging strategies consistently outperform their classical counterparts in terms of out-of-sample performance and resilience to model
misspecification. Additional results indicate that the robust strategies maintain
reliable performance on real market data and remain effective during periods of
market change. Our findings establish a practical and effective framework for
robust deep hedging under realistic market uncertainties.1

1

Introduction

In the past decades, options and derivatives trading has seen enormous growth, with billions of
contracts traded every year [1]. Hedging of financial derivatives refers to taking financial positions
in other linked assets to mitigate the risk associated with the derivative. Thereby, hedging is a
fundamentally important task in the financial services industry. Deep Hedging [2] introduces a
model-free, data-driven framework that employs deep learning to optimize hedging strategies directly
from simulated market scenarios. The core idea is to parameterize hedging decisions via neural
networks. Optimal hedging is achieved by training the neural networks to minimize a risk measure of
the hedged portfolio’s profit and loss (P&L). While this approach has been widely adopted in industry,
the performance of learned hedging strategies critically depends on the quality of the training data. For
instance, the data-generating distribution during training might differ slightly from the test distribution
under which the deep hedging strategy is ultimately deployed and evaluated. This mismatch, known
as model misspecification, can result in suboptimal or even misleading decisions, a phenomenon
that is well documented in various classes of data-driven decision-making problems [3, 4]. This
1

The code is available on https://github.com/Guangyi-Mira/Distributional-AdversarialAttacks-and-Training-in-Deep-Hedging

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

