Continuity and Isolation Lead to Doubts or Dilemmas
in Large Language Models

Hector Pasten
Faculty of Mathematics
Pontifical Catholic University of Chile & CENIA
hector.pasten@uc.cl
Hector Jimenez
University of Chile & CENIA
hjimenez@dcc.uchile.cl

Felipe Urrutia
University of Chile & CENIA
furrutia@dim.uchile.cl

Cristian B. Calderon
CENIA
cristian.buc@cenia.cl

Cristóbal Rojas
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering
Pontifical Catholic University of Chile & CENIA
luis.rojas@uc.cl
Alexander Kozachinskiy
CENIA
alexander.kozachinskiy@cenia.cl

Abstract
Understanding how Transformers work and how they process information is key
to the theoretical and empirical advancement of these machines. In this work, we
demonstrate the existence of two phenomena in Transformers, namely isolation
and continuity. Both of these phenomena hinder Transformers to learn even simple
pattern sequences. Isolation expresses that any learnable sequence must be isolated
from another learnable sequence, and hence some sequences cannot be learned by
a single Transformer at the same time. Continuity entails that an attractor basin
forms around a learned sequence, such that any sequence falling in that basin
will collapse towards the learned sequence. Here, we mathematically prove these
phenomena emerge in all Transformers that use compact positional encoding, and
design rigorous experiments, demonstrating that the theoretical limitations we shed
light on occur on the practical scale.

1

Introduction

The massive adoption of generative artificial intelligence (AI), and in particular the use of Large
Language Models (LLMs), has lead to a growing interest in understanding how these machines work
and what they can and cannot compute [5]. While this endeavor has been primarily addressed from
an empirical, task performance perspective [11, 9, 3], it has now become clear that a fundamental
theoretical understanding of the Transformer (the architecture behind the success of LLM-based
applications [19]) is a crucial step towards explaining and overcoming the observed limitations.
[2, 20, 7]. This paper is a contribution to a recent trend of work devoted to the development of such
an understanding by revealing the mathematical properties of Transformers [17] that underlie these
limitations.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

