Streaming Attention Approximation
via Discrepancy Theory

Ekaterina Kochetkova
EPFL
ekaterina.kochetkova@epfl.ch
Insu Han
KAIST
insu.han@kaist.ac.kr

Amir Zandieh
Google Research
zandieh@google.com

Kshiteej Sheth
EPFL
kshiteej.sheth@epfl.ch
Michael Kapralov
EPFL
michael.kapralov@epfl.ch

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive success, but their high
memory requirements present challenges for long-context token generation. In
this paper we study the streaming complexity of attention approximation, a key
computational primitive underlying token generation.
Our main contribution is BalanceKV, a streaming algorithm for ϵ-approximating
attention computations based on geometric process for selecting a balanced collection of Key and Value tokens as per Banaszczyk’s vector balancing theory. We
complement our algorithm with space lower bounds for streaming attention computation. Besides strong theoretical guarantees, BalanceKV exhibits empirically
validated performance improvements over existing methods, both for attention
approximation and end-to-end performance on various long context benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models are the foundation of ongoing artificial intelligence revolution. Their
applications span a wide range of domains, from leading-edge language models (LLM) [1, 65] to
text-to-image [58, 66, 69], text-to-video synthesis [70], coding assistance [68] and even in multimodal
domains across text, audio, image, and video [53]. At the core of these models is the Transformer architecture, powered by the self-attention mechanism [73], which enables effective capture of pairwise
correlations across tokens in an input sequence. As these models scale in size and context length [41],
they face significant computational challenges, particularly in terms of memory usage. Efficiency and
accuracy are essential to unlock the full potential of LLMs in generating long sequences.
Space bottlenecks in transformer models. Most large language models, along with multimodal
and video models, adopt an autoregressive, decoder-only architecture. This architecture generates
tokens sequentially, applying attention dynamically to each newly generated token. To avoid redundant attention score computations during the generation phase, these models explicitly store the key
and value embeddings of previously generated tokens in a cache in each attention layer. Thus, a
major challenge is the fact that the memory complexity of storing previously generated key value
embeddings scales with both the model size (i.e., the number of layers and attention heads) and,
critically, the context size. Additionally, each model session typically requires its own dedicated
cache for storing key value embeddings, further exacerbating memory usage. This growing demand
has become a significant bottleneck, affecting both memory consumption and computational speed,
particularly for models handling long context lengths.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

