A DV EDM: Fine-grained Adversarial Attack against
VLM-based Embodied Agents

Yichen Wang1,2,4,5,6 Hangtao Zhang6 Hewen Pan1,2,4,5,6 Ziqi Zhou1,2,3,7
Xianlong Wang8 Peijin Guo1,2,4,5,6 Lulu Xue 1,2,4,5,6 Shengshan Hu 1,2,4,5,6
Minghui Li9
Leo Yu Zhang 10
1

National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
Services Computing Technology and System Lab 3 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
5
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
6
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
7
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
8
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
9
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
10
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
{wangyichen, hangt_zhang, hewenpan, zhouziqi, gpj, lluxue, hushengshan, minghuili}@hust.edu.cn
xianlong.wang@my.cityu.edu.hk, leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au
2

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), with their strong reasoning and planning capabilities, are widely used in embodied decision-making (EDM) tasks in embodied
agents, such as autonomous driving and robotic manipulation. Recent research has
increasingly explored adversarial attacks on VLMs to reveal their vulnerabilities.
However, these attacks either rely on overly strong assumptions, requiring full
knowledge of the victim VLM, which is impractical for attacking VLM-based
agents, or exhibit limited effectiveness. The latter stems from disrupting most
semantic information in the image, which leads to a misalignment between the
perception and the task context defined by system prompts. This inconsistency
interrupts the VLM’s reasoning process, resulting in invalid outputs that fail to
affect interactions in the physical world. To this end, we propose a fine-grained
adversarial attack framework, A DV EDM, which modifies the VLM’s perception
of only a few key objects while preserving the semantics of the remaining regions.
This attack effectively reduces conflicts with the task context, making VLMs output
valid but incorrect decisions and affecting the actions of agents, thus posing a more
substantial safety threat in the physical world. We design two variants of based
on this framework, A DV EDM-R and A DV EDM-A, which respectively remove
the semantics of a specific object from the image and add the semantics of a new
object into the image. The experimental results in both general scenarios and EDM
tasks demonstrate fine-grained control and excellent attack performance.

1

Introduction

Visual-language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4 [1] and Gemini-2.0 [2] have been widely adopted for
embodied decision-making (EDM) tasks in embodied agents, including autonomous driving [3, 4, 5]
and robotic manipulation [6, 7, 8], due to their powerful reasoning and planning capabilities. In
these tasks, VLMs generate decisions and plannings based on current inputs and system states, and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

