Horizon Reduction Makes RL Scalable
Seohong Park1 Kevin Frans1 Deepinder Mann1
Benjamin Eysenbach2 Aviral Kumar3 Sergey Levine1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Princeton University 3 Carnegie Mellon University
seohong@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the scalability of offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. In principle, a truly scalable offline RL algorithm should be able to solve
any given problem, regardless of its complexity, given sufficient data, compute, and
model capacity. We investigate if and how current offline RL algorithms match up
to this promise on diverse, challenging, previously unsolved tasks, using datasets
up to 1000× larger than typical offline RL datasets. We observe that despite scaling up data, many existing offline RL algorithms exhibit poor scaling behavior,
saturating well below the maximum performance. We hypothesize that the horizon
is the main cause behind the poor scaling of offline RL. We empirically verify this
hypothesis through several analysis experiments, showing that long horizons indeed present a fundamental barrier to scaling up offline RL. We then show that various horizon reduction1 techniques substantially enhance scalability on challenging
tasks. Based on our insights, we also introduce a minimal yet scalable method
named SHARSA that effectively reduces the horizon. SHARSA achieves the best
asymptotic performance and scaling behavior among our evaluation methods, showing that explicitly reducing the horizon unlocks the scalability of offline RL.
Code: https://github.com/seohongpark/horizon-reduction

1

Introduction

Scalability, the ability to consistently improve performance with more data and compute, is at the
core of the success of modern machine learning algorithms, across natural language processing
(NLP), computer vision (CV), and robotics. In this work, we are interested in the scalability of
offline reinforcement learning (RL), a framework that can leverage large-scale offline datasets to learn
performant policies. While prior works have shown that current offline RL methods scale to more
(but not necessarily harder) tasks with larger models and datasets [49, 86], it remains unclear how
RL scales with data to more challenging tasks, especially those that require more complex, longerhorizon sequential decision making.
Our main question, posed informally is:
To what extent can current offline RL algorithms solve complex tasks
simply by scaling up data and compute?
In principle, a truly scalable offline RL algorithm should be able to master any given task, no
matter how complex and long-horizon it is, given a sufficient amount of data (of sufficient coverage),
compute, and model capacity. Studying how current offline RL algorithms live up to this promise is
important, because it will tell us whether we are ready to scale existing offline RL methods, or if we
must further improve offline RL algorithms before scaling them.
1
Throughout this work, we use the term “horizon reduction” to refer to techniques that reduce the effective
decision horizon, such as n-step returns and hierarchical policies.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

