The third pillar of causal analysis? A measurement
perspective on causal representations
Dingling Yao∗1 , Shimeng Huang∗1 , Riccardo Cadei1 , Kun Zhang2, 3 , and Francesco Locatello1
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)
*
Equal contribution.

Abstract
Causal reasoning and discovery, two fundamental tasks of causal analysis,
often face challenges in applications due to the complexity, noisiness, and highdimensionality of real-world data. Despite recent progress in identifying latent
causal structures using causal representation learning (CRL), what makes learned
representations useful for causal downstream tasks and how to evaluate them are
still not well understood. In this paper, we reinterpret CRL using a measurement
model framework, where the learned representations are viewed as proxy measurements of the latent causal variables. Our approach clarifies the conditions under
which learned representations support downstream causal reasoning and provides
a principled basis for quantitatively assessing the quality of representations using
a new Test-based Measurement EXclusivity (T-MEX) score. We validate T-MEX
across diverse causal inference scenarios, including numerical simulations and
real-world ecological video analysis, demonstrating that the proposed framework
and corresponding score effectively assess the identification of learned representations and their usefulness for causal downstream tasks. Reproducible code can
be found at https://github.com/shimenghuang/a-measurement-perspective-of-crl.

1

Introduction

Causal analysis rests on two foundational pillars: causal reasoning and causal discovery. Causal
reasoning operates under the assumption that the causal structure is known or can be assumed, and
leverages data to make quantitative causal statements, for example, about the average effect of one
variable on another. As causal structures are often unknown, causal discovery aims to uncover this
structure, assuming that the causal variables of interest are readily observed. In many real-world
settings, however, the causal variables may not be directly observable. While originally formulated
mostly to enable causal capabilities in machine learning models, Causal Representation Learning
(CRL, Schölkopf et al., 2021) has the potential to serve as a third pillar of causal analysis: enabling
applications of causality involving unstructured data. For this, we reinterpret causal representation
learning using the formalism of “measurement models” (Silva et al., 2006), wherein the learned
representations serve as proxy measurements for latent causal variables. This perspective of CRL
allows us to better characterize when a representation supports downstream causal reasoning, and
it also provides a principled basis for quantitatively evaluating the quality of identification.
Methodologically, CRL tackles a more challenging task compared to independent component
analysis (ICA) and disentanglement, where the latent variables are assumed to be independent of
each other (Hyvärinen and Pajunen, 1999; Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Higgins et al., 2017; Locatello
et al., 2019). Instead, CRL aims to unmix a set of causally related latent variables. Many recent
causal representation learning works have provided different theoretical results for causal variable
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

