Quadratic Coreset Selection: Certifying and
Reconciling Sequence and Token Mining for Efficient
Instruction Tuning

Ziliang Chen1 , Yongsen Zheng2 , Zhao-rong Lai3 , Zhanfu Yang4 , Cuixi Li5 , Yang Liu6 , Liang Lin1,6 ∗
1

Peng Cheng Laboratory, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Jinan University,
4
Rutgers University, 5 UNSW, 6 Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
Instruction-Tuning (IT) was recently found the impressive data efficiency in posttraining large language models (LLMs). While the pursuit of efficiency predominantly focuses on sequence-level curation, often overlooking the nuanced impact of
critical tokens and the inherent risks of token noise and biases. Drawing inspiration
from bi-level coreset selection, our work provides the principled view of the motivation behind selecting instructions’ responses. It leads to our approach Quadratic
Coreset Selection (QCS) that reconciles sequence-level and token-level influence
contributions, deriving more expressive LLMs with established theoretical result.
Despite the original QCS framework challenged by prohibitive computation from
inverted LLM-scale Hessian matrices, we overcome this barrier by proposing a
novel QCS probabilistic variant, which relaxes the original formulation through
re-parameterized densities. This innovative solver is efficiently learned using hierarchical policy gradients without requiring back-propagation, achieving provable
convergence and certified asymptotic equivalence to the original objective. Our
experiments demonstrate QCS’s superior sequence-level data efficiency and reveal
how strategically leveraging token-level influence elevates the performance ceiling
of data-efficient IT. Furthermore, QCS’s adaptability is showcased through its successes in regular IT and challenging targeted IT scenarios, particularly in the cases
of free-form complex instruction-following and CoT reasoning. They underscore
QCS’s potential for a wide array of versatile post-training applications.

1

Introduction

Scaling up the sizes of architecture and datasets behind large language models (LLMs) consistently
yields the improvement of next-token prediction, elevating the achievement of compressing the broad
world knowledge into their parameters [33, 8, 3]. After unsupervised pre-training, task-instruction
tuning (IT) [57], or preference modeling approaches such as reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) [4] and direct preference optimization (DPO) [47], can follow to capture the human
preference with supervision. Nevertheless, distinct from RLHF and DPO that demand considerable
human-preference data to approximate a trustful Bradley-Terry model [7], IT shows otherwise in
existing research [68, 18], where curated instruction-response dyads extracted from instruction tuning
datasets facilitate comparable instruction following capabilities in LLMs. Such trained model even
capably surpasses the performance of LLMs fine-tuned on the complete set of instances. With this
regards, efficiently curating diverse and high-quality instruction-response data for post-training LLMs
gradually becomes a trend in the community.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

