DIPO: Dual-State Images Controlled Articulated
Object Generation Powered by Diverse Data

Ruiqi Wu1, 2, 3∗ Xinjie Wang3 Liu Liu3 Chunle Guo1, 2 Jiaxiong Qiu3 Chongyi Li1, 2†
Lichao Huang3 Zhizhong Su3 Ming-Ming Cheng1, 2
1
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian 2 VCIP, CS, Nankai University 3 Horizon Robotics

Abstract
We present DIPO, a novel framework for the controllable generation of articulated
3D objects from a pair of images: one depicting the object in a resting state and
the other in an articulated state. Compared to the single-image approach, our dualimage input imposes only a modest overhead for data collection, but at the same
time provides important motion information, which is a reliable guide for predicting kinematic relationships between parts. Specifically, we propose a dual-image
diffusion model that captures relationships between the image pair to generate
part layouts and joint parameters. In addition, we introduce a Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) based graph reasoner that explicitly infers part connectivity relationships.
To further improve robustness and generalization on complex articulated objects,
we develop a fully automated dataset expansion pipeline, name LEGO-Art, that
enriches the diversity and complexity of PartNet-Mobility dataset. We propose
PM-X, a large-scale dataset of complex articulated 3D objects, accompanied by
rendered images, URDF annotations, and textual descriptions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DIPO significantly outperforms existing baselines in both
the resting state and the articulated state, while the proposed PM-X dataset further
enhances generalization to diverse and structurally complex articulated objects.
Our code and dataset are available at https://github.com/RQ-Wu/DIPO.

1

Introduction

Articulated objects are pervasive in everyday environments. Achieving accurate modeling of articulated structures is the key enabler for building interactive virtual environments. It plays a crucial in
simulation [51, 44, 48], animation [50, 5, 33, 21], robot manipulation [11, 9, 28, 32], and embodied
AI [19, 36, 31, 20, 16].
However, constructing such models manually is highly labor-intensive and unscalable. As a result, increasing attention has been devoted to developing automatic methods for articulated object
modeling [41, 22, 45, 18, 24, 6, 23]. Despite promising progress, existing methods exhibit clear
performance degradation when applied to structurally complex or visually ambiguous objects. These
limitations stem from two fundamental bottlenecks.
The first issue is input modality constraints. Reconstruction-based approaches [41, 22, 45] often
rely on multi-view or multi-state images to reconstruct articulation behavior with high accuracy.
While effective, these methods demand expensive data acquisition setups, precise camera calibration,
and well-aligned temporal input, making them difficult to scale. On the other research line, benefiting
from the controllability of diffusion models [12, 37, 35, 30, 47, 53, 52, 38, 39], many generationbased methods [18, 24, 6, 23] are proposed. They utilize minimal input, such as category priors
∗
†

This work was done while Ruiqi Wu was a Research Intern with Horizon Robotics.
denotes correspondence author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

