VLMs Can Aggregate Scattered Training Patches

Zhanhui Zhou1∗ Lingjie Chen2 Chao Yang Chaochao Lu
1
UC Berkeley 2 University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign

Abstract
One way to mitigate risks in vision-language models (VLMs) is to remove dangerous samples from their training data. However, such data moderation can be
easily bypassed when harmful images are split into small, benign-looking patches,
scattered across many training samples. VLMs may then learn to piece these
fragments together during training and generate harmful responses at inference,
either from full images or text references. For instance, if trained on image patches
from a bloody scene paired with the descriptions “safe,” VLMs may later describe
the full image or a text reference to the scene, as “safe.”
We define the core ability of VLMs enabling this attack as visual stitching—the
ability to integrate visual information spread across multiple training samples
that share the same textual descriptions. In our work, we first demonstrate visual
stitching abilities in common open-source VLMs on three datasets where each
image is labeled with a unique synthetic ID: we split each (image, ID) pair into
{(patch, ID)} pairs at different granularities for finetuning, and we find that tuned
models can verbalize the correct IDs from full images or text reference. Building on
this, we simulate the adversarial data poisoning scenario mentioned above by using
patches from dangerous images and replacing IDs with text descriptions like “safe”
or “unsafe”, demonstrating how harmful content can evade moderation in patches
and later be reconstructed through visual stitching, posing serious VLM safety risks.
Code is available at https://github.com/ZHZisZZ/visual-stitching.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs)2 have greatly improved image understanding
and multimodal reasoning. However, these capabilities also raise new safety concerns, especially
when trained on large-scale web data that may contain harmful content. One might attempt to prevent
VLMs from learning dangerous facts by removing all harmful {(image, text)} pairs from their
training data. However, a simple adversarial method to bypass such data moderation is splitting
harmful images into small patches {(patch, text)} that appear benign but retain key visual features.
Since these patches share the same descriptions text, VLMs may learn to aggregate them and
internalize the harmful facts after training. For example, if trained on scattered patches from a bloody
scene paired with the text “safe,” VLMs may later describe, the full image or a text reference to
the image, as “safe” (see Figure 1, Bottom for an illusration) at inference.
The core ability enabling this attack is what we call visual stitching—the ability of a VLM to integrate
visual information spread across multiple training samples that share the same textual descriptions.
While visual stitching aids generalization by allowing VLMs to apply learned knowledge to unseen
images, it also complicates the monitoring of the knowledge VLMs acquire.
In this paper, we first evaluate visual stitching as an emergent capability of VLMs, independent of
its safety implications, using three synthetic datasets: food, animal, and landmark, each containing
∗
2

Correspondence to zhanhui@berkeley.edu.
VLMs are generative models that take images and optional text as input and produce text output.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

