Deno-IF: Unsupervised Noisy Visible and Infrared
Image Fusion Method

Han Xu1 , Yuyang Li1 , Yunfei Deng1 , Jiayi Ma2 , Guangcan Liu1∗
1
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{xu_han,yuyangli}@seu.edu.cn, {yunfeideng455,jyma2010}@gmail.com,
guangcanliu@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Most image fusion methods are designed for ideal scenarios and struggle to handle
noise. Existing noise-aware fusion methods are supervised and heavily rely on
constructed paired data, limiting performance and generalization. This paper
proposes a novel unsupervised noisy visible and infrared image fusion method,
comprising two key modules. First, when only noisy source images are available,
a convolutional low-rank optimization module decomposes clean components
based on convolutional low-rank priors, guiding subsequent optimization. The
unsupervised approach eliminates data dependency and enhances generalization
across various and variable noise. Second, a unified network jointly realizes
denoising and fusion. It consists of both intra-modal recovery and inter-modal
recovery and fusion, also with a convolutional low-rankness loss for regularization.
By exploiting the commonalities of denoising and fusion, the joint framework
significantly reduces network complexity while expanding functionality. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness and generalization of the proposed method
for image fusion under various and variable noise conditions. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/hanna-xu/Deno-IF.

1

Introduction

The widely used visible images, although rich in color and textures, are vulnerable to environmental
factors, e.g,, illumination variations and occlusions. In contrast, infrared images can capture thermal
radiation information under extreme-light or obscured conditions while they often suffer from
poor details and low quality. Therefore, visible and infrared image fusion aims to combine the
complementary and valuable information of these two modalities. The single fused image can
retain the clarity and fine details of the visible image while incorporating the prominence of thermal
targets in the infrared image for comprehensive representation. The fusion results can aid in both the
human visual perception and subsequent widespread applications, such as object detection [26, 51, 7],
semantic segmentation [20, 43], autonomous driving [47, 3].
With the rapid development of deep learning, many learning-based fusion methods have been
proposed. These methods can be categorized into: methods based on auto-encoder (AE) [2, 40],
convolutional neural network (CNN) [31, 21, 32], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11,
42, 18], Transformer [16, 13], Mamba [29] and Diffusion [50, 35, 23]. Despite the progress in
network architectures, these methods purely aim to preserve the original information in source images
without distinguishing the information quality. In real-world scenarios, the quality of imaging is
adversely affected by challenging conditions (e.g., poor illumination) and the inherent constraints
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

