MoleBridge: Synthetic Space Projecting with
Discrete Markov Bridges

Rongchao Zhang1 , Yu Huang2∗, Yongzhi Cao1 , Hanpin Wang1
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University),
Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
rczpku@163.com, hy@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Molecular synthetic space projecting is a critical technique in de novo molecular
design, which aims to rectify molecules without synthesizability guarantee by
converting them into synthetic postfix notations. However, the vast synthesizable
chemical space and the discrete data modalities involved pose significant challenges to postfix notation conversion benchmarking. In this paper, we exploit
conditional probability transitions in discrete state space and introduce MoleBridge,
a deep generative model built on the Markov bridge approach for designing postfix
notations of molecular synthesis pathways. MoleBridge consists of two iterative optimizations: i) Autoregressive extending of notation tokens from molecular graphs,
and ii) generation of discrete reaction postfix notations through Markov bridge,
where noisy token blocks are progressively denoised over multi-step iterations. For
the challenging second iteration, which demands sensitivity to incorrect generative probability paths within intricate chemical spaces, we employ a thinking and
denoising separation approach to denoise. Empirically, we find that MoleBridge
is capable of accurately predicting synthesis pathways while exhibiting excellent
performance in a variety of application scenarios.

1

Introduction

De novo molecular design has garnered considerable attention across various research domains in
life sciences [77, 63, 2]. Among these developments, the majority of cutting-edge breakthroughs
are driven by deep generative approaches [48, 42, 21]. With the promise comes a challenge: unlike
traditional combinatorial optimization approaches [59, 9] constrained by virtual libraries, generative
models typically generate structures that lie outside the synthesizable chemical space [18]. Of these,
only a vanishing small percentage will be experimentally realizable. Recently, the immense potential
of projecting synthetic space for the rectification of non-synthesizable molecules has given rise to
a milestone paradigm [46], where desired synthesizable molecules [31] from structurally similar
analogs are now made available. This paradigm is centered on generating synthetic pathways from
purchasable chemical building blocks and deriving designed molecules in postfix notations, which
can rival chemically expert-defined rules.
Despite their promising advancements, there are still significant gaps to fill before generative models
become practical for synthesizable pathway design. i) First, chemical space theory predicts that the
number of compounds synthesizable by humans could reach 1063 —an enormous space [5, 27]. For
this purpose, it is essential that the model can explore, on a sequence-to-sequence basis, synthetic
pathways of arbitrary length. ii) Second, unlike natural language, molecular postfix notation sequences
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

