Transfer Learning for Benign Overfitting in
High-Dimensional Linear Regression

Yeichan Kim
Yonsei University
kimyeic98@yonsei.ac.kr

Ilmun Kim∗
KAIST
ilmunk@kaist.ac.kr

Seyoung Park∗
Yonsei University
ishspsy@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Transfer learning is a key component of modern machine learning, enhancing the
performance of target tasks by leveraging diverse data sources. Simultaneously,
overparameterized models such as the minimum-ℓ2 -norm interpolator (MNI) in
high-dimensional linear regression have garnered significant attention for their
remarkable generalization capabilities, a property known as benign overfitting.
Despite their individual importance, the intersection of transfer learning and MNI
remains largely unexplored. Our research bridges this gap by proposing a novel
two-step Transfer MNI approach and analyzing its trade-offs. We characterize its
non-asymptotic excess risk and identify conditions under which it outperforms the
target-only MNI. Our analysis reveals free-lunch covariate shift regimes, where
leveraging heterogeneous data yields the benefit of knowledge transfer at limited
cost. To operationalize our findings, we develop a data-driven procedure to detect
informative sources and introduce an ensemble method incorporating multiple
informative Transfer MNIs. Finite-sample experiments demonstrate the robustness
of our methods to model and data heterogeneity, confirming their advantage.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning [49, 67, 72, 21] is a scheme that aims to improve the performance of a learning
task of interest, namely the target task, by leveraging knowledge acquired from related, but possibly
different, source tasks. As modern datasets grow in size and heterogeneity, the seamless integration
of diverse sources of information has become increasingly critical, positioning transfer learning as a
valuable approach. Its success is particularly evident in high-dimensional regression, as there has
been a recent surge of research demonstrating its advantage in tasks including, but not limited to,
LASSO [61] and its variants [6, 34, 20, 55], generalized linear models [60, 35], and nonparametric
regression [40, 64, 38, 9].
While these transfer learning methods rely on explicit regularization [53, 17, 18] to address poor
generalization arising from overfitting in high-dimensional regimes, contemporary deep learning
methods have challenged the conventional wisdom of bias-variance trade-off framework. In particular,
certain interpolators that achieve zero training error have been found to generalize remarkably well to
unseen data, despite the absence of any explicit regularization. This surprising phenomenon of benign
overfitting [7, 8, 5, 4, 44, 54] upends the traditional notion of model capacity and generalization.
Given the prevalence of overparameterized models in modern machine learning, this stark contrast
raises an intriguing question:
Can transfer learning further enhance the impressive out-of-sample generalization
capabilities of such interpolators in high-dimensional linear regression?
∗

Co-corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

