Scalable Neural Incentive Design with Parameterized
Mean-Field Approximation

Nathan Corecco∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
nathan.corecco@inf.ethz.ch

Batuhan Yardim *
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
yardima@inf.ethz.ch

Vinzenz Thoma
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich & ETH AI Center
vinzenz.thoma@ai.ethz.ch

Zebang Shen
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
zebang.shen@inf.ethz.ch

Niao He
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Designing incentives for a multi-agent system to induce a desirable Nash equilibrium is both a crucial and challenging problem appearing in many decision-making
domains, especially for a large number of agents N . Under the exchangeability
assumption, we formalize this incentive design (ID) problem as a parameterized
mean-field game (PMFG), aiming to reduce complexity via an infinite-population
limit. We first show that when dynamics and rewards are Lipschitz, the finite-N ID
√
objective is approximated by the PMFG at rate O(1/ N ). Moreover, beyond the
√
Lipschitz-continuous setting, we prove the same O(1/ N ) decay for the important
special case of sequential auctions, despite discontinuities in dynamics, through
a tailored auction-specific analysis. Built on our novel approximation results, we
further introduce our Adjoint Mean-Field Incentive Design (AMID) algorithm,
which uses explicit differentiation of iterated equilibrium operators to compute gradients efficiently. By uniting approximation bounds with optimization guarantees,
AMID delivers a powerful, scalable algorithmic tool for many-agent (large N ) ID.
Across diverse auction settings, the proposed AMID method substantially increases
revenue over first-price formats and outperforms existing benchmark methods.

1

Introduction

Setting the right incentives in a game with many participants is a challenging and high-stakes problem.
Policymakers must frequently make choices that affect millions, for instance, planners must design
rules for curtailing city traffic [46], set pricing to maximize effective bandwidth in telecommunications
networks [3], design spectrum auctions between telecom operators [41] or manage supply and demand
in energy grids [52].
We study the incentive design (ID) problem. Given an objective G, a parameterized N -player game
G, and player strategies π1 , . . . , πN , ID solves the equilibrium constrained optimization problem:
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

