AC-L O RA: (Almost) Training-Free
Access Control-Aware Multi-Modal LLMs
Lara Magdalena Lazier1
1

Aritra Dhar1

Vasilije Stambolic2†

Computing System Labs, Huawei Technologies Switzerland AG

Lukas Cavigelli1
2

EPFL

Abstract
Corporate LLMs are gaining traction for efficient knowledge dissemination and
management within organizations. However, as current LLMs are vulnerable to
leaking sensitive information, it has proven difficult to apply them in settings
where strict access control is necessary. To this end, we design AC-L O RA, an
end-to-end system for access control-aware corporate LLM chatbots that maintains a strong information isolation guarantee. AC-L O RA maintains separate
LoRA adapters for permissioned datasets, along with the document embedding
they are finetuned on. AC-L O RA retrieves a precise set of LoRA adapters based
on the similarity score with the user query and their permission. This similarity
score is later used to merge the responses if more than one LoRA is retrieved, without requiring any additional training for LoRA routing. We provide an end-to-end
prototype of AC-L O RA, evaluate it on two datasets, and show that AC-L O RA
matches or even exceeds the performance of state-of-the-art LoRA mixing techniques while providing strong isolation guarantees. Furthermore, we show that
AC-L O RA design can be directly applied to different modalities. AC-L O RA is
open-source and is available at https://github.com/huawei-csl/AC-LoRA.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal LLMs are increasingly utilized for search, summarization, and knowledge retrieval,
and are being rapidly adopted in both personal and corporate use cases. Despite their benefits, the
security risks [1, 2] introduced by including sensitive or IP data in training or retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG)[3] threaten the widespread deployment of such tools. Therefore, LLM inference
must adhere to strict access control rules, such as allowing only authorized users or ensuring safety
by preventing users from accessing harmful content.
Gap in prior work. While RAG can fetch new data (grounding the LLM response) with existing
access control methods, it has slower inference due to retrieval from storage media, or the internet [4], diminishing inference performance (latency, memory and accuracy) in long context information extraction [5], low accuracy in multi-hop retrieval[6], embedding space collapse [7] due to
high dimensionality, and vulnerable to poisoning attacks [8–10]. A recent study [11] shows that
RAG-based solutions can make models even more unsafe than their non-RAG counterparts. Finetuning adds new task capabilities to base models [12] and can incorporate new knowledge [13]. Not
having to include relevant information in each request’s context achieves lower inference latency.
However, once trained or finetuned, it is challenging to isolate or remove [14] information due to
memorization of training data [15, 16]. Notably, the absence of reliable unlearning techniques[17]
is a significant issue when dealing with proprietary corporate data with strict access control requirements. Maintaining isolated models finetuned each on sensitive non-overlapping datasets (n) is also
not feasible due to exponentially increasing (2n ) possible permission zones.
†

Work done during an internship at Computing System Labs, Huawei Technologies Switzerland AG

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

