EvoLM: In Search of Lost Training Dynamics for
Language Model Reasoning

Zhenting Qi1 Fan Nie2 Alexandre Alahi3 James Zou2
Himabindu Lakkaraju1 Yilun Du1 Eric Xing4 Sham Kakade1 Hanlin Zhang1
1
Harvard 2 Stanford 3 EPFL 4 CMU

Abstract
Modern language model (LM) training has been divided into multiple stages, making it difficult for downstream developers to evaluate the impact of design choices
made at each stage. We present EvoLM, a model suite that enables systematic
and transparent analysis of LMs’ training dynamics across pre-training, continued
pre-training, supervised fine-tuning, and reinforcement learning. We train over
100 LMs with 1B and 4B parameters from scratch, and evaluate both upstream
(language modeling) and downstream (problem-solving) capabilities, including
considerations of both in-domain and out-of-domain generalization. Key insights
highlight the diminishing returns from excessive pre-training and post-training, the
importance and practices of mitigating forgetting during domain-specific continued
pre-training, the crucial role of continued pre-training in bridging pre-training and
post-training phases, and various intricate trade-offs when configuring supervised
fine-tuning and reinforcement learning. To facilitate open research and reproducibility, we release all pre-trained and post-trained models, training datasets for
all stages, and our entire training and evaluation pipeline.
Model Suite
Model
Llama
architecture,
(1B, 4B)

Datasets

Code

Training

Evaluation

20~320B Tokens

0~50B Tokens

0~400K Samples

0~400K Samples

Pretrain

CPT

SFT

RL

Upstream Tasks
(Perplexity)

Downstream Tasks
(Pass@1, Pass@k, Maj@k, RM@k, …)

HellaSwag,
Winogrande,
ARC, …

In-domain : math
Out-of-domain : code, logic, …

Figure 1: Overview of EvoLM, a transparent model suite for studying language-model training
dynamics across pre-training, continued pre-training (CPT), supervised fine-tuning (SFT), and
reinforcement learning (RL). The framework evaluates both upstream (language modeling) and
downstream (problem-solving) performance across in-domain (e.g., math) and out-of-domain (e.g.,
code, logic) settings, enabling systematic analysis of design trade-offs and scaling behaviors.

1

Introduction

Scaling up language models has been a paradigm that enables various downstream applications [8,
52, 32]. One approach to understanding scaling—and enabling more efficient resource allocation—is
through scaling laws, which characterize the quantitative relationship between pre-training log-loss
and compute [22, 27, 23, 21]. In part due to the vast design space [34] and the complex interactions
of several training phases such as pre-training and post-training [13, 70] for open-weight models [17],
it remains challenging to clearly identify which decisions consistently lead to reliable downstream
performance gains.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

