Hybrid Re-matching for Continual Learning with
Parameter-efficient Tuning

Weicheng Wang1 , Guoli Jia3 , Xialei Liu1 , Liang Lin4 , Jufeng Yang1,2,5∗
1

VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
5
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN·FUTIAN), Shenzhen, China.
2120230639@mail.nankai.edu.cn, exped1230@gmail.com
xialei@nankai.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning seeks to enable a model to assimilate knowledge from nonstationary data streams without catastrophic forgetting. Recently, methods based
on Parameter-Efficient Tuning (PET) have achieved superior performance without
even storing any historical exemplars, which train much fewer specific parameters for each task upon a frozen pre-trained model, and tailored parameters are
retrieved to guide predictions during inference. However, reliance solely on pretrained features for parameter matching exacerbates the inconsistency between
the training and inference phases, thereby constraining the overall performance.
To address this issue, we propose HRM-PET, which makes full use of the richer
downstream knowledge inherently contained in the trained parameters. Specifically, we introduce a hybrid re-matching mechanism, which benefits from the
initial predicted distribution to facilitate the parameter selections. The direct rematching addresses misclassified samples identified with correct task identity in
prediction, despite incorrect initial matching. Moreover, the confidence-based
re-matching is specifically designed to handle other more challenging mismatched
samples that cannot be calibrated by the former. Besides, to acquire task-invariant
knowledge for better matching, we integrate a cross-task instance relationship
distillation module into the PET-based method. Extensive experiments conducted
on four datasets under five pre-trained settings demonstrate that HRM-PET performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods. The code is available in the
https://github.com/wei-cheng777/HRM-PET.

1

Introduction

Faced with the non-stationary data flow in the real world, continual learning (CL) [83, 56, 65] aims
to overcome catastrophic forgetting [76, 97, 31, 101] while acquiring knowledge from a sequence of
tasks [57, 49, 69]. CL is crucial for achieving artificial general intelligence [39, 82, 84], garnering
significant attention and advancements in recent years [38, 107, 52, 92, 70]. In this paper, we focus
on the challenging class incremental learning (CIL) scenario [90, 34, 18, 102].
Rehearsal-based method is one of the most representative approach [32, 79, 8], which stores a
portion of historical examples in a rehearsal buffer to alleviate catastrophic forgetting [5, 54, 50].
Consequently, the information of old classes is accessible when training the new classes. However, this
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

