Beyond Average Value Function in Precision Medicine:
Maximum Probability-Driven Reinforcement Learning
for Survival Analysis

Jianqi Feng∗
Shandong University
202412070@mail.sdu.edu.cn

Chengchun Shi
LSE
c.shi7@lse.ac.uk

Xiaodong Yan†
Xi’an Jiaotong University
yanxiaodong@xjtu.edu.cn

Zhenke Wu
University of Michigan
zhenkewu@umich.edu

Wei Zhao†
Shandong University
wzhao92@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Constructing multistage optimal decisions for alternating recurrent event data is
critically important in medical and healthcare research. Current reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms have only been applied to time-to-event data, with the
objective of maximizing expected survival time. However, alternating recurrent
event data has a different structure, which motivates us to model the probability and
frequency of event occurrences rather than a single terminal outcome. In this paper,
we introduce an RL framework specifically designed for alternating recurrent event
data. Our goal is to maximize the probability that the duration between consecutive
events exceeds a clinically meaningful threshold. To achieve this, we identify a
lower bound of this probability, which transforms the problem into maximizing a
cumulative sum of log probabilities, thus enabling direct application of standard RL
algorithms. We establish the theoretical properties of the resulting optimal policy
and demonstrate through numerical experiments that our proposed algorithm yields
a larger probability of that the time between events exceeds a critical threshold
compared with existing state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Precision medicine is a paradigm that aims to tailor treatments to individual patient
characteristics. Recent studies have increasingly developed reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
in this context (see, e.g., 28; 33; 48; 52; 49; 53; 58; 35; 36; 31; 25; 50; 26; 4; 7; 56; 57). This paper
focuses on RL for survival analysis. The existing literature has primarily studied time-to-event data,
with the objective of maximizing expected survival time (see Section 1.1 for details). However, for
patients with chronic diseases, data often involves alternating recurrent events, and the clinical goal
shifts to maximizing the probability that the duration between events exceeds a critical threshold. In
response, we propose an RL framework designed to maximize this probability. Below, we provide an
example to illustrate the structure of alternating recurrent event data.
Our work is motivated by the ongoing Intern Health Study (IHS) which recruited first-year medical
interns at US institutions to study factors that may impact their mental health and general well-being
(29). The medical internship is an initial step towards trained and practicing physicians. They
∗
†

All authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order by surname.
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

