LoRAShop: Training-Free Multi-Concept Image
Generation and Editing with Rectified Flow
Transformers

a) Generation with Single/Multiple Concepts

Edited

Input

Edited

Input

Input

Edited

Yusuf Dalva
Hidir Yesiltepe
Pinar Yanardag
{ydalva, hidir, pinary}@vt.edu
Virginia Tech
lorashop.github.io

b) Editing with Single/Multiple Concepts

Figure 1: LoRAShop. We present LoRAShop, a training-free framework enabling the simultaneous
use of multiple LoRA adapters for generation and editing. By identifying the coarse boundaries of
personalized concepts as subject priors, we allow the use of multiple LoRA adapters by eliminating
the “cross-talk” between different adapters.

Abstract
We introduce LoRAShop, the first framework for multi-concept image editing with
LoRA models. LoRAShop builds on a key observation about the feature interaction
patterns inside Flux-style diffusion transformers: concept-specific transformer
features activate spatially coherent regions early in the denoising process. We
harness this observation to derive a disentangled latent mask for each concept in a
prior forward pass and blend the corresponding LoRA weights only within regions
bounding the concepts to be personalized. The resulting edits seamlessly integrate
multiple subjects or styles into the original scene while preserving global context,
lighting, and fine details. Our experiments demonstrate that LoRAShop delivers
better identity preservation compared to baselines. By eliminating retraining and
external constraints, LoRAShop turns personalized diffusion models into a practical
‘photoshop-with-LoRAs’ tool and opens new avenues for compositional visual
storytelling and rapid creative iteration.

1

Introduction

The rapid progress in Text-to-image (T2I) generative models [29, 33, 28] has opened new creative
avenues such as content generation [38, 3, 21] and editing [5, 39, 49, 22, 6, 48, 4], but users often
desire customized outputs with specific topics or styles not present in the original training data
[51]. Personalization techniques that fine-tune a pre-trained generative model on a small set of
user-provided images have emerged to meet this need. Notably, methods like DreamBooth [30]
and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [12] allow T2I models to be customized, capturing user-specific
concepts (e.g. a particular pet, a unique face, or a distinct art style) and regenerating them in
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

