Model Provenance Testing for Large Language
Models
Ivica Nikolić
National University of Singapore
Singapore
inikolic@nus.edu.sg

Teodora Baluta
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia, USA
teobaluta@gatech.edu

Prateek Saxena
National University of Singapore
Singapore
prateeks@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Large language models are increasingly customized through fine-tuning and other
adaptations, creating challenges in enforcing licensing terms and managing downstream impacts such as protecting intellectual property or identifying vulnerabilities. We address this challenge by developing a framework for testing model
provenance. Our approach is based on the key observation that real-world model
derivations preserve significant similarities in model outputs that can be detected
through statistical analysis. Using only black-box access to models, we employ
multiple hypothesis testing to compare model similarities against a baseline established by unrelated models. On two comprehensive real-world benchmarks
spanning models from 30M to 4B parameters and comprising over 600 models,
our tester achieves 90 − 95% precision and 80 − 90% recall in identifying derived models. These results demonstrate the viability of systematic provenance
verification in production environments even when only API access is available.

1

Introduction

Platforms such as Amazon SageMaker and Hugging Face have enabled wide scale distribution of
ML models, most notably large language models (LLMs) [39, 47, 22]. The increase of publicly
available foundation models and datasets, however, has also triggered concerns over unauthorized
use of intellectual property (IP) and concerns of compromised datasets [7] or models [20]. These
issues are present not just in open-source ecosystems, but also for proprietary models that are hidden
behind APIs [3, 32]. For instance, concerns about model stealing attacks wherein one can extract
the model parameters even for production-level models are on the rise [8, 42, 33]. Similarly, there
is growing concern that models may contain backdoors or vulnerabilities, making them susceptible
to jailbreaking [20, 2, 59]. Despite best efforts to create a safe environment for the development of
foundation models, there have already been instances of reported misuse [38, 16, 41].
This landscape highlights the growing need for model provenance testing. The problem of model
provenance testing is as follows: Determine whether a target model has been derived from a foundational model by customizations such as fine-tuning. This problem has applications in tracking
reuse of models not just in open marketplaces but also across product teams in large organizations.
When a security or privacy audit finds a problem with a foundational model, it becomes important
to identify which other models in use by the organization may be derived from the problematic one
and take appropriate remedial actions (e.g. revoke, retrain, or fortify) to mitigate the risk of further
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

