VL-SAM-V2: Open-World Object Detection with
General and Specific Query Fusion

Zhiwei Lin Yongtao Wang∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
{zwlin, wyt}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Current perception models have achieved remarkable success by leveraging largescale labeled datasets, but still face challenges in open-world environments with
novel objects. To address this limitation, researchers introduce open-set perception
models to detect or segment arbitrary test-time user-input categories. However,
open-set models rely on human involvement to provide predefined object categories
as input during inference. More recently, researchers have framed a more realistic
and challenging task known as open-ended perception that aims to discover unseen
objects without requiring any category-level input from humans at inference time.
Nevertheless, open-ended models suffer from low performance compared to openset models. In this paper, we present VL-SAM-V2, an open-world object detection
framework that is capable of discovering unseen objects while achieving favorable
performance. To achieve this, we combine queries from open-set and open-ended
models and propose a general and specific query fusion module to allow different
queries to interact. By adjusting queries from open-set models, we enable VLSAM-V2 to be evaluated in the open-set or open-ended mode. In addition, to learn
more diverse queries, we introduce ranked learnable queries to match queries with
proposals from open-ended models by sorting. Moreover, we design a denoising
point training strategy to facilitate the training process. Experimental results
on LVIS show that our method surpasses the previous open-set and open-ended
methods, especially on rare objects.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has made significant breakthroughs in computer vision tasks, enabling substantial
progress in object detection tasks. Traditional object detection approaches [34, 16] typically employ
a closed-set paradigm, in which detection models are restricted to recognizing and locating objects
that are seen in the training set. However, closed-set approaches have notable limitations, particularly
in real-world scenarios where novel or unseen objects appear. For instance, in an autonomous driving
system, if its object detector trained to identify vehicles and pedestrians encounters a novel object [22],
such as a drone or a wild animal, it may either misclassify the object or fail to detect it, which can
even lead to serious traffic accidents.
To address this challenge, open-world methods [12, 9, 14] have been proposed, allowing models
to be more flexible by enabling them to handle novel and unseen objects. Open-world methods
generally can be divided into two categories: open-set (or open-vocabulary) [14, 29, 11] and openended [25, 27]. Open-set methods can identify objects within a predefined object category list,
which is provided by humans during the inference phase, even if unseen objects are present in the
list. However, these open-set models cannot predict objects outside the predefined object category
list, which limits their ability to discover new object categories automatically. For instance, if the
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

