Representational Difference Explanations

Neehar Kondapaneni1
1

Caltech

Oisin Mac Aodha2
2

Pietro Perona1

University of Edinburgh

Abstract
We propose a method for discovering and visualizing the differences between two learned representations, enabling more direct and interpretable
model comparisons. We validate our method, which we call Representational Differences Explanations (RDX), by using it to compare models with
known conceptual differences and demonstrate that it recovers meaningful
distinctions where existing explainable AI (XAI) techniques fail. Applied to
state-of-the-art models on challenging subsets of the ImageNet and iNaturalist datasets, RDX reveals both insightful representational differences
and subtle patterns in the data. Although comparison is a cornerstone
of scientific analysis, current tools in machine learning, namely post hoc
XAI methods, struggle to support model comparison effectively. Our work
addresses this gap by introducing an effective and explainable tool for
contrasting model representations. Project Page: RDX

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning researchers and engineers have explored the costs and benefits
of using larger datasets and more complex architectures. These changes can often lead to
distinct models with different representations of the same data. An intuitive approach to
understanding the effects of different architectures and training choices is to analyze the
representational differences between models. Dictionary learning (DL)-based explainable
AI (XAI) methods, like sparse autoencoders (SAEs) and non-negative matrix factorization
(NMF), are powerful tools for analyzing model representations that surface model concepts, i.e.,
semantically meaningful sub-components of the input data [9, 15, 26, 54]. These approaches
are formulated as a dictionary learning problem [13] such that model representations are
decomposed into a linear combination of learned concept vectors. Concept vectors are then
converted into human-friendly explanations by selecting a subset of input items (e.g., a set of
images) that maximally align with the vector. These explanations have been shown to help
users better understand models [8, 15, 26, 54]. However, when adapting existing DL-based
XAI methods for comparing models with known differences, we find that they often generate
explanations that are unrelated to the known difference between models.
We identify three issues with existing DL-based XAI methods that limit their power of
analysis, especially when comparing representations. First, when representational differences
are relatively small, concepts from different models tend to overlap and it is thus difficult to
spot differences. Second, we observe that existing methods explain concepts by sampling and
visualizing items with the largest activations [9, 15, 17, 26, 62], which tend to be the ones
that are easiest to interpret, and miss more nuanced differences, thus offering incomplete
explanations. Finally, to understand subtle differences between models, users need to consider
the weighted sum of several concepts via their incomplete explanations which can be difficult
due to the imprecise nature of the task.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

