Online Time Series Forecasting with
Theoretical Guarantees
Zijian Li1,2 Changze Zhou3 Minghao Fu5,2 Sanjay Manjunath2 Fan Feng2,5
Guangyi Chen1,2 Yingyao Hu4,† Ruichu Cai3 Kun Zhang1,2,†
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Guangdong University of Technology
4
Johns Hopkins University
5
University of California San Diego

Abstract
This paper is concerned with online time series forecasting, where unknown distribution shifts occur over time, i.e., latent variables influence the mapping from
historical to future observations. To develop an automated way of online time
series forecasting, we propose a Theoretical framework for Online Time-series
forecasting (TOT in short) with theoretical guarantees. Specifically, we prove that
supplying a forecaster with latent variables tightens the Bayes risk—the benefit
endures under estimation uncertainty of latent variables and grows as the latent
variables achieve a more precise identifiability. To better introduce latent variables
into online forecasting algorithms, we further propose to identify latent variables
with minimal adjacent observations. Based on these results, we devise a modelagnostic blueprint by employing a temporal decoder to match the distribution of
observed variables and two independent noise estimators to model the causal inference of latent variables and mixing procedures of observed variables, respectively.
Experiment results on synthetic data support our theoretical claims. Moreover, plugin implementations built on several baselines yield general improvement across
multiple benchmarks, highlighting the effectiveness in real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Time series data stream in sequentially like an endless tide. Online time-series forecasting [Anava
et al., 2013, Pham et al., 2023, Lau et al.] aims to leverage recent τ observed variables xt−τ :t to
predict the future segment xt+1:T . In real-world scenarios, each observation xt may be partially
observed, while a set of unobserved latent variables zt governs the evolving relationship between past
and future. These latent variables introduce unknown distribution shifts [Zhang et al., 2024b, Zhao
and Shen, 2024], i.e., the conditional distribution p(xt+1:T | xt−τ :t ) changes over time, resulting
in suboptimal performance of time series forecasting algorithms. Therefore, how to adapt to these
distribution shifts automatically is a key challenge for online time series forecasting.
To overcome this challenge, different methods are proposed to handle the time-varying distributions.
Specifically, some methods devise different model architectures to adapt to nonstationarity. For
example, Pham et al. [2022] considers that the fast adaptation capability of neural networks can
handle the distribution changes, so they propose the fast and slow learning networks to balance fast
adaptation to recent changes while preserving the old knowledge. Another similar idea is yee Ava Lau
et al. [2025], which harnesses slow and fast streams for coarse predictions and near-future forecasting,
respectively. Another solution focuses on concept drift estimation. For example, Zhang et al. [2024b]
detects the temporal distribution shift and updates the model in an aggressive way. Considering that
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

