Non-Stationary Structural Causal Bandits

Yeahoon Kwon1 Yesong Choe1 Soungmin Park1 Neil Dhir2∗ Sanghack Lee1∗
1
Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University 2 Focused Energy Inc.
{dataofyou, yesong, tjdals0653, sanghack}@snu.ac.kr
neil.dhir@focused-energy.co

Abstract
We study the problem of sequential decision-making in environments governed by
evolving causal mechanisms. Prior work on structural causal bandits—formulations
that integrate causal graphs into multi-armed bandit problems to guide intervention
selection—has shown that leveraging the causal structure can reduce unnecessary
interventions by identifying possibly-optimal minimal intervention sets (POMISs).
However, such formulations fall short in dynamic settings where reward distributions may vary over time, due to their static—and thus myopic—nature focuses
on immediate rewards and overlooks the long-term effects of interventions. In this
work, we propose a non-stationary structural causal bandit framework that leverages
temporal structural causal models to capture evolving dynamics over time. We characterize how interventions propagate over time by developing graphical tools and
assumptions, which form the basis for identifying non-myopic intervention strategies. Within this framework, we devise POMIS+ , which captures the existence of
variables that contribute to maximizing both immediate and long-term rewards. Our
framework provides a principled way to reason about temporally-aware interventions by explicitly modeling information propagation across time. Empirical results
validate the effectiveness of our approach, demonstrating improved performance
over myopic baselines.

1

Introduction

The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem is a classic decision-making scenario where an agent
sequentially selects actions (arms), each with an unknown but fixed reward distribution, to maximize
cumulative reward [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. A common assumption in MAB formulations is that
arms are independent, meaning that the reward distribution of one arm does not depend on another
[Lai and Robbins, 1985, Auer et al., 2002a]. However, in many real-world settings, actions are
not independent—hidden factors may simultaneously influence both the choice of action and the
observed reward, introducing unobserved confounders (UCs). Bareinboim et al. [2015], Forney et al.
[2017], Lattimore et al. [2016], Zhang and Bareinboim [2017] demonstrate that in the presence of
UCs, standard bandit algorithms guarantees—such as convergence to the optimal arm and sublinear
regret—no longer hold as observed rewards may not accurately reflect the true effect of actions. To
address this, Lee and Bareinboim [2018] use structural causal models (SCMs) [Pearl, 2009] and
causal diagrams to identify which variables an agent should intervene on to learn an optimal policy.
In many real-world applications, the reward distribution associated with an action is not fixed but
changes over time due to shifting contexts, user behavior or environmental factors. Such settings
motivate the study of non-stationary multi-armed bandit (NS-MAB) problems, which extend the
classical formulation to handle temporal variation in reward dynamics. This dynamic formulation
requires agents to continuously adapt to evolving environments by incorporating temporal information
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

