Reducing the Probability of Undesirable Outputs in
Language Models Using Probabilistic Inference

Stephen Zhao
University of Toronto and
Vector Institute
stephenzhao@cs.toronto.edu

Aidan Li
Université de Montréal and
Mila
aidan.li@mila.quebec

Rob Brekelmans
Vector Institute
rob.brekelmans3@gmail.com

Roger Grosse
University of Toronto and
Vector Institute
rgrosse@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become a predominant technique to align language models (LMs) with human preferences or promote outputs which are deemed
to be desirable by a given reward function. Standard RL approaches optimize average reward, while methods explicitly focused on reducing the probability of
undesired outputs typically come at a cost to average-case performance. To improve this tradeoff, we introduce RePULSe, a new training method that augments
the standard RL loss with an additional loss that uses learned proposals to guide
sampling low-reward outputs, and then reduces those outputs’ probability. We run
experiments demonstrating that RePULSe produces a better tradeoff of expected
reward versus the probability of undesired outputs and is more adversarially robust,
compared to standard RL alignment approaches and alternatives.

1

Introduction

With the far reaching deployment of large language models in production settings, undesirable or
unexpected behavior can have drastic real-world consequences, such as a man who committed suicide
after speaking with a chatbot [Xiang, 2023]. Because deployment may involve billions of user queries,
even a one-in-a-million failure mode poses a large risk; it is critically important to minimize the
probability of such undesirable LM outputs. Feedback-based alignment methods using Reinforcement
Learning (RL), such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [Ziegler et al., 2019,
Ouyang et al., 2022], have emerged as a dominant paradigm for training LMs to avoid undesirable
outputs, as quantified by some reward model trained on human preferences.1
In the most widely used RL algorithms for LMs (Sec. 2.2), outputs are sampled from the current LM
and gradient updates are made based on the LM’s probability on those outputs, weighted by some
reward or advantage function. Thus, a sequence with low reward has its probability directly reduced
only if it is actually sampled. Otherwise, its probability may only be indirectly reduced if probability
is increased on other samples (as probabilities sum to one), or if probability is reduced on similar
sequences and generalization occurs.
As the LM improves through RLHF-style training, the probability of sampling low-reward (undesirable) sequences shrinks, and their probabilities receive fewer and fewer direct gradient updates.
1

While RL-free methods such as DPO [Rafailov et al., 2023] have been gaining in popularity, RLHF remains
a dominant paradigm; for example, see Xu et al. [2024].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

