High-dimensional neuronal activity from
low-dimensional latent dynamics: a solvable model

Valentin Schmutz∗
University College London
WC1E 6BT London, UK
v.schmutz@ucl.ac.uk

Ali Haydaroğlu∗
University College London
WC1E 6BT London, UK
ali.haydaroglu.20@ucl.ac.uk

Shuqi Wang
École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
shuqi.wang@epfl.ch

Yixiao Feng
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
200240 Shanghai, China
yf2887@nyu.edu

Matteo Carandini
University College London
WC1E 6BT London, UK
m.carandini@ucl.ac.uk

Kenneth D. Harris
University College London
WC1E 6BT London, UK
kenneth.harris@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Computation in recurrent networks of neurons has been hypothesized to occur
at the level of low-dimensional latent dynamics, both in artificial systems and in
the brain. This hypothesis seems at odds with evidence from large-scale neuronal
recordings in mice showing that neuronal population activity is high-dimensional.
To demonstrate that low-dimensional latent dynamics and high-dimensional activity
can be two sides of the same coin, we present an analytically solvable recurrent
neural network (RNN) model whose dynamics can be exactly reduced to a lowdimensional dynamical system, but generates an activity manifold that has a high
linear embedding dimension. This raises the question: Do low-dimensional latents
explain the high-dimensional activity observed in mouse visual cortex? Spectral
theory tells us that the covariance eigenspectrum alone does not allow us to recover
the dimensionality of the latents, which can be low or high, when neurons are
nonlinear. To address this indeterminacy, we develop Neural Cross-Encoder (NCE),
an interpretable, nonlinear latent variable modeling method for neuronal recordings,
and find that high-dimensional neuronal responses to drifting gratings and spontaneous activity in visual cortex can be reduced to low-dimensional latents, while the
responses to natural images cannot. We conclude that the high-dimensional activity
measured in certain conditions, such as in the absence of a stimulus, is explained
by low-dimensional latents that are nonlinearly processed by individual neurons.

1

Introduction

The mammalian cortex comprises a large number of neurons, which, in principle, should allow
it to use a high-dimensional neural code to represent sensory, motor, and cognitive information.
Nevertheless, multi-neuronal recordings in nonhuman primates [1–4] have suggested that cortical
∗

equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

