Provably Efficient RL under Episode-Wise Safety in
Constrained MDPs with Linear Function
Approximation

Toshinori Kitamura
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
toshinori-k@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Tadashi Kozuno
OMRON SINIC X, NexaScience
Tokyo, Japan
Kenta Hoshino∗
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan

Arnob Ghosh
New Jersey Institute of Technology
New Jersey, USA

Wataru Kumagai
OMRON SINIC X, NexaScience
Tokyo, Japan
Yohei Hosoe
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan

Kazumi Kasaura
OMRON SINIC X
Tokyo, Japan

Yutaka Matsuo
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
We study the reinforcement learning (RL) problem in a constrained Markov decision process (CMDP), where an agent explores the environment to maximize the
expected cumulative reward while satisfying a single constraint on the expected
total utility value in every episode. While this problem is well understood in the
tabular setting, theoretical results for function approximation remain scarce. This
paper
√ closes the gap by proposing an RL algorithm for linear CMDPs that achieves
e K) regret with an episode-wise zero-violation guarantee. Furthermore, our
O(
method is computationally efficient, scaling polynomially with problem-dependent
parameters while remaining independent of the state space size. Our results significantly improve upon recent linear CMDP algorithms, which either violate the
constraint or incur exponential computational costs.

1

Introduction

Safe decision-making is essential in real-world applications such as plant control and finance [19].
Constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) is a mathematical framework for developing decisionmaking algorithms with formal safety guarantees [2]. This paper studies the reinforcement learning
(RL) problem in finite-horizon CMDPs, where an agent explores the environment to maximize the
expected cumulative rewards while satisfying a single constraint on the expected total utility value.
Safe exploration has been established in the tabular
√ CMDP settings. Several works [27, 8, 47]
e
achieve episode-wise zero-violation RL with O( K) regret for K number of episodes, ensuring
constraint satisfaction in every episode. Their approach consists of two phases: deploying a known
strictly safe policy π sf and then updating policies via linear programs (LPs), which optimizes an
optimistic objective while satisfying a pessimistic constraint. Deploying π sf is necessary to ensure
feasible solutions for the LPs once enough environmental information is collected.
∗

Current affiliation: Institute of Science Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, and DENSO IT Laboratory, Tokyo, Japan.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

