Generalizing while preserving monotonicity
in comparison-based preference learning models

Julien Fageot∗
Tournesol

Peva Blanchard∗
Kleis Technology

Gilles Bareilles
CTU in Prague

Lê-Nguyên Hoang
Calicarpa, Tournesol

Abstract
If you tell a learning model that you prefer an alternative a over another alternative
b, then you probably expect the model to be monotone, that is, the valuation of a
increases, and that of b decreases. Yet, perhaps surprisingly, many widely deployed
comparison-based preference learning models, including large language models,
fail to have this guarantee. Until now, the only comparison-based preference
learning algorithms that were proved to be monotone are the Generalized BradleyTerry models [10]. Yet, these models are unable to generalize to uncompared data.
In this paper, we advance the understanding of the set of models with generalization
ability that are monotone. Namely, we propose a new class of Linear Generalized
Bradley-Terry models with Diffusion Priors, and identify sufficient conditions on
alternatives’ embeddings that guarantee monotonicity. Our experiments show that
this monotonicity is far from being a general guarantee, and that our new class of
generalizing models improves accuracy, especially when the dataset is limited.

1

Introduction

Preference learning, sometimes known as alignment, has become central to machine learning. In
particular, in recent years, there has been a growing interest to leverage comparative judgments to finetune AI models, using frameworks like Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) [6]
or Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [31] in the context of language models, or linear models in
the context of applications ranging from trolley dilemmas to food donation [1, 20]. These models
are now deployed at scale. In parallel, learning preferences from comparisons with mathematical
guarantees also fits in social choice theory, contributing to developing more transparent social medial,
as advocated recently by “prosocial media” [39], with a direct application for collaborative scoring
of social media content [16, 17], consensus-driven polling [34], or recommender system based on
explicit preference such as [11], among others.
Yet, bizarre aspects of these preference learning algorithms are regularly observed. A common but
striking observation is that, when updating a model based on a comparison judging that an item a is
preferable to an item b, the probability of a can decrease [28, 33, 2]. In fact, most deployed learning
algorithms fail to guarantee monotonicity: the probability or score of an item may be reduced after it
was said to be better than another item.
Perhaps surprisingly, the root cause of this lack of monotonicity is not the nonlinearity of the models.
In fact, we can expose this “bug" with a very basic example. Consider a linear two-dimensional model
with a parameter β ∈ R2 to be learned: the scores of items a and b are β ⊤ xa and β ⊤ xb , where xa
and xb are (two-dimensional) vector embeddings. We are given a comparison that favors alternative
a over b, whose embeddings are xa = (1, 0) and xb = (2, 0). Since xa1 < xb1 , this comparison will
push β1 towards lower values. But since the score of a according to the linear model is β T xa = β1 ,
this means that the score of a will also decrease. Thus, including a comparison that favors a over b
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

