Simple and Efficient Heterogeneous Temporal
Graph Neural Network

Yili Wang1,2 , Tairan Huang1 , Changlong He1 , Qiutong Li1 , Jianliang Gao1,∗
1
Central South University
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
yiliwang@hkust-gz.edu.cn, gaojianliang@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Heterogeneous temporal graphs (HTGs) are ubiquitous data structures in the real
world. Recently, to enhance representation learning on HTGs, numerous attentionbased neural networks have been proposed. Despite these successes, existing methods rely on a decoupled temporal and spatial learning paradigm, which weakens
interactions of spatio-temporal information and leads to a high model complexity.
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel learning paradigm for HTGs called Simple
and Efficient Heterogeneous Temporal Graph Neural Network (SE-HTGNN).
Specifically, we innovatively integrate temporal modeling into spatial learning
via a novel dynamic attention mechanism, which substantially reduces model
complexity while enhancing discriminative representation learning on HTGs. Additionally, to comprehensively and adaptively understand HTGs, we leverage large
language models to prompt SE-HTGNN, enabling the model to capture the implicit
properties of node types as prior knowledge. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that SE-HTGNN achieves up to 10× speed-up over the state-of-the-art and latest
baseline while maintaining the best forecasting accuracy.

1

Introduction

Heterogeneous temporal graphs (HTGs) have been commonly used to model complex systems in the
real world, such as e-commerce networks [1–3], epidemic networks [4, 5], and traffic networks [6, 7].
While static heterogeneous graphs are characterized by diverse node types and relations among connected nodes, HTGs, as shown in Figure 1 (a), extend this data structure by incorporating a temporal
dimension. Therefore, learning on HTGs necessitates not only addressing spatial heterogeneity but
also capturing the interactions among graph snapshots.
Recently, various heterogeneous dynamic graph neural networks (HDGNNs) have been proposed
and have achieved remarkable progress in learning on HTGs [8, 9]. Figure 1 (b) shows a general
framework of HDGNNs [10–13], which is characterized by performing spatial and temporal modeling
in two sequential stages. Specifically, spatial modeling step employs hierarchical (node- and relationlevel) attention-based aggregation on each graph snapshot to generate spatial representations of the
target node. Subsequently, a sequence-based module is employed to model the temporal dependencies
among these spatial representations, enabling the prediction of future representations for downstream
tasks. Such sequence-based module is typically recurrent neural network (RNN) or Transformer [14].
Despite these successes, existing HDGNNs still faced the following limitations: (1) High model
complexity leads to optimization challenges and degrades efficiency. Specifically, existing methods are incremental improvements upon prior frameworks, rather than breakthroughs, which leads
to increasingly complex architectures. For example, stacking additional attention layers and as∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

