Dual Alignment Framework for Few-shot Learning
with Inter-Set and Intra-Set Shifts
Siyang Jiang1 , Rui Fang2 , Hsi-Wen Chen2 , Wei Ding2
Guolaing Xing ,1 , Ming-Syan Chen ,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
National Taiwan University

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to classify unseen examples (query set) into labeled
data (support set) through low-dimensional embeddings. However, the diversity
and unpredictability of environments and capture devices make FSL more challenging in real-world applications. In this paper, we propose Dual Support Query
Shift (DSQS), a novel challenge in FSL that integrates two key issues: inter-set
shifts (between support and query sets) and intra-set shifts (within each set), which
signiﬁcantly hinder model performance. To tackle these challenges, we introduce
a DUal ALignment framework (DUAL), whose core insight is that clean features
can improve optimal transportation (OT) alignment. Firstly, DUAL leverages a
robust embedding function enhanced by a repairer network trained with perturbed
and adversarially generated “hard” examples to obtain clean features. Additionally, it incorporates a two-stage OT approach with a negative entropy regularizer,
which aligns support set instances, minimizes intra-class distances, and uses query
data as anchor nodes to achieve effective distribution alignment. We provide
a theoretical bound of DUAL and experimental results on three image datasets,
compared against 10 state-of-the-art baselines, showing that DUAL achieves a remarkable average performance improvement of 25.66%. Our code is available at
https://github.com/siyang-jiang/DUAL.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning (FSL) addresses the challenge of limited labeled data by extracting features and
leveraging the similarity between support and query sets, rather than training a separate classiﬁer for
each class. This characteristic makes FSL suitable for tasks with scarce data and unseen scenarios,
as exempliﬁed by methods such as MatchingNet [45], which assigns a query example the label of
its most similar counterpart in the support set. Conventional studies on FSL often focus on crossdomain settings [37, 52], where distribution shifts occur between training and testing data [41, 26].
To mitigate this issue, previous approaches have enhanced robustness through data augmentation [49,
50] or adversarial training [18, 53].
However, these methods assume that each support or query set is internally consistent, i.e., they
share the same domain during testing. In practice, Support-Query Shift (SQS) [3] frequently arises
due to differences in environments (e.g., foggy vs. high-luminance scenes) or capture devices (e.g.,
mobile phones vs. SLR cameras), leading to misclassiﬁcation. To address SQS, Bennequin et al. [3]
ﬁrst employed optimal transportation (OT) [7] to align embeddings into a shared latent space. More
recently, Jian et al. [21] introduced a noise-aware data augmentation scheme to alleviate distribution
misalignment, while Aimen et al. [1] highlighted the growing distribution mismatch between support
and query sets during testing.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

