Schrödinger Bridge Matching for Tree-Structured
Costs and Entropic Wasserstein Barycentres

Samuel Howard
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Peter Potaptchik
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

George Deligiannidis
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Abstract
Recent advances in flow-based generative modelling have provided scalable methods for computing the Schrödinger Bridge (SB) between distributions, a dynamic
form of entropy-regularised Optimal Transport (OT) for the quadratic cost. The
successful Iterative Markovian Fitting (IMF) procedure solves the SB problem via
sequential bridge-matching steps, presenting an elegant and practical approach
with many favourable properties over the more traditional Iterative Proportional
Fitting (IPF) procedure. Beyond the standard setting, optimal transport can be
generalised to the multi-marginal case in which the objective is to minimise a cost
defined over several marginal distributions. Of particular importance are costs
defined over a tree structure, from which Wasserstein barycentres can be recovered as a special case. In this work, we extend the IMF procedure to solve for
the tree-structured SB problem. Our resulting algorithm inherits the many advantages of IMF over IPF approaches in the tree-based setting. In the case of
Wasserstein barycentres, our approach can be viewed as extending the widely used
fixed-point approach to use flow-based entropic OT solvers, while requiring only
simple bridge-matching steps at each iteration. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/samuel-howard/Tree_SB_Matching_Barycentres.

1

Introduction

Transporting mass between two distributions is a ubiquitous problem with numerous applications
in machine learning and beyond. Optimal Transport (OT) (Santambrogio, 2015; Peyré and Cuturi,
2019) provides a principled approach for such problems, by seeking to minimise the total cost of
transportation according to a chosen cost function. Since the introduction of Sinkhorn’s algorithm
(Cuturi, 2013) and more recent neural approaches (Makkuva et al., 2020), computational OT has
seen great success across many domains such as biology (Schiebinger et al., 2019; Bunne et al.,
2023), and extensively in machine learning (Genevay et al., 2018; Cuturi et al., 2019; Corenflos
et al., 2021). Recently, ideas from the powerful flow-based approaches that have revolutionised
generative modelling (Song et al., 2021; Peluchetti, 2022; Lipman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden, 2023) have been leveraged to solve the entropy-regularised dynamic OT
problem, known as the Schrödinger Bridge (SB). Such approaches provide significant scalability advantages, enabling approximation of OT maps between high-dimensional continuous datasets such
as image data. Early flow-based SB solvers were based on the classical Iterative Proportional Fitting
(IPF) scheme (De Bortoli et al., 2021; Vargas et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022), but such methods have
since been superseded by those based on the Iterative Markovian Fitting (IMF) scheme (Shi et al.,
2023; Peluchetti, 2023) due to its many superior properties.
Beyond the standard OT problem between two marginals, multi-marginal OT aims to find a joint
coupling over multiple marginals while minimising the total cost. Tree-structured costs are often
Corresponding author: howard@stats.ox.ac.uk
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

