Value Gradient Guidance for Flow Matching Alignment

Zhen Liu1†

Tim Z. Xiao2* Carles Domingo-Enrich3* Weiyang Liu4 Dinghuai Zhang3,5†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) 2 University of Tübingen
3
Microsoft Research 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 Mila – Quebec AI Institute
*
Equal contribution † Corresponding author
vgg-flow.github.io
1

Optimal
Control

Euler Step

Matching

Number of Finetuning Steps

Figure 1: Left: Illustration of our proposed VGG-Flow algorithm. The velocity field is trained to match the
value gradient field obtained from the optimal control problem. The value gradient field is parametrized as
the reward gradient field of the one-step Euler prediction plus a learnable residual field. Right: Evolution of
samples (with fixed seeds and prompts) during the course of finetuning on the reward model of Aesthetic Score.

Abstract
While methods exist for aligning flow matching models – a popular and effective
class of generative models – with human preferences, existing approaches fail to
achieve both adaptation efficiency and probabilistically sound prior preservation.
In this work, we leverage the theory of optimal control and propose VGG-Flow, a
gradient-matching–based method for finetuning pretrained flow matching models.
The key idea behind this algorithm is that the optimal difference between the
finetuned velocity field and the pretrained one should be matched with the gradient
field of a value function. This method not only incorporates first-order information
from the reward model but also benefits from heuristic initialization of the value
function to enable fast adaptation. Empirically, we show on a popular text-toimage flow matching model, Stable Diffusion 3, that our method can finetune flow
matching models under limited computational budgets while achieving effective
and prior-preserving alignment.

1

Introduction

Flow matching models [1, 36, 38] are one of the most effective methods in modeling high-dimensional
real-world continuous distributions and widely used for the generation of images [17], videos [65], 3D
objects [39, 40, 69, 78], etc. These models, compared to diffusion models that rely on simulation with
stochastic differential equations (SDEs), are trained to sample with deterministic ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) of which sampling paths are often straighter and easier to model.
Similar to the motivations for performing alignment for diffusion models [6, 19], it is natural to
finetune flow matching models with reward models so that the generated samples are more aligned
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

