RIGNO: A Graph-based Framework For
Robust And Accurate Operator Learning
For PDEs On Arbitrary Domains

Sepehr Mousavi1

Shizheng Wen2

Maximilian Herde2

Bogdan Raonić2,3

1
2

Levi Lingsch2,3
Siddhartha Mishra2,3

Computational Mechanics Group, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Seminar for Applied Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
ETH AI Center, Switzerland

Abstract
Learning the solution operators of PDEs on arbitrary domains is challenging due to
the diversity of possible domain shapes, in addition to the often intricate underlying
physics. We propose an end-to-end graph neural network (GNN) based neural
operator to learn PDE solution operators from data on point clouds in arbitrary
domains. Our multi-scale model maps data between input/output point clouds by
passing it through a downsampled regional mesh. The approach includes novel
elements aimed at ensuring spatio-temporal resolution invariance. Our model,
termed RIGNO, is tested on a challenging suite of benchmarks composed of
various time-dependent and steady PDEs defined on a diverse set of domains.
We demonstrate that RIGNO is significantly more accurate than neural operator
baselines and robustly generalizes to unseen resolutions both in space and in time.
Our code is publicly available at github.com/camlab-ethz/rigno.

1

Introduction

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) mathematically model a wide variety of interesting phenomena
in physics and engineering, making their study a matter of great scientific importance [9]. Given the
paucity of explicit solution formulas, numerical methods [36], such as finite difference, finite element
and spectral methods constitute the main tools in the quantitative study of PDEs. The computational
cost of existing numerical methods or solvers for PDEs can be prohibitively expensive, particularly
in the context of problems such as uncertainty quantification, inverse problems, control, and design,
where PDE solvers have to be called multiple times [35]. This necessitates the design of fast and
accurate surrogates for PDE solvers.
In this context, machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly being used as surrogates for
PDE solvers, see [31] and the references therein. In particular, operator learning, i.e., where the
task at hand is to learn the underlying solution operator of a PDE from data, has emerged as the
dominant paradigm in the application of ML techniques for PDEs. A large variety of operator learning
algorithms have recently been proposed, with examples being DeepONets [7, 28], Fourier Neural
Operator (FNO) [20], Low-rank Neural Operators [22], Convolutional Neural Operators (CNO) [38]
and transformer-based operator learning algorithms [6, 34, 12, 13, 1], among many others. The
success of these approaches may largely be contributed to their multi-scale learning. For example, the
FNO learns frequencies of different scales within the data, CNO learns by down- and up-sampling
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

