MoRIC: A Modular Region-based Implicit Codec for
Image Compression

Gen Li∗, Haotian Wu∗†, Deniz Gündüz
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K.
{gen.li22, haotian.wu17, d.gunduz}@imperial.ac.uk
https://eedavidwu.github.io/MoRIC/

Abstract
We introduce Modular Region-Based Implicit Codec (MoRIC), a novel image
compression algorithm that relies on implicit neural representations (INRs). Unlike previous INR-based codecs that model the entire image with a single neural
network, MoRIC assigns dedicated models to distinct regions in the image, each tailored to its local distribution. This region-wise design enhances adaptation to local
statistics and enables flexible, single-object compression with fine-grained ratedistortion (RD) control. MoRIC allows regions of arbitrary shapes, and provides
the contour information for each region as separate information. In particular, it incorporates adaptive chain coding for lossy and lossless contour compression, and a
shared global modulator that injects multi-scale global context into local overfitting
processes in a coarse-to-fine manner. MoRIC achieves state-of-the-art performance
in single-object compression with significantly lower decoding complexity than
existing learned neural codecs, which results in a highly efficient compression
approach for fixed-background scenarios, e.g., for surveillance cameras. It also
sets a new benchmark among overfitted codecs for standard image compression.
Additionally, MoRIC naturally supports semantically meaningful layered compression through selective region refinement, paving the way for scalable and flexible
INR-based codecs.

1

Introduction

Traditional image and video codecs [5, 51, 9] rely on hand-crafted transforms to capture statistical
correlations in the data, and exploit redundancies rooted in human perception for compression.
Recently, deep learning-based codecs have demonstrated remarkable rate-distortion (RD) performance
by replacing manually designed analysis and synthesis transforms with neural networks [2, 15, 22].
However, this advancement comes with significantly increased model complexity and decoding
cost that often far exceed those of commercial codecs, limiting their practicality in real-world
applications [26, 54]. Furthermore, these neural approaches typically require large-scale training
or advanced models [47] to generalize across diverse data distributions. Consequently, developing
codecs that balance low computational complexity and high performance remains a critical open
challenge [58].
To address these limitations, overfitted codecs have emerged, leveraging implicit neural representations (INRs) [50] to compress each image individually with low decoding complexity. INRs employ
lightweight multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to parameterize continuous functions [48, 37], with the
quantized network weights serving as a compact, signal-specific compressor [48, 37]. First INR-based
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work and are listed alphabetically.
Corresponding author: Haotian Wu (haotian.wu17@imperial.ac.uk).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

