Hierarchical Information Aggregation for Incomplete
Multimodal Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnosis

Chengliang Liu1, 2, 3 , Yuanxi Que1 , Qihao Xu3 , Yabo Liu4 ,
Jie Wen3 , Jinghua Wang3 , Xiaoling Luo1∗
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
4
College of Artificial Intelligence, Ocean University of China
liucl1996@163.com, {queyuanxi, xqh51199597, xiaolingluoo}@outlook.com,
yaboliu.ug@gmail.com, jiewen_pr@126.com, wangjh2012@foxmail.com

Abstract
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) poses a significant health threat to the aging population,
underscoring the critical need for early diagnosis to delay disease progression and
improve patient quality of life. Recent advances in heterogeneous multimodal artificial intelligence (AI) have facilitated comprehensive joint diagnosis, yet practical
clinical scenarios frequently encounter incomplete modalities due to factors like
high acquisition costs or radiation risks. Moreover, traditional convolution-based
architecture face inherent limitations in capturing long-range dependencies and
handling heterogeneous medical data efficiently. To address these challenges, in
our proposed heterogeneous multimodal diagnostic framework (HAD), we develop
a multi-view Hilbert curve-based Mamba block and a hierarchical spatial feature extraction module to simultaneously capture local spatial features and global
dependencies, effectively alleviating spatial discontinuities introduced by voxel
serialization. Furthermore, to balance semantic consistency and modal specificity,
we build a unified mutual information learning objective in the heterogeneous multimodal embedding space, which maintains effective learning of modality-specific
information to avoid modality collapse caused by model preference. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our HAD significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in various modality-missing scenarios, providing an efficient and reliable
solution for early-stage AD diagnosis.

1

Introduction

AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by cognitive impairment, gradual loss of
memory, and a decline in self-care abilities as its primary clinical manifestations [1, 2, 3]. Due to the
lack of effective cures, AD poses a significant threat to the health of the elderly population, severely
impacting the quality of life of patients and their families and imposing a heavy medical burden on
society [4]. Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is considered a precursor stage of AD, marked by
mild cognitive decline without a noticeable impact on daily functional abilities. Early diagnosis and
intervention during this stage are critical for delaying disease progression and improving patients’
quality of life. In recent years, with the rapid increase of the type of multimodal data, researchers have
been able to better understand and diagnose early-stage AD from multiple perspectives, providing
more comprehensive and objective decision-making support for clinical diagnosis and treatment [5, 6].
∗

Corresponding author: Xiaoling Luo (email: xiaolingluoo@outlook.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

