On Union-Closedness of Language Generation

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Anay Mehrotra
Yale University
anaymehrotra1@gmail.com

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@gmail.com

Grigoris Velegkas∗
Google Research
gvelegkas@google.com

Abstract
We investigate language generation in the limit – a model by Kleinberg and Mullainathan [2024, NeurIPS] and extended by Li, Raman, and Tewari [2025]. While
Kleinberg and Mullainathan proved generation is possible for all countable collections, [Li et al., 2025] defined a hierarchy of generation notions (uniform,
non-uniform, and generatable) and explored their feasibility for uncountable collections. Our first set of results resolve two open questions of [Li et al., 2025] by
proving finite unions of generatable or non-uniformly generatable classes need
not be generatable. These follow from a stronger result: there is a non-uniformly
generatable class and a uniformly generatable class whose union is non-generatable.
This adds to the aspects along which language generation in the limit is different
from traditional tasks in statistical learning theory like classification, which are
closed under finite unions. In particular, it implies that given two generators for
different collections, one cannot combine them to obtain a single “more powerful”
generator, prohibiting this notion of boosting. Our construction also addresses a
third of [Li et al., 2025]’s open questions on whether there are uncountable classes
that are non-uniformly generatable and do not satisfy the eventually unbounded
closure (EUC) condition introduced by Li, Raman, and Tewari. Our approach
utilizes carefully constructed classes along with a novel diagonalization argument
that could be of independent interest in the growing area of language generation.

1

Introduction

The algorithmic problem at the core of language generation – in both humans and large language
models (LLMs) – is deceptively simple: given a sequence of examples from some target language,
generate new and previously unseen strings that also belong to this language. Despite the remarkable
capabilities of humans and, perhaps, more so of LLMs, to generate coherent text, a thorough
understanding of the theoretical underpinnings of language generation has remained elusive.
Language Generation in the Limit. Kleinberg and Mullainathan [2024] recently formalized this
problem in a model resembling online learning: First, an adversary fixes a target language K ∈ L
and an enumeration of K.2 At each round n ≥ 1, the adversary presents the n-th element xn of
the enumeration to the generator. The generator, given the strings Sn = {x1 , . . . , xn } seen so far,
outputs a new string wn ∈
/ Sn – its guess for an unseen string in K. The generator wins this game
if it eventually learns “to generate from K.” Formally, a generator G is said to generate from L in
∗

Part of the work was done while the author was a PhD student at Yale University.
Formally, en enumeration of K is an infinite sequence of elements x1 , x2 , . . . (possibly including duplicates)
such that each xi ∈ K, and for every element x ∈ K there is some position nx in the sequence where x appears.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

