Angular Constraint Embedding via SpherePair Loss
for Constrained Clustering

Shaojie Zhang
Ke Chen
Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, U.K.
{shaojie.zhang,ke.chen}@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
Constrained clustering integrates domain knowledge through pairwise constraints.
However, existing deep constrained clustering (DCC) methods are either limited by
anchors inherent in end-to-end modeling or struggle with learning discriminative
Euclidean embedding, restricting their scalability and real-world applicability. To
avoid their respective pitfalls, we propose a novel angular constraint embedding
approach for DCC, termed SpherePair. Using the SpherePair loss with a geometric formulation, our method faithfully encodes pairwise constraints and leads to
embeddings that are clustering-friendly in angular space, effectively separating
representation learning from clustering. SpherePair preserves pairwise relations
without conflict, removes the need to specify the exact number of clusters, generalizes to unseen data, enables rapid inference of the number of clusters, and is
supported by rigorous theoretical guarantees. Comparative evaluations with stateof-the-art DCC methods on diverse benchmarks, along with empirical validation
of theoretical insights, confirm its superior performance, scalability, and overall
real-world effectiveness. Code is available at our repository.

1

Introduction

Clustering is pivotal in machine learning and data mining. Unsupervised clustering methods, being
fundamentally ill-posed, often partition data based solely on instance similarities or connections,
which may misalign with domain knowledge [1]. To address this issue, integrating domain knowledge
through weakly supervised methods like Constrained Clustering [2, 3, 4] has gained attention. These
methods enforce both positive and negative instance-level pairwise constraints, significantly boosting
clustering accuracy. Moreover, they offer a cost-effective solution in scenarios where obtaining
pairwise relations is easier than acquiring class labels [5].
Most early pairwise constrained clustering (CC) methods adapt traditional unsupervised clustering
by introducing constraints through modified similarity metrics or penalty functions [3, 6, 7, 8, 9].
Recent advances in deep clustering have led to the emergence of deep constrained clustering (DCC)
paradigms, which outperform traditional methods, particularly on high-dimensional and complex
data across various data types, and generalize well to unseen instances. Broadly, based on whether
constraints are enforced at the level of cluster assignments or instance embeddings, we propose
categorizing DCC methods into two paradigms: end-to-end DCC and deep constraint embedding.
As the dominant paradigm, end-to-end DCC methods (e.g., [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]) reformulate clustering
as a pseudo-classification task by introducing anchors to represent classes, learning representations
and cluster assignments jointly. However, the absence of global supervision hinders the proper
alignment of anchors with cluster centers, resulting in a mismatch between local instance-level
similarities and global cluster-level decisions. Moreover, these methods require prior knowledge of
the number of clusters in the data to formulate the pseudo-classification task. These weaknesses,
along with other technical issues reviewed in the next section, limit their practical usability in real
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

