One Filters All: A Generalist Filter
for State Estimation
Shiqi Liu1 *

Wenhan Cao1 * Chang Liu2 Zeyu He1
Yinuo Wang1 Shengbo Eben Li1 3 †

Tianyi Zhang1

1

2

School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University
College of Engineering, Peking University 3 College of AI, Tsinghua University
*
Equal contribution † Corresponding author

Abstract
Estimating hidden states in dynamical systems, also known as optimal filtering, is
a long-standing problem in various fields of science and engineering. In this paper,
we introduce a general filtering framework, LLM-Filter1 , which leverages large
language models (LLMs) for state estimation by embedding noisy observations
with text prototypes. In various experiments for classical dynamical systems, we
find that first, state estimation can significantly benefit from the reasoning knowledge embedded in pre-trained LLMs. By achieving proper modality alignment
with the frozen LLM, LLM-Filter outperforms the state-of-the-art learning-based
approaches. Second, we carefully design the prompt structure, System-as-Prompt
(SaP), incorporating task instructions that enable the LLM to understand the estimation tasks. Guided by these prompts, LLM-Filter exhibits exceptional generalization, capable of performing filtering tasks accurately in changed or even
unseen environments. We further observe a scaling-law behavior in LLM-Filter,
where accuracy improves with larger model sizes and longer training times. These
findings make LLM-Filter a promising foundation model of filtering.

1

Introduction

State estimation of dynamical systems is a crucial topic in various fields, including robotics [1],
meteorology [2], chemistry [3], and transportation [4]. The most comprehensive framework for
state estimation is Bayesian filtering [5], which performs online estimation by iteratively applying
prediction and update steps. Popular online Bayes filters can be categorized into Gaussian filters [6]
and particle filters (PFs) [7]. In high-dimensional non-Gaussian systems, Gaussian filters tend to
produce significant errors [8, 9], whereas PFs are limited by their substantial computational demands
[10, 11].
To address these limitations, there is a growing trend toward learning-based filtering methods [12, 13,
14, 15]. Trained offline on well-curated datasets, these learning-based filters directly capture accurate
system statistics rather than relying on manual modeling, enabling high accuracy and efficient online
estimation. However, these filters are typically tailored to specific tasks and require retraining
when applied to different dynamical systems, as illustrated in Figure 1. Without retraining, their
performance often deteriorates when the system undergoes changes or transitions to entirely new
environments.
The control domain faces analogous challenges when adapting to diverse tasks and environments
[16, 17]. Large control models have been proposed to address these challenges, with examples
1

The code and dataset are publicly accessible at https://github.com/Anonymous-User-2367/LLM-Filter.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

