Parallelizing MCMC Across the Sequence Length

David M. Zoltowski∗
Stanford University
dzoltow@stanford.edu
Leo Kozachkov
Brown University
leokoz8@brown.edu

Skyler Wu∗
Stanford University
skylerw@stanford.edu

Xavier Gonzalez
Stanford University
xavier18@stanford.edu

Scott W. Linderman
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are foundational algorithms for
Bayesian inference and probabilistic modeling. However, most MCMC algorithms
are inherently sequential and their time complexity scales linearly with the sequence
length. Previous work on adapting MCMC to modern hardware has therefore focused on running many independent chains in parallel. Here, we take an alternative
approach: we propose algorithms to evaluate MCMC samplers in parallel across
the chain length. To do this, we build on recent methods for parallel evaluation of
nonlinear recursions that formulate the state sequence as a solution to a fixed-point
problem and solve for the fixed-point using a parallel form of Newton’s method.
We show how this approach can be used to parallelize Gibbs, Metropolis-adjusted
Langevin, and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo sampling across the sequence length. In
several examples, we demonstrate the simulation of up to hundreds of thousands
of MCMC samples with only tens of parallel Newton iterations. Additionally, we
develop two new parallel quasi-Newton methods to evaluate nonlinear recursions
with lower memory costs and reduced runtime. We find that the proposed parallel
algorithms accelerate MCMC sampling across multiple examples, in some cases
by more than an order of magnitude compared to sequential evaluation.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms sequentially generate samples from a target distribution, with computational cost linear in the length of the chain [1–3]. While modern hardware like
GPUs and TPUs can dramatically accelerate parallelizable algorithms, leveraging these advances for
MCMC remains challenging. In particular, while parallel resources can be used to simulate many
independent chains in parallel [4, 5], the runtime remains linear in the sequence length.
In this paper, we present a promising approach for parallelizing MCMC algorithms across the
sequence length to obtain sublinear chain-length complexity. The core idea is to adapt methods for
the parallel evaluation of nonlinear recursions [6–8] to MCMC algorithms. These methods formulate
the state sequence of a nonlinear sequence model as the solution of an optimization problem and
iteratively solve for the state sequence via a parallel-in-time formulation of Newton’s method.
We show that these methods can parallelize widely used classes of MCMC samplers across the chain
length, including Gibbs sampling [9], the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA) [10],
and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [11–13]. Across these examples, we often find that dozens of
parallel evaluations are sufficient to generate anywhere from thousands to hundreds of thousands of
samples. We also propose two new variations of the parallel Newton method that reduce computational
costs and improve efficiency for certain MCMC applications. With these approaches, we find that the
proposed parallel algorithms can dramatically accelerate MCMC sampling.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

