Know Thyself by Knowing Others: Learning Neuron
Identity from Population Context

Vinam Arora1† , Divyansha Lachi1 , Ian J. Knight1 , Mehdi Azabou2 ,
Blake Richards3,4 , Cole Hurwitz2 , Joshua H. Siegle5 , Eva L. Dyer1†
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 Columbia University,
3
McGill University, 4 Mila, 5 Allen Institute for Neural Dynamics

Abstract
Neurons process information in ways that depend on their cell type, connectivity,
and the brain region in which they are embedded. However, inferring these factors
from neural activity remains a significant challenge. To build general-purpose
representations that allow for resolving information about a neuron’s identity, we
introduce NuCLR, a self-supervised framework that aims to learn representations of
neural activity that allow for differentiating one neuron from the rest. NuCLR brings
together views of the same neuron observed at different times and across different
stimuli and uses a contrastive objective to pull these representations together. To
capture population context without assuming any fixed neuron ordering, we build
a spatiotemporal transformer that integrates activity in a permutation-equivariant
manner. Across multiple electrophysiology and calcium imaging datasets, a linear
decoding evaluation on top of NuCLR representations achieves a new state-of-theart for both cell type and brain region decoding tasks, and demonstrates strong
zero-shot generalization to unseen animals. We present the first systematic scaling analysis for neuron-level representation learning, showing that increasing the
number of animals used during pretraining consistently improves downstream
performance. The learned representations are also label-efficient, requiring only
a small fraction of labeled samples to achieve competitive performance. These
results highlight how large, diverse neural datasets enable models to recover information about neuron identity that generalize across animals. Code is available at
https://github.com/nerdslab/nuclr.

1

Introduction

Neurons operate in ways that reflect their cell type, connectivity, and the brain region in which they
are embedded [55, 46, 37]. Understanding how these structural and physiological factors shape
neural activity is an important open question [37] and is central to modern theories of neural function
[16, 10]. Cell type- and circuit-specific effects are also increasingly implicated in neurological
disorders, where it has been shown that particular neuronal subtypes can be selectively affected in
neurodegenerative disease [33, 29] and that neuron subtypes can be targeted to improve efficacy in
real time in closed-loop brain stimulation [57]. Together, these directions highlight a broader need to
understand how features such as cell type and brain region contribute to a neuron’s role in the brain,
motivating the development of methods that can extract aspects of neuron identity.
Much of what we know about neuronal cell types and their connectivity comes from molecular,
anatomical, and morphological labeling techniques that tag neurons based on gene expression profiles
†

Contact: vinam@upenn.edu, dyer1@upenn.edu
Reviewed on OpenReview: https://openreview.net/forum?id=zt3RKc6VBp.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

