BridgePure: Limited Protection Leakage Can Break
Black-Box Data Protection
Yihan Wang*,†
University of Waterloo
yihan.wang@uwaterloo.ca

Yiwei Lu*
University of Ottawa
yiwei.lu@uottawa.ca

Xiao-Shan Gao‡
AMSS, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn

Gautam Kamath‡
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
g@csail.mit.edu

Yaoliang Yu‡
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Availability attacks, or unlearnable examples, are defensive techniques that allow data owners to modify their datasets in ways that prevent unauthorized machine learning models from learning effectively while maintaining the data’s intended functionality. It has led to the release of popular black-box tools (e.g.,
APIs) for users to upload personal data and receive protected counterparts. In
this work, we show that such black-box protections can be substantially compromised if a small set of unprotected in-distribution data is available. Specifically, we propose a novel threat model of protection leakage, where an adversary can (1) easily acquire (unprotected, protected) pairs by querying the blackbox protections with a small unprotected dataset; and (2) train a diffusion bridge
model to build a mapping between unprotected and protected data. This mapping,
termed BridgePure, can effectively remove the protection from any previously
unseen data within the same distribution. BridgePure demonstrates superior purification performance on classification and style mimicry tasks, exposing critical
vulnerabilities in black-box data protection. We suggest that practitioners implement multi-level countermeasures to mitigate such risks. The code is available at
https://github.com/EhanW/bridge-pure.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of machine learning (ML) models has raised significant concerns about
data privacy, copyright, and unauthorized use of personal information. Specifically, machine learning developers usually rely on crawling web data to create their training sets, which can result in data
being trained on without the owners’ consent. This has significant potential for misuse. For example, trained models may be used in sensitive applications such as facial recognition [21], resulting in
individual re-identification or serious privacy breaches. Another example is training on copyrighted
images created by artists. The downstream models could be used for style mimicry and potentially
*

Equal contribution. † Correspondence author. ‡ Listed in alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

