OmniDraft: A cross-vocabulary, online adaptive
drafter for on-device speculative decoding

Ramchalam Kinattinkara Ramakrishnan∗, 1 Zhaocong Yuan∗, 2 ,
Shaojie Zhuo3 , Chen Feng4 , Yicheng Lin5 , Chenzheng Su6 , Xiaopeng Zhang7
Qualcomm AI Research †
{ rkinatti, zhaocong, shaojiez, 4 chenf, 5 yichengl, 6 chenzhen, 7 xiaopeng}
@qti.qualcomm.com
1

2

3

Abstract
Speculative decoding generally dictates having a small, efficient draft model that is
either pretrained or distilled offline to a particular target model series, for instance,
Llama or Qwen models. However, within online deployment settings, there are
two major challenges: 1) usage of a target model that is incompatible with the
draft model; 2) expectation of latency improvements over usage and time. In
this work, we propose OmniDraft, a unified framework that enables a single draft
model to operate with any target model and adapt dynamically to user data. We
introduce an online n-gram cache with hybrid distillation fine-tuning to address
the cross-vocabulary mismatch across draft and target models; and further improve decoding speed by leveraging adaptive drafting techniques. OmniDraft is
particularly suitable for on-device LLM applications where model cost, efficiency
and user customization are the major points of contention. This further highlights
the need to tackle the above challenges and motivates the “one drafter for all”
paradigm. We showcase the proficiency of the OmniDraft framework by performing online learning on math reasoning, coding and text generation tasks. Notably,
OmniDraft enables a single Llama-68M model to pair with various target models
including Vicuna-7B, Qwen2-7B and Llama3-8B models for speculative decoding;
and additionally provides up to 1.5-2x speedup.

1

Introduction

Unlike traditional auto-regressive generation in LLMs, speculative decoding (SpD) [25, 9] offers a
unique advantage to accelerate LLM inference by decoupling the generation phase and verification
phase. Speculative decoding generally requires a small but efficient draft model and a large target
model. The draft model generates a sequence of proposed tokens to be verified by the target in one
shot, amortizing the target model’s memory bottleneck in batch inference and attaining better tokens
per second throughput. The speedup factor relies not only on the predictability of the generated text
like commonly occurring phrases, but also on the alignment between draft and target model. As
such, a common practice is to utilize draft and target models from the same model family given their
consistency in pretrained data, tokenization and training configurations. Alternatively, one might
consider distilling a target model into a smaller model to serve as the drafter [53, 30], which still
follows the same principle of better alignment leading to greater speedup.
The tight coupling of draft and target models limits flexibility of model selection and creates additional
overhead for draft model distillation and maintenance, especially when deploying LLMs at scale
∗
†

Contributed equally
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

