Structured Linear CDEs: Maximally Expressive and
Parallel-in-Time Sequence Models

Benjamin Walker1 , Lingyi Yang1 , Nicola Muça Cirone2 , Cristopher Salvi2 , Terry Lyons1,2
2

1
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London

Abstract
This work introduces Structured Linear Controlled Differential Equations (SLiCEs),
a unifying framework for sequence models with structured, input-dependent statetransition matrices that retain the maximal expressivity of dense matrices whilst
being cheaper to compute. The framework encompasses existing architectures, such
as input-dependent block-diagonal linear recurrent neural networks and DeltaNet’s
diagonal-plus-low-rank structure, as well as two novel variants based on sparsity
and the Walsh–Hadamard transform. We prove that, unlike the diagonal statetransition matrices of S4D and Mamba, SLiCEs employing block-diagonal, sparse,
or Walsh–Hadamard matrices match the maximal expressivity of dense matrices.
Empirically, SLiCEs solve the A5 state-tracking benchmark with a single layer,
achieve best-in-class length generalisation on regular language tasks among parallelin-time models, and match the performance of log neural controlled differential
equations on six multivariate time-series classification datasets while cutting the
average time per training step by a factor of twenty.

1

Introduction

Parallel-in-time architectures, such as Transformers and Structured State-Space Models (SSMs),
have allowed language models to scale to billions of parameters [96, 39]. However, theory and
practice agree that these models do not generalise to longer sequences on state-tracking problems,
a task that classical Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) handle with ease [65, 66, 60]. Linear
Neural Controlled Differential Equations (LNCDEs) are a continuous-time sequence model where
the state-transition matrix, or vector field, depends linearly on the input path. This allows for the
multiplicative interactions between the hidden state and the input path necessary for gating. Reframing
SSMs as LNCDEs, it becomes clear that using a diagonal state-transition matrix severely restricts
expressivity [22]. Replacing it with a dense matrix restores maximal expressivity and the ability to
state-track, but increases the number of parameters and computational cost from O(d2h ) to O(d3h ),
where dh is the hidden dimension [66, 22].
Structured alternatives seek the best of both worlds. Block-diagonal Linear RNNs (LRNNs) [33] and
the Diagonal-Plus-Low-Rank (DPLR) structure of DeltaNet [85, 101, 88] reduce computational cost
while preserving some expressivity, with the latter recently shown to be maximally expressive [72].
We generalise and extend these ideas with Structured Linear Controlled Differential Equations
(SLiCEs), a unifying framework for structured, input-dependent state-transition matrices. SLiCEs
replace the dense state-transition matrix of an LNCDE with an efficient structured variant, such as
block-diagonal, sparse, Walsh–Hadamard or DPLR, which maintain the maximal expressivity of
dense matrices whilst reducing both the parameter count and computational cost.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

