Thinking in Character: Advancing Role-playing
Agents with Role-Aware Reasoning

Yihong Tang1,2 , Kehai Chen1,∗ , Muyun Yang1 , Zhengyu Niu3 ,
Jing Li1 , Tiejun Zhao1 , Min Zhang1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Loop Area Institute (SLAI), Shenzhen, China
3
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{toyhom@stu.hit.edu.cn, chenkehai@hit.edu.cn}

Abstract
The advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has spurred significant
interest in Role-Playing Agents (RPAs) for applications such as emotional companionship and virtual interaction. However, recent RPAs are often built on explicit
dialogue data, lacking deep, human-like internal thought processes, resulting
in superficial knowledge and style expression. While Large Reasoning Models
(LRMs) can be employed to simulate character thought, their direct application
is hindered by attention diversion (i.e., RPAs forget their role) and style drift
(i.e., overly formal and rigid reasoning rather than character-consistent reasoning). To address these challenges, this paper introduces a novel Role-Aware
Reasoning (RAR) method, which consists of two important stages: Role Identity Activation (RIA) and Reasoning Style Optimization (RSO). RIA explicitly
guides the model with character profiles during reasoning to counteract attention
diversion, and then RSO aligns reasoning style with the character and scene via
LRM distillation to mitigate style drift. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed RAR significantly enhances the performance of RPAs by effectively
addressing attention diversion and style drift. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Toyhom/thinking_in_character.

1

Introduction

With the advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs), Role-Playing Agents (RPAs) [1] have
garnered significant attention for applications such as emotional companionship [2] and virtual
interaction [3]. Many RPAs attempt to explicitly integrate rich role-playing dialogue datasets [4],
diverse interaction processes [5], and the inherent generalization capabilities of LLMs [6], yielding
promising results.
Despite their success, existing methods often focus merely on superficial knowledge and style [7]
expression in responses, with models lacking deep, human-like internal thought processes. Large
Reasoning Models (LRMs), such as GPT-o series [8] or Deepseek-R1 [9], can be utilized to generate
structured reason traces to simulate a character’s thought process, thereby addressing this gap.
However, Feng et al. [10] observed that reasoning methods do not effectively improve the performance
of RPAs under certain circumstances. As illustrated in Figure 1, the primary reasons for this
degradation are attention diversion and style drift. Firstly, existing LRMs tend to forget their
designated role, concentrating instead on the task or problem-solving. This diminishes their focus
on the role-playing task, leading to attention diversion. Secondly, they prioritize the generation of
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

