Multi-Class Support Vector Machine
with Differential Privacy

Jinseong Park1 ,
1

Yujin Choi2 ,

Korea Institute for Advanced Study

Jaewook Lee2*
2

Seoul National University

jinseong@kias.re.kr, {uznhigh, jaewook}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
With the increasing need to safeguard data privacy in machine learning models,
differential privacy (DP) is one of the major frameworks to build privacy-preserving
models. Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are widely used traditional machine
learning models due to their robust margin guarantees and strong empirical performance in binary classification. However, applying DP to multi-class SVMs
is inadequate, as the standard one-versus-rest (OvR) and one-versus-one (OvO)
approaches repeatedly query each data sample when building multiple binary
classifiers, thus consuming the privacy budget proportionally to the number of
classes. To overcome this limitation, we explore all-in-one SVM approaches
for DP, which access each data sample only once to construct multi-class SVM
boundaries with margin maximization properties. We propose a novel differentially Private Multi-class SVM (PMSVM) with weight and gradient perturbation
methods, providing rigorous sensitivity and convergence analyses to ensure DP
in all-in-one SVMs. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach surpasses
existing DP-SVM methods in multi-class scenarios.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models may contain sensitive information about training data samples, privacypreserving machine learning methods are actively investigated. Differential privacy (DP) [1, 2] is
one of the prominent privacy concepts by offering a rigorous mathematical framework to quantify
and bound the risk of disclosing a single individual’s data in training datasets. To hide personal
information, DP methods add random perturbations to model parameters or their outputs [3]. At the
same time, as the randomness inevitably degrades the utility of the models, it is important to reduce
the noise level or the number of data accesses [4].
Support vector machine (SVM) [5] is one of the widely used traditional machine learning models with
a strong theoretical guarantee of margin and following empirical performance in binary classification
tasks. Within various privacy-preserving SVMs [6, 7], Chaudhuri et al. [3] proposed a DP convex
optimization approach and applied it to SVM with convex margin maximization to ensure DP within
the SVM framework. Later research has focused on improving the convex optimization analysis to
reduce noise levels [8–10]. Alternatively, previous papers tailored to DP-SVM frameworks [11, 12]
have proposed enhancing SVM privacy using a Wolfe dual formulation. However, the multi-class
classification using DP-SVMs has not been actively investigated. In multi-class classification, Park
et al. [13] argued that traditional one-vs-rest (OvR) or one-vs-one (OvO) strategies present challenges
for DP due to the need for multiple binary SVMs, leading to repeated data accesses for training
samples and, consequently, a repeated consumption of the privacy budget for each classifier.
* Corresponding author
†

Code implementation: https://github.com/JinseongP/private_multiclass_svm

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

