From Contextual Combinatorial Semi-Bandits to
Bandit List Classification: Improved Sample
Complexity with Sparse Rewards

Liad Erez
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
Tel-Aviv University
liaderez@mail.tau.ac.il

Tomer Koren
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study the problem of contextual combinatorial semi-bandits, where input contexts are mapped into subsets of size 𝑚 of a collection of 𝐾 possible actions. In
each round of the interaction, the learner observes feedback consisting of the
realized reward of the predicted actions. Motivated by prototypical applications
of contextual bandits, we focus on the 𝑠-sparse regime where we assume that
the sum of rewards is bounded by some value 𝑠 ≪ 𝐾. For example, in recommendation systems the number of products purchased by any customer is significantly smaller than the total number of available products. Our main result
is for the (𝜀, 𝛿)-PAC variant of the problem for which we design an algorithm
that returns an 𝜀-optimal policy with high
 probability using a sample complexity
e (poly(𝐾/𝑚) + 𝑠𝑚/𝜀 2 ) log(|Π|/𝛿) where Π is the underlying (finite) class
of 𝑂
and 𝑠 is the sparsity parameter. This bound improves upon known bounds for
combinatorial semi-bandits whenever 𝑠 ≪ 𝐾, and in the regime where 𝑠 = 𝑂 (1),
the leading terms in our bound match the corresponding full-information rates,
implying that bandit feedback essentially comes at no cost. Our PAC learning
algorithm is also computationally efficient given access to an ERM oracle for Π.
Our framework generalizes the list multiclass classification problem with bandit
feedback, which can be seen as a special case with binary reward vectors. In the
special case of single-label classification
corresponding to 𝑠 = 𝑚 = 1, we prove

an 𝑂 (𝐾 7 + 1/𝜀 2 ) log(|H |/𝛿) sample complexity bound for a finite hypothesis
class H , which improves upon recent results in this scenario. Additionally, we
consider the regret minimization setting√︁where data can be generated adversarially,
e(|Π| + 𝑠𝑚𝑇 log |Π|), extending the result of [18]
and establish a regret bound of 𝑂
who consider the simpler single label classification setting.

1

Introduction

In the contextual combinatorial semi-bandit (CCSB) problem, a learner is tasked with mapping input
contexts from a (possibly infinite) context space X to subsets of a fixed size 𝑚 of a collection of 𝐾
available actions. The learner’s reward is defined as the sum of the rewards of the predicted actions,
and the feedback revealed to the learner consists of the individual reward values of those actions;
namely, semi-bandit feedback. The primary objective in this problem is to compete with the best
policy in an underlying policy class Π which is a collection of mappings from X to subsets of actions
of size 𝑚.
A natural application of this problem, and in fact, one of the classical motivating applications for
studying contextual bandits [34] is a recommendation system visited sequentially by users (each
arriving with side information playing the role of a context), where upon each visit the system is
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

