Curl Descent: Non-Gradient Learning Dynamics
with Sign-Diverse Plasticity

Hugo Ninou
Département d’Études Cognitives
École normale supérieure - PSL
hugo.ninou@ens.fr

Jonathan Kadmon
Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
jonathan.kadmon@mail.huji.ac.il

N. Alex Cayco-Gajic
Département d’Études Cognitives
École normale supérieure - PSL
natasha.cayco.gajic@ens.fr

Abstract
Gradient-based algorithms are a cornerstone of artificial neural network training,
yet it remains unclear whether biological neural networks use similar gradientbased strategies during learning. Experiments often discover a diversity of synaptic
plasticity rules, but whether these amount to an approximation to gradient descent
is unclear. Here we investigate a previously overlooked possibility: that learning
dynamics may include fundamentally non-gradient “curl”-like components while
still being able to effectively optimize a loss function. Curl terms naturally emerge
in networks with inhibitory-excitatory connectivity or Hebbian/anti-Hebbian plasticity, resulting in learning dynamics that cannot be framed as gradient descent on
any objective. To investigate the impact of these curl terms, we analyze feedforward
networks within an analytically tractable student-teacher framework, systematically introducing non-gradient dynamics through neurons exhibiting rule-flipped
plasticity. Small curl terms preserve the stability of the original solution manifold,
resulting in learning dynamics similar to gradient descent. Beyond a critical value,
strong curl terms destabilize the solution manifold. Depending on the network
architecture, this loss of stability can lead to chaotic learning dynamics that destroy
performance. In other cases, the curl terms can counterintuitively speed learning
compared to gradient descent by allowing the weight dynamics to escape saddles by
temporarily ascending the loss. Our results identify specific architectures capable
of supporting robust learning via diverse learning rules, providing an important
counterpoint to normative theories of gradient-based learning in neural networks.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning relies on backpropagation to compute high-dimensional gradients that assign
credit to individual synapses by propagating error signals backward through the network [Rumelhart
et al., 1986, Chinta and Tweed, 2012]. This mechanism solves the credit assignment problem by
assuming that each synapse can locally adapt in proportion to the negative gradient of the loss.
However, despite its central role in artificial systems, direct evidence for gradient-based learning in
biological neural circuits is still lacking [Lillicrap et al., 2020].
To reconcile this gap, many studies have proposed biologically plausible approximations to gradient
descent [Richards and Kording, 2023]. These typically address concerns related to the locality of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

