Neighbor-aware Contrastive Disambiguation for
Cross-Modal Hashing with Redundant Annotations

Chao Su 1 , Likang Peng 1 , Yuan Sun 2 , Dezhong Peng 1,3 , Xi Peng 1,2 , Xu Wang 1,4∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
2
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models
for Engineering Numerical Simulation, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
3
Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory, Chengdu, China
4
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
suchao.ml@gmail.com, likangpeng@stu.scu.edu.cn, sunyuan_work@163.com,
pengdz@scu.edu.cn, pengx.gm@gmail.com, wangxu.scu@gmail.com

Abstract
Cross-modal hashing aims to efficiently retrieve information across different modalities by mapping data into compact hash codes. However, most existing methods
assume access to fully accurate supervision, which rarely holds in real-world scenarios. In fact, annotations are often redundant, i.e., each sample is associated with
a set of candidate labels that includes both ground-truth labels and redundant noisy
labels. Treating all annotated labels as equally valid introduces two critical issues:
(1) the sparse presence of true labels within the label set is not explicitly addressed,
leading to overfitting on redundant noisy annotations; (2) redundant noisy labels
induce spurious similarities that distort semantic alignment across modalities and
degrade the quality of the hash space. To address these challenges, we propose
that effective cross-modal hashing requires explicitly identifying and leveraging
the true label subset within all candidate annotations. Based on this insight, we
present Neighbor-aware Contrastive Disambiguation (NACD), a novel framework
designed for robust learning under redundant supervision. NACD consists of two
key components. The first, Neighbor-aware Confidence Reconstruction (NACR),
refines label confidence by aggregating information from cross-modal neighbors to
distinguish true labels from redundant noisy ones. The second, Class-aware Robust
Contrastive Hashing (CRCH), constructs reliable positive and negative pairs based
on label confidence scores, thereby significantly enhancing robustness against
noisy supervision. Moreover, to effectively reduce the quantization error, we incorporate a quantization loss that enforces binary constraints on the learned hash
representations. Extensive experiments conducted on three large-scale multimodal
benchmarks demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches, thereby establishing a new standard for cross-modal hashing with
redundant annotations. Code is available at https://github.com/Rose-bud/NACD.

1

Introduction

With the explosion of large-scale and diverse data on the Internet [1–7], efficiently retrieving semantically relevant data across modalities has become increasingly important [8–16]. For large-scale
datasets, cross-modal hashing (CMH) offers an effective solution by encoding heterogeneous data
into compact binary hash codes, enabling high retrieval efficiency and low storage cost. The core
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

