WildCAT3D: Appearance-Aware
Multi-View Diffusion in the Wild
Morris Alper1,2∗ David Novotny2 Filippos Kokkinos2 Hadar Averbuch-Elor3 Tom Monnier2
1

2
3
Tel Aviv University
Meta AI
Cornell University
https://wildcat3d.github.io

Figure 1: WildCAT3D. (top) We use large image collections captured in the wild to train our
feed-forward novel-view synthesis model. (middle) At inference time, WildCAT3D can generate full
scene-level novel views from a single image of a new (never-before encountered) scene. (bottom) It
can also be used to control the appearance of the generated views, e.g. via a text prompt.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in sparse novel view synthesis (NVS) applied to objectcentric scenes, scene-level NVS remains a challenge. A central issue is the lack of
available clean multi-view training data, beyond manually curated datasets with
limited diversity, camera variation, or licensing issues. On the other hand, an
abundance of diverse and permissively-licensed data exists in the wild, consisting
of scenes with varying appearances (illuminations, transient occlusions, etc.) from
sources such as tourist photos. To this end, we present WildCAT3D, a framework
for generating novel views of scenes learned from diverse 2D scene image data captured in the wild. We unlock training on these data sources by explicitly modeling
global appearance conditions in images, extending the state-of-the-art multi-view
diffusion paradigm to learn from scene views of varying appearances. Our trained
model generalizes to new scenes at inference time, enabling the generation of
multiple consistent novel views. WildCAT3D provides state-of-the-art results on
single-view NVS in object- and scene-level settings, while training on strictly fewer
data sources than prior methods. Additionally, it enables novel applications by
providing global appearance control during generation.
∗

Work done during Morris’s internship at Meta.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

