Reduction-based Pseudo-label Generation for
Instance-dependent Partial Label Learning

1

Congyu Qiao1,2 , Ning Xu1,2,∗, Yihao Hu1,2 , and Xin Geng1,2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology and
Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{qiaocy, xning, yhhu, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Instance-dependent Partial Label Learning (ID-PLL) aims to learn a multi-class
predictive model given training instances annotated with candidate labels related
to features, among which correct labels are hidden ﬁxed but unknown. The previous works involve leveraging the identiﬁcation capability of the training model
itself to iteratively reﬁne supervision information. However, these methods overlook a critical aspect of ID-PLL: within the original label space, the model may
fail to distinguish some incorrect candidate labels that are strongly correlated with
features from correct labels. This leads to poor-quality supervision signals and
creates a bottleneck in the training process. In this paper, we propose to leverage reduction-based pseudo-labels to alleviate the inﬂuence of incorrect candidate
labels and train our predictive model to overcome this bottleneck. Speciﬁcally,
reduction-based pseudo-labels are generated by performing weighted aggregation
on the outputs of a multi-branch auxiliary model, with each branch trained in a label subspace that excludes certain labels. This approach ensures that each branch
explicitly avoids the disturbance of the excluded labels, allowing the pseudo-labels
provided for instances troubled by these excluded labels to beneﬁt from the unaffected branches. Theoretically, we demonstrate that reduction-based pseudolabels exhibit greater consistency with the Bayes optimal classiﬁer compared to
pseudo-labels directly generated from the training predictive model.

1

Introduction

Partial Label Learning (PLL), a typical weakly supervised learning paradigm, aims to build a predictive model that assigns the correct label to unseen instances by learning from training instances
annotated with a candidate label set that obscures the exact correct label [5, 3, 49]. The necessity to
learn from such weak supervision naturally arises in ecoinformatics [21, 32], web mining [22], multimedia content analysis [50, 2], and other domains, owing to the difﬁculty in collecting large-scale
high-quality datasets.
PLL has been studied along two different routes: the identiﬁcation-based route[13, 26, 21, 3, 49,
24, 7, 51, 35, 37], which treats correct labels as the latent variable and tries to identiﬁes them,
and the average-based route [12, 5, 52, 23], which treats all candidate labels equally. To facilitate
practical PLL algorithms, some researchers have focused on instance-dependent PLL (ID-PLL),
where incorrect labels related to features are likely to be selected as candidate labels, and tackled this
challenge by following the identiﬁcation-based route. [44] explicitly estimate the label distribution
aligned with the model output on candidate labels through variational inference. [39] induce a
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

