DualOptim: Enhancing Efficacy and Stability in
Machine Unlearning with Dual Optimizers

Xuyang Zhong
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
xuyang.zhong@my.cityu.edu.hk

Haochen Luo
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
chester.hc.luo@my.cityu.edu.hk

Chen Liu ∗
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
chen.liu@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing machine unlearning (MU) approaches exhibit significant sensitivity to
hyperparameters, requiring meticulous tuning that limits practical deployment. In
this work, we first empirically demonstrate the instability and suboptimal performance of existing popular MU methods when deployed in different scenarios. To
address this issue, we propose Dual Optimizer (DualOptim), which incorporates
adaptive learning rate and decoupled momentum factors. Empirical and theoretical
evidence demonstrates that DualOptim contributes to effective and stable unlearning. Through extensive experiments, we show that DualOptim can significantly
boost MU efficacy and stability across diverse tasks, including image classification,
image generation, and large language models, making it a versatile approach to
empower existing MU algorithms. Codes are available at https://github.com/CityUMLO/DualOptim.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in machine unlearning (MU) research have established it as a crucial technique
for utilizing pretrained models while addressing various trustworthy challenges in various applications [1, 2]. These MU methods have two major categories: exact MU [3] and approximate MU [4].
Exact MU requires retraining a model on a dataset excluding forgetting samples from scratch, which
is computationally prohibitive for large-scale models and datasets. Therefore, we study approximate
MU methods in this work, with focuses on their efficacy and stability.
Most existing approximate MU methods [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] aim to maximize loss on forget samples
while preserving performance on retain samples. While effective, these methods exhibit significant
sensitivity to hyperparameter choices, with optimal configurations requiring meticulous tuning that
varies substantially across datasets and forgetting scenarios. This dependency complicates their
practical deployment. As illustrated in Figure 1, we empirically demonstrate that state-of-the-art MU
approaches [6, 7, 8] exhibit suboptimal performance or instability. These limitations highlight the
critical need for techniques to improve the effectiveness and stability of MU methods.
In this work, we first reveal the unstable performance of existing MU methods when they are
applied in different scenarios. Considering the need to optimize two objectives on the forgetting
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

