Optimal Nuisance Function Tuning for Estimating a
Doubly Robust Functional under Proportional
Asymptotics

Sean McGrath
Yale University
sean.mcgrath@yale.edu
Rajarshi Mukherjee
Harvard University
ram521@mail.harvard.edu

Debarghya Mukherjee
Boston University
mdeb@bu.edu
Zixiao Jolene Wang
Harvard University
zixiaowang@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the asymptotically optimal tuning parameter choice in
ridge regression for estimating nuisance functions of a statistical functional that
has recently gained prominence in conditional independence testing and causal inference. Given a sample of size n, we study estimators of the Expected Conditional
Covariance (ECC) between variables Y and A given a high-dimensional covariate
X ∈ Rp . Under linear regression models for Y and A on X and the proportional
asymptotic regime p/n → c ∈ (0, ∞), we evaluate three existing ECC estimators
and two sample splitting strategies for estimating the required nuisance functions.
Since no consistent estimator of the nuisance functions exists in the proportional
asymptotic regime without imposing further structure on the problem, we first
derive debiased versions of the ECC estimators that utilize the ridge regression
nuisance
function estimators. We show that our bias correction strategy yields
√
n-consistent estimators of the ECC across different sample splitting strategies
and estimator choices. We then derive the asymptotic variances of these debiased
estimators to illustrate the nuanced interplay between the sample splitting strategy,
estimator choice, and tuning parameters of the nuisance function estimators for
optimally estimating the ECC. Our analysis reveals that prediction-optimal tuning
parameters (i.e., those that optimally estimate the nuisance functions) may not lead
to the lowest asymptotic variance of the ECC estimator – thereby demonstrating
the need to be careful in selecting tuning parameters based on the final goal of
inference. Finally, we verify our theoretical results through extensive numerical
experiments.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, powerful prediction tools from the machine learning arsenal have been used
to construct robust estimators of statistical functionals such as treatment effects and conditional
dependence measures. Specifically, the seminal work of Double Machine Learning (DML) develops
methods for estimating functionals that require fitting two nuisance functions (e.g., outcome regression
and propensity scores for causal effect estimation), which use novel debiasing techniques that impart
robustness to the fit of the nuisance functions [1]. DML allows researchers to perform sample
splitting where one sample is used to optimally estimate the nuisance functions and the other
sample is used to estimate the statistical functional efficiently based on the fitted nuisance functions.
Importantly, one can be agnostic of the statistical functional that is the target of inference while fitting
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

