Fair Continuous Resource Allocation
with Equality of Impact

Blossom Metevier∗
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01002
blossom.metevier@gmail.com
Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
knatesa@us.ibm.com

Dennis Wei
IBM Research
San Jose, CA 95120
dwei@us.ibm.com
Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01002
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Recent works have studied fair resource allocation in social settings, where fairness
is judged by the impact of allocation decisions rather than more traditional minimum or maximum thresholds on the allocations themselves. Our work significantly
adds to this literature by developing continuous resource allocation strategies that
adhere to equality of impact, a generalization of equality of opportunity. We derive
methods to maximize total welfare across groups subject to minimal violation of
equality of impact, in settings where the outcomes of allocations are unknown but
have a diminishing marginal effect. While focused on a two-group setting, our
study addresses a broader class of welfare dynamics than explored in prior work.
Our contributions are threefold. First, we introduce Equality of Impact (EoI), a
fairness criterion defined via group-level impact functions. Second, we design
an online algorithm for non-noisy settings that leverages the problem’s geometric
structure and achieves constant cumulative fairness regret. Third, we extend this
approach to noisy environments with a meta-algorithm and empirically demonstrate that our methods find fair allocations and perform competitively relative to
representative baselines.

1

Introduction

Resource allocation problems are those in which a limited supply of some resource must be distributed
across groups with varying welfare needs. In social applications, allocation decisions often have
significant fairness and equity implications. For example, in urban planning, the efficient and
equitable management of services like water and power distribution across urban and rural areas is
critical [Turley, 2023, Prieto, 2021]. Similarly, in economic aid distribution, large-scale funds must
be strategically allocated to different regions to maximize economic outcomes while reducing issues
such as discrepancies in unemployment or poverty levels [Tang and Zhang, 2017].
Many frameworks have been developed to define fairness in resource allocation Singh [2020], Mashiat
et al. [2022]. For example, Allocative Equality of Opportunity (AEoO) [Elzayn et al., 2019] adapts
Equality of Opportunity [Hardt et al., 2016], a fairness notion from classification, to allocation
problems. AEoO requires that qualified individuals from different groups have equal probabilities
of receiving a resource. While this criterion promotes fair access to opportunity, it depends on the
∗

Correspondence should be directed to this author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

