Non-stationary Equivariant Graph Neural Networks
for Physical Dynamics Simulation

Chaohao Yuan1,2∗, Maoji Wen1∗, Ercan Engin Kuruoglu1†, Yang Liu2 , Jia Li5 ,
Tingyang Xu3,4 , Deli Zhao3 , Hong Cheng2 , Yu Rong3,4†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 4 Hupan Lab,
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
chaohaoyuan@link.cuhk.edu.hk, wmj24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
kuruoglu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, yu.rong@hotmail.com

Abstract
To enhance the generalization ability of graph neural networks (GNNs) in learning
and simulating physical dynamics, a series of equivariant GNNs have been developed to incorporate the symmetric inductive bias. However, the existing methods
do not consider the non-stationarity nature of physical dynamics, where the joint
distribution changes over time. Moreover, previous approaches for modeling nonstationary time series typically involve normalizing the data, which disrupts the
symmetric assumption inherent in physical dynamics. To model the non-stationary
physical dynamics while preserving the symmetric inductive bias, we introduce
a Non-Stationary Equivariant Graph Neural Network (NS-EGNN) to capture the
non-stationarity in physical dynamics while preserving the symmetric property of
the model. Specifically, NS-EGNN employs Fourier Transform on segments of
physical dynamics to extract time-varying frequency information from the trajectories. It then uses the first and second-order differences to mitigate non-stationarity,
followed by pooling for future predictions. Through capturing varying frequency
characteristics and alleviate the linear and quadric trend in the raw physical dynamics, NS-EGNN better models the temporal dependencies in the physical dynamics.
NS-EGNN has been applied on various types of physical dynamics, including
molecular, motion and protein dynamics, and consistently surpasses the existing
state-of-the-art algorithms, underscoring its effectiveness. The implementation of
NS-EGNN is available at https://github.com/MaojiWEN/NS-EGNN.

1

Introduction

Accurately simulating real-world physical dynamics is crucial in numerous fields, including molecular
dynamics, motion capture [48], drug discovery [37, 54], and protein folding [1]. The challenge lies
in capturing complex interactions among system components. However, traditional methods are
either computationally expensive (e.g., Density Functional Theory [21]) or fail to model the complex
human intention. Hence, various equivariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [38, 16, 39, 18, 19, 24,
58, 26, 4, 57, 22, 5] have been developed to model such physical interactions while incorporating
fundamental symmetry constraints. Specifically, these methods ensure their outputs are equivariant
with respect to a specific group, such as E(3), any 3-dimensional translation/orientation/reflection.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

