Dynamic Regret Reduces to Kernelized Static Regret

Andrew Jacobsen∗
Università degli Studi di Milano
Politecnico di Milano
contact@andrew-jacobsen.com

Alessandro Rudi∗
Bocconi University
alessandro.rudi@sdabocconi.it

Francesco Orabona
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal, 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
francesco@orabona.com
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Università degli Studi di Milano
Politecnico di Milano
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Abstract
We study dynamic regret in online convex optimization, where the objective is
to achieve low cumulative loss relative to an arbitrary benchmark sequence. By
observing that competing with an arbitrary sequence of comparators u1 , . . . , uT
in W ⊆ Rd can be reframed as competing with a fixed comparator function
u : [1, T ] → W, we cast dynamic regret minimization as a static regret problem in
a function space. By carefully constructing a suitable function space in the form of
a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spacep(RKHS),
our reduction enables us to recover
P
the optimal RT (u1 , . . . , uT ) = O(
∥u
−
ut−1 ∥T ) dynamic regret guarant
t
tee in the setting of linear losses, and yields new scale-free and directionallyadaptive dynamic regret guarantees. Moreover, unlike prior dynamic-to-static
reductions—which are valid only for linear losses—our reduction holds for any
sequence of losses, allowing us to recover O ∥u∥2H + deff (λ) ln T bounds when
the losses have meaningful curvature, where deff (λ) is a measure of complexity of
the RKHS. Despite working in an infinite-dimensional space, the resulting reduction leads to algorithms that are computable in practice, due to the reproducing
property of RKHSs.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces new techniques for Online Convex Optimization (OCO), a framework for
designing and analyzing algorithms which learn on-the-fly from a stream of data [10, 11, 18, 39, 59].
Formally, consider T rounds of interaction between a learner and the environment. In each round,
the learner chooses wt ∈ W from a convex set W ⊆ Rd , the environment reveals a convex loss
function ℓt : W → R, and the learner incurs a loss of ℓt (wt ). The classic objective in this setting is
to minimize the learner’s regret relative to any fixed benchmark u ∈ W:
PT
RT (u) := t=1 (ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (u)) .
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

