Template-Guided 3D Molecular Pose Generation via
Flow Matching and Differentiable Optimization

Noémie Bergues1 ∗

Arthur Carré1,2,3 ∗

Paul Join-Lambert1

Brice Hoffmann1

Arnaud Blondel2

Hamza Tajmouati1

1

Iktos SA, 65 rue de Prony, 75017 Paris, France
Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, UMR 3528, Paris, France
3
Doctoral school MTCI (ED 563), Paris Cité University, Paris, France
2

Abstract
Predicting the 3D conformation of small molecules within protein binding sites is
a key challenge in drug design. When a crystallized reference ligand (template)
is available, it provides geometric priors that can guide 3D pose prediction. We
present a two-stage method for ligand conformation generation guided by such
templates. In the first stage, we introduce a molecular alignment approach based
on flow-matching to generate 3D coordinates for the ligand, using the template
structure as a reference. In the second stage, a differentiable pose optimization
procedure refines this conformation based on shape and pharmacophore similarities,
internal energy, and, optionally, the protein binding pocket. We introduce a new
benchmark of ligand pairs co-crystallized with the same target to evaluate our
approach and show that it outperforms standard docking tools and open-access
alignment methods, especially in cases involving low similarity to the template or
high ligand flexibility.

1

Introduction

Drug design is a complex and resource-intensive process, with timelines that can span a decade and
development costs estimated to be on the order of one billion dollars per approved drug [Wouters et al.,
2020]. To address these challenges, computational approaches have emerged to accelerate early-stage
drug discovery and reduce associated costs. In particular, 3D-based methods show great promise
by enabling in silico screening and optimization of candidate molecules, thereby reducing reliance
on expensive and time-consuming experimental assays. Two major 3D computational approaches
are widely used: 3D Ligand-Based (LB) and 3D Structure-Based (SB). LB methods leverage the
3D structure of known active compounds to identify or design structurally and functionally similar
molecules [Acharya et al., 2011, Petrovic et al., 2022, Bolcato et al., 2022], whereas SB methods use
the 3D structure of the target receptor to predict ligand binding modes or affinities [Anderson, 2003].
Popular examples include LB virtual screening tools such as Rapid Overlay of Chemical Structures
(ROCS) [Hawkins et al., 2007], and SB molecular docking tools like AutoDock Vina [Trott and
Olson, 2010] and Glide [Friesner et al., 2004].
Small molecule 3D alignment, or superposition, is an LB approach that aims to spatially align
a molecule with a known 3D template. A variety of methods have been developed for this task,
reflecting the diverse ways in which molecular similarity can be defined and assessed. In their
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: {noemie.bergues, arthur.carre}@iktos.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

