Why Diffusion Models Don’t Memorize: The Role of
Implicit Dynamical Regularization in Training

Tony Bonnaire†
LPENS
Université PSL, Paris
tony.bonnaire@phys.ens.fr

Raphaël Urfin†
LPENS
Université PSL, Paris
raphael.urfin@phys.ens.fr

Giulio Biroli
LPENS
Université PSL, Paris
giulio.biroli@phys.ens.fr

Marc Mézard
Department of Computing Sciences
Bocconi University, Milano
marc.mezard@unibocconi.it

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success across a wide range of generative tasks. A key challenge is understanding the mechanisms that prevent their
memorization of training data and allow generalization. In this work, we investigate the role of the training dynamics in the transition from generalization to
memorization. Through extensive experiments and theoretical analysis, we identify
two distinct timescales: an early time τgen at which models begin to generate
high-quality samples, and a later time τmem beyond which memorization emerges.
Crucially, we find that τmem increases linearly with the training set size n, while
τgen remains constant. This creates a growing window of training times with n
where models generalize effectively, despite showing strong memorization if training continues beyond it. It is only when n becomes larger than a model-dependent
threshold that overfitting disappears at infinite training times. These findings reveal
a form of implicit dynamical regularization in the training dynamics, which allow
to avoid memorization even in highly overparameterized settings. Our results are
supported by numerical experiments with standard U-Net architectures on realistic and synthetic datasets, and by a theoretical analysis using a tractable random
features model studied in the high-dimensional limit.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Models [DMs, 44, 18, 49, 50] achieve state-of-the-art performance in a wide variety of
AI tasks such as the generation of images [41], audios [58], videos [30], and scientific data [28, 36].
This class of generative models, inspired by out-of-equilibrium thermodynamics [44], corresponds
to a two-stage process: the first one, called forward, gradually adds noise to a data, whereas the
second one, called backward, generates new data by denoising Gaussian white noise samples. In
DMs, the reverse process typically involves solving a stochastic differential equation (SDE) with a
force field called score. However, it is also possible to define a deterministic transport through an
ordinary differential equation (ODE), treating the score as a velocity field, an approach that is for
instance followed in flow matching [29].
Understanding the generalization properties of score-based generative methods is a central issue
in machine learning, and a particularly important question is how memorization of the training set
†

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

