Graphs Help Graphs: Multi-Agent
Graph Socialized Learning

Jialu Li1,2,3
jialuli@tju.edu.cn
Wanyu Lin4
wan-yu.lin@polyu.edu.hk

Yu Wang1,2,3,∗
wang.yu@tju.edu.cn

Pengfei Zhu1,2,3,∗
zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn

Xinjie Yao1,2,3
yaoxinjie@tju.edu.cn

Qinghua Hu1,2,3
huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Engineering Research Center of City Intelligence and Digital Governance,
Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Tianjin, China
3
Haihe Lab of ITAI, Tianjin, China
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
2

Abstract
Graphs in the real world are fragmented and dynamic, lacking collaboration akin to
that observed in human societies. Existing paradigms present collaborative information collapse and forgetting, making collaborative relationships poorly autonomous
and interactive information insufficient. Moreover, collaborative information is
prone to loss when the graph grows. Effective collaboration in heterogeneous dynamic graph environments becomes challenging. Inspired by social learning, this
paper presents a Graph Socialized Learning (GSL) paradigm. We provide insights
into graph socialization in GSL and boost the performance of agents through effective collaboration. It is crucial to determine with whom, what, and when to share
and accumulate information for effective GSL. Thus, we propose the “Graphs Help
Graphs” (GHG) method to solve these issues. Specifically, it uses a graph-driven
organizational structure to select interacting agents and manage interaction strength
autonomously. We produce customized synthetic graphs as an interactive medium
based on the demand of agents, then apply the synthetic graphs to build prototypes
in the life cycle to help select optimal parameters. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of GHG in heterogeneous dynamic graphs by an extensive empirical study. The
code is available through https://github.com/Jillian555/GHG.

1

Introduction

Graphs have become a powerful tool for capturing complex relationships between real-world entities,
leading to their widespread use in social networks [1, 2], recommendation systems [3], and bioinformatics [4]. However, real-world graphs tend to be fragmented and dynamic, and there is often a
lack of collaboration between different graphs. From the emergent behavior of ant colonies to the
human collective intelligence, collaboration is common across different societies [5, 6]. It enables
individuals to form social relationships and accomplish complex tasks. Inspired by social learning
in human society, socialized learning has been extensively explored [7, 8]. It aims to have multiple
agents interact, collaborate, and share knowledge. This acquired knowledge benefits other agents
attempting to learn different yet related tasks, demonstrating capabilities beyond a single agent.
∗

Yu Wang and Pengfei Zhu are both the corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

