Toward Relative Positional Encoding
in Spiking Transformers

Changze Lv1∗ Yansen Wang2† Dongqi Han2† Yifei Shen2
Xiaoqing Zheng1† Xuanjing Huang1 Dongsheng Li2
1
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{czlv24}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhengxq,xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn,
{yansenwang,dongqihan,dongsli}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are bio-inspired networks that mimic how neurons
in the brain communicate through discrete spikes, which have great potential in
various tasks due to their energy efficiency and temporal processing capabilities.
SNNs with self-attention mechanisms (spiking Transformers) have recently shown
great advancements in various tasks, and inspired by traditional Transformers,
several studies have demonstrated that spiking absolute positional encoding can
help capture sequential relationships for input data, enhancing the capabilities of
spiking Transformers for tasks such as sequential modeling and image classification.
However, how to incorporate relative positional information into SNNs remains
a challenge. In this paper, we introduce several strategies to approximate relative
positional encoding (RPE) in spiking Transformers while preserving the binary
nature of spikes. Firstly, we formally prove that encoding relative distances with
Gray Code ensures that the binary representations of positional indices maintain a
constant Hamming distance whenever their decimal values differ by a power of two,
and we propose Gray-PE based on this property. In addition, we propose another
RPE method called Log-PE, which combines the logarithmic form of the relative
distance matrix directly into the spiking attention map. Furthermore, we extend
our RPE methods to a two-dimensional form, making them suitable for processing
image patches. We evaluate our RPE methods on various tasks, including time
series forecasting, text classification, and patch-based image classification, and the
experimental results demonstrate a satisfying performance gain by incorporating
our RPE methods across many architectures. Our results provide fresh perspectives
on designing spiking Transformers to advance their sequential modeling capability,
thereby expanding their applicability across various domains. Our code is available
at https://github.com/microsoft/SeqSNN.

1

Introduction

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [1] are a class of bio-inspired models designed to emulate the
communication process of biological neurons, which transmit information through discrete spikes.
In contrast to artificial neural networks (ANNs) that operate on continuous values, SNNs process
information in the form of spikes occurring at precise moments in time. The temporal characteristics of spikes make SNNs particularly well-suited for tasks involving sequential data or dynamic
* The work was conducted during the internship of Changze Lv at Microsoft Research Asia.
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

