Interpretable and Parameter Efficient Graph Neural
Additive Models with Random Fourier Features
Thummaluru Siddartha Reddy, Vempalli Naga Sai Saketh, Mahesh Chandran
{Thummaluru.Siddarthareddy, nagasaisaketh.vempalli, Mahesh.Chandran}@fujitsu.com
Fujitsu Research of India, Bangalore.

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) excel at jointly modeling node features and topology, yet their black-box nature limits their adoption in real-world applications
where interpretability is desired. Inspired by the success of interpretable Neural
Additive Models (NAM) for tabular data, Graph Neural Additive Network (GNAN)
extends the additive modeling approach to graph data to overcome limitations
of GNNs. While being interpretable, GNAN representation learning overlooks the
importance of local aggregation and more importantly suffers from parameter
complexity. To mitigate the above challenges, we introduce Graph Neural Additive
Model with Random Fourier Features (G-NAMRFF), a lightweight, self-interpretable
graph additive architecture. G-NAMRFF represents each node embedding as the
sum of feature-wise contributions where contributions are modeled via a Gaussian
process (GP) with a graph- and feature-aware kernel. Specifically, we construct a
kernel using Radial Basis Function (RBF) with graph structure induced by Laplacian and learnable Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filter. We approximate the kernel
using Random Fourier Features (RFFs) which transforms the GP prior to a Bayesian
formulation, which are subsequently learnt using a single layer neural network
with size equal to number of RFF features. G-NAMRFF is light weight with 168×
fewer parameters compared to GNAN. Despite its compact size, G-NAMRFF matches
or outperforms state-of-the-art GNNs and GNAN on node and graph classification
tasks, delivering real-time interpretability without sacrificing accuracy 1 .

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful and topology-aware deep representation learning
architectures that leverage the structure of graphs as an inductive bias [12, 20, 32]. While GNNs
have demonstrated impressive performance on various downstream machine learning tasks such as
node and graph classification, they remain largely as a black-box models [5, 3]. As a result, the
learned representations often lack interpretability which limits their adoption in regulated domains
like healthcare, finance, and defense [31, 5]. Interpretability in machine learning focuses on designing
models whose representations directly reveal how each feature contributes to the output [28]. This
stands in contrast to post hoc explainable models which seeks to generate explanations for the model
inference after the model has been trained [3, 13].
Additive models are the cornerstone for interpretable representation learning for tabular data. Notable
examples of such models includes Neural Additive Model (NAM) [2], Neural Basis Model (NBM)
[24] and Gaussian Process Additive Model (GPAM) [41]. The key innovation of this additive model
lies in its ability to handle each feature independently by learning a separate univariate function
for every feature and then summing these contributions to obtain the final prediction. Although
all these models share a common trait i.e., additive structure, they differ in how each feature’s
1

Code to reproduce the results is available at https://github.com/FujitsuResearch/GNAM-RFF

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

