ShoeFit: A New Dataset and Dual-image-stream DiT
Framework for Virtual Footwear Try-On

(3) Background-induced (2) Viewpoint
(1) Data Scarcity
Color Distortion
Misalignment with difficult match

Yuhan Li1∗† , Zhiyu Jin2∗ , Yifan Tong2 , Wenxiang Shang2 , Benlei Cui2 ,
Xuanhong Chen1 , Hangcheng Zhu2 , Bingbing Ni1‡
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Alibaba Group

Human feet

Product shoes

(a) We illustrate the challenges in VFTON. (1) Subtle variations make it difficult
Try-on results
(Source view)
to match data pairs. (2) Information needed by the target view is often not provided (Target view)
(b)
ShoeFit
has
demonstrated
excellent
preservation
in the given product image. (3) Shoes often exhibit complex reflections and shadows
that interact with environment lighting, leading to a confusion of their natural color.
of the fidelity of footwear across real-world scenes.

Figure 1: VFTON presents three challenges, while ShoeFit gives a successful solution.

Abstract
Virtual footwear try-on (VFTON), a critical yet underexplored area in virtual try-on
(VTON), aims to synthesize faithful try-on results given diverse footwear and model
images while maintaining 3D consistency and texture authenticity. Unlike conventional garment-focused VTON methods, VFTON presents unique challenges due
to (1) Data Scarcity, which arises from the difficulty of perfectly matching product shoes with models wearing the identical ones, (2) Viewpoint Misalignment,
where the target foot pose and source shoe views are always misaligned, leading to
incomplete texture information and detail distortion, and (3) Background-induced
Color Distortion, where complex material of footwear interacts with environmental lighting, causing unintended color contamination. To address these challenges,
we introduce MVShoes, a multi-view shoe try-on dataset consisting of 7305 wellannotated image triplets, covering diverse footwear categories and challenging
try-on scenarios. Furthermore, we propose a dual-stream DiT architecture, ShoeFit,
designed to mitigate viewpoint misalignment through Multi-View Conditioning
with 3D Rotary Position Embedding, and alleviate background-induced distortion
using the LayeredRefAttention which leverages background features to modulate
* Equal contributions.
†Work done during an internship at Alibaba.
‡Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

