P RO S PERO: Active Learning for Robust Protein
Design Beyond Wild-Type Neighborhoods

Michal Kmicikiewicz1,2

Vincent Fortuin2,3,4

Ewa Szczurek1,5

1

Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Munich
School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
3
Helmholtz AI, 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning
5
Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics, University of Warsaw
{michal.kmicikiewicz, vincent.fortuin, ewa.szczurek}@helmholtz-munich.de
2

Abstract
Designing protein sequences of both high fitness and novelty is a challenging task
in data-efficient protein engineering. Exploration beyond wild-type neighborhoods
often leads to biologically implausible sequences or relies on surrogate models that
lose fidelity in novel regions. Here, we propose P RO S PERO, an active learning
framework in which a frozen pre-trained generative model is guided by a surrogate
updated from oracle feedback. By integrating fitness-relevant residue selection
with biologically-constrained Sequential Monte Carlo sampling, our approach
enables exploration beyond wild-type neighborhoods while preserving biological
plausibility. We show that our framework remains effective even when the surrogate
is misspecified. P RO S PERO consistently outperforms or matches existing methods
across diverse protein engineering tasks, retrieving sequences of both high fitness
and novelty.

1

Introduction

Proteins are essential macromolecules that play a central role in virtually all biological processes.
The ability to design novel protein sequences with desired functional properties is crucial for a wide
range of applications, including drug design, industrial biotechnology, and beyond [1–3]. Despite this
promise, optimization of protein sequences remains a grand challenge in computational biology. The
protein fitness landscape [4], mapping between the space of sequences and fitness, their corresponding
functional levels, is typically rugged, sparse, and highly non-convex [5, 6]. Moreover, upon proposing
a candidate sequence from the combinatorially large search space, evaluation requires querying an
expensive black-box objective function. To alleviate this, machine learning models are often used as
inexpensive surrogate models that approximate the costly black-box oracle [7–9]. To further facilitate
navigation of the landscape, optimization commonly begins from a wild-type sequence, preserved
through natural evolution and, as such, exhibiting reasonable fitness [6, 10].
Numerous strategies have emerged to traverse protein fitness landscapes. Ren et al. [6] introduced
PEX, an evolutionary algorithm that exploits the wild-type neighborhood. While highly effective
and favoring biologically plausible sequences thanks to its local focus, this approach limits broader
exploration of the fitness landscape, potentially missing advantageous sequences that are inaccessible
through local mutations. To overcome this, reinforcement learning (RL) methods [8, 10] and
Generative Flow Networks (GFNs) [9] have been employed to target novel regions of the search
space. However, these global exploration strategies often encounter issues with surrogate model
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

