Toward a Unified Geometry Understanding:
Riemannian Diffusion Framework for Graph
Generation and Prediction
Yisen Gao1,2,4 , Xingcheng Fu1∗, Qingyun Sun3,4 , Jianxin Li4 , Xianxian Li1
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Guangxi Normal University
2
Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-source Information Mining & Security, Guangxi Normal University
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
ygaodi@cse.ust.hk, {fuxc, lixx}@gxnu.edu.cn, {sunqy,lijx}@buaa.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Graph diffusion models have made significant progress in learning structured
graph data and have demonstrated strong potential for predictive tasks. Existing
approaches typically embed node, edge, and graph-level features into a unified
latent space, modeling prediction tasks including classification and regression
as a form of conditional generation. However, due to the non-Euclidean nature
of graph data, features of different curvatures are entangled in the same latent
space without releasing their geometric potential. To address this issue, we aim
to construt an ideal Riemannian diffusion model to capture distinct manifold signatures of complex graph data and learn their distribution. This goal faces two
challenges: numerical instability caused by exponential mapping during the encoding proces and manifold deviation during diffusion generation. To address these
challenges, we propose GeoMancer: a novel Riemannian graph diffusion framework for both generation and prediction tasks. To mitigate numerical instability,
we replace exponential mapping with an isometric-invariant Riemannian gyrokernel approach and decouple multi-level features onto their respective task-specific
manifolds to learn optimal representations. To address manifold deviation, we
introduce a manifold-constrained diffusion method and a self-guided strategy for
unconditional generation, ensuring that the generated data remains aligned with
the manifold signature. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our
approach, demonstrating superior performance across a variety of tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is widely used in real-world applications [2] such as recommendation systems [3], social networks [4], and molecular modeling [5]. Due to the non-Euclidean structure of
graphs, there are some studies [6] that have leveraged differential geometry to explore non-Euclidean
geometric spaces that better align with the intrinsic structure of graphs. In a geometric perspective,
non-Euclidean manifolds can enable a deeper understanding of graph-structured data, which in
turn facilitates improved performance in downstream tasks. For example, hyperbolic spaces are
well-suited for modeling small-world and hierarchical graphs [7, 8], whereas spherical spaces are
more effective at capturing the structure of densely connected graphs [9]. Product manifold [10, 11]
is introduced to model more complex graph data by constructing a space of mixed curvatures [12].
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

