Weak-to-Strong Generalization
under Distribution Shifts
Myeongho Jeon1,∗ Jan Sobotka1,∗ Suhwan Choi2,∗ Maria Brbić1,†
1
EPFL 2 Seoul National University

Abstract
As future superhuman models become increasingly complex, accurately supervising their behavior may exceed human capabilities. Recent works have demonstrated
that in such scenarios, weak models can effectively supervise strong models, a
phenomenon known as weak-to-strong generalization. However, we find that naive
weak-to-strong generalization fails under distribution shifts, often leading to worse
performance of the strong model than its weak supervisors. To address this, we propose RAVEN, a robust weak-to-strong generalization framework that dynamically
learns the optimal combinations of weak models in addition to parameters of the
strong model. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RAVEN on image classification,
text classification, and preference alignment tasks. RAVEN outperforms alternative
baselines by over 30% on out-of-distribution tasks while matching or surpassing
existing methods on in-distribution tasks. Moreover, our results show that RAVEN
assigns higher weights to more accurate weak models, demonstrating its ability to
automatically identify trustworthy supervision.

1

Introduction

Recent AI systems have reached near-human performance through extensive pre-training on large
datasets, followed by fine-tuning with human supervision. Techniques such as supervised finetuning, reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) [17, 61, 50], and direct preference
optimization (DPO) [43, 56] are key examples of effectively aligning models with human preferences.
A fundamental assumption in these methods is that the human supervision is of high quality. However,
when the data to be annotated is beyond human comprehension, providing reliable supervision
becomes challenging. For instance, in domains such as cosmology, healthcare, or biology, even
experts may struggle with accurate labeling. Furthermore, during the alignment phase with human
preferences, if a superhuman-level model generates highly complex outputs, humans may struggle to
fully understand them, making it challenging to provide effective feedback. This challenge is known
as weak supervision [10].
So, how can humans supervise a superhuman model that surpasses their own capabilities? To
mimic this future scenario, an analogous framework has been proposed in [10], where a weak model
simulates human supervision, while a strong model acts as a proxy for a potential superhuman
model. In this setup, weak supervision signals are utilized to train the strong model, aiming to
surpass the weak model’s performance and approach the performance achieved when trained with
ground-truth (GT) labels. Conceptually, this approach, termed weak-to-strong (W2S) generalization
[10], could lead toward developing superhuman models, as surpassing the performance of a weak
model in this context could eventually mean exceeding human capabilities. Moreover, such success
would be practical even before superhuman models emerge—for instance, aligning GPT-5 using only
GPT-4-level supervision could simplify model alignment today [10]. Recent works [10, 26, 45, 19]
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to: mbrbic@epfl.ch

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

