Reverse-Annealed Sequential Monte Carlo for
Efficient Bayesian Optimal Experiment Design

Jake Callahan∗
Program in Applied Mathematics
The University of Arizona

Andrew Chin∗
Department of Biostatistics
Johns Hopkins University

Jason Pacheco
Department of Computer Science
The University of Arizona

Tommie Catanach
Computational Data Science
Sandia National Laboratories

Abstract
Expected information gain (EIG) is a crucial quantity in Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED), quantifying how useful an experiment is by the amount
we expect the posterior to differ from the prior. However, evaluating the EIG can
be computationally expensive since it generally requires estimating the posterior
normalizing constant. In this work, we leverage two idiosyncrasies of BOED to
improve efficiency of EIG estimation via sequential Monte Carlo (SMC). First, in
BOED we simulate the data and thus know the true underlying parameters. Second,
we ultimately care about the EIG, not the individual normalizing constants. Often
we observe that the Monte Carlo variance of standard SMC estimators for the normalizing constant of a single dataset are significantly lower than the variance of the
normalizing constants across datasets; the latter thus contributes the majority of the
variance for EIG estimates. This suggests the potential to slightly increase variance
while drastically decreasing computation time by reducing the SMC population
size, which leads us to an EIG-specific SMC estimator that starts with only a single
sample from the posterior and tempers backwards towards the prior. Using this
single-sample estimator, which we call reverse-annealed SMC (RA-SMC), we
show that it is possible to estimate EIG with orders of magnitude fewer likelihood
evaluations in three models: a four-dimensional spring-mass, a six-dimensional
Johnson-Cook model and a four-dimensional source-finding problem.

1

Introduction

Optimal experimental design (OED) is a powerful method for selecting design parameters for
experiments that update model uncertainty using observational data. By quantifying the utility
U of a design d, one can maximize the utility over all the designs as: d∗ = arg maxd U (d). In
Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED) we are interested in the information gain (IG) from
an experiment for an unknown parameter θ given the dataset y (Lindley, 1956). This is quantified by
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence from the prior to the posterior (Rainforth et al., 2024):
Z
p(θ | y, d)
IG(y | d) = DKL (p(θ | y, d) k p(θ)) = p(θ | y, d) log
dθ.
(1)
p(θ)
θ
∗

Denotes equal contribution. These authors are listed in alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

