Conformal Risk Training:
End-to-End Optimization of Conformal Risk Control

Christopher Yeh, Nicolas Christianson, Adam Wierman, Yisong Yue
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
{cyeh,nchristi,adamw,yyue}@caltech.edu

Abstract
While deep learning models often achieve high predictive accuracy, their predictions
typically do not come with any provable guarantees on risk or reliability, which are
critical for deployment in high-stakes applications. The framework of conformal
risk control (CRC) provides a distribution-free, finite-sample method for controlling
the expected value of any bounded monotone loss function and can be conveniently
applied post-hoc to any pre-trained deep learning model. However, many realworld applications are sensitive to tail risks, as opposed to just expected loss. In this
work, we develop a method for controlling the general class of Optimized CertaintyEquivalent (OCE) risks, a broad class of risk measures which includes as special
cases the expected loss (generalizing the original CRC method) and common tail
risks like the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR). Furthermore, standard post-hoc
CRC can degrade average-case performance due to its lack of feedback to the model.
To address this, we introduce “conformal risk training,” an end-to-end approach
that differentiates through conformal OCE risk control during model training or
fine-tuning. Our method achieves provable risk guarantees while demonstrating
significantly improved average-case performance over post-hoc approaches on
applications to controlling classifiers’ false negative rate and controlling financial
risk in battery storage operation.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of training deep learning models that are used for potentially risky downstream
decision making. For example, in high-stakes tasks such as tumor classification, doctors need models
that achieve both good overall classification accuracy and provably bounded false negative rate, to
ensure that the health risk of a false negative prediction (i.e., misclassifying a tumor as benign) is
sufficiently prioritized in model predictions. In such settings, it is important to design a unified
approach (trained model and decision-making policy) that simultaneously controls for the desired
level of risk while maximizing the utility of downstream decisions.
One promising paradigm is risk control. Given a (pre-trained) model whose predictions are used
by a decision policy parameterized by λ ∈ Λ, the goal is to choose λ such that E[L(λ)] ≤ α for
some loss function L and risk level α. Many common goals can be framed as risk control problems:
bounding the false negative rate of a classifier, producing predictive uncertainty sets that satisfy a
target coverage level, ensuring factuality of large language model outputs, etc. [6, 29].
The conformal risk control (CRC) method [6] introduces a sufficient criterion for solving the risk
control problem when the loss function L is monotone. While CRC is elegant and simple, the original
formulation has several limitations. First, CRC is limited to controlling the expected loss of L, while
more general notions of risk are critical for high-stakes problems in the real world. Notably, the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

