Handling Label Noise via Instance-Level Difficulty
Modeling and Dynamic Optimization
∗

Kuan Zhang1 , Chengliang Chai1, , Jingzhe Xu1 , Chi Zhang1
Han Han2 , Ye Yuan1 , Guoren Wang1 , Lei Cao2
1
Beijing Institute of Technology
2
University of Arizona
{zhangkuan, ccl}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies indicate that deep neural networks degrade in generalization performance under label noise. Existing methods focus on data selection or label
correction, facing limitations such as high computational costs, heavy hyperparameter tuning process, and coarse-grained optimization. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel two-stage noisy learning framework that enables instance-level
optimization through a dynamically weighted loss function, avoiding hyperparameter tuning. To obtain stable and accurate information about noise modeling, we
introduce a simple yet effective metric, termed wrong event, which dynamically
models the cleanliness and difficulty of individual samples while maintaining computational costs. Our framework first collects wrong event information and builds
a strong base model. Then we perform noise-robust training on the base model,
using a probabilistic model to handle the wrong event information of samples.
Experiments on six synthetic and real-world LNL benchmarks demonstrate our
method surpasses state-of-the-art methods in performance, achieves a nearly 75%
reduction in storage and computational time, strongly improving model scalability.
Our code is available at https://github.com/iTheresaApocalypse/IDO.

1

Introduction

Curating large training datasets through web scraping [1], crowd-sourcing [2], or pre-trained models
[3] inevitably introduces label noise. It tends to degrade the performance of the trained deep neural
network (DNN) model [4] due to DNN memorizing and thus overfitting the noisy samples [5].
To mitigate the negative impact of label noise, many works [6–15] consider the patterns of the clean
and noisy samples shown in the DNN training process, i.e., DNNs first learn clean patterns early
in training, then start fitting noise later, and eventually overfit the noisy dataset. However, one key
problem of this strategy is that the noisy samples tend to show behavior similar to the clean but
difficult samples – the clean examples that are close to the decision boundary of the model. To
solve this problem, the most recent approaches [9, 11] try to distinguish noisy examples from hard
examples by introducing the hardness of the samples into the loss function. However, these methods
have the following limitations.
Limitations. (1) These methods are computationally intensive due to the overhead for measuring
the hardness and cleanness of the samples and grouping them into different categories, e.g., clean,
noisy, and difficult [16]; (2) these methods introduce extra hyperparameters, such as coefficients of
loss terms, a cutoff threshold for grouping the samples, and a training epoch threshold to avoid the
model fitting the noise, which are hard to tune [10, 12]; (3) these methods always assign identical
∗

Chengliang Chai is the corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

