AceReason-Nemotron: Advancing Math and Code
Reasoning through Reinforcement Learning

Yang Chen ∗

Zhuolin Yang ∗

Mohammad Shoeybi

Zihan Liu

Chankyu Lee

Bryan Catanzaro

Peng Xu

Wei Ping

NVIDIA

Abstract
Despite recent progress in large-scale reinforcement learning (RL) for reasoning,
the training recipe for building high-performing reasoning models remains elusive.
Key implementation details of frontier models, such as DeepSeek-R1, including
data curation strategies and RL training recipe, are often omitted. Moreover, recent
research indicates distillation remains more effective than RL for smaller models.
In this work, we demonstrate that large-scale RL can significantly enhance the
reasoning capabilities of strong, small- and mid-sized models, achieving results
that surpass those of state-of-the-art distillation-based models. We systematically
study the RL training process through extensive ablations and propose a simple
yet effective approach: first training on math-only prompts, then on code-only
prompts. Notably, we find that math-only RL not only significantly enhances the
performance of strong distilled models on math benchmarks (e.g., +14.6% / +17.2%
on AIME 2025 for the 7B / 14B models), but also code reasoning tasks (e.g., +6.8%
/ +5.8% on LiveCodeBench for the 7B / 14B models). In addition, extended codeonly RL iterations further improve code benchmark performance with minimal
or no degradation in math results. We develop a robust data curation pipeline to
collect challenging prompts with high-quality, verifiable answers and test cases to
enable verification-based RL across both domains. Finally, we identify key insights,
including curriculum learning with progressively increasing response lengths and
the stabilizing effect of on-policy parameter updates. We find that RL not only
elicits the foundational reasoning capabilities acquired during pretraining and
supervised fine-tuning (e.g., distillation), but also pushes the limits of the model’s
reasoning ability, enabling it to solve problems that were previously unsolvable.2

1

Introduction

Reasoning capabilities are a fundamental component of AI. Since the introduction of OpenAI
o1 (OpenAI, 2024), building reasoning models using large-scale reinforcement learning (RL) has
attracted significant attention. Remarkable progress has followed the open-sourcing of DeepSeekR1 (Guo et al., 2025), empowering the open LLM and research communities to develop state-ofthe-art reasoning models through RL or distillation. However, key technical details necessary for
reproduction, such as data curation strategies and the specific RL training recipe, were omitted from
the original DeepSeek-R1 report (Guo et al., 2025), leaving the community scrambling to replicate
its success.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: {yachen, zhuoliny, wping}@nvidia.com
We release the model, dataset, and a full technical report at: https://huggingface.co/papers/
2505.16400.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

