On the Integration of Spatial-Temporal Knowledge: A
Lightweight Approach to Atmospheric Time Series
Forecasting

Yisong Fu1,2 , Fei Wang1,2∗ , Zezhi Shao1 , Boyu Diao1,2 , Lin Wu1,2 ,
Zhulin An1,2 , Chengqing Yu1,2 , Yujie Li1,2 , Yongjun Xu1,2∗
1
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{fuyisong24s, wangfei, shaozezhi, diaoboyu, wulin}@ict.ac.cn,
{anzhulin, yuchengqing22b, liyujie23s, xyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Transformers have gained attention in atmospheric time series forecasting (ATSF)
for their ability to capture global spatial-temporal correlations. However, their
complex architectures lead to excessive parameter counts and extended training
times, limiting their scalability to large-scale forecasting. In this paper, we revisit
ATSF from a theoretical perspective of atmospheric dynamics and uncover a key
insight: spatial-temporal position embedding (STPE) can inherently model spatialtemporal correlations even without attention mechanisms. Its effectiveness arises
from the integration of geographical coordinates and temporal features, which are
intrinsically linked to atmospheric dynamics. Based on this, we propose STELLA,
a Spatial-Temporal knowledge Embedded Lightweight modeL for ASTF, utilizing
only STPE and an MLP architecture in place of Transformer layers. With 10k
parameters and one hour of training, STELLA achieves superior performance on
five datasets compared to other advanced methods. The paper emphasizes the
effectiveness of spatial-temporal knowledge integration over complex architectures,
providing novel insights for ATSF. The code is available at https://github.
com/GestaltCogTeam/STELLA.

1

Introduction

Atmospheric time series forecasting (ATSF), such as weather forecasting and air quality prediction,
is of great significance in a wide variety of domains such as agriculture, energy, and economics. In
recent decades, automatic weather stations have grown exponentially, becoming a cornerstone of
modern meteorology [34]. These stations are cost-effective for applications [3, 36] and are ideally
positioned to provide a large volume of data to advance deep learning (DL) approaches in ATSF [27].
However, the application of DL in ATSF faces two main challenges: (1) the observations of worldwide
stations exhibit intricate spatial-temporal correlations [40], necessitating models with advanced
mining capabilities to ensure accurate forecasting [52]. (2) The requirement for fine-grained and
large-scale forecasting [25, 39] calls for highly efficient and scalable models.
These two challenges are often trade-offs in prior studies, as shown in Figure 1. Transformer and
its variants, which have gained significant popularity in ATSF, utilize sophisticated architectures to
capture global spatial-temporal correlations. For example, AirFormer [16] introduces dartboard attention for air quality prediction, and MRIformer [47] utilizes multi-resolution attention to predict wind
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

