Mixture of Inputs:
Text Generation Beyond Discrete Token Sampling
Yufan Zhuang1 , Liyuan Liu2 , Chandan Singh2 , Jingbo Shang1 , and Jianfeng Gao2
2

1
UC San Diego
Microsoft Research

Abstract
In standard autoregressive generation, an LLM predicts the next-token distribution,
samples a discrete token, and then discards the distribution, passing only the
sampled token as new input. To preserve this distribution’s rich information,
we propose Mixture of Inputs (M O I), a training-free method for autoregressive
generation. After generating a token following the standard paradigm, we construct
a new input that blends the generated discrete token with the previously discarded
token distribution. Specifically, we employ a Bayesian estimation method that
treats the token distribution as the prior, the sampled token as the observation, and
replaces the conventional one-hot vector with the continuous posterior expectation
as the new model input. M O I allows the model to maintain a richer internal
representation throughout the generation process, resulting in improved text quality
and reasoning capabilities. On mathematical reasoning, code generation, and PhDlevel QA tasks, M O I consistently improves performance across multiple models
including QwQ-32B, Nemotron-Super-49B, Gemma-3-27B, and DAPO-Qwen32B, with no additional training and negligible computational overhead.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are trained to predict the full distribution of the next token given
an input context. To generate desirable sequences of text, various methods have been proposed to
sample discrete tokens from these iterative next-token distributions [1, 2]. After the sampling process,
only the discrete token is passed as the new input, and the rich predicted distribution is discarded.
This process forces the model to commit to a single path in its reasoning, potentially abandoning
valuable alternatives that could lead to better solutions.
On the other hand, human thinking first occurs in a high-dimensional and fluid manner before being
articulated as natural language. Inspired by this cognitive process, we explore methods to enable
LLMs to utilize not only articulated natural language but also partially-formed ideas, competing
possibilities, and conceptual associations that exist in a probabilistic space before crystallizing into
words.
Specifically, we propose Mixture of Inputs (M O I), a novel approach that takes as input not only
a discrete, sampled token but also the sampled token’s distribution. This preserves the model’s
uncertainty and allows it to conduct inner speech in a high-dimensional space. We employ a Bayesian
estimation method, treating the token distribution as the prior and the sampled token as the observation,
then replacing the conventional one-hot vector with the continuous posterior expectation. With this
posterior expectation, a weighted average embedding is passed as the new input to subsequent
prediction steps.
Code is available at: https://github.com/EvanZhuang/mixinputs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

