Graph Alignment via Birkhoff Relaxation

Sushil Mahavir Varma
Industrial and Systems Engineering
University of Michigan Ann Arbor
Michigan, USA
sushilv@umich.edu

Irène Waldspurger
CNRS, INRIA
Université Paris Dauphine
Paris, France
waldspurger@ceremade.dauphine.fr

Laurent Massoulié
INRIA, DI/ENS
PSL Research University
Paris, France
laurent.massoulie@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider the graph alignment problem, wherein the objective is to find a vertex
correspondence between two graphs that maximizes the edge overlap. The graph
alignment problem is an instance of the quadratic assignment problem (QAP),
known to be NP-hard in the worst case even to approximately solve. In this paper,
we analyze Birkhoff relaxation, a tight convex relaxation of QAP, and present
theoretical guarantees on its performance when the inputs follow the Gaussian
Wigner Model. More specifically, the weighted adjacency
matrices are correlated
√
Gaussian Orthogonal Ensemble with correlation 1/ 1 + σ 2 . Denote the optimal
solutions of the QAP and Birkhoff relaxation by Π⋆ and X ⋆ respectively. We show
that ∥X ⋆ − Π⋆ ∥2F = o(n) when σ = o(n−1 ) and ∥X ⋆ − Π⋆ ∥2F = Ω(n) when
σ = Ω(n−0.5 ). Thus, the optimal solution X ⋆ transitions from a small perturbation
of Π⋆ for small σ to being well separated from Π⋆ as σ becomes larger than n−0.5 .
This result allows us to guarantee that simple rounding procedures on X ⋆ align
1 − o(1) fraction of vertices correctly whenever σ = o(n−1 ). This condition on σ
to ensure the success of the Birkhoff relaxation is state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Consider two undirected graphs G1 and G2 with vertices [n]. The graph matching/alignment problem
is defined as finding a mapping between the vertices of G1 and G2 such that the edge overlap is
maximized. The graph isomorphism problem is a special case when G1 = G2 up to the permutation of
the vertices. The graph matching problem has widespread applications in network de-anonymization
[28], computational biology [30], pattern recognition [6], etc., underlining the need to design and
study efficient algorithms for this problem.
More formally, let A and B be the adjacency matrices (possibly weighted) of G1 and G2 respectively,
then, the vertex correspondence that maximizes the edge overlap is given by the optimal solution of
the following quadratic assignment problem:
Π⋆ = arg min ∥AX − XB∥2F ,
X∈Pn

(1)

where Pn is the set of all n × n permutation matrices. Quadratic assignment problems are NPhard in the worst case and are known to be difficult to even solve approximately [24]. However,
for typical graphs, one could expect to efficiently solve the graph matching problem. Indeed,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

