Convergence Rates for Gradient Descent on the Edge
of Stability for Overparametrised Least Squares

Hancheng Min∗ Leandro Palma∗ Salma Tarmoun∗
Ziqing Xu∗ René Vidal
Innovation in Data Engineering and Science (IDEAS)
University of Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania, PA 19104
lemacdonald@protonmail.com

Lachlan Ewen MacDonald

Abstract
Classical optimisation theory guarantees monotonic objective decrease for gradient descent (GD) when employed in a small step size, or “stable", regime. In
contrast, gradient descent on neural networks is frequently performed in a large
step size regime called the “edge of stability", in which the objective decreases
non-monotonically with an observed implicit bias towards flat minima. In this paper, we take a step toward quantifying this phenomenon by providing convergence
rates for gradient descent with large learning rates in an overparametrised least
squares setting. The key insight behind our analysis is that, as a consequence of
overparametrisation, the set of global minimisers forms a Riemannian manifold
M , which enables the decomposition of the GD dynamics into components parallel and orthogonal to M . The parallel component corresponds to Riemannian
gradient descent on the objective sharpness, while the orthogonal component is a
bifurcating dynamical system. This insight allows us to derive convergence rates in
three regimes characterised by the learning rate size: (a) the subcritical regime, in
which transient instability is overcome in finite time before linear convergence to
a suboptimally flat global minimum; (b) the critical regime, in which instability
persists for all time with a power-law convergence toward the optimally flat global
minimum; and (c) the supercritical regime, in which instability persists for all time
with linear convergence to an orbit of period two centred on the optimally flat
global minimum.

1

Introduction

The well-known gradient descent (GD) iteration
θ 7→ GDℓ (η, θ) := θ − η∇ℓ(θ),

θ ∈ Rp

(1)

p

for minimisation of an objective function ℓ : R → R, with learning rate η > 0, is the foundation of
most practical algorithms for training deep neural networks (DNNs). Despite the apparent simplicity
of the algorithm and practical ease with which DNNs can be trained using GD, theoretically GD
on DNNs remains poorly understood. In addition to the well-known non-convexity of DNN loss
functions ℓ, our theoretical understanding is hampered by the fact that in practice DNNs tend to be
trained with larger learning rates than permissible according to standard optimisation theory.
Specifically, classical optimisation theory requires that the learning rate η be less than twice the
reciprocal of the largest eigenvalue λ (the sharpness) of the Hessian ∇2 ℓ. The reason for this is easily
∗

Equal contribution, alphabetical order

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

