MALinZero: Efficient Low-Dimensional Search for
Mastering Complex Multi-Agent Planning

Sizhe Tang
The George Washington University
s.tang1@gwu.edu

Jiayu Chen
Carnegie Mellon University
jiayuc2@andrew.cmu.edu

Tian Lan
The George Washington University
tlan@gwu.edu

Abstract
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), which leverages Upper Confidence Bound
for Trees (UCTs) to balance exploration and exploitation through randomized
sampling, is instrumental to solving complex planning problems. However, for
multi-agent planning, MCTS is confronted with a large combinatorial action space
that often grows exponentially with the number of agents. As a result, the branching
factor of MCTS during tree expansion also increases exponentially, making it very
difficult to efficiently explore and exploit during tree search. To this end, we
propose MALinZero, a new approach to leverage low-dimensional representational
structures on joint-action returns and enable efficient MCTS in complex multiagent planning. Our solution can be viewed as projecting the joint-action returns
into the low-dimensional space representable using a contextual linear bandit
problem formulation. We solve the contextual linear bandit problem with convex
and µ-smooth loss functions – in order to place more importance on better joint
actions and mitigate potential representational limitations – and derive a linear
Upper Confidence Bound applied to trees (LinUCT) to enable novel multi-agent
exploration and exploitation in the low-dimensional space. We analyze the regret
of MALinZero for low-dimensional reward functions and propose an (1 − 1e )approximation algorithm for the joint action selection by maximizing a sub-modular
objective. MALinZero demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on multi-agent
benchmarks such as matrix games, SMAC, and SMACv2, outperforming both
model-based and model-free multi-agent reinforcement learning baselines with
faster learning speed and better performance.

1

Introduction

Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) has demonstrated great performance in solving complex planning
problems such as game playing [1], robotic control [2], and optimization [3]. It achieves much higher
data efficiency than value- or policy-based reinforcement learning (RL) [4] by leveraging Upper
Confidence Bound for Trees (UCTs) to balance exploration and exploitation through randomized
sampling and cumulative regret minimization [5]. Integrated with deep learning (e.g., AlphaZero [6]
and MuZero [4]), MCTS algorithms have achieved groundbreaking results in solving complex games,
such as Go, Chess and Shogi [4], relying on little knowledge of domain expertise or game rules.
However, for planning problems involving multiple agents, MCTS is confronted with a large combinatorial action space that often grows exponentially with the number of agents [7, 8]. As the number
of candidate actions increases, the branching factor of MCTS (during tree expansion) also increases
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

