Which Algorithms
Have Tight Generalization Bounds?

Michael Gastpar
EPFL
michael.gastpar@epfl.ch

Ido Nachum
University of Haifa
inachum@univ.haifa.ac.il

Jonathan Shafer
MIT
shaferjo@mit.edu

Thomas Weinberger
EPFL
thomas.weinberger@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study which machine learning algorithms have tight generalization
bounds with respect to a given collection of population distributions. Our
results build on and extend the recent work of Gastpar et al. (2024). First, we
present conditions that preclude the existence of tight generalization bounds.
Specifically, we show that algorithms that have certain inductive biases
that cause them to be unstable do not admit tight generalization bounds.
Next, we show that algorithms that are sufficiently loss-stable do have
tight generalization bounds. We conclude with a simple characterization
that relates the existence of tight generalization bounds to the conditional
variance of the algorithm’s loss.

1

Introduction

Generalization bounds are at the heart of learning theory, and they play a central role
in attempts to mathematically explain the behavior of contemporary supervised machine
learning systems. A generalization bound is an upper bound of the form
LD (A(S)) ≤ b,

(1)

where A(S) is the hypothesis output by learning algorithm A when executed with training
set S, and LD (·) represents the loss with respect to the population distribution D. The term
b is typically an expression of the form
b = LS (A(S)) + c(S, A(S), H),

(2)

where LS (·) is the empirical loss, H is a hypothesis class, and c(S, A(S), H) is a ‘complexity’
term, such as the VC dimension or a spectral norm, etc.
We say that a generalization bound is valid if for every population distribution D, Eq. (1)
holds with high probability; we say that a valid bound is uniformly tight (Definition 2.4) if
for every population distribution, with high probability the difference between the two sides
of Eq. (1) is small.
Bounding the loss using a generalization bound is quite different from using a validation
set. Technically, a generalization bound does not use additional samples beyond the training
set S. And while a validation set provides a single post-hoc measurement of the population
loss after training is complete, a good generalization bound can provide insight into why
a learning algorithm performs well, and can offer guidance for model selection and the
development of new learning algorithms. For a generalization bound to be useful in this
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

