Understanding and Mitigating Numerical Sources of
Nondeterminism in LLM Inference
Jiayi Yuan1∗ Hao Li2∗ Xinheng Ding2 Wenya Xie2 Yu-Jhe Li3
Wentian Zhao3 Kun Wan3 Jing Shi3 Xia Hu1 Zirui Liu2
1
Rice University 2 University of Minnesota Twin Cities 3 Adobe Inc.
{jy101,xia.hu}@rice.edu
{li003703,ding0499,xie00470,zrliu}@umn.edu
{jhel,wezhao,kuwan,jingshi}@adobe.com

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are now integral across various domains and have
demonstrated impressive performance. Progress, however, rests on the premise
that benchmark scores are both accurate and reproducible. We demonstrate that
the reproducibility of LLM performance is fragile: changing system configuration, such as evaluation batch size, GPU count, and GPU version, can introduce
significant differences in the generated responses. This issue is especially pronounced in reasoning models, where minor rounding differences in early tokens
can cascade into divergent chains of thought, ultimately affecting accuracy. For
instance, under bfloat16 precision with greedy decoding, a reasoning model like
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B can exhibit up to 9% variation in accuracy and
9,000 tokens difference in response length due to differences in GPU count,
type, and evaluation batch size. We trace the root cause of this variability to
the non-associative nature of floating-point arithmetic under limited numerical
precision. This work presents the first systematic investigation into how numerical
precision affects reproducibility in LLM inference. Through carefully controlled
experiments across various hardware, software, and precision settings, we quantify
when and how model outputs diverge. Our analysis reveals that floating-point
precision—while critical for reproducibility—is often neglected in evaluation
practices. Inspired by this, we develop a lightweight inference pipeline, dubbed
LayerCast, that stores weights in 16-bit precision but performs all computations in
FP32, balancing memory efficiency with numerical stability. Code is available at
https://github.com/nanomaoli/llm_reproducibility.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being deployed in everyday scenarios, powering
applications from chatbots [2] to automated coding tools [25] and personalized healthcare agents [6].
As their impact grows, rigorous benchmarking and evaluation become critical to measure real
progress and ensure reliability, safety, and fairness [7, 37]. There are two commonly used evaluation
strategies. The first one is to use greedy decoding by setting the temperature to zero, which produces
deterministic outputs, and reports the result from a single run. The second uses random sampling with
a non-zero temperature and reports performance using the Pass@K metric [8], i.e., the probability
that at least one of K independent solution attempts will succeed.
In this paper, we highlight a commonly overlooked factor in both evaluation settings: numerical
precision. First, for the greedy decoding setting, this factor undermines the assumption of determin∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

