Continuous Thought Machines

Luke Darlow1

Ciaran Regan1,2 Sebastian Risi1,3 Jeffrey Seely1
1
Sakana AI, Tokyo, Japan
2
University of Tsukuba, Japan
3
IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark

Llion Jones1

{luke, ciaran, sebastianrisi, jeffrey, llion}@sakana.ai

Abstract
Biological brains demonstrate complex neural activity, where neural dynamics
are critical to how brains process information. Most artificial neural networks
ignore the complexity of individual neurons . We challenge that paradigm. By
incorporating neuron-level processing and synchronization, we reintroduce neural
timing as a foundational element. We present the Continuous Thought Machine
(CTM), a model designed to leverage neural dynamics as its core representation.
The CTM has two innovations: (1) neuron-level temporal processing, where
each neuron uses unique weight parameters to process incoming histories; and
(2) neural synchronization as a latent representation. The CTM aims to strike
a balance between neuron abstractions and biological realism. It operates at a
level of abstraction that effectively captures essential temporal dynamics while
remaining computationally tractable. We demonstrate the CTM’s performance
and versatility across a range of tasks, including solving 2D mazes, ImageNet1K classification, parity computation, and more. Beyond displaying rich internal
representations and offering a natural avenue for interpretation owing to its internal
process, the CTM is able to perform tasks that require complex sequential reasoning.
The CTM can also leverage adaptive compute, where it can stop earlier for simpler
tasks, or keep computing when faced with more challenging instances. The goal of
this work is to share the CTM and its associated innovations, rather than pushing
for new state-of-the-art results. To that end, we believe the CTM represents
a significant step toward developing more biologically plausible and powerful
artificial intelligence systems. We provide an accompanying interactive online
demonstration and an extended technical report.

(a) Perfect route solution (trained up to 100 steps).

(b) (Emergent) further than the training route.

(c) Generalizing to a larger maze.

Figure 1: Solving 100 steps down 39 × 39 mazes. (a, b) Observing using attention (no positional
encoding, weights overlaid), imagining a route (arrows) from red to green pixels, (b) attending
beyond 100 steps, and (c) generalizing to 99 × 99 via sequential re-applications of the same model.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

