Differentially Private Quantiles with Smaller Error

Jacob Imola
BARC, University of Copenhagen
Denmark
jaim@di.ku.dk
Hannah Keller
Aarhus University
Denmark
hkeller@cs.au.dk

Fabrizio Boninsegna
University of Padova
Italy
fabrizio.boninsegna@phd.unipd.it

Anders Aamand
University of Copenhagen
Denmark
aa@di.ku.dk

Amrita Roy Chowdhury
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
United States of America
aroyc@umich.edu

Rasmus Pagh
BARC, University of Copenhagen
Denmark
pagh@di.ku.dk

Abstract
In the approximate quantiles problem, the goal is to output m quantile estimates,
the ranks of which are as close as possible to m given quantiles 0 ≤ q1 ≤
· · · ≤ qm ≤ 1. We present a mechanism for approximate quantiles that satisfies
ε-differential privacy for a dataset of n real numbers where the ratio between
the distance between the closest pair of points and the size of the domain is
bounded by ψ. As longas the minimum
 gap between quantiles is sufficiently
m log(m) log(ψ)
large, |qi − qi−1 | ≥ Ω
for all i, the maximum rank error of
nε


2
(m)
our mechanism is O log(ψ)+log
with high probability. Previously, the best
ε
known algorithm under pure DP wasdue to Kaplan, Schnapp,
 and Stemmer (ICML
log(ψ) log2 (m)+log3 (m)
’22), who achieved a bound of O
. Our improvement
ε
stems from the use of continual counting techniques which allows the quantiles
to be randomized in a correlated manner. We also present an (ε, δ)-differentially
private mechanism that relaxes the gap assumption without affecting the error
bound, improving on existing methods when δ is sufficiently close to zero. We
provide experimental evaluation which confirms that our mechanism performs
favorably compared to prior work in practice, in particular when the number of
quantiles m is large.

1

Introduction

Quantiles are a fundamental statistic of distributions with broad applications in data analysis. In this
paper, we consider the estimation of multiple quantiles under differential privacy. Given a dataset X
of n real numbers and quantiles 0 < q1 < · · · < qm < 1 the goal is to output estimates z1 , . . . , zm
such that the fraction of data points less than zi is approximately qi . We measure the error by the
difference between the rank of zi in X and the optimal rank qi n. For the ease of exposition, we first
consider the case where elements of X are integers in {1, . . . , b} and the error probability is bounded
by 1/b. In particular, the ratio ψ between the closest pair of points and the domain size is bounded
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

