Metric Automata Theory:
A Unifying Theory of RNNs

Adam Dankowiakowski
University of Oxford
adankowiakowski02@gmail.com

Alessandro Ronca
IRIS-AI
alessandro.ronca@iris-ai.org

Abstract
We propose Metric Automata Theory, an elegant generalisation of classic Automata
Theory to continuous dynamical systems, that constitutes a unifying theory of all
kinds of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), including widely-adopted architectures such as xLSTM and State Space Models (SSMs). The theory allows one
to analyse RNNs both in the finite and unbounded precision settings seamlessly,
while utilising fundamental results of Automata Theory. It also provides a novel
notion of robustness that guarantees numerical stability and contributes to stability
of learning. We employ the theory to prove a comprehensive set of expressivity
results for widely-adopted RNNs, with a focus on robustness and finite-precision.
Notably, we contrast the capabilities of xLSTM and SSMs for robustly modelling
all star-free regular languages—xLSTM can do so, while SSMs cannot robustly
recognize the F LIP -F LOP language. Thus we give a novel perspective on the importance of non-linear recurrences, giving insight for why xLSTM shows superior
performance to SSMs on several tasks. We provide an improved understanding
of the capabilities of Mamba, a popular SSM model. We show that Mamba is
not generally capable of recognising the star-free languages under finite-precision,
which is seemingly in contrast with the existing theoretical and empirical results for
SSMs. We clarify the picture, by showing that Mamba admits a piecewise-linearly
separable state space that allows it to approximate star-free languages, with some
length-generalisation abilities. At the same time, Mamba does not admit such state
spaces for languages like Parity. This explains why empirically Mamba performs
well on star-free languages, and fails on Parity.

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) encompass all the neural networks that process sequences by
maintaining a state though some form of recurrence. Notable RNNs are Vanilla RNNs such as
Elman-RNNs [Elman, 1990], LSTM [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997], GRU [Cho et al., 2014],
and the more recent and now widely-adopted xLSTM [Beck et al., 2024] and the family of State
Space Models (SSMs) including S4 [Gu et al., 2022], Mamba [Gu and Dao, 2023], HiPPO [Gu
et al., 2020], and DeltaNet [Yang et al., 2024]. The more recent RNNs achieve state-of-the-art
performance, comparable to other notable neural networks such as Transformers [Vaswani et al.,
2017], by leveraging new design principles that overcome the limitations of previous RNNs, enabling
key properties such as parallel training to take full advantage of modern computer architectures.
Recently, there has been an increasing interested in developing a systematic understanding of the
capabilities of sequence models, including RNNs and Transformers, beyond empirical evidence.
As of now, there is a rich literature of formal results regarding the expressivity of both RNN (cf.
[Knorozova and Ronca, 2024a,b, Weiss et al., 2018, Merrill et al., 2020]) and Transformers (cf.
[Strobl et al., 2024, Merrill and Sabharwal, 2024, Hahn, 2020]), with some studies directly comparing
the two, e.g., [Bhattamishra et al., 2024]. We focus on modelling RNN expressivity in terms of formal
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

