Reward-Aware Proto-Representations
in Reinforcement Learning

Hon Tik Tse

Siddarth Chandrasekar

Marlos C. Machado*

University of Alberta, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
*Canada CIFAR AI Chair
{hontik, siddart2, machado}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
In recent years, the successor representation (SR) has attracted increasing attention
in reinforcement learning (RL), and it has been used to address some of its key
challenges, such as exploration, credit assignment, and generalization. The SR
can be seen as representing the underlying credit assignment structure of the
environment by implicitly encoding its induced transition dynamics. However,
the SR is reward-agnostic. In this paper, we discuss a similar representation that
also takes into account the reward dynamics of the problem. We study the default
representation (DR), a recently proposed representation with limited theoretical
(and empirical) analysis. Here, we lay some of the theoretical foundation underlying
the DR in the tabular case by (1) deriving dynamic programming and (2) temporaldifference methods to learn the DR, (3) characterizing the basis for the vector space
of the DR, and (4) formally extending the DR to the function approximation case
through default features. Empirically, we analyze the benefits of the DR in many
of the settings in which the SR has been applied, including (1) reward shaping,
(2) option discovery, (3) exploration, and (4) transfer learning. Our results show
that, compared to the SR, the DR gives rise to qualitatively different, reward-aware
behaviour and quantitatively better performance in several settings.

1

Introduction

Learning appropriate representations is a key challenge in reinforcement learning (RL). The successor
representation (SR) [10], which represents states as the expected discounted number of visits to
successor states, is a particularly promising idea. It has been shown to be an effective distance metric
for reward shaping [54, 49], a promising inductive bias for temporally-extended exploration [21, 25],
and an effective representation for credit assignment [27, 23], generalization [20], and zero-shot
RL [47, 48, 6, 44, 1]. Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that the SR is a good computational
model for explaining decision-making [28] and neural activity in the brain [41, 40].
The underlying idea behind the SR is to incorporate the temporal aspect of the problem into the
representation so that two states are considered similar if they lead to similar future outcomes.
Similar ideas permeate other concepts such as proto-value functions [27, 26] and slow feature
analysis [39, 53]. In this work, we use the term proto-representations to refer to such temporal
representations that implicitly capture the environment dynamics, with the SR the most prominent
of them. However, the SR (and others [29, 30, 5, 12, 52]) only captures the transition dynamics of
the environment, and does not take rewards into account. In this paper, we demonstrate the benefits
of learning a proto-representation that also takes rewards into account.
One candidate for reward-aware proto-representations is the default representation (DR) [34].
Piray and Daw, in a neuroscience study, applied the DR mainly to replanning tasks and explaining
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

