Beyond the Surface: Enhancing LLM-as-a-Judge
Alignment with Human via Internal Representations

Peng Lai1 , Jianjie Zheng1 , Sijie Cheng2 , Yun Chen3 , Peng Li2 , Yang Liu2 , Guanhua Chen1∗
1
Southern University of Science and Technology, 2 Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics

Abstract
The growing scale of evaluation tasks has led to the widespread adoption of automated evaluation using LLMs, a paradigm known as "LLM-as-a-judge". However,
improving its alignment with human preferences without complex prompts or finetuning remains challenging. Previous studies mainly optimize based on shallow
outputs, overlooking rich cross-layer representations. In this work, motivated by
preliminary findings that middle-to-upper layers encode semantically and taskrelevant representations that are often more aligned with human judgments than the
final layer, we propose LAGER, a post-hoc, plug-and-play framework for improving the alignment of LLM-as-a-Judge point-wise evaluations with human scores, by
leveraging internal representations. LAGER produces fine-grained judgment scores
by aggregating cross-layer score-token logits and computing the expected score
from a softmax-based distribution, while keeping the LLM backbone frozen and
ensuring no impact on the inference process. LAGER fully leverages the complementary information across different layers, overcoming the limitations of relying
solely on the final layer. We evaluate our method on the standard alignment benchmarks Flask, HelpSteer, and BIGGen using Spearman correlation, and find that
LAGER achieves improvements of up to 7.5% over the best baseline across these
benchmarks. Without reasoning steps, LAGER matches or outperforms reasoningbased methods. Experiments on downstream applications, such as data selection
and emotional understanding, further show the generalization of LAGER.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have witnessed significant progress in various tasks like math
reasoning (Ying et al., 2024; Duan & Wang, 2024) and open-domain question answering (Allemang &
Sequeda, 2024),and exhibit great generalization and reasoning abilities on unseen tasks and domains
(Li et al., 2024c; Ye, 2024; Ni et al., 2024), which makes it possible to evaluate the model generations
with an LLM (Bavaresco et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2023). LLM-as-a-judge (Lin & Chen, 2023; Li
et al., 2024a; Wu et al., 2024; Shiwen et al., 2024), an emerging approach to text evaluation, uses large
language models to perform automated and scalable assessment of textual responses, reducing the
reliance on human annotation. This paradigm has found widespread applications in various scenarios
such as model evaluation (Lin & Chen, 2023), data synthesis (Kim et al., 2024a; Cui et al., 2023b;
Wang et al., 2024b), and model enhancement via verification and critic agents (Pace et al., 2024;
Badshah & Sajjad, 2024).
Researchers have explored various approaches to improve the consistency of judgment with human
experts. Prompt-based methods (Lin & Chen, 2023; Liu et al., 2023) improve the judge performance
with guidelines encouraging step-by-step reasoning (Chen et al., 2024; Lin & Chen, 2023; Zhuo, 2024)
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

