DoseSurv: Predicting Personalized Survival Outcomes
under Continuous-Valued Treatments
Moritz Gögl1

Yu Liu1

Christopher Yau1,2 Peter Watkinson1
1
University of Oxford
2
Health Data Research UK
moritz.gogl@keble.ox.ac.uk

Tingting Zhu1

Abstract
Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) of continuous-valued interventions on survival, that is, time-to-event (TTE) outcomes, is crucial in various
fields, notably in clinical decision-making and in driving the advancement of nextgeneration clinical trials. However, while HTE estimation for continuous-valued
(i.e., dosage-dependent) interventions and for TTE outcomes have been separately
explored, their combined application remains largely overlooked in the machine
learning literature. We propose DoseSurv, a varying-coefficient network designed
to estimate HTEs for different dosage-dependent and non-dosage treatment options
from TTE data. DoseSurv uses radial basis functions to model continuity in doseresponse relationships and learns balanced representations to address covariate
shifts arising in HTE estimation from observational TTE data. We present experiments across various treatment scenarios on both simulated and real-world data,
demonstrating DoseSurv’s superior performance over existing baseline models.

1

Introduction

Estimating the causal effects of interventions at the individual level is essential for informed decision
making in fields such as personalized medicine [48], public health [39], social and economic policy
[62], and marketing and retail [44]. Within the machine learning (ML) literature, predominant
attention has been directed toward estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs) on continuous
and binary outcomes [1, 2, 62, 70, 63, 60, 9, 16]. By contrast, time-to-event (TTE) outcomes,
which capture the time until an event of interest, have received comparatively less attention. More
specifically, the existing ML literature on HTE estimation with TTE outcomes has focused on
quantifying causal effects of binary (non-dosage) interventions with “treatment” or “no treatment”
(control) being the only options [14, 58]. However, in practice, treatment settings are typically more
complex, comprising several, possibly continuous-valued treatment options, characterized by their
dosage or frequency of administration.
TTE outcomes have immense practical relevance, for example, in clinical studies that analyze survival
time or time to discharge. Equally, studying the causal effects of continuous-valued treatments is an
important problem in healthcare, with relevant areas including chemotherapy [18], insulin regimens
[36], and cardiovascular treatments [21]. Underlying dose-response relationships can be complex and
non-monotonic, with multiple stimulatory and inhibitory phases. Although average dose-response
curves across a population can be characterized in randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and may
appear simple, dose-response relationships at the patient level are often more intricate. Individual
patient characteristics can complicate these relationships, leading to patient-specific ideal dosages
and necessitating continuous modeling of treatments at the individual level.
While neural network (NN) models for HTE estimation have been developed separately for continuousvalued interventions [60, 9, 51] and for TTE outcomes [12, 14, 58], their joint application remains
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

