Spectral Learning for Infinite-Horizon
Average-Reward POMDPs

Alessio Russo
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
alessio.russo@polimi.it

Alberto Maria Metelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
We address the learning problem in the context of infinite-horizon average-reward
POMDPs. Traditionally, this problem has been approached using Spectral Decomposition (SD) methods applied to samples collected under non-adaptive policies,
such as uniform or round-robin policies. Recently, SD techniques have been extended to accommodate a restricted class of adaptive policies such as memoryless
policies. However, the use of adaptive policies has introduced challenges related to
data inefficiency, as SD methods typically require all samples to be drawn from
a single policy. In this work, we propose Mixed Spectral Estimation, which
generalizes spectral estimation techniques to support a broader class of belief-based
policies. We solve the open question of whether spectral methods can be applied to
samples collected from multiple policies, and we provide finite-sample guarantees
for our approach under standard observability and ergodicity assumptions. Building
on this data-efficient estimation method, we introduce the Mixed Spectral UCRL
algorithm. Through a?refined theoretical analysis, we demonstrate that it achieves
r T q when compared to the optimal policy, without requiring
a regret bound of Op
full knowledge of either the transition or the observation model. Finally, we present
numerical simulations that validate the theoretical analysis of both the proposed
estimation procedure and the Mixed Spectral UCRL algorithm.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL) [31], an agent interacts with an unknown or partially known
environment to maximize the long-term sum of rewards. This approach has been successfully used in
a variety of problems [23, 28, 8] under the assumption of fully observing the state of the environment.
However, less attention has been paid to the more realistic scenario where the agent only receives
partial and noisy observations from the environment, a problem which can be modeled through the
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [35] formalism. This setting can be used to
represent various real-world applications such as autonomous driving [18], resource allocation [7],
or financial settings [6]. Dealing with POMDPs is notably a challenging task both (i) statistically
since it requires estimating the latent model parameters, and (ii) computationally since computing
the optimal policy for a POMDP is intractable even when the model parameters are known [24].
In this work, we tackle the infinite-horizon average-reward POMDP formulation. In the past works, the
learning problem in this setting has been addressed using Spectral Decomposition (SD) methods [2, 1].
In particular, the standard approach consists of deploying fully explorative policies (e.g., roundrobin or uniform) for data collection and then leveraging SD techniques for subsequent model
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

