CORE: Collaborative Optimization with
Reinforcement Learning and Evolutionary Algorithm
for Floorplanning

Pengyi Li1∗, Shixiong Kai2 , Jianye Hao1†, Ruizhe Zhong3 , Hongyao Tang1 ,
Zhentao Tang2 , Mingxuan Yuan2 , Junchi Yan3
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Floorplanning is the initial step in the physical design process of Electronic Design Automation (EDA), directly influencing subsequent placement, routing, and
final power of the chip. However, the solution space in floorplanning is vast, and
current algorithms often struggle to explore it sufficiently, making them prone to
getting trapped in local optima. To achieve efficient floorplanning, we propose
CORE, a general and effective solution optimization framework that synergizes
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) and Reinforcement Learning (RL) for high-quality
layout search and optimization. Specifically, we propose the Clustering-based
Diversified Evolutionary Search that directly perturbs layouts and evolves them
based on novelty and performance. Additionally, we model the floorplanning
problem as a sequential decision problem with B*-Tree representation and employ
RL for efficient learning. To efficiently coordinate EAs and RL, we propose the
reinforcement-driven mechanism and evolution-guided mechanism. The former
accelerates population evolution through RL, while the latter guides RL learning
through EAs. The experimental results on the MCNC and GSRC benchmarks
demonstrate that CORE outperforms other strong baselines in terms of wirelength and area utilization metrics, achieving a 12.9% improvement in wirelength.
CORE represents the first evolutionary reinforcement learning (ERL) algorithm
for floorplanning, surpassing existing RL-based methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/yeshenpy/CORE.

1

Introduction

Electronic Design Automation (EDA) [1, 2] encompasses a series of steps from the initial phase
of electronic system design to final manufacturing and testing. These steps include design, verification, synthesis, physical design (floorplanning, macro placement and routing), packaging, and
manufacturing. Previous works have made significant progress in macro placement [3–11], whereas
research on floorplanning receives less attention. Unlike macro placement, floorplanning requires
representations that support the construction of compact layouts, which makes macro placement algorithms ineffective for solving floorplanning problems. This is empirically validated
in Section 4.2. Floorplanning, as the first step of physical design, primarily involves determining
the locations and shapes of functional modules, providing a foundation for subsequent placement,
clock tree synthesis (CTS), and routing. Floorplanning is a crucial step in EDA, as it directly impacts
∗
†

Contact me at lipengyi@tju.edu.cn
Corresponding author: Jianye Hao (jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

