Unified Scaling Laws for Compressed Representations

Andrei Panferov∗
ISTA

Alexandra Volkova∗
ISTA

Ionut-Vlad Modoranu
ISTA

Vage Egiazarian
ISTA

Dan Alistarh†
ISTA & Red Hat AI

Mher Safaryan
ISTA

Abstract
Scaling laws have shaped recent advances in machine learning by enabling predictable scaling of model performance based on model size, computation, and
data volume. Concurrently, the rise in computational cost for AI has motivated
model compression techniques, notably quantization and sparsification, which have
emerged to mitigate the steep computational demands associated with large-scale
training and inference. This paper investigates the interplay between scaling laws
and compression formats, exploring whether a unified scaling framework can accurately predict model performance when training occurs over various compressed
representations, such as sparse, scalar-quantized, sparse-quantized or even vectorquantized formats. Our key contributions include validating a general scaling law
formulation and showing that it is applicable both individually but also composably
across compression types. Based on this, our main finding is demonstrating both
theoretically and empirically that there exists a simple “capacity” metric—based
on the representation’s ability to fit random Gaussian data—which can robustly
predict parameter efficiency across multiple compressed representations. On the
practical side, we extend our formulation to directly compare the accuracy potential
of different compressed formats, and to derive better algorithms for training over
sparse-quantized formats. Our source code is available at: IST-DASLab/unifiedsc-laws

1

Introduction

A key recent advance in machine learning has been the idea of predictable scaling of learning
performance with respect to model, computation and data sizes. This approach is encompassed
by the scaling laws Kaplan et al. [17], which allow researchers to predict the values of these three
parameters required to reach a certain model performance. This powerful idea has been expanded
upon in several directions, e.g. [15; 5; 22], and is a key ingredient behind the massive expansion of
computational power for AI [12].
A parallel research direction, motivated by this massive increase in computational cost, has been model
compression, which proposes a series of techniques to reduce the computational and memory footprint
of model inference and training, via techniques such as sparsification [14] and quantization [11].
In this paper, we focus on the interplay between scaling laws and the degree of compression of the
representation over which learning occurs. While there is significant emerging work in this direction,
e.g. [9; 19; 33; 31], current scaling laws are specialized to single representations (e.g., quantization or
sparsity) and/or formats (e.g., integer quantization), and cannot yet address the question of predicting
model scaling behavior when training over general compressed representations.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

