MEIcoder: Decoding Visual Stimuli from Neural
Activity by Leveraging Most Exciting Inputs

Jan Sobotka1,∗
Luca Baroni2
Ján Antolík2
1
2
EPFL, Switzerland Charles University, Czechia

Abstract
Decoding visual stimuli from neural population activity is crucial for understanding the brain and for applications in brain-machine interfaces. However, such
biological data is often scarce, particularly in primates or humans, where highthroughput recording techniques, such as two-photon imaging, remain challenging
or impossible to apply. This, in turn, poses a challenge for deep learning decoding techniques. To overcome this, we introduce MEIcoder, a biologically
informed decoding method that leverages neuron-specific most exciting inputs
(MEIs), a structural similarity index measure loss, and adversarial training. MEIcoder achieves state-of-the-art performance in reconstructing visual stimuli from
single-cell activity in primary visual cortex (V1), especially excelling on small
datasets with fewer recorded neurons. Using ablation studies, we demonstrate that
MEIs are the main drivers of the performance, and in scaling experiments, we show
that MEIcoder can reconstruct high-fidelity natural-looking images from as few as
1,000-2,500 neurons and less than 1,000 training data points. We also propose a
unified benchmark with over 160,000 samples to foster future research. Our results
demonstrate the feasibility of reliable decoding in early visual system and provide
practical insights for neuroscience and neuroengineering applications.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in machine learning (ML), together with advances in collecting single-cell brain
activity data, has enabled powerful data-driven approaches to model the brain. The dominant approach
is to use ML models to characterize the stimulus-response function, i.e., to predict brain activity in
response to external variables (encoding), such as visual stimuli [2, 9, 24, 27, 28, 46]. The inverse
problem of decoding high-fidelity stimuli from brain activity started to garner attention only relatively
recently [6, 8, 18, 23, 33, 37]. One of the main reasons for this is the inherent difficulty of decoding
high-information content, such as images, from a small number of neurons that provide a highly
compressed and noisy version of the original stimulus [21]. This inverse problem is exaggerated
by the scarcity of single-subject data, which is necessary to accurately capture the unique responsestimulus mapping of the subject’s visual system. Therefore, there is a need for decoding techniques
that can learn from limited training examples and from a small number of recorded neurons.
However, training machine learning models from scratch on such scarce single-subject data tends to
yield low-fidelity image reconstructions that lack sufficient detail [18, 33, 51]. Conversely, leveraging
pre-trained models, particularly those from the field of Generative AI (GenAI), provides highresolution but unreliable reconstructions, often containing hallucinated content [31, 35, 37]. Indeed,
as [39] and our results in subsection 4.5 show, prior decoding methods employing (text-guided) GenAI
are heavily biased toward their pre-training distribution of semantically rich images. This leads
to deceptively realistic, yet often pixel-level inaccurate, image reconstructions that do not capture
∗

Correspondence to: jan.sobotka@epfl.ch

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

