Deferring Concept Bottleneck Models:
Learning to Defer Interventions to Inaccurate Experts

Andrea Pugnana∗
University of Trento

Riccardo Massidda∗
University of Pisa

Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga
University of Cambridge
University of Oxford

Francesco Giannini
Scuola Normale Superiore

Roberto Pellungrini
Scuola Normale Superiore

Fosca Giannotti
Scuola Normale Superiore

Pietro Barbiero
IBM Research

Gabriele Dominici
USI

Davide Bacciu
University of Pisa

Abstract
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) are interpretable machine learning models
that ground their predictions on human-understandable concepts, allowing for
targeted interventions in their decision-making process. However, when intervened
on, CBMs assume the availability of humans that can identify the need to intervene
and always provide correct interventions. Both assumptions are unrealistic and impractical, considering labor costs and human error-proneness. In contrast, Learning
to Defer (L2D) extends supervised learning by allowing machine learning models
to identify cases where a human is more likely to be correct than the model, thus
leading to deferring systems with improved performance. In this work, we gain
inspiration from L2D and propose Deferring CBMs (DCBMs), a novel framework
that allows CBMs to learn when an intervention is needed. To this end, we model
DCBMs as a composition of deferring systems and derive a consistent L2D loss to
train them. Moreover, by relying on a CBM architecture, DCBMs can explain the
reasons for deferring on the final task. Our results show that DCBMs can achieve
high predictive performance and interpretability by deferring only when needed.

1

Introduction

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [Koh et al., 2020] are a family of interpretable machine learning
(ML) models that incorporate human-interpretable concepts as part of their training and predictive
process. At test time, CBMs enable experts to correct any of their intermediate concepts’ values,
potentially triggering a change to the CBM’s task prediction. This fosters a collaborative interaction
between humans and AI systems, where a CBM may improve its accuracy when deployed with
the support of an expert. However, CBMs suffer from a few shortcomings: first, increasing interpretability often comes at the expense of predictive accuracy, leading to an interpretability-accuracy
trade-off [Zarlenga et al., 2022]; second, CBMs often assume that their set of concepts can fully
predict the final task (i.e., they are complete [Yeh et al., 2020]); third, CBMs assume that human
interventions are infallible, an over-simplification that does not reflect the real world where human
experts may introduce errors, be unaware of their own potential weaknesses, and have a specific
sub-expertise [Rastogi et al., 2022]. These practical limitations muddle the effects and dynamics of
the human-AI collaboration expected when using CBMs.
∗

Equal Contribution (andrea.pugnana@unitn.it, riccardo.massidda@di.unipi.it).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

