Multi-head Transformers Provably Learn Symbolic
Multi-step Reasoning via Gradient Descent

Tong Yang˚
CMU

Huang Yu:
UPenn

Yingbin Liang;
OSU

Yuejie Chi§
Yale

Abstract
Transformers have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in multi-step reasoning
tasks. However, understandings of the underlying mechanisms by which they
acquire these abilities through training remain limited, particularly from a theoretical standpoint. This work investigates how transformers learn to solve symbolic
multi-step reasoning problems through chain-of-thought processes, focusing on
path-finding in trees. We analyze two intertwined tasks: a backward reasoning task,
where the model outputs a path from a goal node to the root, and a more complex
forward reasoning task, where the model implements two-stage reasoning by first
identifying the goal-to-root path and then reversing it to produce the root-to-goal
path. Our theoretical analysis, grounded in the dynamics of gradient descent, shows
that trained one-layer transformers can provably solve both tasks with generalization guarantees to unseen trees. In particular, our multi-phase training dynamics
for forward reasoning elucidate how different attention heads learn to specialize
and coordinate autonomously to solve the two subtasks in a single autoregressive
path. These results provide a mechanistic explanation of how trained transformers
can implement sequential algorithmic procedures. Moreover, they offer insights
into the emergence of reasoning abilities, suggesting that when tasks are structured
to take intermediate chain-of-thought steps, even shallow multi-head transformers
can effectively solve problems that would otherwise require deeper architectures.

1

Introduction

Transformers [30]—the building blocks of large language models (LLMs)—have demonstrated
impressive capabilities in tasks that require multi-step reasoning [32], where LLMs start to excel
in solving hard problems via taking simpler step-by-step actions, and executing different subtasks
within a single response. Many of these capabilities are further fueled by the remarkable phenomenon
called emergence of reasoning ability, where simply extending the length of intermediate reasoning
steps can dramatically boost accuracy [10].
Spurred by their remarkable success, understanding how transformers enable Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
and multi-step reasoning has attracted considerable research attention recently. Most of the theoretical
studies on the multi-step reasoning mechanism focus on the expressive power [9, 23, 25, 5], statistical
properties [12, 28, 22] or learnability [1, 11, 34, 29, 19, 2] of the CoT mechanism. Notwithstanding,
the training theory of transformers, which examines the optimization and generalization properties of
transformers trained via gradient-based methods, is another important direction for understanding
˚

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University; email:
tongyang@andrew.cmu.edu
:
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania; email:
yuh42@wharton.upenn.edu
;
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University; email: liang.889@osu.edu
§
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University; email: yuejie.chi@yale.edu
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

