NoisyRollout: Reinforcing Visual Reasoning
with Data Augmentation

Xiangyan Liu*1
1

Jinjie Ni*1 Zijian Wu*1 Chao Du2 Longxu Dou2
Tianyu Pang†2 Michael Qizhe Shieh1

National University of Singapore

2

Sea AI Lab

Code

Haonan Wang1

Collection

Abstract
Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) have strengthened the reasoning
capabilities of vision-language models (VLMs). However, enhancing policy exploration to better scale test-time compute remains largely underexplored. In addition,
VLMs continue to struggle with imperfect visual perception, which in turn affects
the subsequent reasoning process. We introduce NoisyRollout, a simple yet effective data augmentation method that addresses these issues by mixing training
trajectories from both clean and moderately distorted images. This approach injects
perceptual diversity, encouraging better policy exploration and leading to more
robust reasoning. A noise annealing schedule gradually reduces distortion strength,
aiding exploration early in training while ensuring later stability. Crucially, our
method is easy-to-adopt—requiring no additional training cost and no modifications to the RL objective. Extensive experiments on 2 distinct training datasets
demonstrate that NoisyRollout achieves state-of-the-art performance among opensource RL-tuned models across 5 out-of-domain reasoning and perception benchmarks. Furthermore, we validate the effectiveness of NoisyRollout across model
sizes (7B and 32B), data scales (from 1K to 6K) and image augmentation types
(Gaussion noise and rotation), highlighting its generalizability and scalability.
Policy Update

Policy
Model

Reward
Model

Group
Computation

Figure 1: An Illustration of the NoisyRollout workflow. Solid lines depict the generation and use of
clean rollouts from the clean (original) input (I, q), while dashed lines depict the generation and
˜ q). The distorted image I˜ is obtained
use of noisy rollouts from the corresponding noisy input (I,
by applying a distortion function I˜ = Tαt (I) with distortion strength αt . The distortion level αt
is controlled by a noise annealing schedule, which gradually decreases distortion during training.
1 +n2
1 +n2
Rollouts from both sources are mixed to form the final trajectories {oi }ni=1
, rewards {ri }ni=1
,
n1 +n2
and advantages {Ai }i=1
. Crucially, policy optimization conditions only on clean inputs (I, q);
˜ q) are used solely to collect diverse rollouts for exploration.
the corresponding noisy inputs (I,
*Equal contribution. † Correspondence to Tianyu Pang.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

