TADA: Improved Diffusion Sampling with
Training-free Augmented DynAmics

Tianrong Chen, Huangjie Zheng, David Berthelot, Jiatao Gu, Josh Susskind, Shuangfei Zhai
Apple
{tchen54,huangjie_zheng,dberthelot,jgu32, jsusskind,szhai}@apple.com

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated exceptional capabilities in generating highfidelity images but typically suffer from inefficient sampling. Many solver designs
and noise scheduling strategies have been proposed to dramatically improve sampling speeds. In this paper, we introduce a new sampling method that is up to 186%
faster than the current state of the art solver for comparative FID on ImageNet512.
This new sampling method is training-free and uses an ordinary differential equation (ODE) solver. The key to our method resides in using higher-dimensional
initial noise, allowing to produce more detailed samples with less function evaluations from existing pretrained diffusion models. In addition, by design our
solver allows to control the level of detail through a simple hyper-parameter at
no extra computational cost. We present how our approach leverages momentum dynamics by establishing a fundamental equivalence between momentum
diffusion models and conventional diffusion models with respect to their training
paradigms. Moreover, we observe the use of higher-dimensional noise naturally
exhibits characteristics similar to stochastic differential equations (SDEs). Finally,
we demonstrate strong performances on a set of representative pretrained diffusion
models, including EDM, EDM2, and Stable-Diffusion 3, which cover models in
both pixel and latent spaces, as well as class and text conditional settings. The code
is available at https://github.com/apple/ml-tada.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Models (DMs; Song et al. [27]; Ho et al. [14]) and Flow Matching [20, 21] are foundational
techniques in generative modeling, widely recognized for their impressive scalability and capability
to generate high-resolution, high-fidelity images [4, 10, 24]. Both share a common underlying
mathematical structure and generate data by iteratively denoising Gaussian noise through a solver.
Sampling from a diffusion model is typically discretized through a multi-step noise schedule. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models sample new noise at every step resulting in a process interpretable
as discretized solutions of diffusion Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs). Meanwhile, Denoising
Diffusion Implicit Models only sample initial noise which is reused at every step resulting in a process
interpretable as discretized solutions of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs). Both ODE and
SDE solvers should perform similarly since they merely represent different interpretations of the
same Fokker-Planck Partial Differential Equation. In practice, however, ODE solvers often yield
lower-fidelity results than SDE solvers as evidenced by the FID scores in [17] when sufficient
function evaluations are performed and model capacity is a limiting factor. On the other hand, SDE
solvers require finer steps due to the noise injection at every step, which gets amplified through
discretization.
Generating high-quality images using DMs often necessitates a high number of steps and therefore
a high Number of Function Evaluations (NFEs), substantially increasing computational costs com39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

