Interpretable Next-token Prediction
via the Generalized Induction Head

Weiwei Yang1

Eunji Kim1,2∗

Sriya Mantena1,3∗

Chandan Singh1

Sungroh Yoon2,4†

Jianfeng Gao1†

1

2

Microsoft Research
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
3
Stanford University
4
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University

Abstract
While large transformer models excel in predictive performance, their lack of
interpretability restricts their usefulness in high-stakes domains. To remedy this,
we propose the Generalized Induction-Head Model (GIM), an interpretable model
for next-token prediction inspired by the observation of “induction heads” in
LLMs. GIM is a retrieval-based module that identifies similar sequences in
the input context by combining exact n-gram matching and fuzzy matching
based on a neural similarity metric. We evaluate GIM in two settings: language modeling and fMRI response prediction. In language modeling, GIM
improves next-token prediction by up to 25%p over interpretable baselines, significantly narrowing the gap with black-box LLMs. In an fMRI setting, GIM
improves neural response prediction by 20% and offers insight into the language selectivity of the brain. GIM represents a significant step toward uniting interpretability and performance across domains. The code is available at
https://github.com/ejkim47/generalized-induction-head.

1

Introduction

While modern transformer models have achieved impressive performance across a wide array of
next-token prediction tasks [1–3], these models remain black-boxes, limiting their use in real-world
applications. Their opacity is detrimental in fields such as neuroscience [4] and social science [5],
where trustworthy interpretation, specifically, token-level attribution that traces outputs back to input
data, is often the end goal. Their lack of transparency also hinders adoption in high-stakes applications
such as medicine [6], raising concerns around regulatory compliance, safety, and alignment [7–10].
As an alternative to these black-box models, interpretable models have been proposed for various
tasks [11–13], but they continue to struggle on the task of next-token prediction. For example, in
next-token prediction for natural language, the state-of-the-art interpretable model is Infini-gram [14],
which trails GPT-2 by 30%p on the BabyLM dataset (see Table 1). Our analysis suggests that this
performance gap stems from Infini-gram’s inability to adapt to novel contexts or handle minor input
variations such as typos and rephrasings.
∗
†

Equal contribution. Work conducted during an internship at Microsoft Research.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

