Role Bias in Diffusion Models: Diagnosing and
Mitigating through Intermediate Decomposition

Sina Malakouti
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA
sem238@pitt.edu

Adriana Kovashka
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA
kovashka@cs.pitt.edu

https://sinamalakouti.github.io/ReBind/

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models exhibit impressive photorealistic image generation capabilities, yet they struggle in compositional image generation. In this
work, we introduce RoleBench, a benchmark focused on evaluating compositional
generalization in action-based relations (e.g., “mouse chasing cat”). We show that
state-of-the-art T2I models and compositional generation methods consistently
default to frequent reversed relations (i.e., “cat chasing mouse”), a phenomenon
we call role collapse. Related works attribute this to the model’s architectural limitation or underrepresentation in the data. Our key insight reveals that while models
fail on rare compositions when their inversions are common, they can successfully
generate similar intermediate compositions (e.g., “mouse chasing boy”), suggesting
that this limitation is also due to the presence of frequent counterparts rather than
just the absence of rare compositions. Motivated by this, we hypothesize that
directional decomposition can gradually mitigate role collapse. We test this via
ReBind, a lightweight framework that teaches role bindings using carefully selected
active/passive intermediate compositions. Experiments suggest that intermediate
compositions through simple fine-tuning can significantly reduce role collapse,
with humans preferring ReBind more than 78% compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our findings highlight the role of distributional asymmetries in compositional
failures and offer a simple, effective path for improving generalization.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models generate high-quality, photorealistic images from text, yet
they struggle with spatial understanding, complex descriptions, attribute binding, and compositional
generation [Chatterjee et al., 2024, Samuel et al., 2024, Cong et al., 2025, Trusca et al., 2024, Zeng
et al., 2023]. Existing methods improve spatial reasoning and attribute binding through attention
manipulation [Chefer et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2024], layout conditioning [Li et al., 2023, Feng
et al., 2023b], and LLM-based methods [Lian et al., 2024, Yang et al., 2024, Wu et al., 2024a].
However, these approaches are typically evaluated on simple spatial relations (e.g., left/right) and basic
attributes (e.g., color and size), leaving their ability to generalize to rare (unseen) compositions
underexplored.
We explore a more challenging form of compositional generalization: action-based relations
with unusual directions, i.e., where typical agent-patient roles are reversed (e.g., “mouse chasing
cat”). Prior works have mainly studied static compositions involving rare objects and/or unusual
attributes [Samuel et al., 2024, Cong et al., 2025, Park et al., 2025]. In contrast, we focus on
dynamic action-based relations that require correct role binding between subject (agent) and object
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

