Reasoning Path Compression: Compressing
Generation Trajectories for Efficient LLM Reasoning

Jiwon Song 1 Dongwon Jo 1 Yulhwa Kim 2 ∗ Jae-Joon Kim 1∗
1
Seoul National University 2 Sungkyunkwan University
{jiwon.song, dongwonjo, kimjaejoon}@snu.ac.kr
{yulhwakim}@skku.edu

Abstract
Recent reasoning-focused language models achieve high accuracy by generating
lengthy intermediate reasoning paths before producing final answers. While this
approach is effective in solving problems that require logical thinking, long reasoning paths significantly increase memory usage and reduce throughput of token
generation, limiting the practical deployment of such models. We propose Reasoning Path Compression (RPC), a training-free method that accelerates inference by
leveraging the semantic sparsity of reasoning paths. RPC periodically compresses
the KV cache by retaining cache entries that receive high importance score, which
are computed using a selector window composed of recently generated queries.
Experiments show that RPC improves generation throughput of QwQ-32B by up to
1.60× compared to the inference with full KV cache, with an accuracy drop of 1.2%
on the AIME 2024 benchmark. Our findings demonstrate that semantic sparsity in
reasoning traces can be effectively exploited for compression, offering a practical
path toward efficient deployment of reasoning LLMs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/jiwonsong-dev/ReasoningPathCompression.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) equipped with reasoning capabilities have expanded the application
of LLMs beyond simple natural language processing tasks to complex problem-solving tasks such as
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) reasoning and code generation. Early
reasoning approaches primarily focused on guiding LLMs through explicit step-by-step logic to
facilitate more interpretable and accurate outcomes [1]. Recently, advanced reasoning LLMs, such
as OpenAI o1 [2], DeepSeek-R1 [3], adopted the concept of test-time compute scaling [4, 5]. This
method involves generating longer, iterative reasoning outputs, which significantly enhance accuracy.
Such iterative generation allows models to carefully evaluate intermediate reasoning steps, refine
outputs through internal reflection, and ultimately handle tasks requiring complex reasoning.
Though reasoning LLMs have been widely adopted due to their ability to handle complex tasks
through complicated reasoning processes, reasoning LLMs face challenges in inference efficiency
due to their tendency to generate long reasoning sequences. The long token sequences required for
detailed reasoning processes substantially increase the KV cache overhead during inference. For
example, the reasoning path of OpenAI’s o3-mini-high can exceed 50K tokens [6], and Claude 3.7
Sonnet [7] supports reasoning sequences of up to 64K tokens. Such a long token generation imposes
critical memory and computational overhead, significantly slowing down inference. Consequently, it
is crucial to develop KV cache compression techniques to mitigate these inference efficiency issues
and support practical deployment of reasoning LLMs.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

