Vision Function Layer in Multimodal LLMs

1

Cheng Shi1,2∗, Yizhou Yu2 , Sibei Yang1†
Sun Yat-sen University, School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
shicheng2025@connect.hku.hk, yizhouy@acm.org, yangsb3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

https://github.com/ChengShiest/Vision-Function-Layer

Abstract
This study identifies that visual-related functional decoding is distributed across
different decoder layers in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Typically, each function, such as counting, grounding, or OCR recognition, narrows
down to two or three layers, which we define as Vision Function Layers (VFL).
Additionally, the depth and its order of different VFLs exhibits a consistent pattern
across different MLLMs, which is well-aligned with human behaviors (e.g., recognition occurs first, followed by counting, and then grounding). These findings are
derived from Visual Token Swapping, our novel analytical framework that modifies
targeted KV cache entries to precisely elucidate layer-specific functions during
decoding. Furthermore, these insights offer substantial utility in tailoring MLLMs
for real-world downstream applications. For instance, when LoRA training is
selectively applied to VFLs whose functions align with the training data, VFLLoRA not only outperform full-LoRA but also prevent out-of-domain function
forgetting. Moreover, by analyzing the performance differential on training data
when particular VFLs are ablated, VFL-select automatically classifies data by
function, enabling highly efficient data selection to directly bolster corresponding
capabilities. Consequently, VFL-select surpasses human experts in data selection,
and achieves 98% of full-data performance with only 20% of the original dataset.
This study delivers deeper comprehension of MLLM visual processing, fostering
the creation of more efficient, interpretable, and robust models.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs)[2, 3, 8, 17, 47, 55, 57, 59, 60], built on deep transformer layers [61],
have become the dominant paradigm in natural language processing, demonstrating remarkable
versatility and human-level performance across diverse tasks [16, 45, 53, 56, 69]. Recent studies [11,
38, 44] further reveal that frontier LLMs develop hierarchical internal structures and problem-solving
strategies analogous to human cognition, in which simple features are combined into complex
representations and tasks are decomposed into sub-components. Understanding these mechanisms
has become central to improving interpretability [20, 32], efficiency [11, 76], and driving architectural
advances like Mixture of Experts [1, 15, 66].
Extending LLMs, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [3, 6, 7, 23, 64] achieve joint
text-vision understanding and reasoning by processing integrated visual and textual inputs. Through
supervised fine-tuning on vision instruction data, these MLLMs have progressed beyond simple
image captioning to address diverse tasks requiring visual perception and understanding. However,
despite these remarkable advancements in visual understanding capabilities, the internal workings
of these MLLMs—particularly how they process and reason with vision tokens—remain largely
∗
†

Work done during Cheng’s internship at SYSU.
Corresponding author is Sibei Yang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

