ConfTuner: Training Large Language Models to
Express Their Confidence Verbally

Yibo Li
National University of Singapore
liyibo@u.nus.edu

Miao Xiong
National University of Singapore
miao.xiong@u.nus.edu

Jiaying Wu
National University of Singapore
jiayingwu@u.nus.edu

Bryan Hooi
National University of Singapore
bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed in high-stakes domains
such as science, law, and healthcare, where accurate expressions of uncertainty
are essential for reliability and trust. However, current LLMs are often observed
to generate incorrect answers with high confidence—a phenomenon known as
“overconfidence”. Recent efforts have focused on calibrating LLMs’ verbalized
confidence: i.e., their expressions of confidence in text form, such as “I am 80% confident that...”. Existing approaches either rely on prompt engineering or fine-tuning
with heuristically generated uncertainty estimates, both of which have limited effectiveness and generalizability. Motivated by the notion of proper scoring rules for
calibration in classical machine learning models, we introduce ConfTuner, a simple
and efficient fine-tuning method that introduces minimal overhead and does not
require ground-truth confidence scores or proxy confidence estimates. ConfTuner
relies on a new loss function, tokenized Brier score, which we theoretically prove to
be a proper scoring rule, intuitively meaning that it “correctly incentivizes the model
to report its true probability of being correct”. ConfTuner improves calibration
across diverse reasoning tasks and generalizes to black-box models such as GPT-4o.
Our results further show that better-calibrated confidence enables downstream gains
in self-correction and model cascade, advancing the development of trustworthy
LLM systems. The code is available at https://github.com/liushiliushi/ConfTuner.

1

Introduction

A large language model’s (LLM) ability to recognize and communicate uncertainty through verbalized
confidence–that is, expressions of confidence conveyed in natural language, such as “I am 80
percent confident that...” [22]–is central to effective human–AI collaboration [20]. This capability is
particularly important in high-stakes domains such as scientific inquiry [1], law [19], and healthcare
[21], where decision quality and interpretability are essential. However, current LLMs are not
explicitly trained to express calibrated uncertainty. As a result, they often report very high confidence
even when producing hallucinated or incorrect content [14, 28, 13, 32]. This overconfidence problem
undermines trust and poses serious challenges for the safe deployment of LLMs (Figure 1).
Recent efforts [30, 32, 22, 33, 29] have focused on improving the elicitation of verbalized confidence
from LLMs. Prompt-based methods rely on carefully crafted instructions [30, 32], but have shown
limited effects in improving calibration [30, 32]. Alternatively, training-based approaches fine-tune
LLMs on synthetic datasets annotated with uncertainty estimates. Due to the lack of ground truth
confidence scores, current methods typically rely on heuristically generated proxy scores as targets,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

