Recursive Transformer: Boosting Reasoning Ability
with State Stack
Kechi Zhang1,2 , Ge Li1,2∗, Jia Li3 , Huangzhao Zhang,
Yihong Dong1,2 , Jia Li4 , Jingjing Xu5 , Zhi Jin1,2,3∗
1
Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technology (PKU), Ministry of Education
2
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
4
College of AI, Tsinghua University
5
ByteDance
{zhangkechi,lige,zhijin}@pku.edu.cn, zhijin@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
The Transformer architecture has emerged as a landmark advancement within
the broad field of artificial intelligence, effectively catalyzing the advent of large
language models (LLMs). However, despite its remarkable capabilities and the
substantial progress it has facilitated, the Transformer architecture still has some
limitations. One such intrinsic limitation is its inability to effectively recognize
regular expressions or deterministic context-free grammars. Standard Transformers
lack an explicit mechanism for recursion and structured state transitions, which
can hinder systematic generalization on nested and hierarchical patterns. Drawing inspiration from pushdown automata, which efficiently resolve deterministic
context-free grammars using stacks, we equip layers with a differentiable stack and
propose S TACK T RANS with recursion to address the aforementioned issue within
LLMs. Unlike previous approaches that modify the attention computation, S TACK T RANS explicitly incorporates hidden state stacks between Transformer layers.
This design maintains compatibility with existing frameworks like flash-attention.
Specifically, our design features stack operations – such as pushing and popping
hidden states – that are differentiable and can be learned in an end-to-end manner.
Our comprehensive evaluation spans benchmarks for both Chomsky hierarchy and
large-scale natural languages. Across these diverse tasks, S TACK T RANS consistently outperforms standard Transformer models and other baselines. We have
successfully scaled S TACK T RANS up from 360M to 7B parameters. In particular,
our from-scratch pretrained model S TACK T RANS-360M outperforms several larger
open-source LLMs with 2–3× more parameters, showcasing its superior efficiency
and reasoning capability.

1

Introduction

In the era of large language models (LLMs) [GPT-4, 2023], the Transformer architecture has emerged
as the nearly universal backbone, achieving remarkable success across various domains and beyond
[Bi et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a]. However, recent empirical studies [Delétang
et al., 2022; Hahn, 2020] have demonstrated that Transformers struggle with tasks involving Chomsky hierarchy [Chomsky, 1956], such as regular expressions (REs) and deterministic context-free
grammars (DCFs) with hierarchical/recursive structure. In formal language theory, deterministic
context-free languages are a proper subset of context-free languages. For example, in an RE match* Ge Li and Zhi Jin are the corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

