RefLoRA: Refactored Low-Rank Adaptation
for Efficient Fine-Tuning of Large Models

Yilang Zhang
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55414
zhan7453@umn.edu

Bingcong Li
Department of CS
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
bingcong.li@inf.ethz.ch

Georgios B. Giannakis
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55414
georgios@umn.edu

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) lowers the computational and memory overhead
of fine-tuning large models by updating a low-dimensional subspace of the pretrained weight matrix. Albeit efficient, LoRA exhibits suboptimal convergence and
noticeable performance degradation, due to inconsistent and imbalanced weight
updates induced by its nonunique low-rank factorizations. To overcome these
limitations, this article identifies the optimal low-rank factorization per step that
minimizes an upper bound on the loss. The resultant refactored low-rank adaptation (RefLoRA) method promotes a flatter loss landscape, along with consistent
and balanced weight updates, thus speeding up stable convergence. Extensive
experiments evaluate RefLoRA on natural language understanding, and commonsense reasoning tasks with popular large language models including DeBERTaV3,
LLaMA-7B, LLaMA2-7B and LLaMA3-8B. The numerical tests corroborate that
RefLoRA converges faster, outperforms various benchmarks, and enjoys negligible
computational overhead compared to state-of-the-art LoRA variants.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized a wide spectrum of applications including
chatbots [1], code generation [8], and scientific discovery [55]. Despite their success, adapting
LLMs to specific tasks remains computationally demanding. LLMs are built on a two-stage learning
process, namely pre-training and fine-tuning. Pre-training is performed on massive, Internet-scale
corpora. This endows LLMs with in-text comprehension and generation abilities, but results in
models with billions to trillions parameters [1, 17]. Though broad language capabilities are granted,
pre-trained LLMs are yet not tailored for specialized applications. To acquire domain-specific
expertise, LLMs must be further trained on downstream tasks, what is known as fine-tuning. With the
continually growing model size however, conventional full fine-tuning approaches (optimizing all
model parameters) can be increasingly prohibitive due to the immense GPU memory and substantial
computational capacity demands, rendering them impossible for individual users and organizations.
To tackle the computational bottleneck, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [22] has been investigated to enhance fine-tuning efficiency. As opposed to fully fine-tuning all parameters, PEFT methods
either optimize a sparse subset [18, 54], or introduce additional lightweight trainable parameters
while keeping the pre-trained ones frozen [22, 46, 36, 29, 33]. Among these approaches, low-rank
adaptation (LoRA) [23] has gained popularity due to its low additional cost during inference. LoRA
presumes that the parameter updates during fine-tuning lie on a low-dimensional manifold, and thus
can be captured by a low-rank matrix. Though effective, LoRA is observed to suffer from challenges
such as slow and unstable convergence [41], inconsistent and unbalanced weight updates [67, 20], and
notable performance gaps relative to full fine-tuning [23]. One key reason behind these challenges is
the nonuniqueness of LoRA’s low-rank factorization [67].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

