Continual Multimodal Contrastive Learning

Xiaohao Liu

Xiaobo Xia∗ See-Kiong Ng Tat-Seng Chua
National University of Singapore

xiaohao.liu@u.nus.edu

{xbx, seekiong, dcscts}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Multimodal Contrastive Learning (MCL) advances in aligning different modalities and generating multimodal representations in a joint space. By leveraging
contrastive learning across diverse modalities, large-scale multimodal data enhances representational quality. However, a critical yet often overlooked challenge remains: multimodal data is rarely collected in a single process, and training from scratch is computationally expensive. Instead, emergent multimodal data
can be used to optimize existing models gradually, i.e., models are trained on a sequence of modality pair data. We define this problem as Continual Multimodal
Contrastive Learning (CMCL), an underexplored yet crucial research direction
at the intersection of multimodal and continual learning. In this paper, we formulate CMCL through two specialized principles of stability and plasticity. We
theoretically derive a novel optimization-based method, which projects updated
gradients from dual sides onto subspaces where any gradient is prevented from
interfering with the previously learned knowledge. Two upper bounds provide
theoretical insights on both stability and plasticity in our solution. Beyond our
theoretical contributions, we conduct experiments on multiple datasets by comparing our method against advanced continual learning baselines. The empirical
results further support our claims and demonstrate the efficacy of our method. Our
codes are available at https://github.com/Xiaohao-Liu/CMCL.

1

Introduction

Humans perceive the world in a multimodal way. They capture and process information from
what they see, hear, smell, and touch. Machines are evolving towards multisensory processing
to mimic this capability by leveraging specialized latent representations to interpret the world effectively [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Multimodal contrastive learning (MCL) builds upon unimodal [6, 7, 8] and
cross-modal contrastive learning [9, 10], which demonstrates exceptional representational power
and broad applicability. The core principle behind it is to bring modality pairs (e.g., vision-text or
vision-audio data) from the same instance closer together while simultaneously pushing apart representations of different instances. Consequently, MCL constructs a unified representation space yet
capable of accommodating diverse modalities [11, 12, 13, 14].
Extensive data support is critical for ensuring representational quality. Recent studies have focused
on either compensating to the existing modality data [13, 14] or introducing the emergent ones [15].
Besides learning from scratch, collected data can also be incrementally introduced to gradually
enhance a model’s capabilities, thereby resolving two significant challenges: 1) the difficulty of
collecting all prepared multimodal data in a single process, and 2) the high computational expense
associated with training on mixed datasets from initialization. With the emergent multimodal data,
multimodal models can be progressively elevated via continual/incremental learning. Unfortunately,
recent research in MCL primarily advances in an “all in one go” manner. Moreover, it is intractable
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

