Bilevel Optimization for Adversarial Learning
Problems: Sharpness, Generation, and Beyond
Risheng Liu† , Zhu Liu† , Weihao Mao‡ , Wei Yao‡§ , Jin Zhang‡§¶∗
†
School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology
‡
Mathematical Department, Southern University of Science and Technology
§
National Center for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen
¶
Detection Institute for Advanced Technology Longhua-Shenzhen (DIATLHSZ)
rsliu@dlut.edu.cn, liuzhu@mail.dlut.edu.cn, mwhaea123456@google.com,
yaow@sustech.edu.cn, zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial learning is a widely used paradigm in machine learning, often formulated as a min-max optimization problem where the inner maximization imposes adversarial constraints to guide the outer learner toward more robust solutions. This framework underlies methods such as Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). However, traditional
gradient-based approaches to such problems often face challenges in balancing
accuracy and efﬁciency due to second-order complexities. In this paper, we propose a bilevel optimization framework that reformulates these adversarial learning
problems by leveraging the tractability of the lower-level problem. The bilevel
framework introduces no additional complexity and enables the use of advanced
bilevel tools. We further develop a provably convergent single-loop stochastic
algorithm that effectively balances learning accuracy and computational cost. Extensive experiments show that our method improves generation quality of GANs,
and consistently achieves higher accuracy for SAM under label noise and across
various backbones, while promoting ﬂatter loss landscapes. Overall, this work
provides a practical and theoretically grounded framework for solving adversarial
learning tasks through bilevel optimization.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, adversarial learning has attracted considerable attention due to its broad applicability
in machine learning, particularly in addressing fairness and robustness. Typically formulated as
a min-max optimization problem [46, 80, 16], adversarial learning involves maximizing an inner
objective to impose adversarial constraints, thereby guiding the outer learner toward more robust
solutions. This framework underpins a wide range of applications. In Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8, 33, 41, 66, 77, 79], a generator (minimizer) and discriminator (maximizer) compete to improve the quality of synthetic data. In Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) [2, 68, 69],
adversarial perturbations on model parameters encourage optimization in ﬂatter loss regions. In adversarial training [62, 46, 1, 80], input-space attacks are maximized to enhance model robustness
against perturbations. These examples highlight the foundational role of adversarial learning across
various domains.
Despite the widespread adoption and their empirical success, the traditional min-max framework
introduces signiﬁcant challenges for scalability, primarily because each training step involves
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

