Optimal Online Change Detection via
Random Fourier Features
Florian Kalinke∗
Information Systems
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
florian.kalinke@kit.edu

Shakeel Gavioli-Akilagun*
Department of Decision Analytics and Operations
City University Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
sgavioli@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This article studies the problem of online non-parametric change point detection
in multivariate data streams. We approach the problem through the lens of kernelbased two-sample testing and introduce a sequential testing procedure based on
random Fourier features, running with logarithmic time complexity per observation
and with overall logarithmic space complexity. The algorithm has two advantages
compared to the state of the art. First, our approach is genuinely online, and no
access to training data known to be from the pre-change distribution is necessary.
Second, the algorithm does not require the user to specify a window parameter over
which local tests are to be calculated. We prove strong theoretical guarantees on the
algorithm’s performance, including information-theoretic bounds demonstrating
that the detection delay is optimal in the minimax sense. Numerical studies on real
and synthetic data show that our algorithm is competitive with respect to the state
of the art.

1

Introduction

In the online change point detection problem, data is observed sequentially, and the goal is to flag
a change if the distribution of the data changes. The problem dates back to the early work of Page
[43], and has now been extensively studied in the statistics and machine learning literature [30, 3, 52].
However, these classical approaches assume that the data are low-dimensional and that the preand post-change distributions belong to a known parametric family. In modern applications, both
assumptions are usually not satisfied. Examples of modern online change point detection problems
include: detecting changes in audio streams [4], in videos [1, 25], in highway traffic data [15], in
internet traffic data [31], or in cardiac time series [61]. Further, such data frequently has high volume,
and online change point detection procedures should still be able to process new data in real time and
with limited memory.
While algorithms for the problem of non-parametric online change point detection have been
proposed—see Section 2 for a brief overview—state-of-the-art methods suitable for modern data
suffer from at least one of the following two limitations. First, most procedures are not genuinely
online from a statistical perspective, in the sense that they either assume the pre-change distribution to
be known completely or they assume having access to historical data known to be from the pre-change
distribution. Second, most approaches require the user to specify a window parameter over which
local tests for a change in distribution will be applied. Choosing such a window is notoriously difficult
[47], and choosing the window too small or too large leads to a reduction in power or an increase
in the detection delay, respectively. Moreover, the window size imposes a limit on the historic data
considered, rendering detecting sufficiently small changes impossible.
∗

Contributed equally.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

