Brain Harmony: A Multimodal Foundation Model
Unifying Morphology and Function into 1D Tokens
Zijian Dong∗1 Ruilin Li∗1,2 Joanna Su Xian Chong1 Niousha Dehestani1 Yinghui Teng1
Yi Lin1 Zhizhou Li1 Yichi Zhang1 Yapei Xie1 Leon Qi Rong Ooi1 B.T. Thomas Yeo1
Juan Helen Zhou†1
1

National University of Singapore
2
Now at MiroMind AI

Abstract
We present Brain Harmony (BrainHarmonix), the first multimodal brain foundation model that unifies structural morphology and functional dynamics into
compact 1D token representations. The model was pretrained on two of the largest
neuroimaging datasets to date, encompassing 64,594 T1-weighted structural MRI
3D volumes (~14 million images) and 70,933 functional MRI (fMRI) time series. BrainHarmonix is grounded in two foundational neuroscience principles:
structure complements function - structural and functional modalities offer distinct yet synergistic insights into brain organization; function follows structure brain functional dynamics are shaped by cortical morphology. The modular pretraining process involves single-modality training with geometric pre-alignment
followed by modality fusion through shared brain hub tokens. Notably, our dynamics encoder uniquely handles fMRI time series with heterogeneous repetition
times (TRs), addressing a major limitation in existing models. BrainHarmonix
is also the first to deeply compress high-dimensional neuroimaging signals into
unified, continuous 1D tokens, forming a compact latent space of the human brain.
BrainHarmonix achieves strong generalization across diverse downstream tasks,
including neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorder classification and
cognition prediction - consistently outperforming previous approaches. Our models
- pretrained on 8 H100 GPUs - aim to catalyze a new era of AI-driven neuroscience powered by large-scale multimodal neuroimaging. Code is available at:
https://github.com/hzlab/Brain-Harmony

1

Introduction

The human brain is an extraordinarily complex organ, characterized by intricate anatomical architecture and dynamic functional processes. To investigate these aspects in vivo, researchers rely
on neuroimaging techniques that probe brain structure and function. However, each neuroimaging
modality captures only a single facet of this multifaceted system [1, 2, 3]. This limitation highlights
the necessity of multimodal neuroimaging approaches that combine complementary information (e.g.,
both structural and functional) to offer a holistic understanding of human cognition and improve
clinical applications.
Recent advances in brain foundation models have transformed Artificial Intelligence (AI) for neuroimaging analysis from task-specific approaches to self-supervised pretrained models capable of
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: helen.zhou@nus.edu.sg

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

