Spatial-MLLM: Boosting MLLM Capabilities in
Visual-based Spatial Intelligence

Diankun Wu ∗
Tsinghua University

Fangfu Liu ∗
Tsinghua University

Yi-Hsin Hung
Tsinghua University

<Thinking> The goal is to reach the nightstand closer to the window. From my current
position to the left side of the bed, I need to find this specific nightstand. I've already
gone past a lamp on the left, so I should be looking around the wall area before the bed.
Given the window is on the right side of the bed, it seems logical that the nightstand is
further along that side.
...

You are a robot beginning at the stairs and facing into the room. You want to
navigate to the nightstand closer to the window. You will perform the
following actions (Note: for each [please fill in], choose either 'turn back,'
'turn left,' or 'turn right.'):1. Go forward until the foot of the bed. 2. [please
fill in] 3. Go forward until the wall. 4. [please fill in] 5. Go forward until the
nightstand. You have reached the final destination.
A. Turn Left, Turn Left
C. Turn Back, Turn Left

Yueqi Duan †
Tsinghua University

B. Turn Left, Turn Right
D. Turn Right, Turn Left

Current
Position?

Get to where?
window..How?

Walk along wall
--> window

from window
to nightstand

...To get there, I need to turn right. The wall will be
on my right side. Once I'm along the wall, I need to
turn left when I reached the window, which is where
the nightstand is located. </Thinking>

<answer> D </answer>

Appearance Order

C. toilet, basket, bed, ceiling light

Absolute Distance

2.1

Relative Distance

A. table

Relative Direction

A. front-right

Obj. Size

Obj. Count
Room Size

3

215
28.6

Figure 1: We propose Spatial-MLLM, a method that significantly enhances the visual-based spatial intelligence
of existing video MLLMs. As shown, Spatial-MLLM is capable of understanding and reasoning about the
underlying scene from video input, achieving state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of tasks.

Abstract
Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
significantly enhanced performance on 2D visual tasks. However, improving their
spatial intelligence remains a challenge. Existing 3D MLLMs always rely on
additional 3D or 2.5D data to incorporate spatial awareness, restricting their utility
in scenarios with only 2D inputs, such as images or videos. In this paper, we
present Spatial-MLLM, a novel framework for visual-based spatial reasoning from
purely 2D observations. Unlike conventional video MLLMs which rely on CLIPbased visual encoders optimized for semantic understanding, our key insight is to
unleash the strong structure prior from the feed-forward visual geometry foundation
model. Specifically, we propose a dual-encoder architecture: a pretrained 2D visual
encoder to extract semantic features, and a 3D spatial encoder—initialized from
the backbone of the visual geometry model—to extract 3D structure features. A
connector then integrates both features into unified visual tokens for enhanced
spatial understanding. Furthermore, we propose a space-aware frame sampling
strategy at inference time, which selects the spatially informative frames of a
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

