Understanding and Improving Adversarial Robustness
of Neural Probabilistic Circuits
Weixin Chen
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
weixinc2@illinois.edu

Han Zhao
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
hanzhao@illinois.edu

Abstract
Neural Probabilistic Circuits (NPCs), a new class of concept bottleneck models,
comprise an attribute recognition model and a probabilistic circuit for reasoning.
By integrating the outputs from these two modules, NPCs produce compositional
and interpretable predictions. While offering enhanced interpretability and high
performance on downstream tasks, the neural-network-based attribute recognition model remains a black box. This vulnerability allows adversarial attacks to
manipulate attribute predictions by introducing carefully crafted, subtle perturbations to input images, potentially compromising the final predictions. In this
paper, we theoretically analyze the adversarial robustness of NPC and demonstrate
that it only depends on the robustness of the attribute recognition model and is
independent of the robustness of the probabilistic circuit. Moreover, we propose
RNPC, the first robust neural probabilistic circuit against adversarial attacks on the
recognition module. RNPC introduces a novel class-wise integration for inference,
ensuring a robust combination of outputs from the two modules. Our theoretical
analysis demonstrates that RNPC exhibits provably improved adversarial robustness compared to NPC. Empirical results on image classification tasks show that
RNPC achieves superior adversarial robustness compared to existing concept bottleneck models while maintaining high accuracy on benign inputs. The code is
available at https://github.com/uiuctml/RNPC.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) exhibit superior performance across a range of downstream tasks.
However, DNNs are often criticized for their lack of interpretability, making it hard to understand
the decision-making process, especially when they are deployed in high-stakes domains, such as
legal justice and healthcare [1]. Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [2–6] are a class of models that
attempt to improve model interpretability by incorporating human-understandable binary concepts
(e.g., white color) as an intermediate layer, followed by simple predictors such as linear models. This
bottleneck enables model predictions to be interpreted using the predicted concepts due to the simplicity of the linear predictors on top of the concepts. While demonstrating improved interpretability,
CBMs usually suffer from a performance drop compared to DNNs. Recently, a new class of concept
bottleneck models, Neural Probabilistic Circuits (NPCs) [7, 8], has been introduced, which offers a
promising balance between model interpretability and task performance. NPC consists of an attribute
recognition model and a probabilistic circuit [9]. The attribute recognition model predicts various
interpretable categorical attributes (e.g., color) from an input image. The probabilistic circuit supports
tractable joint, marginal, and conditional inference over these attributes and the class variable. By
integrating the probability of each instantiation of attributes and the conditional probability of a
specific class given that instantiation, NPC generates the prediction score for the class.
Despite enhanced transparency in the model architecture, the attribute recognition model within NPC,
implemented using a neural network, remains a black box. This raises the threat of malicious attacks
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

