One-Step Diffusion-Based Image Compression with
Semantic Distillation

1

Naifu Xue1∗ , Zhaoyang Jia2∗ , Jiahao Li3 , Bin Li3 , Yuan Zhang1 , Yan Lu3
Communication University of China 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{aaronxuenf, yzhang}@cuc.edu.cn, {jzy_ustc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{li.jiahao, libin, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
While recent diffusion-based generative image codecs have shown impressive
performance, their iterative sampling process introduces unpleasant latency. In
this work, we revisit the design of a diffusion-based codec and argue that multistep sampling is not necessary for generative compression. Based on this insight,
we propose OneDC, a One-step Diffusion-based generative image Codec—that
integrates a latent compression module with a one-step diffusion generator. Recognizing the critical role of semantic guidance in one-step diffusion, we propose using
the hyperprior as a semantic signal, overcoming the limitations of text prompts in
representing complex visual content. To further enhance the semantic capability of
the hyperprior, we introduce a semantic distillation mechanism that transfers knowledge from a pretrained generative tokenizer to the hyperprior codec. Additionally,
we adopt a hybrid pixel- and latent-domain optimization to jointly enhance both
reconstruction fidelity and perceptual realism. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that OneDC achieves SOTA perceptual quality even with one-step generation, offering over 39% bitrate reduction and 20× faster decoding compared to prior multistep diffusion-based codecs. Project: https://onedc-codec.github.io/

1

Introduction

The rapid growth in image data has led to increased storage and transmission costs, heightening the
need for efficient, high-quality image compression techniques. While VAE-based learned image
compression (LIC) [36, 71] has surpassed traditional codecs (e.g., VVC [8]) in rate-distortion (RD)
performance, it often produces blurry details at low bitrates [41] since they are typically optimized
for objective distortion rather than human perception [7]. To mitigate this, some approaches [41, 44]
focus on optimizing visual quality by incorporating perceptual metrics and adversarial losses to enable
generative image compression. Despite these advances, such generative models tend to introduce
artifacts under extreme compression, degrading the realism of reconstructed images.
Recently, diffusion-based generative codecs [9, 33] have been introduced to enhance reconstruction
quality by leveraging the powerful content synthesis capabilities of pretrained models. While these
methods significantly improve perceptual realism, they may occasionally generate content that
deviates from the original input, thereby compromising reconstruction fidelity. In addition, their
inherently iterative sampling process leads to substantial computational overhead, making them
notably slower than conventional VAE-based codecs.
In standard diffusion-based image generation, the model progressively refines a noisy signal through
iterative denoising, beginning with coarse structures and gradually synthesizing high-frequency details
[65]. However, when applied to image compression, the task changes: at low bitrates, codecs typically
∗

Naifu Xue and Zhaoyang Jia are visiting students at Microsoft Research Asia.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

