How Many Domains Suffice for Domain
Generalization? A Tight Characterization via the
Domain Shattering Dimension

Cynthia Dwork
Harvard University
dwork@seas.harvard.edu

Lunjia Hu ∗
Northeastern University
lunjia@alumni.stanford.edu

Han Shao †
University of Maryland, College Park
hanshao@umd.edu

Abstract
We study a fundamental question of domain generalization: given a family of
domains (i.e., data distributions), how many randomly sampled domains do we
need to collect data from in order to learn a model that performs reasonably well
on every seen and unseen domain in the family? We model this problem in the PAC
framework and introduce a new combinatorial measure, which we call the domain
shattering dimension. We show that this dimension characterizes the domain sample complexity. Furthermore, we establish a tight quantitative relationship between
the domain shattering dimension and the classic VC dimension, demonstrating that
every hypothesis class that is learnable in the standard PAC setting is also learnable
in our setting.

1

Introduction

The ability to generalize across domains is an important component of human intelligence and
a crucial milestone in the development of increasingly powerful artificial intelligence. It is not
surprising that an experienced driver in one country can reasonably, albeit imperfectly, drive in
another country even without further training. It is also not surprising that a skilled chess player can
outperform an average person on a totally different board game. An expert doctor who has studied a
disease using data from a few large hospitals can potentially provide reasonable treatment for patients
in a geographically remote and biologically different population that does not have access to those
large hospitals and has not been the subject of prior study. Such domain generalization abilities are
empowered by the capability of the learner (i.e., the driver, chess player, or doctor) to distill and
master universal laws (about driving, game playing, or medical treatment) that hold even on unseen
domains, while separating them from idiosyncratic patterns that are domain-specific.
In this work, we study the theoretical foundations of domain generalization with a focus on capturing
this ability of learning “universal laws” while not overfitting to the “idiosyncratic patterns”. Consider
a family G of domains, where every domain D is a distribution on examples (x, y) each consisting of
an instance x ∈ X and a binary label y ∈ {0, 1}. On a specific domain D, there may be a hypothesis
∗

Work done while at Harvard. Supported by the Simons Foundation Collaboration on the Theory of
Algorithmic Fairness and the Harvard Center for Research on Computation and Society (CRCS).
†
Work done while at Harvard. Supported by the Harvard Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications
(CMSA).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

