Part-Aware Bottom-Up Group Reasoning for
Fine-Grained Social Interaction Detection
Dongkeun Kim
Minsu Cho
Suha Kwak
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{kdk1563, mscho, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Social interactions often emerge from subtle, fine-grained cues such as facial
expressions, gaze, and gestures. However, existing methods for social interaction
detection overlook such nuanced cues and primarily rely on holistic representations
of individuals. Moreover, they directly detect social groups without explicitly
modeling the underlying interactions between individuals. These drawbacks limit
their ability to capture localized social signals and introduce ambiguity when group
configurations should be inferred from social interactions grounded in nuanced cues.
In this work, we propose a part-aware bottom-up group reasoning framework for
fine-grained social interaction detection. The proposed method infers social groups
and their interactions using body part features and their interpersonal relations. Our
model first detects individuals and enhances their features using part-aware cues,
and then infers group configuration by associating individuals via similarity-based
reasoning, which considers not only spatial relations but also subtle social cues that
signal interactions, leading to more accurate group inference. Experiments on the
NVI dataset demonstrate that our method outperforms prior methods, achieving
the new state of the art, while additional results on the Café dataset further validate
its generalizability to group activity understanding.

1

Introduction

Understanding the intentions and behaviors of others is a fundamental aspect of human perception
and social intelligence. In our daily lives, we rely not only on what people say, but also on how they
appear, move, and behave to make sense of others. Understanding such interactions enables broad
applications, including surveillance, human-robot interaction, and sports analysis. Social interaction
understanding encompasses a wide range of tasks, including group activity recognition [13, 19, 23,
30, 54, 56], pedestrian trajectory prediction [1, 2, 37, 52] and group activity detection [10, 11, 24, 45].
While these tasks have advanced the ability to model social interactions, most existing work primarily
focuses on group behaviors inferred from coarse visual cues such as appearances, actions, or geometric
configurations of group members. Consequently, they often overlook fine-grained social interactions,
such as identifying whether two people are smiling at each other, engaging in mutual gaze, or
performing gestures like pointing, that are essential for nuanced social perception. The ability to
understand such fine-grained social interactions is crucial for inferring intent, emotion, and social
relationships, particularly when verbal communication is limited or absent.
Recently, a new task of detecting multi-person interactions based on such fine-grained, nuanced, and
ambiguous social cues has been introduced along with a dedicated dataset, NVI [51]. The task, named
nonverbal interaction detection (NVI-DET), is formulated to detect each individual, identify the
social group they belong to, and classify their fine-grained social interaction, encapsulated as a triplet
<individual, group, interaction>. This formulation draws inspiration from human–object
interaction (HOI) detection [31, 44, 58], but differs in that it targets human–human social interactions,
including facial expression, gesture, posture, gaze, and touch, that are inherently more nuanced and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

