Is the acquisition worth the cost? Surrogate losses for
Consistent Two-stage Classifiers

Florence Regol
Block, Toronto, Canada and McGill University, ILLS, Mila
florence.robert-regol@mail.mcgill.ca
Theodore Glavas
McGill University, ILLS, Mila

Joseph Cotnareanu
McGill University, ILLS, Mila

Mark Coates
McGill University, ILLS, Mila

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of a spectrum of foundation models,
covering a broad range of capabilities and costs. Often, we effectively use foundation models as feature generators and train classifiers that use the outputs of
these models to make decisions. In this paper, we consider an increasingly relevant
setting where we have two classifier stages. The first stage has access to features
x and has the option to make a classification decision or defer, while incurring a
cost, to a second classifier that has access to features x and z. This is similar to
the “learning to defer” setting, with the important difference that we train both
classifiers jointly, and the second classifier has access to more information. The
natural loss for this setting is an ℓ01c loss, where a penalty is paid for incorrect
classification, as in ℓ01 , but an additional penalty c is paid for consulting the second
classifier. The ℓ01c loss is unwieldy for training. Our primary contribution in this
paper is the derivation of a hinge-based surrogate loss ℓchinge that is much more
amenable to training but also satisfies the property that ℓchinge -consistency implies
ℓ01c -consistency.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of a spectrum of foundation models, covering a broad range of capabilities and
costs, we are increasingly faced with a decision as to which model to use. For example, can we
make a decision locally, on an edge device, or should we incur the additional communication and
computational cost of sending the query to a more powerful remote model? In many cases, we use
the pre-trained foundation model essentially as a feature generator, and strive to train a classifier that
uses the output of the foundation model as its input. In this setting, we then face a task of training
two classifiers, while simultaneously learning when to defer to the more powerful model.
One approach to solve this problem is to 1) train the more powerful classifier first; and 2) train the
decision module with the smaller classifier afterwards (either jointly or separately). This strategy
has proven successful and benefits from strong theoretical foundations [Keswani et al., 2021, Wilder
et al., 2021, Verma et al., 2022, Mao et al., 2023, 2024b], but intuitively, this appears inefficient.
Indeed, with this approach, both classifiers expend effort exploring regions of the input space where
their predictions will ultimately not be used. Because of this, it is important to consider and formalize
the problem where the classifiers and the module deciding which model to use are trained jointly.
While there has been a significant body of work establishing consistent losses for the related problem
of classification with learning to defer to experts or with reject [Verma et al., 2022, Herbei and
Wegkamp, 2006], these losses do not cover the case where we jointly train multiple inference
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

