VisualLens: Personalization through Task-Agnostic
Visual History
♢♥†∗

♢♥†

♢

♢

Wang Bill Zhu
Deqing Fu
Kai Sun
Yi Lu
Zhaojiang Lin
♢
♢
♢
Seungwhan Moon
Kanika Narang
Mustafa Canim
♢
♢
♢
Yue Liu
Anuj Kumar
Xin Luna Dong
♢

Meta

♥

♢

USC

Abstract
Existing recommendation systems either rely on user interaction logs, such as
online shopping history for shopping recommendations, or focus on text signals.
However, item-based histories are not always accessible, and are not generalizable
for multimodal recommendation. We hypothesize that a user’s visual history —
comprising images from daily life — can offer rich, task-agnostic insights into their
interests and preferences, and thus be leveraged for effective personalization. To
this end, we propose VisualLens, a novel framework that leverages multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) to enable personalization using task-agnostic
visual history. VisualLens extracts, filters, and refines a spectrum user profile
from the visual history to support personalized recommendation. We created two
new benchmarks, Google Review-V and Yelp-V, with task-agnostic visual histories,
and show that VisualLens improves over state-of-the-art item-based multimodal
recommendations by 5-10% on Hit@3, and outperforms GPT-4o by 2-5%. Further
analysis shows that VisualLens is robust across varying history lengths and excels
at adapting to both longer histories and unseen content categories.

1

Introduction

Imagine a personal assistant, similar to Vannevar Bush’s Memex [4], observing what you do in your
daily life. With her keen insight, she can make informed guesses about what you may enjoy or find
intriguing. When you ask for recommendations on anything from restaurants and activities to movies,
books, and products, based on her in-depth understanding of you she will provide suggestions tailored
specifically to your tastes.
While the concept is intuitive, a truly comprehensive personal assistant capable of making recommendations across all aspects of life has yet to be realized. Most existing multimodal recommendation
systems remain domain-specific and rely heavily on item-based interaction histories [41, 34]. For
example, an e-commerce platform may suggest products based on past purchases but ignore dining
habits or interests outside shopping.
This work explores how can we leverage such a user’s visual record to better understand individual
preferences and enable more general, personalized recommendations. Achieving task-agnostic
recommendations from visual history poses several challenges. First, visual histories are often diverse
and noisy, containing images unrelated to any specific recommendation task, entities that fail to
accurately represent user preference, or non-informative elements (e.g., background objects like
∗
†

Correspondence: wangzhu@usc.edu
Work done at Meta.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

