Tracing the Roots: Leveraging Temporal Dynamics in
Diffusion Trajectories for Origin Attribution

Andreas Floros
Imperial College London
andreas.floros18@imperial.ac.uk
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli∗
Apple
smoosavi@apple.com

Pier Luigi Dragotti
Imperial College London
p.dragotti@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Diffusion models have transformed image synthesis through iterative denoising,
by defining trajectories from noise to coherent data. While their capabilities are
widely celebrated, a critical challenge remains unaddressed: ensuring responsible
use by verifying whether an image originates from a model’s training set, its novel
generations or external sources. We introduce a framework that analyzes diffusion
trajectories for this purpose. Specifically, we demonstrate that temporal dynamics
across the entire trajectory allow for more robust classification and challenge
the widely-adopted "Goldilocks zone" conjecture, which posits that membership
inference is effective only within narrow denoising stages. More fundamentally,
we expose critical flaws in current membership inference practices by showing that
representative methods fail under distribution shifts or when model-generated data
is present. For model attribution, we demonstrate a first white-box approach directly
applicable to diffusion. Ultimately, we propose the unification of data provenance
into a single, cohesive framework tailored to modern generative systems.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling has seen major advancements with the rise of diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020).
These models have become the standard for image synthesis, achieving state-of-the-art performance
via trajectories from noise to coherent data (Karras et al., 2024). However, their growing prevalence
has raised significant concerns about privacy, security and accountability. For instance, sensitive or
copyrighted data used during training can be memorized and inadvertently reproduced by the model
during inference (Carlini et al., 2023; Somepalli et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2025). Furthermore, the
lack of mechanisms to attribute content to specific models has made it easier to distribute harmful
or malicious outputs without repercussions (Wang et al., 2023; Laszkiewicz et al., 2024; Liu et al.,
2025). We are therefore broadly concerned with the following question regarding data provenance:
Given pretrained generative models and data points, what relationships, if any, exist between them?
Specifically, toward responsible generative modeling, our goal is to determine whether an image
is (i) part of a model’s training (member) set, (ii) a novel sample from the model (belonging) or
(iii) sourced externally (external). In doing so, we propose to unify two traditionally separate tasks:
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs), which determine whether an image was part of a model’s
training set (Shokri et al., 2017; Yeom et al., 2018), and Model Attribution (MA), which determines
whether an image was generated by a specific model (Wang et al., 2023; Laszkiewicz et al., 2024).
∗

Work done while at Imperial.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

