Atom of Thoughts for Markov LLM Test-Time Scaling

Fengwei Teng1,2 , Quan Shi3 , Zhaoyang Yu2 , Jiayi Zhang1,2 ,
Yuyu Luo1 , Chenglin Wu2† , Zhijiang Guo1†
1
HKUST(GZ), 2 DeepWisdom, 3 Renmin University of China

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved significant performance gains
through test-time scaling methods. However, existing approaches often incur redundant computations due to the accumulation of historical dependency information
during inference. To address this challenge, we leverage the memoryless property
of Markov processes to minimize reliance on historical context and propose a
Markovian reasoning process. This foundational Markov chain structure enables
seamless integration with various test-time scaling methods, thereby improving
their scaling efficiency. By further scaling up the Markovian reasoning chain
through integration with techniques such as tree search and reflective refinement,
we uncover an emergent atomic reasoning structure, where reasoning trajectories
are decomposed into a series of self-contained, low-complexity atomic units. We
name this design Atom of Thoughts (AOT). Extensive experiments demonstrate
that AOT consistently outperforms existing baselines as computational budgets
increase. Importantly, AOT integrates seamlessly with existing reasoning frameworks and different LLMs (both reasoning and non-reasoning), facilitating scalable,
high-performance inference.We submit our code alongside this paper and will make
it publicly available to facilitate reproducibility and future research.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit remarkable scaling behavior: as model parameters and
training data increase, their performance improves predictably across a wide range of tasks [21].
Recently, test-time scaling methods have emerged to push the performance boundary further by
increasing computational resources during inference. These range from basic Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) prompting that extends reasoning chains [33], to more structured approaches like Tree-ofThought (ToT) [40] and Graph-of-Thought (GoT) [4] that organize multiple LLM invocations for
exploring solution spaces, and recent reasoning models such as OpenAI O1 [26] and DeepSeek
R1 [9] that enhance LLMs’ long-chain reasoning ability through post-training [29, 24, 18].
However, current framework-based test-time scaling methods typically rely heavily on retaining
extensive historical information. Even the simplest CoT must preserve the entire reasoning trajectory
to generate each subsequent step [33, 53]. Tree-based methods maintain ancestor and sibling relations
for branching decisions [40, 56, 11], while Graph-based methods introduce even more complex
dependencies through arbitrary node connections [4, 52]. Figure 1b analyzes these representative
structures and abstract the complexity of historical information and reasoning completion token
involved at each LLM invocation.
To decouple the current problem’s reasoning from processing historical information and thus minimize their mutual interference during test-time computation, we aim to generalize Markov chain–style
structures to general-purpose reasoning. By exploiting the memoryless property of Markov processes, we design the Markovian reasoning process, where each state encapsulates a self-contained
†

Corresponding Authors. Contact: steamedbun2002@outlook.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

