Capturing Polysemanticity with PRISM: A
Multi-Concept Feature Description Framework

Laura Kopf1,2 Nils Feldhus1,2 Kirill Bykov1,2,3,7,8
Anna Hedström1,3,4,5 Marina M.-C. Höhne3,6

Philine Lou Bommer1,3
Oliver Eberle1,2

1

Technische Universität Berlin, Germany 2 BIFOLD, Germany
UMI Lab, ATB Potsdam, Germany 4 Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institute, Germany
5
ETH AI Center, Switzerland 6 Universität Potsdam, Germany
7
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML) 8 Technische Universität München
{kopf,feldhus,oliver.eberle}@tu-berlin.de
{kbykov,pbommer,ahedstroem,mhoehne}@atb-potsdam.de

3

Abstract
Automated interpretability research aims to identify concepts encoded in neural
network features to enhance human understanding of model behavior. Within
the context of large language models (LLMs) for natural language processing
(NLP), current automated neuron-level feature description methods face two key
challenges: limited robustness and the assumption that each neuron encodes a
single concept (monosemanticity), despite increasing evidence of polysemanticity.
This assumption restricts the expressiveness of feature descriptions and limits
their ability to capture the full range of behaviors encoded in model internals. To
address this, we introduce Polysemantic FeatuRe Identification and Scoring Method
(PRISM), a novel framework specifically designed to capture the complexity of
features in LLMs. Unlike approaches that assign a single description per neuron,
common in many automated interpretability methods in NLP, PRISM produces
more nuanced descriptions that account for both monosemantic and polysemantic
behavior. We apply PRISM to LLMs and, through extensive benchmarking against
existing methods, demonstrate that our approach produces more accurate and
faithful feature descriptions, improving both overall description quality (via a
description score) and the ability to capture distinct concepts when polysemanticity
is present (via a polysemanticity score).

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have rapidly become integral to a range of real-world applications,
from software development [1] to medical diagnostics [2]. Despite their growing influence, the
internal decision-making processes of these models remain largely opaque. A growing number
of approaches aim to understand these black-box systems by analyzing their internal structure in
human-interpretable ways, such as mechanistic interpretability [3, 4, 5], structured explanations [6, 7],
advanced feature attributions [8, 9], and free-text explanations [10, 11].
A central goal of this research is to assign interpretable, functional roles to individual components
such as neurons or attention heads [12, 13, 14, 15]. The presence of polysemanticity, the tendency of
individual features to encode multiple, semantically distinct concepts or patterns [16, 17], complicates
the process of explaining model components, as it defies the common assumption that a single neuron
is associated with a single function or pattern. From a coding-theoretic perspective, this reflects how
neural capacity is distributed across multiple tasks. While several concept extraction techniques like
sparse autoencoders (SAEs) [18, 19] aim to disentangle polysemantic features, many learned features
still encode multiple concepts [20], and therefore cannot be regarded as truly monosemantic.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

