3D-Agent: A Tri-Modal Multi-Agent Responsive
Framework for Comprehensive 3D Object Annotation

Jusheng Zhang1 , Yijia Fan1 , Zimo Wen2 , Jian Wang3 , Keze Wang1,†
1

Sun Yat-sen University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Snap Inc.
†
Corresponding author: kezewang@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Driven by the applications in autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality,
3D object annotation is a critical task compared to 2D annotation, such as spatial
complexity, occlusion, and viewpoint inconsistency. The existing methods relying
on single models often struggle with these issues. In this paper, we introduce
Tri-MARF, a novel framework that integrates tri-modal inputs (i.e., 2D multi-view
images, text descriptions, and 3D point clouds) with multi-agent collaboration to
enhance the 3D annotation process. Our Tri-MARF consists of three specialized
agents: a vision-language model agent that generates multi-view descriptions,
an information aggregation agent that selects optimal descriptions, and a gating
agent that aligns text descriptions with 3D geometries for more refined captioning.
Extensive experiments on the Objaverse-LVIS, Objaverse-XL, and ABO datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our Tri-MARF, which achieves a CLIPScore of 88.7
(compared to 78.6–82.4 for other SOTA methods), retrieval accuracy of 45.2/43.8
(ViLT R@5), and an impressive throughput of 12,000 objects per hour on a single
NVIDIA A100 GPU.

1

Introduction

3D object annotation is crucial in computer vision, providing semantic labels for 3D data across
autonomous driving [30, 5, 28, 24, 17, 40, 78, 61], robotics, and AR applications. The existing
methods primarily use single large-scale models without leveraging multi-agent collaboration, creating challenges with complex scenes [26, 17, 20, 73, 52, 71]. Unlike 2D annotation, 3D annotation
faces unique difficulties: increased spatial relationship complexity, occlusion issues [13, 1, 32, 70],
and viewpoint variations affecting cross-view consistency [45]. Traditional 3D annotation methods
face serious problems with multi-view data: single models struggle to handle viewpoint differences,
geometric complexity, and semantic consistency simultaneously. When objects are partially occluded
or only visible from specific angles, existing methods often generate incomplete or inconsistent
annotations. Existing approaches, which typically rely on vision-language models, often encounter
hallucination problems and description inconsistencies [75, 58, 67]. The existing methods struggle to
maintain perspective consistency when using multi-view information and often overlook inherent
geometric information by relying solely on 2D images [42, 14].
After performing deep and comprehensive analysis of these challenges, we find that it is vital to
overcome the inherent difficulty of a single decision-making system by optimizing multiple competing
objectives simultaneously, i.e., accuracy, completeness, consistency [64, 46, 41], and efficiency [18].
In complex 3D annotation tasks, a single model often struggles to balance these goals effectively
[62], akin to a solitary expert lacking proficiency across all domains. These formidable challenges
inspire a key question: how can we design a system that collaborates like a team of human experts,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025)

