Strategic Hypothesis Testing

Yatong Chen∗

Safwan Hossain∗

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Harvard University

Tübingen AI Center

shossain@g.harvard.edu

yatong.chen@tuebingen.mpg.de
Yiling Chen
Harvard University
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We examine hypothesis testing within a principal-agent framework, where a strategic agent, holding private beliefs about the effectiveness of a product, submits data
to a principal who decides on approval. The principal employs a hypothesis testing
rule, aiming to pick a p-value threshold that balances false positives and false negatives while anticipating the agent’s incentive to maximize expected profitability.
Building on prior work, we develop a game-theoretic model that captures how the
agent’s participation and reporting behavior respond to the principal’s statistical
decision rule. Despite the complexity of the interaction, we show that the principal’s errors exhibit clear monotonic behavior when segmented by an efficiently
computable critical p-value threshold, leading to an interpretable characterization
of their optimal p-value threshold. We empirically validate our model and these
insights using publicly available data on drug approvals. Overall, our work offers a
comprehensive perspective on strategic interactions within the hypothesis testing
framework, providing technical and regulatory insights.

1

Introduction

In data-driven decision making, the outcome assigned to an agent often depends on data submitted
by them, creating the potential for misaligned incentives. The role of strategic behavior in decision
making systems has thus become a burgeoning area of research in the machine learning community,
from classification [1, 2], to regression [3, 4, 5] and beyond [6]. However, limited literature exists
on this perspective for a widely used and influential process in regulatory and scientific settings:
hypothesis testing. Widely used in clinical trials, scientific research, and technological innovations [7,
8, 9, 10], hypothesis testing serves as a foundational method for assessing whether the evidence
provided by a participating agent is both statistically significant and convincing. Consider, for
instance, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which oversees drug approvals by setting
a p-value threshold α for submitted clinical trials. Pharmaceutical firms incur substantial costs
by participating in drug development and running trials in the hopes of being approved. Although
falsifying results has high reputational and legal risks, firms are free to decide if to participate and how
large to run a trial. We argue these decisions are intimately shaped by the FDA’s p-value threshold
and the cost-benefit calculus of the overall process. We thus propose a principal-agent model to
understand these nuanced strategic decisions surrounding participation and evidence collection for a
hypothesis test.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to yatong.chen@tuebingen.mpg.de or shossain@g.harvard.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

