NeuroH-TGL: Neuro-Heterogeneity Guided Temporal
Graph Learning Strategy for Brain Disease Diagnosis

Shengrong Li1 , Qi Zhu1† , Chunwei Tian2 , Xinyang Zhang1 , Wei Shao1 ,
Jie Wen2† , Daoqiang Zhang1
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
Harbin Institute of Technology
lisrong@nuaa.edu.cn, zhuqi@nuaa.edu.cn, chunweitian@hit.edu.cn,
xinyang@nuaa.edu.cn, shaowei20022005@nuaa.edu.cn, wenjie@hit.edu.cn,
dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic functional brain networks (DFBNs) are powerful tools in neuroscience
research. Recent studies reveal that DFBNs contain heterogeneous neural nodes
with more extensive connections and more drastic temporal changes, which play
pivotal roles in coordinating the reorganization of the brain. Moreover, the spatiotemporal patterns of these nodes are modulated by the brain’s historical states.
However, existing methods not only ignore the spatio-temporal heterogeneity of
neural nodes, but also fail to effectively encode the temporal propagation mechanism of heterogeneous activities. These limitations hinder the deep exploration of
spatio-temporal relationships within DFBNs, preventing the capture of abnormal
neural heterogeneity caused by brain diseases. To address these challenges, this
paper proposes a Neuro-Heterogeneity guided Temporal Graph Learning strategy
(NeuroH-TGL). Specifically, we first develop a spatio-temporal pattern decoupling
module to disentangle DFBNs into topological consistency networks and temporal
trend networks that align with the brain’s operational mechanisms. Then, we introduce a heterogeneity mining module to identify pivotal heterogeneity nodes that
drive brain reorganization from the two decoupled networks. Finally, we design
temporal propagation graph convolution to simulate the influence of the historical
states of heterogeneity nodes on the current topology, thereby flexibly extracting
heterogeneous spatio-temporal information from the brain. Experiments show that
our method surpasses several state-of-the-art methods, and can identify abnormal
heterogeneous nodes caused by brain diseases.

1

Introduction

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measures neural activity by detecting changes in
blood oxygen level-dependent signals, and is commonly employed to construct functional brain
networks [1, 2, 3]. In fact, the brain is constantly reorganizing even during the resting state [4, 5].
Obviously, compared with the static functional brain network, the dynamic functional brain network
(DFBN) can more comprehensively describe the topological evolution of the brain. Studies have
shown that brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease can change the spatiotemporal properties of DFBNs [6, 7]. Therefore, effectively analyzing the spatio-temporal structure
of DFBNs is crucial for brain disease diagnosis and biomarker mining.
To capture the time-varying structure of DFBNs, they are usually modeled as a series of dynamic
brain graphs [8, 9, 10, 11]. In dynamic brain graphs, nodes represent brain regions and edges
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

