Learning Chern Numbers of Multiband Topological
Insulators with Gauge Equivariant Neural Networks

Longde Huang
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Chalmers University of Technology
University of Gothenburg
longde@chalmers.se

Oleksandr Balabanov
Department of Physics
Stockholm University

Hampus Linander
VERSES AI
Los Angeles, CA, USA
hampus.linander@verses.ai

Mats Granath
Department of Physics
University of Gothenburg
mats.granath@physics.gu.se

Daniel Persson
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Chalmers University of Technology
University of Gothenburg
daniel.persson@chalmers.se

Jan E. Gerken
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Chalmers University of Technology
University of Gothenburg
gerken@chalmers.se

Abstract
Equivariant network architectures are a well-established tool for predicting invariant
or equivariant quantities. However, almost all learning problems considered in
this context feature a global symmetry, i.e. each point of the underlying space is
transformed with the same group element, as opposed to a local gauge symmetry,
where each point is transformed with a different group element, exponentially
enlarging the size of the symmetry group. We use gauge equivariant networks to
predict topological invariants (Chern numbers) of multiband topological insulators
for the first time. The gauge symmetry of the network guarantees that the predicted
quantity is a topological invariant. A major technical challenge is that the relevant
gauge equivariant networks are plagued by instabilities in their training, severely
limiting their usefulness. In particular, for larger gauge groups the instabilities
make training impossible. We resolve this problem by introducing a novel gauge
equivariant normalization layer which stabilizes the training. Furthermore, we
prove a universal approximation theorem for our model. We train on samples with
trivial Chern number only but show that our model generalizes to samples with
non-trivial Chern number and provide various ablations of our setup.

1

Introduction

Geometric deep learning is a subfield of machine learning that takes advantage of the geometric
and topological structures inherent in complex data to construct more efficient neural network
architectures [1]. This approach has been successfully applied in a variety of domains, from medical
imaging [2] to high-energy physics [3] and quantum chemistry [4]. As we show in this paper, this
perspective is particularly valuable for studying topological insulators, a class of materials which has
been one of the main areas of interest in condensed matter physics over the last two decades [5, 6],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

