Mind the Gap: Removing the Discretization Gap in
Differentiable Logic Gate Networks

Shakir Yousefi
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
syousefi@ethz.ch

Andreas Plesner∗
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
aplesner@ethz.ch

Till Aczel∗
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
taczel@ethz.ch

Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zürich
Switzerland
wattenhofer@ethz.ch

Abstract
Modern neural networks exhibit state-of-the-art performance on many existing
benchmarks, but their high computational requirements and energy usage cause
researchers to explore more efficient solutions for real-world deployment. Differentiable logic gate networks (DLGNs) learns a large network of logic gates for
efficient image classification. However, learning a network that can solve simple
problems like CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100 can take days to weeks to train. Even
then, almost half of the neurons remains unused, causing a discretization gap. This
discretization gap hinders real-world deployment of DLGNs, as the performance
drop between training and inference negatively impacts accuracy. We inject Gumbel noise with a straight-through estimator during training to significantly speed
up training, improve neuron utilization, and decrease the discretization gap. We
theoretically show that this results from implicit Hessian regularization, which
improves the convergence properties of DLGNs. We train networks 4.5× faster in
wall-clock time, reduce the discretization gap by 98%, and reduce the number of
unused gates by 100%. ∗ Equal contribution.

Introduction

Deep neural networks have reached human-level performance across a wide array of tasks [1, 2]. However,
these advances come at the cost of immense computational demands during training and inference,
limiting their deployment in many real-world environments [3–6]. This has sparked growing interest
in designing models that retain competitive accuracy
while being more efficient [7–11].

Test Accuracy

1

0.4

0.2

GLGN (ours) (discrete)
GLGN (ours) (soft)
DLGN (discrete)
DLGN (soft)

At their core, all computations on digital hardware
0
500
1000
reduce to Boolean operations such as AND, OR, and
3
Iteration (·10 )
NOT. This motivates the question: Can we express
and execute machine learning models directly in the Figure 1: CIFAR-10 test accuracy comparnative language of hardware - namely, logic gates? ison. Solid and dashed lines show discrete
One approach is logic gate networks (LGNs), which and soft performance, respectively. Gumbel
replaces arithmetic computations with compositions LGNs (GLGN, red) demonstrate faster conof discrete logical operations, thereby enabling effi- vergence and minimal discretization gap comcient inference. While inference with LGNs is effi- pared to DLGNs (DLGN, blue).
cient, training them poses significant challenges. To
address this, differentiable logic gate networks (DL39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

