QFFT, Question-Free Fine-Tuning for Adaptive
Reasoning

Wanlong Liu∗1,2 , Junxiao Xu∗ 2 , Fei Yu2 , Yukang Lin2 , Ke Ji2 , Wenyu Chen1
Yan Xu3† , Yasheng Wang3 , Lifeng Shang3 , Benyou Wang2†
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Recent advancements in Long Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning models have
improved performance on complex tasks, but they suffer from overthinking, which
generates redundant reasoning steps, especially for simple questions. This paper
revisits the reasoning patterns of Long and Short CoT models, observing that
the Short CoT patterns offer concise reasoning efficiently, while the Long CoT
patterns excel in challenging scenarios where the Short CoT patterns struggle. To
enable models to leverage both patterns, we propose Question-Free Fine-Tuning
(QFFT), a fine-tuning approach that removes the input question during training and
learns exclusively from Long CoT responses. This approach enables the model to
adaptively employ both reasoning patterns: it prioritizes the Short CoT patterns
and activates the Long CoT patterns only when necessary. Experiments on various
mathematical datasets demonstrate that QFFT reduces average response length
by more than 50%, while achieving performance comparable to Supervised FineTuning (SFT). Additionally, QFFT exhibits superior performance compared to SFT
in noisy, out-of-domain, and low-resource scenarios. QFFT is publicly available at
https://github.com/LWL-cpu/Question-Free-Fine-Tuning.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in Long CoT reasoning models, such as OpenAI o1 [1] and DeepSeek-R1 [2],
have significantly improved performance on complex tasks, such as mathematics and coding [3,
4, 5, 6, 7]. These improvements are largely attributed to the test-time scaling paradigm, where
models generate Long CoT, consuming more tokens, to effectively simulate human-like deep thinking
behavior like self-reflection, error correction, and exploration of multiple solution strategies. Building
on this success, a growing body of research has focused on distillation methods that transfer the
Long CoT reasoning abilities of OpenAI o1 and DeepSeek-R1 into smaller LLMs, achieving notable
performance gains [8, 9, 10, 2].
However, recent studies [11, 12] have identified a critical limitation in current Long CoT models (e.g.,
DeepSeek-R1): they often exhibit overthinking, generating unnecessarily complex or redundant
reasoning steps even for simple problems. As a result, models distilled from these Long CoT models
tend to inherit this drawback, leading to inefficiencies during inference.
To mitigate this issue, recent Long-to-Short methods [13, 14, 15, 16, 17] explore compressing the
length of Long CoT responses. However, these methods incur substantial additional training costs
while achieving only limited reductions in token usage.
∗
†

Wanlong Liu and Junxiao Xu contributed to this work equally.
Yan Xu and Benyou Wang are the corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

