How to Auto-optimize Prompts for Domain Tasks?
Adaptive Prompting and Reasoning through
Evolutionary Domain Knowledge Adaptation

Yang Zhao Pu Wang Hao Frank Yang ∗
Johns Hopkins University
{yzhao229, pwang80, haofrankyang}@jhu.edu
Project page: https://miemieyanga.github.io/EGOPrompt/

Abstract
Designing optimal prompts and reasoning processes for large language models
(LLMs) on domain-specific tasks is both necessary and challenging in real-world
applications. Determining how to integrate domain knowledge, enhance reasoning
efficiency, and even provide domain experts with refined knowledge integration
hints are particularly crucial yet unresolved tasks. In this research, we propose
Evolutionary Graph Optimization for Prompting (EGO-Prompt), an automated
framework to designing better prompts, efficient reasoning processes and providing
enhanced causal-informed process. EGO-Prompt begins with a general prompt
and fault-tolerant initial Semantic Causal Graph (SCG) descriptions, constructed
by human experts, which is then automatically refined and optimized to guide
LLM reasoning. Recognizing that expert-defined SCGs may be partial or imperfect
and that their optimal integration varies across LLMs, EGO-Prompt integrates a
novel causal-guided textual gradient process in two steps: first, generating nearly
deterministic reasoning guidance from the SCG for each instance, and second,
adapting the LLM to effectively utilize the guidance alongside the original input.
The iterative optimization algorithm further refines both the SCG and the reasoning
mechanism using textual gradients with ground-truth. We tested the framework on
real-world public health, transportation and human behavior tasks. EGO-Prompt
achieves 7.32%–12.61% higher F1 than cutting-edge methods, and allows small
models to reach the performence of larger models at under 20% of the original cost.
It also outputs a refined, domain-specific SCG that improves interpretability.

1

Introduction

Foundation models, particularly Large Language Models (LLMs), are increasingly being adapted
for domain-specific tasks, providing reasoning and decision support across real-world applications,
such as public health [1–3], transportation [4–7], medical treatment [8, 9], and robotics [10–12]. For
these models to be used effectively in particular domains, additional task adaptations are usually
necessary. Prompt engineering has emerged as the primary, flexible, and cost-effective method for this
adaptation [4, 13–16]. In this process, domain experts generally incorporate specialized knowledge
and priors into prompt design by structuring the prompts and excluding irrelevant information to
enhance the reasoning process. However, experts can also inadvertently introduce assumptions,
mechanisms, even biases in prompt engineering [17, 18]. Therefore, critical questions arise – how
can we optimize prompts and reasoning procedures, and discover better combinations that
integrate structured domain knowledge for domain-specific tasks? Furthermore, how can we
automate this prompt-and-reasoning optimization?
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

