VeriLoC: Line-of-Code Level Prediction of
Hardware Design Quality from Verilog Code

Raghu Vamshi Hemadri1∗ Jitendra Bhandari1∗ Andre Nakkab1
Badri P Gopalan3 Ramesh Narayanaswamy3 Ramesh Karri1
1

Johann Knechtel2
Siddharth Garg1

New York University Tandon School of Engineering
2
New York University Abu Dhabi
3
Synopsys

Abstract
Modern chip design is complex, and there is a crucial need for early-stage prediction
of key design-quality metrics like timing and routing congestion directly from
Verilog code (a commonly used programming language for hardware design).
It is especially important yet complex to predict individual lines of code that
cause timing violations or downstream routing congestion. Prior works have
tried approaches like converting Verilog into an intermediate graph representation
and using LLM embeddings alongside other features to predict module-level
quality, but did not consider line-level quality prediction. We propose VeriLoC,
the first method that predicts design quality directly from Verilog at both the
line- and module-level. To this end, VeriLoC leverages recent Verilog codegeneration LLMs to extract local line-level and module-level embeddings, and
trains downstream classifiers/regressors on concatenations of these embeddings.
VeriLoC achieves high F1-scores of 0.86–0.95 for line-level congestion and timing
prediction, and reduces the mean average percentage error from 14% − 18% for
SOTA methods down to only 4%. We believe that VeriLoC embeddings and
insights from our work will also be of value for other predictive and optimization
tasks for complex hardware design.

1

Introduction

Modern chip design is highly complex. It begins with devising a description of the chip’s behavior
in a hardware description language (HDL) like Verilog.2 This is followed by a series of automated
steps, including synthesis (where RTL code is converted into a circuit of Boolean logic and its gate
implementation), placement (which arranges gates on the chip canvas), and routing (which connects
gates using metal wires). This process transforms the RTL code into a manufacturable chip layout.
Key metrics for design quality, like area, timing, power, routing congestion, etc., can only be verified
from final layouts, but obtaining these layouts can take hours or days as synthesis, placement, routing,
and other steps in the design flow are extremely complex and time-consuming. Designers often
iterate multiple times till specifications and quality targets are met; these iterations can take anywhere
from weeks to months, impacting time-to-market. Timing and routing congestion, in particular, are
difficult to manage and are frequently the main impediment to design closure [1–5].
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
HDL codes are commonly also referred to as register-transfer level (RTL) descriptions. We use RTL or
Verilog interchangeably from here on.
2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

