Far from the Shallow: Brain-Predictive Reasoning
Embedding through Residual Disentanglement

Linyang He1,2∗ Tianjun Zhong3∗ Richard Antonello1,2
Gavin Mischler1,2 Micah Goldblum2 Nima Mesgarani1,2
1
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University
3
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
Correspondence: linyang.he@columbia.edu nima@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Understanding how the human brain progresses from processing simple linguistic
inputs to performing high-level reasoning is a fundamental challenge in neuroscience. While modern large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used
to model neural responses to language, their internal representations are highly
"entangled," mixing information about lexicon, syntax, meaning, and reasoning.
This entanglement biases conventional brain encoding analyses toward linguistically shallow features (e.g., lexicon and syntax), making it difficult to isolate the
neural substrates of cognitively deeper processes. Here, we introduce a residual
disentanglement method that computationally isolates these components. By first
probing an LM to identify feature-specific layers, our method iteratively regresses
out lower-level representations to produce four nearly orthogonal embeddings for
lexicon, syntax, meaning, and, critically, reasoning. We used these disentangled
embeddings to model intracranial (ECoG) brain recordings from neurosurgical
patients listening to natural speech. We show that: 1) This isolated reasoning embedding exhibits unique predictive power, accounting for variance in neural activity
not explained by other linguistic features and even extending to the recruitment
of visual regions beyond classical language areas. 2) The neural signature for
reasoning is temporally distinct, peaking later (~350-400ms) than signals related
to lexicon, syntax, and meaning, consistent with its position atop a processing
hierarchy. 3) Standard, non-disentangled LLM embeddings can be misleading, as
their predictive success is primarily attributable to linguistically shallow features,
masking the more subtle contributions of deeper cognitive processing. Our work
provides compelling neural evidence for an abstract reasoning computation during language comprehension and offers a robust framework for mapping distinct
cognitive functions from artificial models to the human brain2 .
A growing body of work has shown that LLMs exhibit strong representational alignment with human
brain activity during language comprehension. These studies employ language encoding models,
powerful predictors of measured brain activity in response to a language stimulus [41, 19, 10, 20, 38,
5, 13, 34, 17, 7, 27, 2, 3, 8, 9]. Typically, these models are created by inputting a language stimulus
into an LLM, to create a contextual embedding of the stimulus using the models’ internal hidden state.
A linear mapping is then learned between these hidden states and the measured brain response to that
stimulus. Modern language encoding models represent some of the most advanced computational
approaches for studying neural processing across sensory modalities, and they provide a unique
window into the semantic processing landscape of human cortex.
∗
2

Equal Contribution.
Code available here.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

