Towards Self-Refinement of Vision-Language Models
with Triangular Consistency
Yunlong Deng1* , Guangyi Chen1,2* , Tianpei Gu3 , Lingjing Kong2 , Yan Li1 , Zeyu Tang2 , and
Kun Zhang1,2
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
ByteDance US

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) integrate visual knowledge with the analytical
capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) through supervised visual instruction tuning, using image-question-answer triplets. However, the potential of VLMs
trained without supervised instruction remains largely unexplored. This study
validates that VLMs possess inherent self-refinement capabilities, enabling them
to generate high-quality supervised data without external inputs and thereby learn
autonomously. Specifically, to stimulate the self-refinement ability of VLMs, we
propose a self-refinement framework based on a Triangular Consistency principle:
within the image-query-answer triangle, any masked elements should be consistently and accurately reconstructed. The framework involves three steps: (1) We
enable the instruction generation ability of VLMs by adding multi-task instruction
tuning like image→question-answer or image-answer→question. (2) We generate image-query-answer triplets from unlabeled images and use the Triangular
Consistency principle for filtering. (3) The model is further updated using the
filtered synthetic data. To investigate the underlying mechanisms behind this selfrefinement capability, we conduct a theoretical analysis from a causal perspective.
Using the widely recognized LLaVA-1.5 as our baseline, our experiments reveal
that the model can autonomously achieve consistent, though deliberately modest,
improvements across multiple benchmarks without any external supervision, such
as human annotations or environmental feedback. We expect that the insights of
this study on the self-refinement ability of VLMs can inspire future research on the
learning mechanism of VLMs. Code is available at SRF-LLaVA.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities
in natural language understanding and generation. By incorporating visual features into the linguistic
modalities understandable by Large Language Models (LLMs), Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
have developed the capability to interpret visual content effectively. A key factor in the success of
these VLMs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] is visual instruction tuning, which aligns visual content with the
representation of LLM by optimizing the model’s responses to visual instructions.
Acquiring supervised data with high-quality annotations is crucial for the success of visual instruction
tuning. However, compiling visual instructions, such as image-question-answer triplets, is non-trivial.
Such data cannot be directly crawled from the web and requires human involvement, making the
process both challenging and costly. Careless data collection may lead to copyright issues. These
factors motivate researchers to leverage synthetic data instead.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

