Regional Explanations: Bridging Local and Global
Variable Importance

Salim I. Amoukou∗
J.P. Morgan AI Research

Nicolas J-B. Brunel
LaMME, ENSIIE, University Paris Saclay & Capgemini Invent

Abstract
We analyze two widely used local attribution methods, Local Shapley Values and
LIME, which aim to quantify the contribution of a feature value xi to a specific
prediction f (x1 , . . . , xp ). Despite their widespread use, we identify fundamental
limitations in their ability to reliably detect locally important features, even under
ideal conditions with exact computations and independent features. We argue that a
sound local attribution method should not assign importance to features that neither
influence the model output (e.g., features with zero coefficients in a linear model)
nor exhibit statistical dependence with functionality-relevant features. We demonstrate that both Local SV and LIME violate this fundamental principle. To address
this, we propose R-LOCO (Regional Leave Out COvariates), which bridges the
gap between local and global explanations and provides more accurate attributions.
R-LOCO segments the input space into regions with similar feature importance
characteristics. It then applies global attribution methods within these regions,
deriving an instance’s feature contributions from its regional membership. This
approach delivers more faithful local attributions while avoiding local explanation
instability and preserving instance-specific detail often lost in global methods.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are valued for their predictive capabilities, but often lack transparency.
This opacity poses issues in high-stakes domains such as healthcare, finance, and criminal justice,
where understanding the “why” behind a decision is as critical as the decision itself. In response,
eXplainable AI (XAI) has emerged, developing methods and tools to explain model predictions.
These tools can be categorized into local and global methods. Local explanations aim to provide
insights into individual predictions, while global explanations focus on understanding the overall
behavior of a model across the entire input space. Popular local methods, such as Local Shapley
Values L-SV [Lundberg and Lee, 2017b] and LIME [Ribeiro et al., 2016b], seek to create a local
linear approximation of the model within the vicinity of a given instance. In contrast, global methods
primarily consist of "leave-one-out" approaches [Lei et al., 2016, Williamson and Feng, 2020, Covert
et al., 2020b, Gan et al., 2022], which assess performance changes when a variable is excluded.
In this paper, we focus on local attribution methods, specifically L-SV and LIME, which are widely
used but have limited theoretical understanding. While the intuition behind these methods are
appealing, the exact quantities they estimate remain unclear. Apart from the case of linear or additive
models [Bordt and von Luxburg, 2023, Garreau and Luxburg, 2020], there is little work explaining the
specific quantities these methods compute. A theoretical study on LIME, by Garreau and Luxburg
[2020], shows that in the case of a linear model, the LIME coefficients are proportional to the partial
derivatives. However, it also reveals that the coefficient of important variables can vanish by simply
changing a parameter of the method.
∗

Correspondence to: Salim I. Amoukou <salim.ibrahimamoukou@jpmorgan.com>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

