StreamBP: Memory-Efficient Exact Backpropagation
for Long Sequence Training of LLMs

Qijun Luo1
1

Mengqi Li1

Lei Zhao2

Xiao Li1∗

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{qijunluo,mengqili1}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, l.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn,
lixiao@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Training language models on long sequence data is a demanding requirement for
enhancing the model’s capability on complex tasks, e.g., long-chain reasoning.
However, as the sequence length scales up, the memory cost for storing activation
values becomes huge during the Backpropagation (BP) process, even with the
application of gradient checkpointing technique. To tackle this challenge, we
propose a memory-efficient and exact BP method called StreamBP, which performs
a linear decomposition of the chain rule along the sequence dimension in a layerwise manner, significantly reducing the memory cost of activation values and
logits. The proposed method is applicable to common objectives such as SFT,
GRPO, and DPO. From an implementation perspective, StreamBP achieves less
computational FLOPs and faster BP speed by leveraging the causal structure of
the language model. Compared to gradient checkpointing, StreamBP scales up the
maximum sequence length of BP by 2.8 − 5.5× larger, while using comparable
or even less BP time. Note that StreamBP’s sequence length scaling ability can
be directly transferred to batch size scaling for accelerating training. We further
develop a communication-efficient distributed StreamBP to effectively support
multi-GPU training and broaden its applicability. Our code can be easily integrated
into the training pipeline of any transformer models and is available at https:
//github.com/Ledzy/StreamBP.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 6, 32] have been regarded as a powerful approach toward general
artificial intelligence [3]. Recently, there has been growing interest in training LLMs for reasoning
tasks, leading to significant improvements on math and code benchmarks as shown by OpenAI-o1
and DeepSeek-R1 [12, 8]. However, such models often require extremely long input sequences due
to the inclusion of detailed reasoning traces [8, 35, 24, 33, 34], which results in substantial GPU
memory consumption during backpropagation (BP) when training reasoning models using either
reinforcement learning (RL) or supervised finetuing (SFT). This considerable memory usage mainly
stems from storing intermediate activations during the BP process. This work aims to provide an
efficient solution to such a memory issue.
Background and related works. Due to rapid growth of research in this field, we provide a
non-exhaustive background overview on reasoning models and memory-efficient training methods.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

