E2E-VGuard: Adversarial Prevention for Production
LLM-based End-To-End Speech Synthesis

Zhisheng Zhang1,2 , Derui Wang3 , Yifan Mi2 , Zhiyong Wu1∗ ,
Jie Gao1 , Yuxin Cao5 , Kai Ye6 , Minhui Xue3,4 , Jie Hao2∗
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3 CSIRO’s Data61
4
Responsible AI Research (RAIR) Centre, The University of Adelaide
5
National University of Singapore 6 The University of Hong Kong
∗
Corresponding authors

Abstract
Recent advancements in speech synthesis technology have enriched our daily lives,
with high-quality and human-like audio widely adopted across real-world applications. However, malicious exploitation like voice-cloning fraud poses severe
security risks. Existing defense techniques struggle to address the production
large language model (LLM)-based speech synthesis. While previous studies have
considered the protection for fine-tuning synthesizers, they assume manually annotated transcripts. Given the labor intensity of manual annotation, end-to-end (E2E)
systems leveraging automatic speech recognition (ASR) to generate transcripts
are becoming increasingly prevalent, e.g., voice cloning via commercial APIs.
Therefore, this E2E speech synthesis also requires new security mechanisms. To
tackle these challenges, we propose E2E-VGuard, a proactive defense framework
for two emerging threats: (1) production LLM-based speech synthesis, and (2) the
novel attack arising from ASR-driven E2E scenarios. Specifically, we employ the
encoder ensemble with a feature extractor to protect timbre, while ASR-targeted
adversarial examples disrupt pronunciation. Moreover, we incorporate the psychoacoustic model to ensure perturbative imperceptibility. For a comprehensive
evaluation, we test 16 open-source synthesizers and 3 commercial APIs across
Chinese and English datasets, confirming E2E-VGuard’s effectiveness in timbre
and pronunciation protection. Real-world deployment validation is also conducted.
Our code and demo page are available at https://wxzyd123.github.io/e2e-vguard/.

1

Introduction

High-quality synthetic speech based on deepfake techniques [1, 2] has been applied in daily scenarios,
such as video dubbing, and vehicle-mounted voice assistants. Large language models (LLMs) [3, 4]
have furthered the development of speech synthesis, i.e., text-to-speech (TTS). Current TTS models
enhance the synthesis performance by integrating LLMs as a core component for paralanguage
features, achieving human-level results. The most advanced technique can be based on an audio
foundation model [5]. TTS models can be divided into two categories, i.e., zero-shot [1] and finetuning-based [6]. Zero-shot models utilize reference audio as the prompt to clone the voice. In
contrast, fine-tuning-based models require a few minutes of speech samples to replicate the target
speaker better. The advancements in speech synthesis, on the one hand, bring huge convenience;
on the other hand, they pose a potential security threat in the hands of pirate users. These pirate
users may conduct illegal speech synthesis for illegal purposes, such as telecommunication fraud.
Therefore, the prevention approach against unauthorized synthesis is of vital importance.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

