KGGen: Extracting Knowledge Graphs from Plain
Text with Language Models

Belinda Mo∗1 , Kyssen Yu∗2 , Joshua Kazdan∗ 1 , Joan Cabezas, Proud Mpala1 , Lisa Yu2 , Chris Cundy3 ,
Charilaos Kanatsoulis1 , Sanmi Koyejo1
1
Stanford University 2 University of Toronto 3 FAR AI

Abstract
Recent interest in building foundation models for knowledge graphs has highlighted
a fundamental challenge: knowledge graph data is scarce. The best-known knowledge graphs are primarily human-labeled, created by pattern-matching, or extracted
using early NLP techniques. While human-generated knowledge graphs are in
short supply, automatically extracted ones are of questionable quality. We present
KGGen, a novel text-to-knowledge-graph generator that uses language models to
extract high-quality graphs from plain text with a novel entity resolution approach
that clusters related entities, significantly reducing the sparsity problem that plagues
existing extractors. Unlike other KG generators, KGGen clusters and de-duplicates
related entities to reduce sparsity in extracted KGs. Along with KGGen, we release
Measure of Information in Nodes and Edges (MINE), the first benchmark to test an
extractor’s ability to produce a useful KG from plain text. We benchmark our new
tool against leading existing generators such as Microsoft’s GraphRAG; we achieve
comparable retrieval accuracy on the generated graphs and better information retention. Moreover, our graphs exhibit more concise and generalizable entities and
relations. Our code is open-sourced at https://github.com/stair-lab/kg-gen/.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graph (KG) applications and graph-based Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
systems are increasingly bottlenecked by the scarcity and incompleteness of available KGs. KGs
consist of a set of subject-predicate-object triples, and have become a fundamental data structure
for information retrieval [Schneider, 1973]. Most real-world KGs, including Wikidata [contributors,
2024], DBpedia [Lehmann et al., 2015], and YAGO [Suchanek et al., 2007], are far from complete,
with many missing relations between entities [Shenoy et al., 2021]. The lack of domain-specific and
verified graph data poses a serious challenge for downstream tasks such as KG embeddings, graph
RAG, and synthetic graph training data.
Several synthetic plain-text-to-KG extractors have been proposed to address KG scarcity, most
prominently including OpenIE [Angeli et al., 2015] and Microsoft’s GraphRAG [Larson and Truitt,
2024]. Both OpenIE and GraphRAG extract entities and relations directly from text, but they lack
effective mechanisms for entity resolution and relation normalization. This leads to graphs with nearly
as many unique relation types as edges, resulting in sparse, disconnected knowledge representations
that limit their utility for downstream tasks. To solve this problem, we propose KGGen, a textto-knowledge-graph generator that leverages language models (LMs) and an algorithm for entity
and edge resolution to extract high-quality, dense KGs from text. First, KGGen uses an LM-based
extractor to read unstructured text and predict subject-predicate-object triples to capture entities and
relations; after extracting the triples, it applies a novel, iterative clustering algorithm to refine the
raw graph. Inspired by crowd-sourcing strategies for entity resolution [Wang et al., 2012], KGGen
∗

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

