Learning from Disjoint Views: A Contrastive
Prototype Matching Network for Fully Incomplete
Multi-View Clustering

Yiming Wang1,2
Qun Li1,2
Dongxia Chang3,4
Jie Wen5
1,2
1,2,∗
3,4
Hua Dai
Fu Xiao
Yao Zhao
1
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
State Key Laboratory of Tibetan Intelligence, Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications 3 Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
ymwang@njupt.edu.cn, liqun@njupt.edu.cn, dxchang@bjtu.edu.cn,
jiewen_pr@126.com, daihua@njupt.edu.cn, xiaof@njupt.edu.cn,
yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view clustering aims to enhance clustering performance by leveraging information from diverse sources. However, its practical application is often hindered
by a barrier: the lack of correspondences across views. This paper focuses on
the understudied problem of fully incomplete multi-view clustering (FIMC), a
scenario where existing methods fail due to their reliance on partial alignment.
To address this problem, we introduce the Contrastive Prototype Matching Network (CPMN), a novel framework that establishes a new paradigm for cross-view
alignment based on matching high-level categorical structures. Instead of aligning
individual instances, CPMN performs a more robust cluster prototype alignment.
CPMN first employs a correspondence-free graph contrastive learning approach,
leveraging mutual k-nearest neighbors (MNN) to uncover intrinsic data structures
and establish initial prototypes from entirely unpaired views. Building on the
prototypes, we introduce a cross-view prototype graph matching stage to resolve
category misalignment and forge a unified clustering structure. Finally, guided by
this alignment, we devise a prototype-aware contrastive learning mechanism to
promote semantic consistency, replacing the reliance on the initial MNN-based
structural similarity. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our method significantly outperforms various baselines and ablation variants,
validating its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Over the recent years, the rapid increase in multi-view data has made effective analysis an urgent
necessity[17, 15]. Multi-view clustering, which seeks to uncover underlying data relationships
by partitioning instances into distinct categories without supervision, has emerged as a prominent
solution. While these algorithms have advanced significantly and are widely applied in applications
like recommendation systems and multimedia analysis [26, 38, 37, 29], most existing algorithms
heavily rely on the assumption of complete multi-view information [3, 33]. However, in practice, it is
∗

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

