Bounds on the computational complexity of neurons
due to dendritic morphology

Anamika Agrawal
Center for Data-Driven Discovery
Allen Institute
Seattle, WA 98109
Department of Neurobiology and Biophysics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
anamika.agrawal@alleninstitute.org

Michael A. Buice
Center for Data-Driven Discovery
Allen Institute
Seattle, WA 98109
michaelbu@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
The simple linear threshold units used in many artiﬁcial neural networks have
a limited computational capacity. Famously, a single unit cannot handle nonlinearly separable problems like XOR. In contrast, real neurons exhibit complex
morphologies as well as active dendritic integration, suggesting that their computational capacities outperform those of simple linear units. Considering speciﬁc
families of Boolean functions, we empirically examine the computational limits
of single units that incorporate more complex dendritic structures. For random
Boolean functions, we show that there is a phase transition in learnability as a
function of the input dimension, with most random functions below a certain critical dimension being learnable and those above not. This critical dimension is best
predicted by the overall size of the dendritic arbor. This demonstrates that real
neurons have a far higher computational complexity than is usually considered in
neural models, whether in machine learning or computational neuroscience. Furthermore, using architectures that are, respectively, more “apical" or “basal" we
show that there are non-trivially disjoint sets of learnable functions by each type
of neuron. Importantly, these two types of architectures differ in the robustness
and generality of the computations they can perform. The basal-like architecture
shows a higher probability of function realization, while the apical-like architecture shows an advantage with fast retraining for different functions. Given the
cell-type speciﬁcity of morphological characteristics, these results suggest both
that different components of the dendritic arbor as well as distinct cell types may
have distinct computational roles. In single neurons, morphology sculpts computation, shaping not only what neurons do, but how they learn and adapt. Our analysis
offers new directions for neuron-level inductive biases in NeuroAI models using
scalable models for neuronal cell-type speciﬁc computation.

1

Introduction

The relationship between neuronal structure and function has received renewed attention due to
the growing appreciation of morphoelectric diversity across cell types [Gouwens et al., 2019, 2020,
Dembrow et al., 2024, Kalmbach et al., 2021]. Yet, other than classical studies of synaptic integration and circuit motifs, the computational roles of single neurons, shaped by their dendritic morphology, remain underexplored. While traditional models often simplify neurons as linear threshold
units, such approximations neglect the rich, nonlinear processing capabilities arising from the spatial and electrical organization of dendritic arbors. Recent experimental evidence demonstrates that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

