Learning Linear Attention in Polynomial Time

Morris Yau
MIT CSAIL
morrisy@mit.edu
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT Brain and Cognitive Sciences
jbt@mit.edu

Ekin Akyürek
MIT CSAIL
akyurek@mit.edu

Jiayuan Mao
MIT CSAIL
jiayuanm@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
TUM Munich, MCML, MIT CSAIL
stefje@mit.edu

Jacob Andreas
MIT CSAIL
jda@mit.edu

Abstract
Previous research has explored the expressivity of Transformer models in simulating Boolean circuits or Turing machines. However, the efficient learnability of
Transformers from data has remained an open question. Our study addresses this
gap by providing the first polynomial-time learnability results (specifically strong,
agnostic PAC learning) for single-layer Transformers with linear attention. We
show that learning the optimal multi head linear attention can be recast as finding
the optimal kernel predictor in a suitably defined RKHS. Moving to generalization,
we construct an algorithm that, given a dataset, checks in polynomial time whether
the set of best fit multi head linear attention networks on this data all perform an
identical computation–a powerful notion for out of distribution generalization. We
empirically validate our theoretical findings on several canonical tasks: learning
random linear attention networks, key–value associations, and learning to execute
finite automata. Our findings bridge a critical gap between theoretical expressivity
and learnability of Transformer models.

1

Introduction

Transformers are the dominant neural architecture used in language modeling. A growing body of
work seeks to explain the behavior of trained Transformers and characterize their learnability [Pérez
et al., 2019, Edelman et al., 2022b, Hahn, 2020, Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023, Merrill et al., 2022,
2021, Liu et al., 2022, Feng et al., 2023, Edelman et al., 2022a, Wei et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2024,
Trauger and Tewari, 2023, Chen and Li, 2024]. While a large body of work shows that Transformers
are expressive enough to implement important models of computation, it remains an open question
whether these constructions may be efficiently learned. Even verifying that a trained model has
successfully learned a computational procedure (uniform circuit family) has remained challenging.
Existing work shows positive results on how Transformer-like architectures can express diverse
computations, including simulating universal Turing machines [Li et al., 2024], evaluating sentences
of first-order logic [Barceló et al., 2020], and recognizing various formal languages [Strobl et al.,
2024]. On the other hand, results on learnability in polynomial time and samples with provable
guarantees tend to rely on strong data-generating assumptions, e.g., Gaussian data, etc. [Zhang et al.,
2023, Jelassi et al., 2022, Tian et al., 2023, Oymak et al., 2023, Fu et al., 2023, Tarzanagh et al., 2024,
Deora et al., 2023]. This brings us to our first motivating question.
Is there an efficient algorithm in time and samples that learns the optimal parameters of a class of
Transformer models for any dataset?
In this paper, we establish the strong, agnostic PAC-learnability of linear attention. Linear attention
variants (kernel, gated, flash, etc.) Yang et al. [2025, 2024], mLSTM in xLSTM Beck et al. [2024],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

