BREAD: Branched Rollouts from Expert
Anchors Bridge SFT & RL for Reasoning
Xuechen Zhang˚
University of Michigan
zxuechen@umich.edu

Zijian Huang˚
University of Michigan
zijianh@umich.edu

Yingcong Li
University of Michigan
yingcong@umich.edu

Chenshun Ni
University of Michigan
nichensh@umich.edu

Jiasi Chen
University of Michigan
jiasi@umich.edu

Samet Oymak
University of Michigan
oymak@umich.edu

Abstract
Small language models (SLMs) struggle to learn complex reasoning behaviors,
especially when high-quality traces are scarce or difficult to learn from. The
standard training approach combines a supervised fine-tuning (SFT) stage, often
to distill capabilities of a larger model, followed by a reinforcement learning (RL)
stage such as Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO). In this paper, we
investigate the fundamental limitations of this SFT + RL paradigm and propose
methods to overcome them. Under a suitable theoretical model, we demonstrate
that the SFT + RL strategy can fail completely when (1) the expert’s traces are too
difficult for the small model to express, or (2) the small model’s initialization has
exponentially small likelihood of success. To address these, we introduce BREAD:
a GRPO variant that unifies the SFT and RL stages via partial expert guidance
and branched rollouts. When self-generated traces fail, BREAD adaptively inserts
short expert prefixes/hints, allowing the small model to complete the rest of the
reasoning path, and ensuring that each update includes at least one successful
trace. This mechanism both densifies the reward signal and induces a natural
learning curriculum. BREAD requires fewer than 40% of ground-truth traces,
consistently outperforming standard GRPO while speeding up the training by about
3ˆ. Importantly, we demonstrate that BREAD helps the model solve problems
that are otherwise unsolvable by the SFT + RL strategy, highlighting how branched
rollouts and expert guidance can substantially boost SLM reasoning.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, we have witnessed a significant push toward enhancing language model
reasoning, which has led to highly capable frontier models such as OpenAI o1 [17], Gemini 2.5 [19],
and DeepSeek R1 [13]. These models can generate longer chain-of-thought (CoT) traces and utilize
more test-time compute to tackle challenging tasks [24]. Despite these innovations, reasoning with
small language models (SLM) remains a challenge. For instance, the large DeepSeek-R1 [13] has
671B parameters in total whereas the SFT-distilled model sizes range from 1.5B to 70B, and their
performance substantially degrades at the 1.5B model (see Table 5 in [13]).
This work studies optimization strategies to enhance SLMs, with emphasis on reasoning tasks. Two
popular optimization strategies for training LLMs are supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement
learning (such as GRPO or proximal policy optimization). Often, an SFT phase is employed, followed
by an RL phase. While this two-stage procedure has found success, for SLMs, long-context reasoning
˚

These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondance to {zxuechen,zijianh,oymak}@umich.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

