Mixed-Sample SGD: an End-to-end Analysis of
Supervised Transfer Learning

Yuyang Deng
Columbia University, Statistics
yd2824@columbia.edu

Samory Kpotufe
Columbia University, Statistics
skk2175@columbia.edu

https://github.com/matthewgo2009/mixed-sample-sgd

Abstract
Theoretical works on supervised transfer learning (STL)—where the learner has
access to labeled samples from both source and target distributions—have for the
most part focused on statistical aspects of the problem, while efficient optimization has received less attention. We consider the problem of designing an SGD
procedure for STL that alternates sampling between source and target data, while
maintaining statistical transfer guarantees without prior knowledge of the quality
of the source data. A main algorithmic difficulty is in understanding how to design
such an adaptive sub-sampling mechanism at each SGD step, to automatically gain
from the source when it is informative, or bias towards the target and avoid negative
transfer when the source is less informative.
We show that, such a mixed-sample SGD procedure is feasible for general prediction tasks with convex losses, rooted in tracking an abstract sequence of constrained
convex programs that serve to maintain the desired transfer guarantees. We instantiate these results in the concrete setting of √
linear regression with square loss, and
show that the procedure converges, with 1/ T rate, to a solution whose statistical
performance on the target is adaptive to the a priori unknown quality of the source.
Experiments with synthetic and real datasets support the theory.

1

Introduction

In supervised transfer learning (STL), some amount of target data is to be complemented by a usually
larger amount of related source data towards training a predictor. A characteristic problem to be
solved is whether and how much to bias towards the source or target data without prior knowledge of
the predictive quality of the source data for the target task. Many recent theoretical works on STL
have yielded important insights into general approaches that may guarantee good target performance.
Our main aim in this work is to understand the extent to which such insights may be incorporated into
actual efficient procedures, in particular, practical stochastic gradient descent (SGD) type procedures,
while maintaining good statistical guarantees for transfer.
For background, theoretical approaches for STL often take the form of penalized or constrained risk
minimization—e.g., minimizing empirical risk on source subject to low target risk, or vice versa—-or
more generally, some type of weighted risk minimization that aims to favor either source or target
data, whichever is most beneficial (which is not usually known a priori). For example, let P and Q
denote source and target distributions respectively, a typical approach, say in linear regression, would
be to consider a weighted objective of the form1 R̂P (θ) + λR̂Q (θ) and solve for choice λ∗ so that
θ∗ = θ∗ (λ∗ ) has small target risk RQ (θ).
1

Equivalently, of the form αR̂P (θ) + (1 − α)R̂Q (θ) for α ∈ [0, 1], α = 1 − λ/(1 + λ).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

