Speculative Jacobi-Denoising Decoding for
Accelerating Autoregressive Text-to-image Generation

Yao Teng1 Fuyun Wang2 Xian Liu2 Zhekai Chen1 Han Shi3
Yu Wang4 Zhenguo Li3 Weiyang Liu2 Difan Zou1 Xihui Liu1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 CUHK 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 Tsinghua University

Abstract
As a new paradigm of visual content generation, autoregressive text-to-image
models suffer from slow inference due to their sequential token-by-token decoding
process, often requiring thousands of model forward passes to generate a single
image. To address this inefficiency, we propose Speculative Jacobi-Denoising
Decoding (SJD2), a framework that incorporates the denoising process into Jacobi
iterations to enable parallel token generation in autoregressive models. Our method
introduces a next-clean-token prediction paradigm that enables the pre-trained
autoregressive models to accept noise-perturbed token embeddings and predict the
next clean tokens through low-cost fine-tuning. This denoising paradigm guides
the model towards more stable Jacobi trajectories. During inference, our method
initializes token sequences with Gaussian noise and performs iterative next-cleantoken-prediction in the embedding space. We employ a probabilistic criterion to
verify and accept multiple tokens in parallel, and refine the unaccepted tokens for
the next iteration with the denoising trajectory. Experiments show that our method
can accelerate generation by reducing model forward passes while maintaining the
visual quality of generated images.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive models have emerged as a cornerstone of visual generative tasks through next-token
prediction [1–4]. However, the autoregressive paradigm suffers from significant inference latency due
to its sequential, token-by-token decoding process. For instance, generating a single high-resolution
image often requires thousands of sequential forward passes. To address this challenge, we focus on
accelerating autoregressive text-to-image generation models via parallel token decoding.
Jacobi decoding [5] is an iterative method that accelerates the inference of autoregressive models
through parallel token decoding without any training. This method operates on a sequence of randomly
initialized tokens and iteratively calls the neural network to refine the tokens until the convergence
(i.e., tokens are correctly decoded). Its variant, Speculative Jacobi Decoding (SJD) [6], improves
Jacobi decoding with a probabilistic criterion tailored for accelerating text-to-image generation
using discrete tokens. The core of SJD is a verification-refinement process. Specifically, given a
sequence of tokens, in each Jacobi iteration, SJD first predicts the probability for each input token,
and then these probabilities enable the criterion to determine the acceptance of a prefix of the tokens
(i.e., verification) while also guiding the resampling of unaccepted tokens for the next iteration
(i.e., refinement). The above verification-refinement process operates within a fixed-length sliding
Jacobi window where the accepted tokens are removed and newly initialized tokens are appended.
By accepting multiple tokens (at least one token) per iteration, SJD reduces model forward passes,
speeding up generation compared to token-by-token decoding.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

