How Classifier Features Transfer to Downstream:
An Asymptotic Analysis in a Two-Layer Model

HEE BIN YOO
Interdisciplinary Program in
Artificial Intelligence
Seoul National University
yooheebin@snu.ac.kr
Cheongjae Jang
Department of Computer Science
Hanyang University
jchastro@gmail.com

Sungyoon Lee
Department of Computer Science
Hanyang University
sungyoonlee@hanyang.ac.kr

Dong-Sig Han
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
d.han@imperial.ac.uk

Jaein Kim
Interdisciplinary Program in
Neuroscience
Seoul National University
qpwodlsqp@snu.ac.kr

Byoung-Tak Zhang∗
Artificial Intelligence Institute
Seoul National University
btzhang@snu.ac.kr

Seunghyeon Lim
Artificial Intelligence Institute
Seoul National University
shlim@bi.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural networks learn effective feature representations, which can be transferred to
new tasks without additional training. While larger datasets are known to improve
feature transfer, the theoretical conditions for the success of such transfer remain
unclear. This work investigates feature transfer in networks trained for classification
to identify the conditions that enable effective clustering in unseen classes. We
first reveal that higher similarity between training and unseen distributions leads
to improved Cohesion and Separability. We then show that feature expressiveness
is enhanced when inputs are similar to the training classes, while the features of
irrelevant inputs remain indistinguishable. We validate our analysis on synthetic
and benchmark datasets, including CAR, CUB, SOP, ISC, and ImageNet. Our
analysis highlights the importance of the similarity between training classes and
the input distribution for successful feature transfer.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have demonstrated remarkable success through their ability to learn hidden representations, which are crucial for generalization [Damian et al., 2022]. These learned features, especially
those extracted from the penultimate layers, are semantically meaningful and transferable across tasks
[Yosinski et al., 2014, Kornblith et al., 2019]. A wide range of techniques, from open-set clustering
[Roth et al., 2020] to vision-language models [Li et al., 2023] and language models [Kojima et al.,
2023], leverage feature transfer for downstream tasks. Recent successes in feature transfer have
been largely attributed to the increasing volume of available data [Brown et al., 2020, Radford et al.,
2021, An et al., 2023]. However, the underlying conditions under which features can be effectively
transferred remain underexplored.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

