From stability of Langevin diffusion to convergence of
proximal MCMC for non-log-concave sampling

Marien Renaud∗
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251
F-33400 Talence, France
Valentin de Bortoli
ENS, CNRS, PSL University
Paris, 75005, FRANCE

Arthur Leclaire
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris, France

Nicolas Papadakis
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, INRIA, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251
F-33400 Talence, France

Abstract
We consider the problem of sampling distributions stemming from non-convex potentials with Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA). We prove the stability of the
discrete-time ULA to drift approximations under the assumption that the potential
is strongly convex at infinity. In many context, e.g. imaging inverse problems, potentials are non-convex and non-smooth. Proximal Stochastic Gradient Langevin
Algorithm (PSGLA) is a popular algorithm to handle such potentials. It combines
the forward-backward optimization algorithm with a ULA step. Our main stability result combined with properties of the Moreau envelope allows us to derive the
first proof of convergence of the PSGLA for non-convex potentials. We empirically validate our methodology on synthetic data and in the context of imaging
inverse problems. In particular, we observe that PSGLA exhibits faster convergence rates than Stochastic Gradient Langevin Algorithm for posterior sampling
while preserving its restoration properties. The code associated with the paper can
be found in github.

1

Introduction

Sampling a probability distribution π ∝ e−V on Rd is a fundamental task in machine learning [2,
10, 13, 28, 42, 51, 91]. It becomes challenging when the potential V is non-convex [39, 43]. A
well-known approach is to solve the Langevin stochastic differential equation [59, 79], defined by
√
dxt = −∇V (xt )dt + 2dwt ,
(1)
d
where (wt )t≥0 is a Wiener process [53]
√ on R . This process can be seen as a continuous gradient
descent on V randomly perturbed by 2dwt . Under mild assumptions, equation (1) admits π as its
invariant distribution [79]. Moreover, the solution converges geometrically in law to π when t goes
to infinity if V is strongly convex at infinity [30, 23]. In Section 4 we discuss alternative methods
that have been developed to sample π, such as Gibbs Sampling [17] or Diffusion Models [87].

As the function ∇V = −∇ log π is often unknown [74], it is approximated by a drift function
b : Rd → Rd such that b ≈ ∇V . In practice, the Euler-Maruyama discretization of equation (1)
∗

corresponding author: marien.renaud@math.u-bordeaux.fr

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

