Event-based HDR Structured Light

Jiacheng Fu

Yue Li Xin Dong Wenming Weng Yueyi Zhang Zhiwei Xiong∗
University of Science and Technology of China
jc_fu@mail.ustc.edu.cn
zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Event-based structured light (SL) systems have attracted increasing attention for
their potential in high-performance 3D measurement. Despite the inherent HDR
capability of event cameras, reflective and absorptive surfaces still cause event
clutter and absence, which produce overexposed and underexposed regions that
degrade the reconstruction quality. In this work, we present the first HDR 3D
measurement framework specifically designed for event-based SL systems. First,
we introduce a multi-contrast HDR coding strategy that facilitates imaging of areas
with different reflectance. Second, to alleviate inter-frame interference caused by
overexposed and underexposed areas, we propose a universal confidence-driven
stereo matching strategy. Specifically, we estimate a confidence map as the fusion
weight for features via an energy-guided confidence estimation. Further, we
propose the confidence propagation volume, an innovative cost volume that offers
both effective suppression of inter-frame interference and strong representation
capability. Third, we contribute an event-based SL simulator and propose the
first event-based HDR SL dataset. We also collect a real-world benchmarking
dataset with ground truth. We validate the effectiveness of our method with the
proposed confidence-driven strategy on both synthetic and real-world datasets.
Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed HDR framework enables
accurate 3D measurement even under extreme conditions. The code and data are
available at https://github.com/Quma233/Event-based-HDR-SL.

1

Introduction

Structured light (SL) systems perform high-quality depth estimation by projecting predefined patterns
onto a scene and analyzing their deformation upon interaction with object surfaces. Their high
precision and dense reconstruction capabilities make them well-suited for applications in both
consumer electronics and industrial applications [1, 2, 3]. However, reconstructing scenes under
high dynamic range (HDR) conditions remains a significant challenge, as conventional cameras only
capture the brightness levels with limited range. The target surfaces, such as rust, glossy paint, or
carbon fiber, always lead to overexposure or underexposure of the projected patterns in captured
images [4, 5], resulting in degraded or failed reconstruction. Existing solutions typically adopt
multi-exposure fusion and multi-projection fusion techniques, but these approaches require extensive
manual tuning of exposure settings and projection intensity to achieve satisfactory results [1].
Recently, event cameras [6], high-speed neuromorphic sensors with HDR capability, have been
integrated into SL systems, demonstrating advantages in capturing high-speed dynamic scenes and
maintaining imaging quality under complex illumination conditions. Previous work has shown that
event-based SL systems offer improved HDR scene reconstruction compared to frame-based cameras,
however, they still suffer from limitations of low reconstruction quality and insufficient robustness,
especially in overexposed and underexposed areas [7, 8, 9]. Practical tests further indicate that,
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

