Checklists Are Better Than Reward Models For
Aligning Language Models

Vijay Viswanathan ♡ Yanchao Sun♣ Shuang Ma♣∗ Xiang Kong♣
Meng Cao♣ Graham Neubig♡ Tongshuang Wu♡
♡
Carnegie Mellon University ♣ Apple

Abstract
Language models must be adapted to understand and follow user instructions.
Reinforcement learning is widely used to facilitate this – typically using fixed
criteria such as “helpfulness” and “harmfulness”. In our work, we instead propose
using flexible, instruction-specific criteria as a means of broadening the impact
that reinforcement learning can have in eliciting instruction following. We propose
“Reinforcement Learning from Checklist Feedback” (RLCF). From instructions,
we extract checklists and evaluate how well responses satisfy each item—using
both AI judges and specialized verifier programs—then combine these scores to
compute rewards for RL. We compare RLCF with other alignment methods on top
of a strong instruction following model (Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct) on five widelystudied benchmarks – RLCF is the only method to help on every benchmark,
including a 4-point boost in hard satisfaction rate on FollowBench, a 6-point
increase on InFoBench, and a 3-point rise in win rate on Arena-Hard. We show
that RLCF can also be used off-policy to improve Llama 3.1 8B Instruct and
OLMo 2 7B Instruct. These results establish rubrics as a key tool for improving
language models’ support of queries that express a multitude of needs. We release
our our dataset of rubrics (WildChecklists), models, and code to the public.1

1

Introduction

Language models must follow user instructions to be useful. As the general public integrates language
model-based assistants into their completion of daily tasks, there is an expectation that models can
faithfully follow the users’ requests, which increasingly involve rich, multi-step instructions [Liu
et al., 2024a, Zhao et al., 2024, Zheng et al.]. Today’s models are almost universally trained to follow
instructions via a two-step process: instruction finetuning, followed by reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF). Instruction finetuning, where the model is trained to mimic responses
generated by annotators [Raffel et al., 2019], has historically been the primary workhorse for imbuing
language models with some amount of instruction following ability [Wang et al., 2022, Chung et al.,
2022, Xu et al., 2024, Lambert et al., 2024a]. Model developers then frequently employ RLHF, where
the model is trained to generate responses that look more like labeled “good” responses than “bad”
responses, as a refinement step to decrease the likelihood that the model exhibits predefined poor
behaviors (typically harmful behaviors) [Ziegler et al., 2019, Bai et al., 2022]. Unlike “verifiable”
tasks where reinforcement learning is a workhorse [DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025, Lambert et al., 2024a,
Pyatkin et al., 2025], reinforcement learning remains difficult to utilize for ambiguous or “nonverifiable” tasks, such as instruction following. What would it take to make RL a general-purpose
solution at eliciting desirable behaviors in subjective or open-ended settings?
∗
1

Work performed while at Apple.
Code: www.github.com/viswavi/RLCF, Dataset: www.huggingface.co/datasets/viswavi/rlcf

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

