Dependency Parsing
is More Parameter-Efficient with Normalization
Paolo Gajo
University of Bologna
paolo.gajo2@unibo.it

Domenic Rosati
Dalhousie University
Domenic.Rosati@Dal.Ca

Hassan Sajjad
Dalhousie University
HSajjad@dal.ca

Alberto Barrón-Cedeño
University of Bologna
a.barron@unibo.it

Abstract
Dependency parsing is the task of inferring natural language structure, often approached by modeling word interactions via attention through biaffine scoring. This
mechanism works like self-attention in Transformers, where scores are calculated
for every pair of words in a sentence. However, unlike Transformer attention,
biaffine scoring does not use normalization prior to taking the softmax of the scores.
In this paper, we provide theoretical evidence and empirical results revealing that
a lack of normalization necessarily results in overparameterized parser models,
where the extra parameters compensate for the sharp softmax outputs produced by
high variance inputs to the biaffine scoring function. We argue that biaffine scoring
can be made substantially more efficient by performing score normalization. We
conduct experiments on semantic and syntactic dependency parsing in multiple
languages, along with latent graph inference on non-linguistic data, using various
settings of a k-hop parser. We train N -layer stacked BiLSTMs and evaluate the
parser’s performance with and without normalizing biaffine scores. Normalizing
allows us to achieve state-of-the-art performance with fewer samples and trainable
parameters. Code: https://github.com/paolo-gajo/EfficientSDP

1

Introduction

Dependency parsing (DP) consists in classifying node labels ti (words), edges eij (relations), and
edge labels rij (relation types) of a dependency graph [31]. A popular model for this task, introduced
by Dozat and Manning [7], entails modeling word interactions as a fully connected graph via biaffine
attention. Despite its simplicity, a number of models using this biaffine transformation [3, 7, 8, 13, 14]
require more parameters than necessary, due to what we identify as a lack of normalization of
its outputs. We hypothesize that this overparameterization is caused by the high variance of the
outputs, which extra parameters help mitigate. After showing that variance can be reduced through
normalization, we demonstrate that similar or better performance can be obtained for DP with fewer
parameters and training samples.
In this task, we consider a graph G “ pV, Eq comprising a set of nodes V, connected by a set of edges
E, with each edge eij P E connecting pairs of nodes pvi , vj q P V. In latent graph inference (LGI) for
dependency graphs, a sentence of |V| words is modeled as a |V| ˆ |V| graph via biaffine scoring [7]:
J
XW X J “ XpWQ WK
qX J “ XWQ pXWK qJ “ QK J ,

X P R|V|ˆd .

?
Observe that this is equivalent to the `
unnormalized
scores used in [38]’s self-attention: QK J { dk
˘
?
where AttentionpQ, K, V q “ Softmax QK J { dk V and dk is the output size of the keys.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

