Detecting High-Stakes Interactions
with Activation Probes
Alex McKenzie1∗ Urja Pawar1∗ Phil Blandfort1∗ William Bankes1,2∗
David Krueger3
Ekdeep Singh Lubana4,5,6 Dmitrii Krasheninnikov7
1
LASR Labs 2 University College London 3 MILA
4
Harvard University 5 NTT Research 6 Goodfire 7 University of Cambridge

Abstract
Monitoring is an important aspect of safely deploying Large Language Models (LLMs). This paper examines activation probes for detecting “high-stakes”
interactions—where the text indicates that the interaction might lead to significant
harm—as a critical, yet underexplored, target for such monitoring. We evaluate
several probe architectures trained on synthetic data, and find them to exhibit robust
generalization to diverse, out-of-distribution, real-world data. Probes’ performance
is comparable to that of prompted or finetuned medium-sized LLM monitors, while
offering computational savings of six orders-of-magnitude. These savings are enabled by reusing activations of the model that is being monitored. Our experiments
also highlight the potential of building resource-aware hierarchical monitoring
systems, where probes serve as an efficient initial filter and flag cases for more
expensive downstream analysis. We release our novel synthetic dataset and the
codebase at https://github.com/arrrlex/models-under-pressure.

1

Introduction

As general-purpose AI systems continue to proliferate throughout society, they are increasingly
used in contexts with the potential for significant
harm (Khosravi et al., 2024; Csernatoni, 2024;
Kumar et al., 2022). However, these systems
are susceptible to failures arising from misuse,
incomplete data, or misalignment with intended
objectives (Salhab et al., 2024; Bommasani et al.,
2022; Uuk et al., 2024). Monitoring, of model
inputs, internal states, or outputs, has been proposed as a solution to mitigate these risks by enabling the interception or flagging of potentially
harmful behaviour (Autio et al., 2024; Greenblatt et al., 2024b).
While monitoring is crucial, it involves a
trade-off between effectiveness and cost.
Monitoring techniques like Chain-of-Thought
analysis and guardrail safety classifier models
(Inan et al., 2023b; Zeng et al., 2024) can be
resource-intensive, prompting a need for more
economical solutions. Probes, which are often
minimalistic (e.g. linear) classifiers trained on
∗

Figure 1: Our activation probe achieves
comparable performance to more expensive
LLM baselines. The probe achieves performance
comparable to that of finetuned and prompted
LLM classifiers of intermediate sizes while being
around 1,000,000 times more efficient. For further
details see Figure 6.

Equal contribution. Correspondence to mail@alexmck.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

