Autoencoding Random Forests

Binh Duc Vu1∗
binh.vu@kcl.ac.uk

Jan Kapar2,3∗
kapar@leibniz-bips.de

Marvin N. Wright2,3
wright@leibniz-bips.de

David S. Watson1
david.watson@kcl.ac.uk

1

2

King’s College London
Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology – BIPS
3
University of Bremen

Abstract
We propose a principled method for autoencoding with random forests. Our strategy builds on foundational results from nonparametric statistics and spectral graph
theory to learn a low-dimensional embedding of the model that optimally represents
relationships in the data. We provide exact and approximate solutions to the decoding problem via constrained optimization, split relabeling, and nearest neighbors
regression. These methods effectively invert the compression pipeline, establishing
a map from the embedding space back to the input space using splits learned by
the ensemble’s constituent trees. The resulting decoders are universally consistent
under common regularity assumptions. The procedure works with supervised or
unsupervised models, providing a window into conditional or joint distributions.
We demonstrate various applications of this autoencoder, including powerful new
tools for visualization, compression, clustering, and denoising. Experiments illustrate the ease and utility of our method in a wide range of settings, including
tabular, image, and genomic data.

1

Introduction

Engineering compact, informative representations is central to many learning tasks [58, 96, 11, 44, 81].
In supervised applications, it can simplify regression or classification objectives, helping users better
understand the internal operations of large, complicated models [42, 104]. In reinforcement learning,
embeddings help agents navigate complex environments, imposing useful structure on a potentially
high-dimensional state space [2, 63]. In unsupervised settings, latent projections can be used for data
compression [69], visualization [93], clustering [97], and generative modeling [92].
The current state of the art in representation learning is dominated by deep neural networks (DNNs).
Indeed, the tendency of these algorithms to learn rich embeddings is widely cited as a key component
of their success [44], with some even arguing that large language models are essentially compression
engines [29]. It is less obvious how to infer latent factors from tree-based ensembles such as random
forests (RFs) [17], a popular and flexible function class widely used in areas like bioinformatics [23]
and econometrics [3]. DNNs are known to struggle in tabular settings with mixed continuous and
categorical covariates, where tree-based ensembles typically match or surpass their performance
[86, 48]. Though several authors have proposed methods for computing nonlinear embeddings with
RFs (see Sect. 2), these approaches tend to be heuristic in nature. Moreover, the task of decoding
latent vectors to recover input data in these pipelines remains unresolved.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

