VoxDet: Rethinking 3D Semantic Scene Completion as
Dense Object Detection

Wuyang Li1
Zhu Yu2
Alexandre Alahi1
1
Zhejiang University
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
wuyang.li@epfl.ch
yu_zhu@zju.edu.cn alexandre.alahi@epfl.ch
2

Project Page: https://vita-epfl.github.io/VoxDet/

Abstract
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) aims to reconstruct the 3D geometry and semantics of the surrounding environment. With dense voxel labels, prior works typically
formulate SSC as a dense segmentation task, independently classifying each voxel.
However, this paradigm neglects critical instance-centric discriminability, leading
to instance-level incompleteness and adjacent ambiguities. To address this, we
highlight a “free lunch” of SSC labels: the voxel-level class label has implicitly
told the instance-level insight, which is ever-overlooked by the community. Motivated by this observation, we first introduce a training-free Voxel-to-Instance
(VoxNT) trick: a simple yet effective method that freely converts voxel-level
class labels into instance-level offset labels. Building on this, we further propose
VoxDet, an instance-centric framework that reformulates the voxel-level SSC as
dense object detection by decoupling it into two sub-tasks: offset regression and
semantic prediction. Specifically, based on the lifted 3D volume, VoxDet first uses
(a) Spatially-decoupled Voxel Encoder to generate disentangled feature volumes
for the two sub-tasks, which learn task-specific spatial deformation in the densely
projected tri-perceptive space. Then, we deploy (b) Task-decoupled Dense Predictor to address SSC via dense detection. Here, we first regress a 4D offset field
to estimate distances (6 directions) between voxels and the corresponding object
boundaries in the voxel space. The regressed offsets are then used to guide the
instance-level aggregation in the classification branch, achieving instance-aware
scene completion. VoxDet can be deployed on both camera and LiDAR input and
jointly achieves state-of-the-art results on both benchmarks, which gives 63.0 IoU
on the SemanticKITTI test set, ranking 1st on the online leaderboard.

1

Introduction

Spatial AI [12] is crucial for autonomous systems to perceive and interpret the physical world. As
a critical step, precise reconstruction of geometric structures and semantics lays the foundation for
scene understanding [27, 41, 31], underpinning the downstream forecasting and planning [1, 14].
This capability is indispensable for applications such as autonomous driving and robotic navigation.
To this end, Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has attracted significant attention by simultaneously
inferring complete 3D geometry and semantics via occupancy representation. Prior SSC works can
be broadly categorized into LiDAR-based [55, 50, 66] and camera-based approaches [83, 34, 79, 22].
The former uses sparse 3D inputs (e.g., point clouds) for SSC to provide precise geometric information.
In contrast, camera-based methods have recently demonstrated promising potential due to their
flexibility and computational efficiency. They employ dedicated vision-centric algorithms to lift
2D imagery into 3D space, enabling SSC, including Features Line-of-Sight Projection (FLoSP) [6],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

