Beyond Scalar Rewards:
An Axiomatic Framework for Lexicographic MDPs

1

Mehran Shakerinava1 2 ∗ , Siamak Ravanbakhsh1 2 , Adam Oberman2 3 4
School of Computer Science, McGill University 2 Mila – Quebec AI Institute
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University 4 LawZero

Abstract
Recent work has formalized the reward hypothesis through the lens of expected
utility theory, by interpreting reward as utility. Hausner’s foundational work
showed that dropping the continuity axiom leads to a generalization of expected
utility theory where utilities are lexicographically ordered vectors of arbitrary
dimension. In this paper, we extend this result by identifying a simple and practical
condition under which preferences in a Markov Decision Process (MDP) cannot be
represented by scalar rewards, necessitating a 2-dimensional reward function. We
provide a full characterization of such reward functions, as well as the general ddimensional case under a memorylessness assumption on preferences. Furthermore,
we show that optimal policies in this setting retain many desirable properties of
their scalar-reward counterparts, while in the Constrained MDP (CMDP) setting –
another common multiobjective setting – they do not.

1

Introduction

Framing decision-making as an optimization problem typically begins with specifying one or more
utility functions and defining an objective with respect to these utilities. The reward hypothesis of
Reinforcement Learning (RL) advocates for “maximization of the expected value of the cumulative
sum of a received scalar signal” (Sutton, 2004; Sutton & Barto, 2018; Littman, 2017). Other
approaches include specifying several utility functions with the objective of finding a solution
whose expected utilities are Pareto optimal. In the Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP)
framework (Altman, 1999), the goal is to maximize the expectation of a primary utility subject
to constraints on the expected values of auxiliary utilities. Another approach is lexicographic
optimization, where utilities are ordered by priority, and the objective is to lexicographically maximize
the expected utility vector (Gábor et al., 1998).
It is common to pick one such objective based on heuristics, and then study its properties and propose
algorithms for it. The axiomatic approach goes in the opposite direction and characterizes a family of
utility functions and an objective that correspond to a set of assumptions (axioms) on our preferences.
In other words, it shows the sufficiency of an objective in capturing certain properties. For instance,
it is well-known that a lexicographic order cannot be scalarized, e.g., an order-preserving mapping
from a lexicographically ordered square to a line is not possible even though both sets have the same
cardinality. In the axiomatic expected utility framework, one can show that a utility function that
cannot be scalarized can always be captured by a lexicographic utility function (Hausner, 1954).
In this work, motivated by potential applications in AI safety, we show how this axiomatic approach
can lead to lexicographic objectives in MDPs. A lexicographic objective assumes that an infinitesimal
increase in the first-priority objective is preferred to any amount of increase in the second-priority
objective. Such settings might appear when there is a critical safety requirement that should be
∗

Correspondence to <mehran.shakerinava@mail.mcgill.ca>. Work done in part while interning at LawZero.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

