Tiled Flash Linear Attention:
More Efficient Linear RNN and xLSTM Kernels
Maximilian Beck1,2 Korbinian Pöppel1,2 Phillip Lippe2∗ Sepp Hochreiter1,2
1
ELLIS Unit, LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz, Austria
2
NXAI GmbH, Linz, Austria

Abstract
Linear RNNs with gating recently demonstrated competitive performance compared to Transformers in language modeling. Although their linear compute
scaling in sequence length offers theoretical runtime advantages over Transformers, realizing these benefits in practice requires optimized custom kernels, as
Transformers rely on the highly efficient Flash Attention kernels (Dao, 2024).
Leveraging the chunkwise-parallel formulation of linear RNNs, Flash Linear Attention (FLA) (Yang & Zhang, 2024) shows that linear RNN kernels are faster than
Flash Attention, by parallelizing over chunks of the input sequence. However, since
the chunk size of FLA is limited, many intermediate states must be materialized
in GPU memory. This leads to low arithmetic intensity and causes high memory
consumption and IO cost, especially for long-context pre-training. In this work, we
present Tiled Flash Linear Attention (TFLA), a novel kernel algorithm for linear
RNNs, that enables arbitrary large chunk sizes and high arithmetic intensity by
introducing an additional level of sequence parallelization within each chunk. First,
we apply TFLA to the xLSTM with matrix memory, the mLSTM (Beck et al., 2024).
Second, we propose an mLSTM variant with sigmoid input gate and reduced computation for even faster kernel runtimes at equal language modeling performance.
In our speed benchmarks, we show that our new mLSTM kernels based on TFLA
outperform highly optimized Flash Attention, Linear Attention and Mamba kernels,
setting a new state of the art for efficient long-context sequence modeling primitives.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/NX-AI/mlstm_kernels

1

Introduction

With the trend of training models of ever increasing size with large datasets on thousands of GPUs, it
becomes increasingly important to optimize the model architecture as well as its low-level implementations for modern hardware. Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), which are the core architecture
of nowadays state-of-the-art models are highly optimized, but the computational requirements of
self-attention scale quadratically with sequence length. This creates significant challenges for both
training and inference on long context.
Recently, recurrent alternatives with linear scaling in sequence length (Beck et al., 2024; Sun et al.,
2023; Dao & Gu, 2024; Yang et al., 2024b) promise efficiency gains, especially on long sequences and
during inference while providing competitive performance. The success of these emerging recurrent
architectures is based on two main pillars: (1) A parallel or chunkwise-parallel formulation (Sun
et al., 2023; Hua et al., 2022), which, like Attention, calculates all outputs in parallel during training,
and (2) kernel implementations that are close to or exceed training speeds of FlashAttention (Dao,
2024).
Yang et al. (2024b) show that their custom Flash Linear Attention (FLA) kernels, based on
the chunkwise-parallel formulation of linear RNNs, achieve faster runtimes than FlashAttention.
∗

Now at Google Deepmind.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

