Rebalancing Return Coverage for Conditional
Sequence Modeling in Ofﬂine Reinforcement
Learning

Wensong Bai1 , Chufan Chen1 , Yichao Fu1 , Qihang Xu1 , Chao Zhang1,2,∗, Hui Qian1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Advanced Technology Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{wensongb,chufan.chen,fuyichao,22351233,zczju,qianhui}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in ofﬂine reinforcement learning (RL) have underscored the
capabilities of conditional sequence modeling (CSM), a paradigm that models the
action distribution conditioned on both historical trajectories and target returns
associated with each state. However, due to the imbalanced return distribution
caused by suboptimal datasets, CSM is grappling with a serious distributional shift
problem when conditioning on high returns. While recent approaches attempt to
empirically tackle this challenge through return rebalancing techniques such as
weighted sampling and value-regularized supervision, the relationship between return rebalancing and the performance of CSM methods is not well understood. In
this paper, we reveal that both expert-level and full-spectrum return-coverage critically inﬂuence the performance and sample efﬁciency of CSM policies. Building
on this ﬁnding, we devise a simple yet effective return-coverage rebalancing mechanism that can be seamlessly integrated into common CSM frameworks, including
the most widely used one, Decision Transformer (DT). The resulting CSM algorithm, referred to as Return-rebalanced Value-regularized Decision Transformer
(RVDT), integrates both implicit and explicit return-coverage rebalancing mechanisms, and achieves state-of-the-art performance in the D4RL experiments.

1

Introduction

Ofﬂine RL aims to learn effective policies solely from previously collected datasets, without any
further environment interaction [40, 17, 25, 30]. Recent advancements in ofﬂine RL primarily focus on the use of conditional sequence modeling (CSM), where the core idea is to learn the returnconditioned distribution of actions at each state given historical information [61, 25, 65, 66, 26]. One
of the most representative methods in CSM is the decision transformer (DT) [11], wherein historical
trajectories composed of multiple return-state-action triplets are exploited to train a Transformerbased model. During inference time, the model predicts a sequence of actions conditioned on a target
return, effectively reframing the ofﬂine RL problem as a supervised learning task. By enabling the
policy to make decisions directly from temporally extended trajectories, this paradigm circumvents
the need for recursive value estimation, thereby avoiding both the challenges of Bellman completeness and the bootstrapping errors associated with dynamic programming-based methods [11, 68].
However, CSM-based algorithms encounter substantial difﬁculties when learning from suboptimal
datasets, particularly due to the imbalance between near-optimal and low-return trajectories within
datasets [34, 42]. This uneven distribution of trajectory quality in the training dataset may induce a
∗

Corresponding author: zczju@zju.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

