Diffusion Tree Sampling: Scalable inference-time
alignment of diffusion models

Vineet Jain

Kusha Sareen
Mohammad Pedramfar
Siamak Ravanbakhsh
Mila – Québec AI Institute, McGill University
{jain.vineet,kusha.sareen,mohammad.pedramfar,siamak.ravanbakhsh}@mila.quebec

Abstract
Adapting a pretrained diffusion model to new objectives at inference time remains
an open problem in generative modeling. Existing steering methods suffer from
inaccurate value estimation, especially at high noise levels, which biases guidance.
Moreover, information from past runs is not reused to improve sample quality,
resulting in inefficient use of compute. Inspired by the success of Monte Carlo Tree
Search, we address these limitations by casting inference-time alignment as a search
problem that reuses past computations. We introduce a tree-based approach that
samples from the reward-aligned target density by propagating terminal rewards
back through the diffusion chain and iteratively refining value estimates with each
additional generation. Our proposed method, Diffusion Tree Sampling ( DTS ),
produces asymptotically exact samples from the target distribution in the limit of
infinite rollouts, and its greedy variant, Diffusion Tree Search (DTS⋆ ), performs a
global search for high reward samples. On MNIST and CIFAR-10 class-conditional
generation, DTS matches the FID of the best-performing baseline with up to 10×
less compute. In text-to-image generation and language completion tasks, DTS⋆
effectively searches for high reward samples that match best-of-N with up to 5×
less compute. By reusing information from previous generations, we get an anytime
algorithm that turns additional compute into steadily better samples, providing a
scalable approach for inference-time alignment of diffusion models. Project page:
https://diffusion-tree-sampling.github.io.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as one of the most powerful frameworks for generative modeling,
achieving state-of-the-art results across a wide range of modalities, including image synthesis
[30; 75; 64], molecule conformer generation [32; 89], and text generation [68; 48]. Despite their
success, adapting a pretrained diffusion model to satisfy new, user-defined objectives at inference
time without expensive retraining or fine-tuning remains a major challenge [79].
Most objectives can be cast as a reward function, turning alignment into a posterior sampling problem
where the target is to sample from the pretrained model density weighted by exponentiated reward.
The key challenge is that rewards are only available at the end of the denoising trajectory. So,
inference-time alignment seeks to guide the denoising process based on unseen terminal rewards.
A range of different methods have been proposed – gradient-based guidance [17; 11; 3], where one
uses reward gradients to bias the denoising process; sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) [84; 77; 7; 19; 39]
which maintains a population of particles and resamples them during denoising based on an estimate
of terminal rewards; or more recently, search-based methods [45; 46; 50] that perform a local greedy
search based on approximate rewards. The common issue undermining all of these methods is that
they rely on certain approximations to estimate the unseen terminal rewards. As we demonstrate in
Section 3, these approximations bias decisions and degrade sample quality.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

