Can We Infer Confidential Properties of Training Data
from LLMs?
Pengrun Huang, Chhavi Yadav, Kamalika Chaudhuri† , Ruihan Wu†
University of California, San Diego
{peh006, cyadav, kamalika, ruw076}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly fine-tuned on domain-specific
datasets to support applications in fields such as healthcare, finance, and law. These
fine-tuning datasets often have sensitive and confidential dataset-level properties —
such as patient demographics or disease prevalence—that are not intended to be
revealed. While prior work has studied property inference attacks on discriminative
models (e.g., image classification models) and generative models (e.g., GANs for
image data), it remains unclear if such attacks transfer to LLMs. In this work,
we introduce PropInfer, a benchmark task for evaluating property inference in
LLMs under two fine-tuning paradigms: question-answering and chat-completion.
Built on the ChatDoctor dataset, our benchmark includes a range of property types
and task configurations. We further propose two tailored attacks: a prompt-based
generation attack and a shadow-model attack leveraging word frequency signals.
Empirical evaluations across multiple pretrained LLMs show the success of our
attacks, revealing a previously unrecognized vulnerability in LLMs. We release
our code at github.com/PengrunH/Property_inference_attack_LLM.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed in real-world applications across domains
such as healthcare [14], finance [19], and law [17]. To adapt to domain-specific tasks, such as
customer service or tele-medicine, these models are typically fine-tuned on proprietary datasets that
are relevant to the tasks at hand before deployment. These domain-specific fine-tuning datasets
however often contain dataset-level confidential information. For example, a customer-service dataset
sourced from a business may contain information about their typical customer-profile; a doctor-patient
chat dataset sourced from a hospital may contain patient demographics or the fraction of patients with
a sensitive disease such as HIV. Many businesses and medical practices would consider this kind of
information non-public for business or other reasons. Thus, unintentional leakage of this information
through a deployed model could lead to a breach of confidentiality. Unlike individual-level privacy
breaches that is typically addressed by rigorous definitions such as differential privacy [9, 10], the
risk here is the leakage of dataset-level properties.
Prior work has investigated this form of leakage, commonly referred to as property inference [2].
Most of the literature here has focused on two settings. The first involves discriminative models
trained on tabular or image data [2, 11, 6, 28, 33, 12], where the goal is to infer attributes such as
the gender distribution in a hospital dataset. The second focuses on generative models [34, 31], such
as GANs for face synthesis, where attackers may attempt to recover aggregate properties such as
the racial composition of the training data. In both cases, property inference has been shown to be
feasible, and specialized attacks have been proposed to exploit these vulnerabilities.
1†

Equal advising.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

