Revisiting Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader with
Unbounded Perturbations in Bandit Problems
Jongyeong Lee
Korea Institute of Science and Technology∗
jongyeong@kist.re.kr

Junya Honda
Kyoto University, RIKEN AIP
honda@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Shinji Ito
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN AIP
shinji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National University
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) policies have achieved Best-of-BothWorlds (BOBW) results in various settings through hybrid regularizers, whereas
analogous results for Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader (FTPL) remain limited due to
inherent analytical challenges. To advance the analytical foundations of FTPL, we
revisit classical FTRL-FTPL duality for unbounded perturbations and establish
BOBW results for FTPL under a broad family of asymmetric unbounded Fréchettype perturbations, including hybrid perturbations combining Gumbel-type and
Fréchet-type tails. These results not only extend the BOBW results of FTPL but
also offer new insights into designing alternative FTPL policies competitive with
hybrid regularization approaches. Motivated by earlier observations in two-armed
bandits, we further investigate the connection between the 1/2-Tsallis entropy and
a Fréchet-type perturbation. Our numerical observations suggest that it corresponds
to a symmetric Fréchet-type perturbation, and based on this, we establish the first
BOBW guarantee for symmetric unbounded perturbations in the two-armed setting.
In contrast, in general multi-armed bandits, we find an instance in which symmetric
Fréchet-type perturbations violate the key condition for standard BOBW analysis,
which is a problem not observed with asymmetric or nonnegative Fréchet-type
perturbations. Although this example does not rule out alternative analyses achieving BOBW results, it suggests the limitations of directly applying the relationship
observed in two-armed cases to the general case and thus emphasizes the need for
further investigation to fully understand the behavior of FTPL in broader settings.

1

Introduction

In multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems, an agent plays an arm It from a set of K arms at each round
t ∈ [T ] := {1, . . . , T } over a time horizon T . After playing an arm, the agent observes only the loss
⊤
ℓt,It of the played arm, where the loss vectors ℓt = (ℓt,1 , . . . , ℓt,K ) ∈ [0, 1]K are determined by the
environment. Given the constraints of partial feedback, the agent must handle the tradeoff between
gathering information about the arms and playing arms strategically to minimize total loss.
Although numerous policies have been developed for MAB, many of them can be largely classified
into two primary frameworks, namely Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader (FTPL) [32] and Follow-theRegularized-Leader (FTRL) [6]. While FTPL was inspired by a game theoretic approach [22, 25]
and FTRL emerged from the context of online optimization [26], both frameworks have analogs
∗

He was affiliated with Seoul National University at the time of submission.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

