DKDR: Dynamic Knowledge Distillation for
Reliability in Federated Learning

Yueyang Yuan1,2† , Wenke Huang1,2† , Guancheng Wan1† ,
Kaiqi Guan1 , He Li1 , Mang Ye1∗
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
{yueyangyuan, wenkehuang, guanchengwan, yemang}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has demonstrated a promising future in privacy-friendly
collaboration but it faces the data heterogeneity problem. Knowledge Distillation
(KD) can serve as an effective method to address this issue. However, challenges
arise from the unreliability of existing distillation methods in multi-domain scenarios. Prevalent distillation solutions primarily aim to fit the distributions of
the global model directly by minimizing forward Kullback-Leibler divergence
(KLD). This results in significant bias when the outputs of the global model are
multi-peaked, which indicates the unreliability of distillation pathway. Meanwhile, cross-domain update conflicts can notably reduce the accuracy of the global
model (teacher model) in certain domains, reflecting the unreliability of the
teacher model in these domains. In this work, we propose DKDR (Dynamic
Knowledge Distillation for Reliability in Federated Learning), which dynamically
assigns weights to forward and reverse KLD based on knowledge discrepancies.
This enables clients to fit the outputs from the teacher precisely. Moreover, we
use knowledge decoupling to identify domain experts, thus clients can acquire
reliable domain knowledge from experts. Empirical results from single-domain
and multi-domain image classification tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method and the efficiency of its key modules. The code is available at
https://github.com/YueyangYuan/DKDR.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a collaborative paradigm [21, 60, 27, 14–16, 62], enabling multiple clients to
jointly train a shared global model [39, 28, 15] while ensuring privacy protection [52]. However,
the distributed data is collected from different sources with diverse preferences and brings the nonindependent and identically distributed (non-IID) characteristics. Knowledge distillation [13, 4]
addresses this challenge effectively by aligning the outputs of local models with the global model. It
brings the optimization objectives of each client closer together thus resolving the problem.
However, existing distillation methods [25, 11, 36, 5] typically use forward KLD to fit the distributions
of the global model. We argue that this approach is unreliable in multi-domain scenarios. Given
the global model distribution Z(y|x) and the local model distribution Zw (y|x) parameterized by
w, standard knowledge distillation objectives aim to minimize the forward KLD between them,
denoted as KL[Z|Zw ]. This approach compels Zw to encompass all modes of Z. However, we
†

Equal Contribution.

* Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

