Option-aware Temporally Abstracted Value for
Offline Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning

Hongjoon Ahn1∗ Heewoong Choi1∗ Jisu Han2∗ Taesup Moon1,2,3†
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE), Seoul National University
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence (IPAI), Seoul National University
3
ASRI / INMC, Seoul National University
{hong0805, chw0501, jshcdi, tsmoon}@snu.ac.kr

2

Abstract
Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) offers a practical learning
paradigm in which goal-reaching policies are trained from abundant state–action
trajectory datasets without additional environment interaction. However, offline
GCRL still struggles with long-horizon tasks, even with recent advances that
employ hierarchical policy structures, such as HIQL [33]. Identifying the root cause
of this challenge, we observe the following insight. Firstly, performance bottlenecks
mainly stem from the high-level policy’s inability to generate appropriate subgoals.
Secondly, when learning the high-level policy in the long-horizon regime, the
sign of the advantage estimate frequently becomes incorrect. Thus, we argue that
improving the value function to produce a clear advantage estimate for learning
the high-level policy is essential. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective
solution: Option-aware Temporally Abstracted value learning, dubbed OTA, which
incorporates temporal abstraction into the temporal-difference learning process. By
modifying the value update to be option-aware, our approach contracts the effective
horizon length, enabling better advantage estimates even in long-horizon regimes.
We experimentally show that the high-level policy learned using the OTA value
function achieves strong performance on complex tasks from OGBench [32], a
recently proposed offline GCRL benchmark, including maze navigation and visual
robotic manipulation environments. Our code is available at https://github.com/otav/ota-v

1

Introduction

Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) has emerged as a practical framework for
real-world applications by leveraging pre-collected datasets to train goal-reaching policies without
requiring additional environment interaction [23, 32]. However, learning an accurate goal-conditioned
value function in long-horizon settings remains a major challenge, as naively training the value
function often leads to noisy estimates and erroneous policies [35, 20, 33]. To mitigate the learning
of an erroneous policy, Hierarchical Implicit Q-Learning (HIQL) [33], one of the state-of-the-art
methods, adopts a simple hierarchical structure in which a high-level policy predicts subgoals, and
a low-level policy learns to execute actions toward those subgoals. Though a hierarchical policy
is still learned from the noisy value function, both policies receive more reliable learning signals
than when training a flat, non-hierarchical policy. However, despite reasonable performance gains
of hierarchical methods in some long-horizon environments, a recent challenging benchmark [32]
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

