CLiFT: Compressive Light-Field Tokens for
Compute Efficient and Adaptive Neural Rendering

Zhengqing Wang1 Yuefan Wu1 Jiacheng Chen1
Fuyang Zhang1 Yasutaka Furukawa1,2
1

Simon Fraser University

2

Wayve

Abstract
This paper proposes a neural rendering approach that represents a scene as “compressed light-field tokens (CLiFTs)”, retaining rich appearance and geometric
information of a scene. CLiFT enables compute-efficient rendering by compressed
tokens, while being capable of changing the number of tokens to represent a scene
or render a novel view with one trained network. Concretely, given a set of images,
multi-view encoder tokenizes the images with the camera poses. Latent-space
K-means selects a reduced set of rays as cluster centroids using the tokens. The
multi-view “condenser” compresses the information of all the tokens into the centroid tokens to construct CLiFTs. At test time, given a target view and a compute
budget (i.e., the number of CLiFTs), the system collects the specified number of
nearby tokens and synthesizes a novel view using a compute-adaptive renderer.
Extensive experiments on RealEstate10K and DL3DV datasets quantitatively and
qualitatively validate our approach, achieving significant data reduction with comparable rendering quality and the highest overall rendering score, while providing
trade-offs of data size, rendering quality, and rendering speed. Check demos and
code on the project page: https://clift-nvs.github.io.

1

Introduction

Global consumption of visual media is skyrocketing, driven by platforms like Instagram, YouTube,
and TikTok. Billions of photos and videos are captured, shared, and streamed daily, placing enormous
demands on storage and bandwidth. The success of these platforms owes much to advances in
visual data compression, allowing high-resolution content to be delivered efficiently across a range
of devices and network conditions. From images to high-definition videos, modern compression
algorithms have enabled rich visual experiences to become a ubiquitous part of everyday life.
Beyond passive viewing of recorded media, interactive novel view synthesis (NVS) is gaining
momentum, allowing users to freely navigate virtual environments. Neural rendering techniques such
as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) are the driving forces. Recent
research has explored efficiency of neural rendering pipelines, including compression of radiance
fields [24, 35], sparse representations [17, 22], and adaptive quality rendering [9, 36]
Along the line of interactive visual media, reconstruction-free novel view synthesis is emerging
as a promising direction. Models such as Large View Synthesis Models (LVSM) [12] and Scene
Representation Transformers (SRT) [25] synthesize novel views directly, without defining bottleneck
geometric and photometric representations by heuristics and reconstructing them. By avoiding explicit
reconstruction, these methods would better handle scene dynamics and capture fine-grained visual
details directly from the data. Compute-efficient representations and compute-adaptive rendering
within these systems would unlock the full potential of NVS technology, driving new applications
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

