AccuQuant: Simulating Multiple Denoising Steps for
Quantizing Diffusion Models

Seunghoon Lee∗ Jeongwoo Choi∗ Byunggwan Son

Jaehyeon Moon

Jeimin Jeon

Bumsub Ham†

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/AccuQuant

Abstract
We present in this paper a novel post-training quantization (PTQ) method, dubbed
AccuQuant, for diffusion models. We show analytically and empirically that quantization errors for diffusion models are accumulated over denoising steps in a
sampling process. To alleviate the error accumulation problem, AccuQuant minimizes the discrepancies between outputs of a full-precision diffusion model and its
quantized version within a couple of denoising steps. That is, it simulates multiple
denoising steps of a diffusion sampling process explicitly for quantization, accounting the accumulated errors over multiple denoising steps, which is in contrast to
previous approaches to imitating a training process of diffusion models, namely,
minimizing the discrepancies independently for each step. We also present an
efficient implementation technique for AccuQuant, together with a novel objective,
which reduces a memory complexity significantly from O(n) to O(1), where n
is the number of denoising steps. We demonstrate the efficacy and efficiency of
AccuQuant across various tasks and diffusion models on standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [17, 49] have shown the effectiveness for various generation tasks, including textto-image generation [41, 43], audio generation [29], and video generation [2, 1, 12]. In the context of
image generation, diffusion models train neural networks to denoise images progressively, corrupted
by Gaussian noise, reversing the noise-adding process, and recovering original images. At test time,
starting from a random noise, diffusion models perform a sampling process, where the trained neural
networks denoise the corrupted image gradually. To generate realistic images, the sampling process
typically involves lots of denoising steps, which is computationally demanding. To overcome this
problem, many approaches attempt to reduce the number of denoising steps [35, 55], providing an
efficient image generation process. Another line of research focuses on compressing neural networks
themselves (e.g., using network quantization [25, 19] or pruning [4]) to reduce the computational
cost for each denoising step.
Network quantization lowers bit-widths of full-precision weights and activations into lower ones,
enabling a fixed-point computation for efficient inference. There are mainly two approaches to
quantizing neural networks: Quantization-aware training (QAT) and post-training quantization (PTQ).
QAT optimizes network weights and quantization parameters (e.g., step-sizes and zero-points) jointly
using entire training samples, which is computationally expensive, making it hard to apply QAT
for large models (e.g., ViTs [8]). PTQ has recently gained significant attention across various
models [37, 26, 34, 36] due to its efficiency. In contrast to QAT, PTQ calibrates quantization
parameters only without retraining the network weights, using a small subset of training samples.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

