Can Knowledge-Graph-based Retrieval Augmented
Generation Really Retrieve What You Need?

Junchi Yu1 , Yujie Liu2 , Jindong Gu1 , Philip Torr1 , Dongzhan Zhou2∗
1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China
junchi.yu@eng.ox.ac.uk, liuyujie1@pjlab.org.cn, jindong.gu@eng.ox.ac.uk,
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk, zhoudongzhan@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) based on knowledge graphs (KGs) enhances large language models (LLMs) with structural and textual external knowledge. Yet, existing KG-based RAG methods struggle to retrieve accurate and
diverse information when handling complex queries. By modeling KG-based
retrieval as a multi-step decision process, Process Reward Models (PRMs) offer a
promising solution to align the retrieval behavior with the query-specific knowledge
requirements. However, PRMs heavily rely on process-level supervision signals
that are expensive and hard to obtain on KGs. To address this challenge, we propose
GraphFlow, a framework that efficiently retrieves accurate and diverse knowledge
required for complex queries from text-rich KGs. GraphFlow employs a detailed
balance objective with local exploration to jointly optimize a retrieval policy and a
flow estimator. The flow estimator factorizes the outcome reward of the retrieval
results into the intermediate retrieval steps. Such reward factorization guides the
retrieval policy to retrieve candidates from KGs in proportion to their outcome
reward. This allows GraphFlow to explore relevant regions of KGs that yield
diverse and accurate results. We evaluate GraphFlow on STaRK benchmark, which
includes real-world queries from multiple domains over text-rich KGs. GraphFlow
outperforms strong KG-based RAG baselines including GPT-4o by 10% performance gain on both retrieval accuracy and diversity metrics. GraphFlow also shows
strong generalization by effectively retrieving information from unseen KGs to
support new-domain queries, highlighting its effectiveness and robustness 2 .

1

Introduction

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [36] has emerged as a promising framework to reduce the
hallucination of Large Language Models (LLMs) by mitigating the gap between model knowledge
and factual knowledge [28, 89, 26]. Traditional RAG usually employs an unstructured vector-indexed
database as the external knowledge source, where the text corpus is indexed using pretrained encoders
to support retrieval. Recent work has explored knowledge graphs (KGs) [68] as a structural alternative
to the external knowledge source of RAG [59]. KGs enjoy several advantages over the vector-indexed
database in traditional RAG, such as representing relational information with graph structures [88],
integrating knowledge from heterogeneous resources [59], and enhancing interpretability by neuralsymbolic reasoning [87]. Thus, KG-based RAG has demonstrated great potential in enhancing LLMs
in many domains, including medical diagnosis [67], biochemistry [77], and physics [72].
∗
2

Corresponding Author
Code is available https://github.com/Samyu0304/GraphFlow

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

