DAIL: Beyond Task Ambiguity for
Language-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
Runpeng Xie∗1 , Quanwei Wang∗2 , Hao Hu3 , Zherui Zhou4 , Ni Mu2 , Xiyun Li5 , Yiqin Yang†1 ,
Shuang Xu1 , Qianchuan Zhao2 , Bo Xu†1
1

The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 3 Moonshot AI
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University 5 Tecent AI Lab
xierunpeng2021@ia.ac.cn, wqw21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Comprehending natural language and following human instructions are critical
capabilities for intelligent agents. However, the flexibility of linguistic instructions induces substantial ambiguity across language-conditioned tasks, severely
degrading algorithmic performance. To address these limitations, we present
a novel method named DAIL (Distributional Aligned Learning), featuring two
key components: distributional policy and semantic alignment. Specifically, we
provide theoretical results that the value distribution estimation mechanism enhances task differentiability. Meanwhile, the semantic alignment module captures the correspondence between trajectories and linguistic instructions. Extensive experimental results on both structured and visual observation benchmarks
demonstrate that DAIL effectively resolves instruction ambiguities, achieving
superior performance to baseline methods. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/RunpengXie/Distributional-Aligned-Learning.

1

Introduction

Artificial agents are anticipated to master diverse skills while effectively interpreting human instructions and generalizing across various tasks. Therefore, comprehension and following of natural language emerges as critical capabilities for agents in this context. For example, languageconditioned agents have achieved remarkable success in robotic manipulation [36, 6], text-based
environments [35, 7], visual navigation [62, 22], and autonomous driving [14, 51]. The fundamental
requirement has propelled language-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) to the forefront of
research, which focuses on enabling agents to interpret and execute natural language instructions
through RL frameworks.
Recent advancements in the language-conditioned RL domain have focused on bridging the gap
between linguistic understanding and decision-making processes, aiming to create agents capable
of executing complex instructions with human-like adaptability. For example, some works [12, 4]
integrate language-conditioned policy with trial-and-error learning, significantly improving the
performance and sample efficiency in robot task acquisition. Meanwhile, some studies [18, 19]
leverage expert demonstrations to map language instructions to reward signals directly to address the
issue of sparse rewards in language-conditioned RL. However, linguistic instructions exhibit high
flexibility, which induces exponential growth in task space. In this case, identical tasks may have
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to Yiqin Yang and Bo Xu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

