QiMeng-NeuComBack: Self-Evolving Translation
from IR to Assembly Code

Hainan Fang1,2 , Yuanbo Wen1 , Jun Bi1 , Yihan Wang1,2 , Tonghui He1,2 ,
Yanlin Tang1,2 , Di Huang1 , Jiaming Guo1 , Rui Zhang1 , Qi Guo1 , Yunji Chen1,2∗
1
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{fanghainan23s, wenyuanbo, bijun, wangyihan25s, hetonghui23s,
tangyanlin21s, huangdi, guojiaming, zhangrui, guoqi, cyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Compilers, while essential, are notoriously complex systems that demand prohibitively expensive human expertise to develop and maintain. The recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) offer a compelling new paradigm:
Neural Compilation, which could potentially simplify compiler development for
new architectures and facilitate the discovery of innovative optimization techniques. However, several critical obstacles impede its practical adoption. Firstly,
a significant lack of dedicated benchmarks and robust evaluation methodologies
hinders objective assessment and tracking of progress in the field. Secondly, systematically enhancing the reliability and performance of LLM-generated assembly
remains a critical challenge. Addressing these challenges, this paper introduces
NeuComBack, a novel benchmark dataset specifically designed for IR-to-assembly
compilation. Leveraging this dataset, we first define a foundational Neural Compilation workflow and conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the capabilities of recent
frontier LLMs on Neural Compilation, establishing new performance baselines. We
further propose a self-evolving prompt optimization method that enables LLMs to
iteratively evolve their internal prompt strategies by extracting insights from prior
self-debugging traces, thereby enhancing their neural compilation capabilities. Experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves both the functional
correctness and the performance of LLM-generated assembly code. Compared
to baseline prompts, the functional correctness rates improved from 44% to 64%
on x86_64 and from 36% to 58% on aarch64, respectively. More significantly,
among the 16 correctly generated x86_64 programs using our method, 14 (87.5%)
surpassed clang-O3 performance. These consistent improvements across diverse
architectures (x86_64 and aarch64) and program distributions (NeuComBack L1
and L2) validate our method’s superiority over conventional approaches and its
potential for broader adoption in low-level neural compilation.

1

Introduction

Compilers are indispensable and highly complex software systems, meticulously engineered over
decades to translate high-level programming languages into low-level machine code executable by
specific hardware architectures (Lattner & Adve, 2004). This process involves multiple stages of
analysis, transformation, and optimization, often requiring deep expertise and significant development
effort. In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant progress in natural
language processing (OpenAI, 2024b; Liu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a; Grattafiori et al., 2024)
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

