TRIDENT: Tri-Modal Molecular Representation
Learning with Taxonomic Annotations and Local
Correspondence

Feng Jiang1 Mangal Prakash2 Hehuan Ma1 Jianyuan Deng2 Yuzhi Guo1
Amina Mollaysa2 Tommaso Mansi2 Rui Liao2 Junzhou Huang1
1

University of Texas at Arlington

2

Johnson & Johnson Innovative Medicine
{fxj8843, hehuan.ma, yuzhi.guo}@mavs.uta.edu {jzhuang}@uta.edu
{MPraka12, JDeng34, MAminanm, TMansi, RLiao2}@ITS.JNJ.com

Abstract
Molecular property prediction aims to learn representations that map chemical
structures to functional properties. While multimodal learning has emerged as a
powerful paradigm to learn molecular representations, prior works have largely
overlooked textual and taxonomic information of molecules for representation
learning. We introduce TRIDENT, a novel framework that integrates molecular
SMILES, textual descriptions, and taxonomic functional annotations to learn rich
molecular representations. To achieve this, we curate a comprehensive dataset of
molecule-text pairs with structured, multi-level functional annotations. Instead
of relying on conventional contrastive loss, TRIDENT employs a volume-based
alignment objective to jointly align tri-modal features at the global level, enabling
soft, geometry-aware alignment across modalities. Additionally, TRIDENT introduces a novel local alignment objective that captures detailed relationships
between molecular substructures and their corresponding sub-textual descriptions.
A momentum-based mechanism dynamically balances global and local alignment,
enabling the model to learn both broad functional semantics and fine-grained
structure-function mappings. TRIDENT achieves state-of-the-art performance on
18 downstream tasks, demonstrating the value of combining SMILES, textual, and
taxonomic functional annotations for molecular property prediction. Our code and
data are available at https://github.com/uta-smile/TRIDENT.

1

Introduction

Molecular representation learning, which converts complex chemical structures into computational
features, has been instrumental in advancing various aspects of drug discovery including virtual
screening, and molecular design [15, 4, 34]. Multi-modal molecular models further enhance representation quality by integrating structural, textual, and functional information, enabling better
generalization and predictive performance [16]. These approaches hold promise for unlocking deeper
insights into chemical space and accelerating the discovery of therapeutic compounds with desired
properties.
However, current multimodal approaches [21, 35] face three key limitations: (1) Overlooking finegrained annotations across taxonomies: Most existing methods simplify the representation of
molecules by focusing on unified functional descriptions, neglecting the nuanced annotations provided
by different taxonomic systems. As illustrated in Figure 2, the same molecule may have distinct
emphases depending on the taxonomy: for example, the LOTUS Tree [33] taxonomy highlights
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

