DPA: A One-stop Metric to Measure Bias
Amplification in Classification Datasets

Bhanu Tokas∗
Arizona State University
bhanu.tokas@asu.edu

Rahul Nair∗
Arizona State University
rnair21@asu.edu

Hannah Kerner
Arizona State University
hkerner@asu.edu

Abstract
Most ML datasets today contain biases. When we train models on these datasets,
they often not only learn these biases but can worsen them — a phenomenon
known as bias amplification. Several co-occurrence-based metrics have been
proposed to measure bias amplification in classification datasets. They measure
bias amplification between a protected attribute (e.g., gender) and a task (e.g.,
cooking). These metrics also support fine-grained bias analysis by identifying the
direction in which a model amplifies biases. However, co-occurrence-based metrics
have limitations — some fail to measure bias amplification in balanced datasets,
while others fail to measure negative bias amplification. To solve these issues,
recent work proposed a predictability-based metric called leakage amplification
(LA). However, LA cannot identify the direction in which a model amplifies biases.
We propose Directional Predictability Amplification (DPA), a predictability-based
metric that is (1) directional, (2) works with balanced and unbalanced datasets, and
(3) correctly identifies positive and negative bias amplification. DPA eliminates
the need to evaluate models on multiple metrics to verify these three aspects.
DPA also improves over prior predictability-based metrics like LA: it is less
sensitive to the choice of attacker function (a hyperparameter in predictabilitybased metrics), reports scores within a bounded range, and accounts for dataset
bias by measuring relative changes in predictability. Our experiments on wellknown datasets like COMPAS (a tabular dataset), COCO, and ImSitu (image
datasets) show that DPA is the most reliable metric to measure bias amplification
in classification problems. To compare DPA with existing bias amplification
metrics, we released a one-stop library of major bias amplification metrics at
https://github.com/kerner-lab/Bias-Amplification.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models should perform fairly across demographics, genders, and other groups.
However, ensuring fairness is challenging when training datasets are biased, as is the case with many
datasets. For instance, in the ImSitu dataset [1], 67% of the images labeled “cooking” feature females,
indicating a gender bias that women are more likely to be associated with cooking than men [2].
Given a biased training set, it is not surprising for a model to learn these dataset biases. Surprisingly,
models not only learn dataset biases but can also amplify them [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. In the example from
ImSitu, where females and cooking co-occurred 67% of the time, bias amplification occurs when
> 67% of the images predicted as cooking feature females.
Several co-occurrence-based metrics (BA→ , M ulti→ , BAM ALS ) have been proposed to measure
bias amplification in classification datasets. They measure the bias amplification between a protected
attribute (e.g., gender), denoted as A, and a task (e.g., cooking), denoted as T [2, 3, 4]. If A and
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

