On the Hardness of Conditional Independence Testing
In Practice
Zheng He
UBC
zhhe@cs.ubc.ca
Namrata Deka
CMU
ndeka@andrew.cmu.edu

Roman Pogodin
McGill and Mila
rmn.pogodin@gmail.com

Yazhe Li
Microsoft AI∗
yazheli@outlook.com

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Unit, UCL
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Danica J. Sutherland
UBC and Amii
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Tests of conditional independence (CI) underpin a number of important problems
in machine learning and statistics, from causal discovery to evaluation of predictor
fairness and out-of-distribution robustness. Shah and Peters (2020) showed that,
contrary to the unconditional case, no universally finite-sample valid test can
ever achieve nontrivial power. While informative, this result (based on “hiding”
dependence) does not seem to explain the frequent practical failures observed with
popular CI tests. We investigate the Kernel-based Conditional Independence (KCI)
test – of which we show the Generalized Covariance Measure underlying many
recent tests is nearly a special case – and identify the major factors underlying
its practical behavior. We highlight the key role of errors in the conditional mean
embedding estimate for the Type-I error, while pointing out the importance of
selecting an appropriate conditioning kernel (not recognized in previous work) as
being necessary for good test power but also tending to inflate Type-I error.

1

Introduction

Conditional independence (CI) testing is a fundamental task, required for almost any scientific
hypothesis that “controls for” confounders; it is moreover a core subroutine in the standard PC
algorithm for causal discovery and its many variants (Spirtes et al., 1993). Further recent major
machine learning-specific applications include checking or enforcing the fairness of a predictor
or representation with equalized odds (Hardt et al., 2016), and relatedly for a predictor’s domain
invariance, particularly in “anticausal” settings (e.g. Lu et al., 2021).
When the conditioning variable takes on a small number of discrete values, the problem is simple to
reduce to that of unconditional independence testing, for which there are many good methods: for
instance, many based on the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al., 2005;
Gretton et al., 2007). When the conditioning variable is continuous, however, the situation is much
more challenging: when testing whether A ⊥
⊥ B | C based on samples for a continuously distributed
C,1 we will only observe one (A, B) pair for each value of C, and so we must make some form of
assumption on the smoothness of the conditional distribution (A, B) | C = c as a function of c. Shah
and Peters (2020) proved that doing so in total generality is impossible. Their lower bound, however,
is an adversarial construction of a particular distribution (discussed in Section 4) which does not
seem especially informative as to the widespread failures of CI tests in practical settings. Since the
importance of the task means that, despite its impossibility in general, we still want to pursue CI
testing, we must consider particular types of tests used in practice and when, and why, they fail.
∗
1

Work done at Gatsby Unit, UCL.
We will always use A ⊥
⊥ B | C, since papers in this area use both X ⊥
⊥ Y | Z and X ⊥
⊥Z |Y.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

