Derivative-Free Guidance in Continuous and Discrete
Diffusion Models with Soft Value-based Decoding

Xiner Li 1,4 Yulai Zhao 2 Chenyu Wang 3 Gabriele Scalia 4
Gokcen Eraslan 4 Surag Nair 4 Tommaso Biancalani 4 Shuiwang Ji 1
Aviv Regev 4∗ Sergey Levine 5∗ Masatoshi Uehara 6∗
1
Texas A&M University 2 Princeton University 3 MIT 4 Genentech
5
UC Berkeley 6 EvolutionaryScale

Abstract
Diffusion models excel at capturing the natural design spaces of images, molecules,
and biological sequences. However, for many applications, rather than merely
generating designs that are natural, we aim to optimize downstream reward functions while preserving the naturalness of these design spaces. Existing methods
for achieving this goal often require “differentiable” proxy models (e.g., classifier guidance) or computationally-expensive fine-tuning of diffusion models (e.g.,
classifier-free guidance, RL-based fine-tuning). Here, we propose a new method,
Soft Value-based Decoding in Diffusion models (SVDD), to address these challenges. SVDD is an iterative sampling method that integrates soft value functions,
which looks ahead to how intermediate noisy states lead to high rewards in the future, into the standard inference procedure of pre-trained diffusion models. Notably,
SVDD avoids fine-tuning generative models and eliminates the need to construct
differentiable models. This enables us to (1) directly use non-differentiable features/reward feedback, commonly used in many scientific domains, and (2) apply
our method to recent discrete diffusion models in a principled way. Finally, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of SVDD across several domains, including image
generation, molecule generation (optimization of docking scores, QED, SA), and
DNA/RNA generation (optimization of activity levels). The code is available at
https://github.com/masa-ue/SVDD.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have gained popularity as powerful generative models. Their applications extend
beyond image generation to include natural language generation (Sahoo et al., 2024; Shi et al.,
2024; Lou et al., 2023), molecule generation (Jo et al., 2022; Vignac et al., 2022), and biological
(DNA, RNA, protein) sequence generation (Avdeyev et al., 2023; Stark et al., 2024). In each of
these domains, diffusion models have been shown to be very effective at capturing complex natural
distributions. However, in practice, we might not only want to generate realistic samples, but to
produce samples that optimize specific downstream reward functions while preserving naturalness by
leveraging pre-trained models. For example, in computer vision, we might aim to generate natural
images with high aesthetic and alignment scores (Black et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023). In drug
discovery, we may seek to generate valid molecules with high QED/SA/docking scores (Lee et al.,
2023; Jin et al., 2018) or RNAs (such as mRNA vaccines (Cheng et al., 2023)) with high translational
efficiency and stability (Castillo-Hair & Seelig, 2021; Asrani et al., 2018), and regulatory DNAs that
drives high cell-specificity of expression (Gosai et al., 2023; Taskiran et al., 2024; Lal et al., 2024).
∗
Corresponding authors: regev.aviv@gene.com, svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu,
ueharamasatoshi136@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

