FAME: Adaptive Functional Attention with Expert
Routing for Function-on-Function Regression

Yifei Gao
Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, China
gao-yf@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yong Chen
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
yong-chen@uiowa.edu

Chen Zhang∗
Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, China
zhangchen01@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Functional data play a pivotal role across science and engineering, yet their infinitedimensional nature makes representation learning challenging. Conventional statistical models depend on pre-chosen basis expansions or kernels, limiting the
flexibility of data-driven discovery, while many deep-learning pipelines treat functions as fixed-grid vectors, ignoring inherent continuity. In this paper, we introduce
Functional Attention with a Mixture-of-Experts (FAME), an end-to-end, fully datadriven framework for function-on-function regression. FAME forms continuous
attention by coupling a bidirectional neural controlled differential equation with
MoE-driven vector fields to capture intra-functional continuity, and further fuses
change to inter-functional dependencies via multi-head cross attention. Extensive
experiments on synthetic and real-world functional regression benchmarks show
that FAME achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and strong robustness to arbitrarily
sampled discrete observations of functions.

1

Introduction

Functional data are samples whose individual elements are random continuous functions, providing
rich temporal–spatial dynamics in domains such as biology [13], marketing [11], transportation [17],
and meteorology [42]. With the growing demand for high-resolution measurements, functional data
analysis (FDA) is attracting increasing attention in both scientific research and practical applications
[41, 27, 20, 48]. Among canonical problems in functional data analysis (FDA), function-on-function
regression (FoFR) is widely regarded as the most challenging and representative task, as it requires
the model to accommodate both infinite-dimensional inputs and outputs. [35, 25, 9]. While functional
data offer new opportunities, they also bring intertwined challenges: (1) Intra-functional continuity:
each function lies in infinite-dimensional continuous functional space with features such as local
dynamics and global trends [29]; (2) Inter-functional interactions: different dimensions of the input
function can have nonlinear couplings with each other [6]; (3) Feature heterogeneity: different
functions may exhibit vastly different properties such as scale, smoothness, or noise, and may even
reside in different functional spaces [7].
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

