Language Ranker: A Lightweight Ranking framework
for LLM Decoding

Chenheng Zhang1∗

Tianqi Du1∗
Jizhe Zhang1
Mingqing Xiao1,4
1,2†
Yisen Wang
Zhouchen Lin1,2†

Yifei Wang3

1

State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
MIT CSAIL, MA, USA
4
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Conventional research on large language models (LLMs) has primarily focused on
refining output distributions, while paying less attention to the decoding process
that transforms these distributions into final responses. Recent advances, such as
scaling the computation of inference time with reward models, have underscored
the importance of decoding, but these methods often suffer from high computational costs and limited applicability. In this paper, we revisit LLM generation
through the lens of recommender systems, conceptualizing the decoding process
as analogous to the ranking stage in recommendation pipelines. From this perspective, we observe that both traditional decoding methods and reward models
exhibit clear limitations such as redundancy. Motivated by this insight, we propose
Language Ranker, a novel framework that introduces a lightweight module to
rerank candidate responses using features extracted by the base model. Experiments
across a wide range of tasks show that Language Ranker achieves performance
comparable to large-scale reward models, while requiring only <0.5M additional
parameters, significantly reducing the computational overhead during both training and inference stages. This highlights the efficiency and effectiveness of our
method, showcasing its potential to fully unlock the capabilities of LLMs. The
implementation is released at https://github.com/chenhengzh/language_ranker.

1

Introduction

Traditional research on enhancing the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) has primarily
focused on improving the quality of output distributions through approaches such as scaling up model
sizes [1], fine-tuning for specific tasks (SFT) [2, 3], and reinforcement learning with human feedback
(RLHF) [4, 5]. However, the decoding process, which converts the output distributions into final
responses, has not received sufficient attention. Current decoding strategies, including top-k sampling
[6, 7], self-consistency [8], and contrastive decoding [9], are largely rule-based and task-specific,
limiting their ability to fully exploit the potential of LLMs’ powerful output distributions.
It is found that if an oracle could select the best response from multiple samples generated by a model,
the performance of a 7B model could even surpass that of a 70B model as the sample number increases
[10] . This finding highlights the tremendous potential of the decoding process in maximizing model
performance. To approximate the oracle, recent studies on inference-time computing [11, 12, 13]
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: Zhouchen Lin (zlin@pku.edu.cn) and Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

