3D Visual Illusion Depth Estimation

Chengtang Yao1,2†, Zhidan Liu1,2†, Jiaxi Zeng1,2 , Lidong Yu3,4 , Yuwei Wu1,2∗, Yunde Jia2,1∗
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, Shenzhen, China
3
NVIDIA, 4 NEOLIX
{zdliu, wuyuwei, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn
{yao.c.t.adam, yvlidong, jiaxizeng.jx}@gmail.com

Abstract
3D visual illusion is a perceptual phenomenon where a two-dimensional plane
is manipulated to simulate three-dimensional spatial relationships, making a flat
artwork or object look three-dimensional in the human visual system. In this paper,
we reveal that the machine visual system is also seriously fooled by 3D visual
illusions, including monocular and binocular depth estimation. In order to explore
and analyze the impact of 3D visual illusion on depth estimation, we collect a
large dataset containing almost 3k scenes and 200k images to train and evaluate
SOTA monocular and binocular depth estimation methods. We also propose a 3D
visual illusion depth estimation framework that uses common sense from the vision
language model to adaptively fuse depth from binocular disparity and monocular
depth. Experiments show that SOTA monocular, binocular, and multi-view depth
estimation approaches are all fooled by various 3D visual illusions, while our
method achieves SOTA performance.

1

Introduction

Depth estimation aims to recover the 3D geometry of a scene from a single image or an image
sequence. It is a long-standing and challenging vision problem, with extensive research in monocular
depth estimation [46, 47, 3, 17], stereo matching [27, 42, 5, 13], and multi-view reconstruction
[41, 39]. These works have achieved impressive performance in typical, well-structured scenes,
approaching human-level perception. However, beyond typical scenes, there exist many 3D visual
illusion scenes that make a flat artwork or object look three-dimensional, as illustrated in Figure 1.
These 3D visual illusions mislead the depth perception and seriously affect the downstream applications, causing safety-critical risks in AR/VR and robotics.
In this paper, we present a 3D-Visual-Illusion dataset to investigate the impact of 3D visual illusions
on depth estimation. The dataset includes five types of illusions: inpainting illusion (e.g., inpainting
on walls or floors), picture illusion (e.g., image printed/drawn on a paper), replay illusion (e.g., videos
replayed on different screens), holography illusion, and mirror illusion (e.g., specular and transparent
surfaces). It comprises nearly 3,000 scenes and 200,000 images, covering various environments from
small objects to large scenes and from indoor to outdoor settings. We construct the dataset from both
virtual and real-world data. Virtual data is generated using two separate pipelines: one based on
web-sourced videos and the other on generative models. Real-world data is captured using a stereo
camera and a solid-state LiDAR depth sensor.
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.

* Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

