Training-Free Guidance Beyond Differentiability:
Scalable Path Steering with Tree Search in Diffusion
and Flow Models
Yingqing Guo ∗

Yukang Yang ∗

Hui Yuan ∗

Mengdi Wang

Princeton University

Abstract
Training-free guidance enables controlled generation in diffusion and flow models,
but most methods rely on gradients and assume differentiable objectives. This work
focuses on training-free guidance addressing challenges from non-differentiable
objectives and discrete data distributions. We propose TreeG: Tree Search-Based
Path Steering Guidance, applicable to both continuous and discrete settings in diffusion and flow models. TreeG offers a unified framework for training-free guidance
by proposing, evaluating, and selecting candidates at each step, enhanced with tree
search over active paths and parallel exploration. We comprehensively investigate
the design space of TreeG over the candidate proposal module and the evaluation
function, instantiating TreeG into three novel algorithms. Our experiments show
that TreeG consistently outperforms top guidance baselines in symbolic music generation, small molecule design, and enhancer DNA design with improvements of
29.01%, 26.38%, and 18.43%. Additionally, we identify an inference-time scaling
law showing TreeG’s scalability in inference-time computation.2

1

Introduction

During the inference process of diffusion and flow models, guidance methods steer generations
toward desired objectives, achieving remarkable success in vision [15, 25], audio [35], biology
[45, 80], and decision making [1, 12]. In particular, training-free guidance offers high applicability by
directly controlling the generation process with off-the-shelf objective functions without extra training
[53, 81, 4, 24]. Most training-free guidance methods are gradient-based, leveraging the objective’s
gradient to steer inference, and thus assume the objective function is differentiable [78, 22].
However, recent advances have pushed the boundaries of guided generation beyond differentiability:
guidance objectives have expanded to include non-differentiable goals [30, 1]; diffusion and flow
models have shown strong performance on discrete data [2, 67], where objectives are inherently
non-differentiable unless approximated via differentiable features [36, 77]. In such settings, trainingfree methods designed for differentiable objectives face fundamental limitations. Yet, the design
space beyond differentiability remains under-explored: only a few methods exist [38, 30], they differ
significantly and appear disconnected from prior guidance principles [38, 13]. This underscores the
need for a unified perspective and comprehensive study of guidance beyond differentiability. To
this end, we propose an algorithmic framework TreeG: Tree Search-Based Path Steering Guidance,
designed for both diffusion and flow models across continuous and discrete data spaces.
TreeG is based on path steering guidance, providing a unified perspective on training-free guidance beyond differentiability. Let x0 , · · · , xt , xt+∆t , · · · , x1 denote the inference trajectory of a
∗

Equal contribution. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University. Authors’
emails are: {yg6736, yy1325, huiyuan, mengdiw}@princeton.edu.
2
Code available at https://github.com/yukang123/UniTreeG.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

