Just One Layer Norm
Guarantees Stable Extrapolation

Juliusz Ziomek⋆,† , George Whittle⋆ , Michael A. Osborne
Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford
⋆
Equal Contribution
†
Corresponding Author
{juliusz, george, mosb} @ robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In spite of their prevalence, the behaviour of Neural Networks when extrapolating
far from the training distribution remains poorly understood, with existing results
limited to specific cases. In this work, we prove general results—the first of their
kind—by applying Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory to analyse infinitelywide neural networks trained until convergence and prove that the inclusion of
just one Layer Norm (LN) fundamentally alters the induced NTK, transforming
it into a bounded-variance kernel. As a result, the output of an infinitely wide
network with at least one LN remains bounded, even on inputs far from the training
data. In contrast, we show that a broad class of networks without LN can produce
pathologically large outputs for certain inputs. We support these theoretical findings
with empirical experiments on finite-width networks, demonstrating that while
standard NNs often exhibit uncontrolled growth outside the training domain, a
single LN layer effectively mitigates this instability. Finally, we explore real-world
implications of this extrapolatory stability, including applications to predicting
residue sizes in proteins larger than those seen during training and estimating age
from facial images of underrepresented ethnicities absent from the training set.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NN) have dominated the Machine Learning landscape for more than a decade.
Various deep architectures became the state-of-the-art approaches across countless applications.
However, despite this empirical success, we still have a limited understanding of how these models
learn and how they behave when making predictions.
What poses particular difficulty is analysing the network’s prediction as inputs get further away from
the training data. Clearly, a network achieving a low training set error should output values close to
the ground truth labels on the training points. Yet, it is difficult to say how the network will behave
outside of the training domain, as the training process does not necessarily constrains the network’s
output there. As such, the extrapolatory behaviour of these networks is very much undefined.
Lack of understanding of this extrapolatory behaviour can be dangerous. For example, a deep learningbased control system that applies voltages to a robot arm based on camera inputs can encounter pixel
values with brightness exceeding those found in the training set. If this causes the network to output
extreme values, this could easily lead to a serious safety hazard in the system. As such, understanding
how networks behave outside of the training domain and whether their predictions are stable out of
distribution is critical.
One of the most complete theoretical approaches to studying the behaviour of Deep Neural Networks
is the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory [19, 23]. Previous work in that stream [23] managed to
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

