Visual Instruction Bottleneck Tuning

Changdae Oh Jiatong Li Shawn Im Sharon Li
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin–Madison
{changdae,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Despite widespread adoption, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) suffer
performance degradation when encountering unfamiliar queries under distribution
shifts. Existing methods to improve MLLM generalization typically require either
more instruction data or larger advanced model architectures, both of which incur
non-trivial human labor or computational costs. In this work, we take an alternative
approach to enhance the generalization and robustness of MLLMs under distribution shifts, from a representation learning perspective. Inspired by information
bottleneck (IB) principle, we derive a variational lower bound of the IB for MLLMs
and devise a practical implementation, Visual Instruction Bottleneck Tuning
(Vittle). We then provide a theoretical justification of Vittle by revealing its
connection to an information-theoretic robustness metric of MLLM. Empirical
validation of multiple MLLMs on open-ended and closed-form question answering
and object hallucination detection tasks over 45 datasets, including 30 shift scenarios, demonstrates that Vittle consistently improves the MLLM’s robustness
under shifts by pursuing the learning of a minimal sufficient representation.
Code: https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/vittle

1

Introduction

In intensive races on the track of frontier-level AI models, we have observed unprecedented achievements through the form of a general-purpose chat assistant known as multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] that combine a visual encoder with a large language model. Their
universal yet flexible question-answering interface enables MLLMs to easily permeate our lives from
general problem-solving [5, 6] to practical applications [7, 8, 9, 10]. While these models may achieve
human-like or even surpass human-level performance on certain tasks, a critical gap remains in their
robustness—particularly in handling input variations that humans process effortlessly.
Human intelligence thrives on the ability to distill a large amount of sensory and cognitive inputs
into concise abstract representations, a process akin to conceptual compression [11, 12]. By prioritizing sparse salient features while discarding redundancy, humans can shape a robust prototypical
representation of complex data instances that captures a proper level of invariance to low-level
superficial features for generalization, yet maintains sensitivity to high-level abstract features
for discrimination [13, 14, 15]. Unfortunately, there are consistent reports implying that the current
MLLMs still lag far behind this desired trade-off between invariance and sensitivity [16, 17, 18, 19].
Specifically, MLLMs fail to produce relevant responses under query distribution shifts. That is, they
are vulnerable to processing subtly perturbed samples and long-tailed samples [19]. This limitation
partially stems from the difficulty of acquiring diverse high-quality multimodal instruction data
at scale. When trained using standard maximum likelihood estimation on this relatively limited
amount of instruction data, MLLM tends to fit to data-specific patterns and results in a brittle
solution [20, 21, 22]. To enhance generalization, existing efforts typically fall into two categories (1)
data-centric approaches, which collect more instruction data [23, 24, 25] and processes input in a
finer granularity [26, 27], and (2) model-centric approaches, which scale up the underlying model
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

