Online Strategic Classiﬁcation
with Noise and Partial Feedback
Tianrun Zhao, Xiaojie Mao∗, Yong Liang
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, 100084
ztr23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, maoxj@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn,
liangyong@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn,

Abstract
In this paper, we study an online strategic classiﬁcation problem, where a principal aims to learn an accurate binary linear classiﬁer from interactions with sequentially arriving agents. For each agent, the principal announces a classiﬁer. The
agent can strategically exercise costly manipulations on his features to be classiﬁed as the favorable positive class. The principal is unaware of the true featurelabel relationship, but observes all reported features and only labels of positively
classiﬁed agents. We assume that the true feature-label relationship is given by
a halfspace model subject to arbitrary feature-dependent but bounded noise (i.e.,
Massart noise). This problem faces the combined challenges of agents’ strategic
feature manipulations, partial feedback observations, and label noise. We tackle
these challenges by a novel learning algorithm. We show that the proposed algorithm yields classiﬁers√that converge to the clairvoyant optimal classiﬁer and
attains a regret rate of O( T ) up to poly-logarithmic and constant factors over T
cycles.

1

Introduction

Strategic classiﬁcation studies the problem of learning robust classiﬁers in presence of self-interested
strategic agents. When subjugated to decision-making aided by classiﬁcation algorithms, agents
may strategically modify their observable features to game the classiﬁcation algorithms into making
decisions that best serve the agents’ goals. For example, a bank may use classiﬁcation to determine
whether loan applicants are qualiﬁed to grant approvals. The applicants prefer positive classiﬁcation
and loan approvals, so they have the incentive to modify their proﬁles (e.g., credit score), potentially
at certain costs, without actually improving their ﬁnancial status. It is crucial that classiﬁcation
algorithms used for decision-making be robust to such strategic manipulation.
Besides the strategic feature manipulation, another common challenge in classiﬁcation-based
decision-making is that the decision-maker often only observes partial feedback. In particular, the
decision-maker may only observe the true labels of agents who have received the positive decision.
For example, the bank can observe the true ﬁnancial qualiﬁcation only for applicants who have
already been classiﬁed as qualiﬁed and granted loan approvals, but has no chance to observe the
true qualiﬁcation of rejected applicants. This type of partial feedback is sometimes called one-sided
feedback, apple-tasting feedback [e.g., Harris et al., 2023, Helmbold et al., 2000] or selective label
feedback [e.g., Lakkaraju et al., 2017, Chen et al., 2025].
In this paper, we study an online strategic classiﬁcation problem with partial feedback. In this
problem, a principal (decision-maker) interacts with sequentially arriving agents. The principal
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

