MI-TRQR: Mutual Information-Based Temporal
Redundancy Quantification and Reduction for
Energy-Efficient Spiking Neural Networks

Dengfeng Xue1∗ Wenjuan Li2,3† Yifan Lu2,3 Chunfeng Yuan2,3,4 Yufan Liu2,3 Wei Liu2,3
Man Yao2 Li Yang2,3 Guoqi Li2 Bing Li2,3,4,5 Stephen Maybank6 Weiming Hu2,3,4,7 Zhetao Li8
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Super Intelligent Security of Multi-Modal Information
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 PeopleAI Inc.
6
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Birkbeck College, University of London
7
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
8
College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University

Abstract
Brain-inspired spiking neural networks (SNNs) provide energy-efficient computation through event-driven processing. However, the shared weights across multiple
timesteps lead to serious temporal feature redundancy, limiting both efficiency and
performance. This issue is further aggravated when processing static images due to
the duplicated input. To mitigate this problem, we propose a parameter-free and
plug-and-play module named Mutual Information-based Temporal Redundancy
Quantification and Reduction (MI-TRQR), constructing energy-efficient SNNs.
Specifically, Mutual Information (MI) is properly introduced to quantify redundancy between discrete spike features at different timesteps on two spatial scales:
pixel (local) and the entire spatial features (global). Based on the multi-scale redundancy quantification, we apply a probabilistic masking strategy to remove redundant
spikes. The final representation is subsequently recalibrated to account for the spike
removal. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our MI-TRQR achieves
sparser spiking firing, higher energy efficiency, and better performance concurrently with different SNN architectures in tasks of neuromorphic data classification,
static data classification, and time-series forecasting. Notably, MI-TRQR increases
accuracy by 1.7% on CIFAR10-DVS with 4 timesteps while reducing energy cost
by 37.5%. Our codes are available at https://github.com/dfxue/MI-TRQR.

1

Introduction

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), inspired by the processing mechanisms of biological neural
networks [18], offer an energy-efficient approach to neuromorphic hardware by performing spikebased accumulation and avoiding the computation of zero-value inputs (i.e., event-driven) [36, 48, 10].
With the release of neuromorphic chips [5, 37] and the proposal of algorithms for various tasks
[56, 11, 87, 79, 50, 63, 73, 64, 55], neuromorphic computing systems are progressing toward practical
deployment in real-world applications [30].
SNNs rely on sequential timesteps to transmit temporal information, and their outputs are typically
averaged across time to improve accuracy [8, 77]. The temporally shared weights induce spatio∗
†

An intern at CASIA.
Corresponding author: wenjuan.li@ia.ac.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

