CMoB: Modality Valuation via Causal Effect for
Balanced Multimodal Learning

1

Jun Wang1 , Fuyuan Cao1,2∗, Zhixin Xue1 , Xingwang Zhao1 , Jiye Liang1
School of Computer and Information Technology, Key Laboratory of Computational
Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education,
Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China
2
Shanxi Taihang Laboratory, Taiyuan, China
jwang8532@gmail.com, cfy@sxu.edu.cn, xuezhixin@sxu.edu.cn,
zhaoxw@sxu.edu.cn, ljy@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing early and late fusion frameworks in multimodal learning are confronted
with the fundamental challenge of modality imbalance, wherein disparities in representational capacities induce inter-modal competition during training. Current
research methodologies primarily rely on modality-level contribution assessments
to measure gaps in representational capabilities and enhance poorly learned modalities, overlooking the dynamic variations of modality contributions across individual
samples. To address this, we propose a Causal-aware Modality valuation approach
for Balanced multimodal learning (CMoB). We define a benefit function based on
Shannon’s theory of informational uncertainty to evaluate the changes in the importance of samples across different stages of multimodal training. Inspired by human
cognitive science, we propose a causal-aware modality contribution quantification
method from a causal perspective to capture fine-grained changes in modality contribution degrees within samples. In the iterative training of multimodal learning,
we develop targeted modal enhancement strategies that dynamically select and optimize modalities based on real-time evaluation of their contribution variations across
training samples. Our method enhances the discriminative ability of key modalities
and the learning capacity of weak modalities while achieving fine-grained balance
in multimodal learning. Extensive experiments on benchmark multimodal datasets
and multimodal frameworks demonstrate the superiority of our CMoB approach
for balanced multimodal learning.

1

Introduction

Humans construct multi-dimensional perception through multiple sensory modalities like vision,
touch, hearing, and smell, processing information hierarchically to understand the real world [1, 2, 3].
This biological cognitive mechanism has inspired the development of multimodal learning paradigms
in the field of machine learning. These paradigms involve constructing collaborative learning
frameworks across heterogeneous modal representation spaces (e.g., text, images, audio, and video)
to simulate the cognitive process of human cross-modal information fusion [4]. From a cognitive
neuroscience perspective [5, 6, 7], this paradigm aligns with the neural mechanisms of the human
brain’s multisensory integration, where different sensory cortices enable collaborative learning across
heterogeneous modalities through synaptic plasticity.
In recent years, although extensive research on multimodal learning has made significant progress,
some studies have found that most existing multimodal models encounter the challenge of modality
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

