A Learning-Augmented Approach
to Online Allocation Problems
Ilan Reuven Cohen
Faculty of Engineering
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat Gan, Israel.
ilan-reuven.cohen@biu.ac.il

Debmalya Panigrahi
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC, USA.
debmalya@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In online allocation problems, an algorithm must choose from a set of options at
each step, where each option incurs a set of costs/rewards associated with a set
of d agents. The goal is to minimize/maximize a function of the accumulated
costs/rewards assigned to the agents over the course of the entire allocation process.
Such problems are common in combinatorial optimization, including minimization
problems such as machine scheduling and network routing, as well as maximization
problems such as fair allocation for welfare maximization.
In this paper, we develop a general learning-augmented algorithmic framework for
online allocation problems that produces a nearly optimal solution using only a
single d-dimensional vector of learned weights. Using this general framework, we
derive learning-augmented online algorithms for a broad range of application problems in routing, scheduling, and fair allocation. Our main tool is convex programming duality, which may also have further implications for learning-augmented
algorithms in the future.

1

Introduction

In the last few years, tremendous advances in machine learning have triggered much interest and
rapid progress in a new domain called learning-augmented online algorithms. In many practical
scenarios, one needs to solve optimization problems with dynamically evolving requirements (called
online algorithms), where uncertainty about the future significantly affects the quality of the solution.
The basic premise of the learning-augmented paradigm is to use (possibly noisy) machine-learned
predictions as a proxy for the future, and design online algorithms that can take advantage of
good predictions while not falling prey to bad ones. (The resulting algorithms are sometimes also
referred to as “online algorithms with predictions”.) The explosive growth of this new area over
the last few years has spanned a large variety of domains such as caching, scheduling, matching,
clustering, network design, and many others (see related work), and generated much excitement at
the intersection of algorithm design and machine learning. While many novel and clever algorithms
have been designed in the learning-augmented setting, these are typically tailored to the requirements
of a specific problem at hand, and do not generalize to broader problem classes. Indeed, there is a
surprising absence of unifying algorithmic models and general-purpose tools for online algorithms
with predictions, particularly when contrasted with other models of computation where algorithmic
progress has largely relied on broad, unifying models and algorithmic techniques.
In this paper, we aim to partially rectify this situation by studying a broad class of problems called
online allocation in the learning-augmented setting. The setup is the following: in each online step,
the algorithm is presented a set of options and has to choose one of them. Each option is represented
by a vector, and the final objective is a (linear or non-linear) function of the (coordinate-wise) sum
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

