Can MLLMs Absorb Math Reasoning Abilities
from LLMs as Free Lunch?
Yijie Hu1,2∗, Zihao Zhou1,2∗, Kaizhu Huang3 , Xiaowei Huang2 , Qiufeng Wang1†
1
Xi’an-Jiaotong Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool
3
Duke Kunshan University

Abstract
Math reasoning has been one crucial ability of large language models (LLMs),
where significant advancements have been achieved in recent years. However,
most efforts focus on LLMs by curating high-quality annotation data and intricate
training (or inference) paradigms, while the math reasoning performance of multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) remains lagging behind. Since the MLLM typically
consists of an LLM and a vision block, we wonder: Can MLLMs directly absorb
math reasoning abilities from off-the-shelf math LLMs without tuning? Recent
model-merging approaches may offer insights into this question. However, they
overlook the alignment between the MLLM and LLM, where we find that there is
a large gap between their parameter spaces, resulting in lower performance. Our
empirical evidence reveals two key factors behind this issue: the identification of
crucial reasoning-associated layers in the model and the mitigation of the gaps in
parameter space. Based on the empirical insights, we propose IP-Merging that first
Identifies the reasoning-associated parameters in both MLLM and Math LLM, then
Projects them into the subspace of MLLM, aiming to maintain the alignment, and
finally merges parameters in this subspace. IP-Merging is a tuning-free approach
since parameters are directly adjusted. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
IP-Merging method can enhance the math reasoning ability of MLLMs directly
from Math LLMs without compromising their other capabilities. 3 .

1

Introduction

As one fundamental ability of large language models (LLMs), improving math reasoning abilities is
crucial to handle complex problem-solving tasks [1]. By creating a substantial amount of high-quality
math reasoning data [47] and designing intricate training procedures, LLMs such as GPT-4 or Qwen
have achieved remarkable progress in solving text-based math reasoning problems [1, 2, 9]. Despite
these advancements, the challenge of mathematical reasoning remains a significant obstacle for
MLLMs [19, 23, 57, 54]. Visual math reasoning tasks, which are essential for real-world applications,
require MLLMs to extract image information, analyze problem constraints, integrate text and visuals,
and perform complex reasoning.
Following similar training strategies for improving math reasoning abilities in LLMs, attempts have
been made to enhance MLLM’s math reasoning skills [30]. Despite the notable progress, collecting
and annotating high-quality multimodal reasoning data [8, 56] is expensive. Additionally, training
large models demands extensive computational resources, which makes it costly to improve their
reasoning abilities. As MLLMs typically include a foundation LLM as the core component [20]
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
3
Code Repository: https://github.com/tambourine666/MergeVLM

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

