OCTDiff: Bridged Diffusion Model for Portable OCT
Super-Resolution and Enhancement

Ye Tian1 , Angela McCarthy3 , Gabriel Gomide3 , Nancy Liddle2 , Jedrzej Golebka3 ,
Royce W.S. Chen3 , Jeffrey M. Liebmann3 , Kaveri A. Thakoor1,2,3
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
3
Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
{yt2793, k.thakoor}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Medical imaging super-resolution is critical for improving diagnostic utility and
reducing costs, particularly for low-cost modalities such as portable Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT). We propose OCTDiff, a bridged diffusion model
designed to enhance image resolution and quality from portable OCT devices.
Our image-to-image diffusion framework addresses key challenges in the conditional generation process of denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs).
We introduce Adaptive Noise Aggregation (ANA), a novel module to improve
denoising dynamics within the reverse diffusion process. Additionally, we integrate
Multi-Scale Cross-Attention (MSCA) into the U-Net backbone to capture local
dependencies across spatial resolutions. To address overfitting on small clinical
datasets and to preserve fine structural details essential for retinal diagnostics, we
design a customized loss function guided by clinical quality scores. OCTDiff outperforms convolutional baselines and standard DDPMs, achieving state-of-the-art
performance on clinical portable OCT datasets. Our model and its downstream
applications have the potential to generalize to other medical imaging modalities
and revolutionize the current workflow of ophthalmic diagnostics. The code is
available at https://github.com/AI4VSLab/OCTDiff.

1

Introduction

Medical image analysis has been transformed by recent deep learning advances, including disease
classification [1, 2], tissue and cellular segmentation [3], and contrast enhancement [4]. However,
most existing models are trained on data from high-end imaging systems, making them less effective
and even unusable in low-resource or point-of-care settings. One critical domain with this limitation
is ophthalmology, where high-quality Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) systems can cost
over 50,000 dollars and weigh more than 50 pounds, significantly reducing their accessibility in
underdeveloped regions.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been
widely applied for OCT image enhancement tasks including super-resolution (SR) and denoising.
For instance, an early approach [5] built on ESRGAN [6] and MedGAN [7] demonstrated promising
visual improvements on simulated low-resolution OCT images. However, it suffered from mode
collapse and generated unwanted artifacts; hence, its generalizability to real-world clinical scans
remains untested. CNN-based super-resolution methods have also been applied on other medical
imaging modalities such as computed tomographpy (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
[8, 9]. Though quantitative performance improves, these models tend to hallucinate fine details and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

