Towards Provable Emergence of
In-Context Reinforcement Learning

Jiuqi Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
jiuqi@email.virginia.edu

Rohan Chandra
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
rohanchandra@virginia.edu

Shangtong Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
shangtong@virginia.edu

Abstract
Typically, a modern reinforcement learning (RL) agent solves a task by updating
its neural network parameters to adapt its policy to the task. Recently, it has been
observed that some RL agents can solve a wide range of new out-of-distribution
tasks without parameter updates after pretraining on some task distribution. When
evaluated in a new task, instead of making parameter updates, the pretrained
agent conditions its policy on additional input called the context, e.g., the agent’s
interaction history in the new task. The agent’s performance increases as the
information in the context increases, with the agent’s parameters fixed. This
phenomenon is typically called in-context RL (ICRL). The pretrained parameters
of the agent network enable the remarkable ICRL phenomenon. However, many
ICRL works perform the pretraining with standard RL algorithms. This raises the
central question this paper aims to address: Why can the RL pretraining algorithm
generate network parameters that enable ICRL? We hypothesize that the parameters
capable of ICRL are minimizers of the pretraining loss. This work provides initial
support for this hypothesis through a case study. In particular, we prove that when
a Transformer is pretrained for policy evaluation, one of the global minimizers of
the pretraining loss can enable in-context temporal difference learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton and Barto [2018]) is a powerful machine learning paradigm
for solving sequential decision-making problems via trial and error. In deep RL [Mnih et al., 2015,
Schulman et al., 2015, 2017], a classic workflow is to first train an agent with an RL algorithm in a
task and then deploy it in the same task. Once the task changes, the skills acquired by the agent will
be obsolete, and a new agent must typically be trained for the new task by repeating the expensive
procedure above. In-context RL (ICRL, Moeini et al. [2025b]), first coined by Laskin et al. [2023],
has the potential to address this limitation. In short, ICRL enables the agent to learn in the forward
pass of their neural network by adding some additional data, called the context, to the network’s
input. This learning in the forward pass occurs without any parameter updates. Specifically, in ICRL,
the RL agent is pretrained on a set of pretraining tasks. After pretraining, the RL agent network’s
parameters stay fixed, and the agent gets tested on some new test tasks, which can significantly
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

