GeoRemover: Removing Objects and Their Causal
Visual Artifacts
Zixin Zhu1,2∗ Haoxiang Li2† Xuelu Feng1 He Wu2 Chunming Qiao1
1
University at Buffalo 2 Pixocial Technology

Junsong Yuan1

{zixinzhu, xuelufen, qiao, jsyuan}@buffalo.edu,
haoxiang.li@pixocial.com, heu199825@gmail.com

Abstract
Towards intelligent image editing, object removal should eliminate both the target
object and its causal visual artifacts, such as shadows and reflections. However, existing image appearance-based methods either follow strictly mask-aligned training
and fail to remove these casual effects which are not explicitly masked, or adopt
loosely mask-aligned strategies that lack controllability and may unintentionally
over-erase other objects. We identify that these limitations stem from ignoring the
causal relationship between an object’s geometry presence and its visual effects.
To address this limitation, we propose a geometry-aware two-stage framework that
decouples object removal into (1) geometry removal and (2) appearance rendering.
In the first stage, we remove the object directly from the geometry (e.g., depth) using strictly mask-aligned supervision, enabling structure-aware editing with strong
geometric constraints. In the second stage, we render a photorealistic RGB image
conditioned on the updated geometry, where causal visual effects are considered implicitly as a result of the modified 3D geometry. To guide learning in the geometry
removal stage, we introduce a preference-driven objective based on positive and negative sample pairs, encouraging the model to remove objects as well as their causal
visual artifacts while avoiding new structural insertions. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in removing
both objects and their associated artifacts on two popular benchmarks. The project
page is available at https://buxiangzhiren.github.io/GeoRemover.

1

Introduction

Object removal is a challenging computer vision task with applications in image editing and scene
rendering, aiming to erase undesired objects as if they never present. Following the inpainting
framework [1, 2, 3, 4], traditional strictly mask-aligned approaches [5, 6, 7, 8] assume that user
specified mask fully covers the objects to be removed, thus only deal with the masked region while
do not change the remained image. However, in real-world scenarios, objects often cast causal
visual artifacts (e.g., shadows and reflections) onto surrounding regions, leading to illumination
inconsistencies beyond the masked area. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, although the child is successfully
removed, his shadow remains as the causal artifact. A simple solution to address such an associated
artifact is to extend the object removal mask to cover these artifacts, but this places a significant
burden on users, who must identify and annotate all subtle, detached, and ambiguous artifacts. As a
result, this approach is neither scalable nor user-friendly.
Therefore, recent methods [9, 10, 11] assume a more practical and user-friendly setting where the
input mask only covers the objects to remove, but the model implicitly infers and removes causal
visual artifacts such as shadows and reflections in an intelligent way. For example, previous methods
∗
†

Work completed while the author was an intern at Pixocial Technology.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

