Transforming Generic Coder LLMs to Effective
Binary Code Embedding Models for Similarity
Detection
Litao Li∗
Queen’s University
litao.li@queensu.ca
Benjamin C.M. Fung
McGill University
ben.fung@mcgill.ca

Leo Song∗
Queen’s University
leo.song@queensu.ca

Steven H. H. Ding
McGill University
steven.h.ding@mcgill.ca

Philippe Charland
Mission Critical Cyber Security Section, Defence R&D Canada
philippe.charland@drdc-rddc.gc.ca

Abstract
Cybersecurity and software research have crossed paths with modern deep learning
research for a few years. The power of large language models (LLMs) in particular
has intrigued us to apply them to understanding binary code. In this paper, we
investigate some of the many ways LLMs can be applied to binary code similarity
detection, as it is a significantly more difficult task compared to source code
similarity detection due to the sparsity of information and less meaningful syntax.
It also has great practical implications, such as vulnerability and malware detection.
We find that pretrained LLMs are mostly capable of detecting similar binary code,
even with a zero-shot setting. Our main contributions and findings are to provide
several supervised fine-tuning methods that, when combined, significantly surpass
zero-shot LLMs and state-of-the-art binary code similarity detection methods.
Specifically, we up-train the model through data augmentation, translation-style
causal learning, LLM2Vec, and cumulative GTE loss. With a complete ablation
study, we show that our training method can transform a generic language model
into a powerful binary similarity expert, and is also robust and general enough for
cross-optimization, cross-architecture, and cross-obfuscation detection.

1

Introduction

LLMs are almost ubiquitous in everyday life, fueling many powerful applications. Cybersecurity and
software researchers have utilized language models to solve complex tasks, such as code generation,
summarization, and similarity detection. In this paper, we investigate the benefits that LLMs can
bring to binary code modeling. In particular, binary code similarity detection (BCSD) and retrieval
are difficult due to the sparsity of information, loss of semantics and structures, and its limited syntax
compared to source code. Moreover, the same source code can be compiled into many formats
of binary code using different compiler settings and environments, including optimization levels,
machine architectures, compiler software, and obfuscation techniques. Existing LLMs [Roziere et al.,
2023; Radford, 2018] can somewhat perform binary code analysis with their large training data of
trillions of natural language and code tokens, but the proportion of binary code is small. Downstream
tasks like similarity detection and vulnerability detection are still difficult and require fine-tuning.
Some open-source coder models like CodeT5 [Wang et al., 2021] and GraphCodeBERT [Guo et al.,
2020] even lack the training of binary code, making zero-shot useless for binary analysis.
* Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

