Hessian-guided Perturbed Wasserstein Gradient Flows
for Escaping Saddle Points

Naoya Yamamoto
The University of Tokyo

Juno Kim∗
UC Berkeley

yamamoto-naoya251@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

junokim@berkeley.edu

Taiji Suzuki
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN AIP
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Wasserstein gradient flow (WGF) is a common method to perform optimization
over the space of probability measures. While WGF is guaranteed to converge
to a first-order stationary point, for nonconvex functionals the converged solution
does not necessarily satisfy the second-order optimality condition; i.e., it could
converge to a saddle point. In this work, we propose a new algorithm for probability
measure optimization, perturbed Wasserstein gradient flow (PWGF), that achieves
second-order optimality for general nonconvex objectives. PWGF enhances WGF
by injecting noisy perturbations near saddle points via a Gaussian process-based
scheme. By pushing the measure forward along a random vector field generated
from a Gaussian process, PWGF helps the solution escape saddle points efficiently
by perturbing the solution towards the smallest eigenvalue direction of the Wasserstein Hessian. We theoretically derive the computational complexity for PWGF
to achieve a second-order stationary point. Furthermore, we prove that PWGF
converges to a global optimum in polynomial time for strictly benign objectives.

1

Introduction

We consider the general problem of optimizing a probability measure: minµ∈P2 (Rd ) F (µ), where
P2 (Rd ) denotes the space of Borel probability measures on Rd with finite second moment and
F : P2 (Rd ) → R is a given functional which is not necessarily convex. Optimization of measures
appears extensively in machine learning and statistics either explicitly or implicitly, such as in
sampling and variational inference (Jordan et al., 1998; Liu & Wang, 2016), generative models (Arbel
et al., 2019; Chu et al., 2019) and training neural networks (Mei et al., 2018; Nitanda et al., 2022),
and has garnered significant attention both theoretically and practically. To solve such problems, the
Wasserstein gradient flow (WGF) is extensively employed:


δF
∂t µt + ∇ · −∇
(µt )µt = 0, (µt ) ⊂ P2 (Rd ).
(1)
δµ
WGF is the continuity equation of the velocity field ∇ δF
δµ and can be interpreted as gradient descent
with respect to the 2-Wasserstein metric (Jordan et al., 1998). Moreover, (1) is equivalent to the
continuous-time and infinite-particle limit of first-order optimization algorithms such as gradient
descent, and serves as the foundation for numerous machine learning methods; see Appendix A for a
discussion of related works and applications. It is thus of paramount importance to understand the
convergence of WGF, and to develop algorithms which guarantee well-behaved solutions.
∗

This work was primarily conducted while the author was at the University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

