Attention! Your Vision Language Model Could Be
Maliciously Manipulated

Xiaosen Wang1 , Shaokang Wang2 , Zhijin Ge3 , Yuyang Luo4 , Shudong Zhang3
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University,
3
Xidian University, 4 Brown University
xswanghuster@gmail.com

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable success in
understanding complex real-world scenarios and supporting data-driven decisionmaking processes. However, VLMs exhibit significant vulnerability against adversarial examples, either text or image, which can lead to various adversarial
outcomes, e.g., jailbreaking, hijacking, and hallucination, etc. In this work, we
empirically and theoretically demonstrate that VLMs are particularly susceptible to
image-based adversarial examples, where imperceptible perturbations can precisely
manipulate each output token. To this end, we propose a novel attack called Visionlanguage model Manipulation Attack (VMA), which integrates first-order and
second-order momentum optimization techniques with a differentiable transformation mechanism to effectively optimize the adversarial perturbation. Notably, VMA
can be a double-edged sword: it can be leveraged to implement various attacks, such
as jailbreaking, hijacking, privacy breaches, Denial-of-Service, and the generation
of sponge examples, etc., while simultaneously enabling the injection of watermarks for copyright protection. Extensive empirical evaluations substantiate the
efficacy and generalizability of VMA across diverse scenarios and datasets. Code
is available at https://github.com/Trustworthy-AI-Group/VMA.

1

Introduction

Recently, the rapid growth in both model parameters and training data has led to significant advancements in large models, sparking considerable interest in their application to language tasks [3, 31]
and image-related tasks [20, 34]. At the same time, researchers have demonstrated that Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) are susceptible to adversarial attacks [29, 12, 36]. This combination of remarkable
capabilities of large models and vulnerabilities identified in DNNs has brought increasing attention to their reliability and trustworthiness, including both Large Language Models (LLMs) and
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), within both academic and industry contexts [54].
While LLMs primarily process textual prompts, VLMs integrate visual data alongside text, enabling
a more comprehensive understanding of both context and content. However, the incorporation of an
additional input modality introduces unique security risks [19]: attackers may exploit vulnerabilities
by manipulating text inputs [44], visual inputs [46], or both [7, 11, 35]. Besides, the inherent versatility
of VLMs renders them susceptible to diverse malicious objectives, such as jailbreaking [14, 47],
hijacking [2], hallucination [40], and privacy breaches [30]. As shown in Fig. 1, the extensive
potential modifications in the input with a broad spectrum of target results in numerous attack vectors,
complicating the landscape of VLMs security.
In this work, we empirically and theoretically validate that VLMs are extremely susceptible to visual
inputs due to their continuous nature, compared to the discrete properties of text tokens. Consequently,
imperceptible perturbations could precisely manipulate each output token. To this end, we propose a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

