A Latent Multilayer Graphical Model for Complex,
Interdependent Systems

Martin Ondrus
Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute
University of Alberta

Ivor Cribben
Alberta School of Business
University of Alberta

Yang Feng
School of Global Public Health
New York University

Abstract
Networks have been extensively used and have provided novel insights across a
wide variety of research areas. However, many real-world systems are, in fact, a
“network of networks”, or a multilayer network, which interact as components of a
larger multimodal system. A major difficulty in this multilayer framework is the
estimation of interlayer edges or connections. In this work, we propose a new estimation method, called multilayer sparse + low-rank inverse covariance estimation
(multiSLICE), which estimates the interlayer edges. multiSLICE bridges latent
variable Gaussian graphical methods with multilayer networks, offering a flexible
framework for modeling processes with irregular sampling and heterogeneous
graph structures. We develop an effective algorithm to compute the estimator. We
also establish theoretical conditions for the recoverability of the joint space, analyze
how interlayer interactions influence joint parameter estimation, and provide theoretical bounds on their relationships. Finally, we rigorously evaluate our method on
both simulated and multimodal neuroimaging data, demonstrating improvements
over state-of-the-art approaches. All the relevant R code implementing the method
in the article is available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Our world is a complex assemblage of many interdependent systems that can be described as sets of
interacting components. Networks (or graphs, which we use interchangeably) succinctly represent
these systems, wherein individual actors (nodes) are connected through relationships (edges) that
often encode some quantitative meaning (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). By representing systems as
graphs, local and global graph attributes can describe phenomena in social analysis (Wasserman and
Faust, 1994), genomics (Seal et al., 2023; Argelaguet et al., 2018), and neuroscience (Bassett and
Sporns, 2017; Bassett et al., 2011), among others.
Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) estimate dependencies in such systems by modeling them
as multivariate Gaussian distributions, parameterized by the inverse covariance (precision) matrix
(Hastie et al., 2009). However, many real-world systems are in fact a “network of networks” (Craven
and Wellman, 1973) that interact as parts of a larger multimodal system. For example, a logistics
network may contain multiple transportation types or “layers” (e.g., air, rail, pipeline, road), which
have within (intralayer) and between (interlayer) relationships. In neuroscience, genes, cells, tissue,
anatomical structure, and functional measures can interact and contribute to behaviors or pathologies.
Multilayer graphs naturally extend to such cases and encode rich multimodal data into a unified
representation (Kivelä et al., 2014), but learning the dependence structure remains difficult.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

