SHF: Symmetrical Hierarchical Forest with
Pretrained Vision Transformer Encoder for
High-Resolution Medical Segmentation

Enzhi Zhang1,2 Peng Chen2 ∗ Rui Zhong1 Du Wu2 Isaac Lyngaas3
Jun Igarashi2 Xiao Wang3 Masaharu Munetomo1 Mohamed Wahib2
1

Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
RIKEN Center for Computational Science, Hyogo, Japan
3
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tennessee, USA
{zhangenzhi, zhongrui, munetomo}@iic.hokudai.ac.jp
{peng.chen, du.wu, jigarashi, mohamed.attia}@riken.jp
{lyngaasir, wangx2}@ornl.gov
2

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to addressing the long-sequence problem in
high-resolution medical images for Vision Transformers (ViTs). Using smaller
patches as tokens can enhance ViT performance, but quadratically increases computation and memory requirements. Therefore, the common practice for applying
ViTs to high-resolution images is either to: (a) employ complex sub-quadratic
attention schemes or (b) use large to medium-sized patches and rely on additional
mechanisms within the model to capture the spatial hierarchy of details. We
propose Symmetrical Hierarchical Forest (SHF), a lightweight approach that adaptively patches the input image to increase token information density and encode
hierarchical spatial structures into the input embedding. We then apply a reverse
depatching scheme to the output embeddings of the transformer encoder, eliminating the need for convolution-based decoders. Unlike previous methods that modify
attention mechanisms or use a complex hierarchy of interacting models, SHF can be
retrofitted to any ViT model to allow it to learn the hierarchical structure of details
in high-resolution images without requiring architectural changes. Experimental
results demonstrate significant gains in computational efficiency and performance:
on the PAIP WSI dataset, we achieved a 3∼32× speedup or a 2.95%∼7.03%
increase in accuracy (measured by Dice score) at a 64K 2 resolution with the same
computational budget, compared to state-of-the-art production models. On the 3D
medical datasets BTCV and KiTS, training was 6× faster, with accuracy gains of
6.93% and 5.9%, respectively, compared to models without SHF.

1

Introduction

Recently, Transformers have been rapidly adopted in the field of computer vision [1, 2]. Building on
the self-attention mechanism, Vision Transformers (ViTs) and their variants have achieved significant
advancements in various image classification and downstream visual tasks [3–7]. Text tokens are
atomic, semantically distinct, and rich in information, whereas visual tokens are geometrically related
and sparse in semantics. In other words, feeding a sequence of image patches to a transformer encoder
deprives the self-attention mechanism of direct information about spatial hierarchy.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

