Iterative Missing Data Imputation with Model Form
Adaptation and Non-Missing Feature Supervision

Hao Wang1∗ Zhengnan Li1∗ Zhichao Chen2 Xu Chen3† Shuting He4
Guangyi Liu5 Haoxuan Li6† Zhouchen Lin2,7,8,†
1
Xiaohongshu Inc.
2
State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
5
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
6
Center for Data Science, Peking University
7
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
8
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Abstract
Iterative imputation is a prevalent method for missing data imputation, where
each feature is imputed iteratively by treating it as a target variable estimated
from all other features. However, iterative imputation method suffers from two
principal limitations: ❶ it imposes a single parametric model form to impute all
features, neglecting the potential for optimal models to vary among features, which
risks model misspecification; and ❷ it assumes every feature contains missing
values, overlooking the potential presence of non-missing features, termed as
oracle features, which are informative for imputation. To address these limitations,
we propose kernel point imputation (KPI), a bi-level optimization framework
for iterative missing data imputation. At the inner level, KPI adaptively learns
the optimal model form for each feature within a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space, addressing limitation ❶. At the outer level, KPI utilizes oracle features as
supervisory signals to iteratively refine the imputations, addressing limitation ❷.
Experiments demonstrate that KPI outperforms competitive imputation methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/FMLYD/kpi.git.

1

Introduction

Missing data are ubiquitous in real-world data collection and analytics [25, 46, 39]. For example, in
manufacturing, temperature sensors may fail due to overheating or electrical disruptions, compromising data integrity and impeding analytical workflows [1]. Similarly, equipment-monitoring systems
can experience connectivity loss in electrical sensors, impeding fault detection and introducing
security risks [36, 35]. These issues highlight the importance of missing data imputation (MDI)
techniques, which aim to recover missing data using observed data, thereby enhancing the integrity
of collected datasets [40, 38] and the reliability of subsequent data-driven applications [3, 2, 33, 43].
Existing MDI methods can be broadly categorized as discriminative or generative [7]. On the one
hand, discriminative methods, such as statistical imputation (e.g., mean and median imputation [45])
and iterative imputation (which iteratively estimates missing values using univariate models [27, 30]),
have been well developed. On the other hand, generative methods have recently attracted attention
∗
†

This work was done in the internship at Xiaohongshu Inc. Both authors have equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

