Monoculture or Multiplicity: Which Is It?

Mila Gorecki

Moritz Hardt

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center
{mgorecki, hardt}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Two narratives about machine learning ecosystems grew out of the recent algorithmic fairness discourse. In one, dubbed monoculture, algorithmic ecosystems
tend toward homogeneity akin to a single model making all decisions. Individuals
then face the risk of systematic exclusion with no recourse. In the other, model
multiplicity, many models solve the same task with similar accuracy, causing
excessive variation in individual outcomes. Both narratives are compelling, yet,
seemingly at odds: model multiplicity can’t materialize in a strict monoculture. In
this work, we conduct a comprehensive empirical evaluation to test both claims. We
work from the premise that increasingly decision makers will use large language
models for consequential prediction tasks. We therefore examine 50 language
models, open source models ranging in size from 1B to 141B parameters and
state-of-the-art commercial models, under 4 different prompt variations, and across
6 different prediction tasks. Evaluating both new and old quantitative measures of
monoculture and multiplicity, we find the empirical landscape sits between the two
extremes. Each narrative finds some empirical support, but neither tightly fits the
observations. Systematic exclusion with no recourse is rare, but model similarity
is real. Even when starting from a single model, prompt variation induces some
diversity in predictions. Our results contribute empirical insights that illuminate
the underappreciated middle ground between monoculture and multiplicity.

1

Introduction

Bureaucratic decisions have always provoked two distinct anxieties. One is the fear of systematic
exclusion with no recourse, discretion, or alternatives [Weber, 2019, Merton, 1940, Eubanks, 2019].
The other is a fear of haphazard, inconsistent, and arbitrary decisions [Lipsky, 1980, Pasquale, 2016].
In one case decision making is too rigid, in the other it is too loose.
These concerns extend to algorithmic ecosystems—networks of multiple institutions that each use
algorithms for consequential decisions about individuals. In this context, the two fears map onto a
growing academic discourse about algorithmic monoculture and model multiplicity. In a monoculture,
the algorithmic ecosystem collapses to a single rule leading to homogeneous outcomes and reduced
welfare [Creel and Hellman, 2021, Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021, Bommasani et al., 2022]. In
contrast, model multiplicity proliferates the algorithmic ecosystem with inconsistent outcomes
[Breiman, 2001, Marx et al., 2020]. Both narratives issue compelling warnings of what society might
face, but there is apparent tension between the two. One problem, if severe enough, is an antidote to
the other [Black et al., 2022, Ganesh et al., 2025, Gur-Arieh and Lee, 2025].
In this work, we systematically study the degree to which either narrative fits the empirical landscape.
In doing so, we anticipate a near future where decision makers prompt large language models for
risk assessments and predictions about individuals. Traditionally, institutions have procured special39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

