FaCT: Faithful Concept Traces for Explaining Neural
Network Decisions
Amin Parchami-Araghi

Sukrut Rao

Jonas Fischer†

Bernt Schiele†

{amin.parchami,sukrut.rao,jonas.fischer,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
Deep networks have shown remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks,
yet getting a global concept-level understanding of how they function remains a
key challenge. Many post-hoc concept-based approaches have been introduced to
understand their workings, yet they are not always faithful to the model. Further,
they make restrictive assumptions on the concepts a model learns, such as classspecificity, small spatial extent, or alignment to human expectations. In this work,
we put emphasis on the faithfulness of such concept-based explanations and propose
a new model with model-inherent mechanistic concept-explanations. Our concepts
are shared across classes and, from any layer, their contribution to the logit and
their input-visualization can be faithfully traced. We also leverage foundation
models to propose a new concept-consistency metric, C2 -score, that can be used
to evaluate concept-based methods. Compared to prior work, we show that our
concepts are quantitatively more consistent and that users find them to be more
interpretable, while retaining competitive ImageNet performance. 1

1

Introduction

Deep learning has proven effective across a wide range of tasks, yet understanding the inner workings
of such models remains a challenge, which is critical for their use in sensitive applications such as
healthcare. Attribution methods [5, 54, 56] have been typically used to understand the decisions of
deep models, but they only show where in the input features of importance are located, and not which
high-level concepts a model uses.
To address this, concept-based explanation methods have become a popular tool to decompose model
decisions [9, 35] and arbitrary activations [18, 22] into high-level human-interpretable concepts.
These include part-prototype networks [9, 57] and concept bottleneck models [35, 42, 49] that aim to
create inherently interpretable models, yet often provide unfaithful explanations [27, 39, 61]. Other
approaches like CRAFT [18] decompose model activations post hoc, but the extracted concepts are not
directly used for prediction, leading to reliance on approximate methods to estimate the importance
of concepts to the output [17] and to visualize which region of the input the concept is activated
for [52, 61, 62], which may also not be faithful to the original decision-making [2]. Furthermore,
concepts are often subject to restrictive assumptions, e.g. being class-specific [18, 22, 36], being
limited to small patches or object parts [18, 22, 57], or belonging to a pre-defined set [35, 42],
hindering such methods from faithfully explaining the true concepts used by the model.
In this work we propose FaCT, an inherently interpretable model that provides concept decompositions
that are faithful-by-design (Fig. 1). Our model uses B-cos transforms [8] across its layers to facilitate
obtaining faithful attributions for any activation, and sparse autoencoders (SAEs) [6] at intermediate
1

Code available at github.com/m-parchami/FaCT. † Denotes equal contribution as advisors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

