Enhancing the Maximum Effective Window for
Long-Term Time Series Forecasting

Jiahui Zhang1,2 , Zhengyang Zhou1,2 , Wenjie Du1,2,† , Yang Wang1,2,†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, China
kongping@mail.ustc.edu.cn {zzy0929, duwenjie, angyan}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) aims to predict future trends based on
historical data. While longer lookback windows theoretically offer more comprehensive insights, Transformer-based models often struggle with them. On
one hand, longer windows introduce more noise and redundancy, hindering the
model’s learning process. On the other hand, Transformers suffer from attention dispersion and are prone to overfitting to noise, especially when processing
long sequences. In this paper, we introduce the Maximum Effective Window
(MEW) metric to assess a model’s ability to effectively utilize the lookback window. We also propose two model-agnostic modules to enhance MEW, enabling
models to better leverage historical data for improved performance. Specifically,
to reduce redundancy and noise, we introduce the Information Bottleneck Filter
(IBF), which employs information bottleneck theory to extract the most essential
subsequences from the input. Additionally, we propose the Hybrid-TransformerMamba (HTM), which incorporates the Mamba mechanism for selective forgetting of long sequences while harnessing the Transformer’s strong modeling capabilities for shorter sequences. We integrate these two modules into various
Transformer-based models, and experimental results show that they effectively
enhance MEW, leading to improved overall performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/forever-ly/PIH.

1

Introduction

Long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) [14] holds significant importance across various domains
such as traffic management, energy optimization, and financial analysis. Transformer-base methods [31], known for their attention mechanisms that facilitate the automatic learning of sequential
dependencies, have emerged as promising tools for LTSF.
Intuitively, extending the lookback window is a natural choice to enhance the forecasting capability
of the model. This allows the model to capture long-term trends more accurately, thereby improving
its ability to predict seasonal variations, cyclical patterns, and overall trends. However, prior research
has found that current Transformer-based models are not effective in leveraging long lookback
windows [40]. To quantitatively assess a model’s efficiency in utilizing the lookback window, we
propose a new metric Maximum Effective Window (MEW): For a given model, as the lookback
window is increased while keeping other settings constant, there exists a point beyond which further
increases in the window do not result in better performance. This point is referred to as the model’s
Maximum Effective Window, which reflects the model’s potential to utilize historical information.
†: corresponding author
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

