A is for Absorption: Studying Feature Splitting and
Absorption in Sparse Autoencoders

David Chanin*,1,2
1

LASR Labs

2

James Wilken-Smith*,1
Satvik Golechha4

Tomáš Dulka*,1
Joseph Bloom1,5

Hardik Bhatnagar*,1,3

University College London 3 Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
4
MATS 5 Decode Research

Abstract
Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) aim to decompose the activation space of large
language models (LLMs) into human-interpretable latent directions or features.
As we increase the number of features in the SAE, hierarchical features tend
to split into finer features (“math” may split into “algebra”, “geometry”, etc.),
a phenomenon referred to as feature splitting. However, we show that sparse
decomposition and splitting of hierarchical features is not robust. Specifically, we
show that seemingly monosemantic features fail to fire where they should, and
instead get “absorbed” into their children features. We coin this phenomenon
feature absorption, and show that it is caused by optimizing for sparsity in SAEs
whenever the underlying features form a hierarchy. We introduce a metric to detect
absorption in SAEs, and validate our findings empirically on hundreds of LLM
SAEs. Our investigation suggests that varying SAE sizes or sparsity is insufficient
to solve this issue. We discuss the implications of feature absorption in SAEs and
some potential approaches to solve the fundamental theoretical issues before SAEs
can be used for interpreting LLMs robustly and at scale.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks,
yet our understanding of their internal mechanisms lags behind their capabilities. This gap between
performance and interpretability raises concerns about the “black box” nature of these models [30].
The field of mechanistic interpretability aims to address this issue by reverse-engineering the internal
algorithms of neural networks and performing causal analysis on them [24].
Recent work theorizes that models represent concepts as linear directions in a high-dimensional space,
known as the Linear Representation Hypothesis (LRH) [26, 8]. The model is able to represent far
more concepts than it has neurons in its hidden space by allowing these concept directions to overlap
slighly, known as superposition [8]. Superposition makes it challenging to directly interpret neurons
in an LLM, and requires different techniques to extract interpretable feature directions.
As long as the active features in a given LLM activation are sparse and the underlying features follow
the LRH, Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) should be able to recover the true LLM features despite
supersition using sparse dictionary learning [27]. Indeed, SAEs have shown potential in decomposing
the dense, polysemantic activations of LLMs into more “interpretable” latent features [5, 2].
However, we show that even if all underlying features are linear and sparsely activating, an SAE will
still fail to recover the true underlying features if the features form a hierarchy. Instead, an SAE will
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

