Is Limited Participant Diversity Impeding EEG-based
Machine Learning?

Philipp Bomatter
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
philipp.bomatter@ed.ac.uk

Henry Gouk
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
henry.gouk@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
The application of machine learning (ML) to electroencephalography (EEG) has
great potential to advance both neuroscientific research and clinical applications.
However, the generalisability and robustness of EEG-based ML models often
hinge on the amount and diversity of training data. It is common practice to split
EEG recordings into small segments, thereby increasing the number of samples
substantially compared to the number of individual recordings or participants.
We conceptualise this as a multi-level data generation process and investigate the
scaling behaviour of model performance with respect to the overall sample size
and the participant diversity through large-scale empirical studies. We then use the
same framework to investigate the effectiveness of different ML strategies designed
to address limited data problems: data augmentations and self-supervised learning.
Our findings show that model performance scaling can be severely constrained by
participant distribution shifts and provide actionable guidance for data collection
and ML research. The code for our experiments is publicly available online.1

1

Introduction

A century after the first human electroencephalogram was recorded in 1924, Electroencephalography
(EEG) is in many ways still the best available technique for the direct and non-invasive measurement
of brain activity. In particular, with newer generations of dry-electrode recording hardware, it has
a unique set of desirable properties, including its low cost and patient burden, portability, and high
temporal resolution. Given the complexity and high dimensionality of EEG signals, machine learning
(ML) has shown considerable promise in advancing neuroscientific research and clinical applications
[1, 2, 3, 4]. However, the successful deployment of ML in EEG-based applications is not without
challenges. A fundamental obstacle is the limited availability of high-quality EEG data, which is
often sparse, noisy, and costly to collect.
While prior works have acknowledged limited data as a challenge for EEG-based machine learning
[5, 6], systematic studies are currently lacking. In particular, an aspect that has largely been ignored is
the hierarchical nature of the data generation process relevant to EEG machine learning work. EEGbased ML models rarely operate on full recordings; samples usually correspond to more manageable
segments on the order of a few seconds, extracted from recordings through sliding-window approaches
[5]. As a result, the overall sample size is usually considerably larger than the number of individual
participants in the dataset. Many applications, particularly in a medical context, require models to
generalise to new participants—e.g., a diagnostic model is of little use if it can only diagnose patients
in the training data. Consequently, if there is a significant distribution shift between participants,
1

https://github.com/bomatter/participant-diversity-paper

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

