L AYER IF: Estimating Layer Quality for Large
Language Models using Influence Functions

Hadi Askari† , Shivanshu Gupta§ , Fei Wang ∥, Anshuman Chhabra††, Muhao Chen†
†
University of California, Davis § University of California, Irvine
∥
University of Southern California ††University of South Florida

Abstract
Pretrained Large Language Models (LLMs) achieve strong performance across
a wide range of tasks, yet exhibit substantial variability in the various layers’
training quality with respect to specific downstream applications, limiting their
downstream performance. It is therefore critical to estimate layer-wise training
quality in a manner that accounts for both model architecture and training data.
However, existing approaches predominantly rely on model-centric heuristics (such
as spectral statistics, outlier detection, or uniform allocation) while overlooking
the influence of data. To address these limitations, we propose L AYER IF, a datadriven framework that leverages Influence Functions to quantify the training quality
of individual layers in a principled and task-sensitive manner. By isolating each
layer’s gradients and measuring the sensitivity of the validation loss to training
examples by computing layer-wise influences, we derive data-driven estimates of
layer importance. Notably, our method produces task-specific layer importance
estimates for the same LLM, revealing how layers specialize for different test-time
evaluation tasks. We demonstrate the utility of our scores by leveraging them for
two downstream applications: (a) expert allocation in LoRA-MoE architectures
and (b) layer-wise sparsity distribution for LLM pruning. Experiments across
multiple LLM architectures demonstrate that our model-agnostic, influence-guided
allocation leads to consistent gains in task performance.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks, particularly Large Language Models (LLMs), have become increasingly
powerful, achieving impressive performance across numerous natural language processing tasks such
as question answering [1, 2], natural language inference [3], commonsense reasoning [4, 5], and code
generation [6]. Recent models have demonstrated strong generalization across these benchmarks,
such as Mistral [7], Gemma [8], GPT-4 [9], DeepSeek [10], LLaMA [11], and Qwen [12] model
families. However, despite their effectiveness, these models exhibit significant internal variability,
with layers differing substantially in terms of training quality and contribution to overall model
performance [13–16]. Recent diagnostic tools, such as layer-wise adaptive learning rates [17, 18]
and pruning strategies [19] informed by empirical spectral densities (ESDs), have highlighted that
not all layers within a deep model are equally well-trained or consequential to its final performance.
There is a broad effort in the ML community to interpret and explain the behavior of these complex
models. Many approaches take a model-centric perspective, examining how the model’s learned
weights effect predictions [20, 19]. Other methods use activations, or attention patterns to deduce
internal mechanisms [21–24]. In contrast Influence Functions (IFs) [25, 26] offer a more explicitly
data-centric perspective by quantifying the effect of individual training points on model’s loss
landscape. Rather than focusing on internal representations, Influence Functions (IFs) measure how
a model’s output would change if a given training example was perturbed or removed, effectively
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

