What’s Producible May Not Be Reachable:
Measuring the Steerability of Generative Models
Keyon Vafa
Harvard University

Sarah Bentley
MIT

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University

Sendhil Mullainathan
MIT

Abstract
How should we evaluate the quality of generative models? Many existing metrics
focus on a model’s producibility, i.e. the quality and breadth of outputs it can
generate. However, the actual value from using a generative model stems not
just from what it can produce but whether a user with a specific goal can produce
an output that satisfies that goal. We refer to this property as steerability. In this
paper, we first introduce a mathematical decomposition for quantifying steerability
independently from producibility. Steerability is more challenging to evaluate than
producibility because it requires knowing a user’s goals. We address this issue
by creating a benchmark task that relies on one key idea: sample an output from
a generative model and ask users to reproduce it. We implement this benchmark in
user studies of text-to-image and large language models. Despite the ability of these
models to produce high-quality outputs, they all perform poorly on steerability.
These results suggest that we need to focus on improving the steerability of generative models. We show such improvements are indeed possible: simple image-based
steering mechanisms achieve more than 2x improvement on this benchmark.

1

Introduction

There is a wedge between how we evaluate generative models and how we intend to use them. For
example, a common way to evaluate image generation models is to measure the quality of outputs
they can generate, e.g. by measuring how realistic or diverse the images they produce are [70, 32, 46].
But when these models are used by people, their success depends on more than just what they’re
capable of producing: can users create the images they actually want?
In this paper, we introduce methods for quantifying model steerability: how well can a user with
a specific end goal guide a model to achieve that goal? Evaluating and benchmarking steerability
is necessary for improving the real-world performance of generative models, in the same way that
producibility benchmarks have been crucial for improving the quality of their outputs [19]. But
creating a benchmark for steerability is challenging for two reasons. First, existing methods for
evaluating models under human use [48, 39, 81] blend steerability and producibility: if a model
doesn’t produce the image a user wants, is it because it’s incapable of producing it or because it can’t
be steered? Second, measuring steerability requires knowing a human user’s goals, which are often
latent or difficult to articulate.
We first provide a mathematical framework for modeling steerability and producibility. The key
insight of this framework is to decompose model performance into two terms: a producibility term
(how well can models produce the kinds of outputs a human may want), and a steerability term (how
well can models be steered by humans towards the best output they’re capable of producing).
We then propose a procedure that resolves the core challenges of benchmarking steerability. The
procedure: sample an output from a model and instruct users to steer the model toward that output.
This procedure is straightforward and can be applied to a variety of generative models. For example, for
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

