RAST: Reasoning Activation in LLMs
via Small-model Transfer

Siru Ouyang1 , Xinyu Zhu2 , Zilin Xiao3 , Minhao Jiang4 , Yu Meng2 , Jiawei Han1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 University of Virginia
3
Rice University, 4 GE HealthCare
siruo2@illinois.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become a powerful approach for improving the
reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs), as evidenced by recent
successes such as OpenAI’s o1 and Deepseek-R1. However, applying RL at scale
remains intimidatingly resource-intensive, requiring multiple model copies and
extensive GPU workloads. On the other hand, while being powerful, recent studies
suggest that RL does not fundamentally endow models with new knowledge;
rather, it primarily reshapes the model’s output distribution to activate reasoning
capabilities latent in the base model. Building on this insight, we hypothesize that
the changes in output probabilities induced by RL are largely model-size invariant,
opening the door to a more efficient paradigm: training a small model with RL
and transferring its induced probability shifts to larger base models. To verify our
hypothesis, we conduct a token-level analysis of decoding trajectories and find
high alignment in RL-induced output distributions across model scales, validating
our hypothesis. Motivated by this, we propose R AST, a simple yet effective
method that transfers reasoning behaviors by injecting RL-induced probability
adjustments from a small RL-trained model into larger models. Experiments across
multiple mathematical reasoning benchmarks show that R AST substantially and
consistently enhances the reasoning capabilities of base models while requiring
significantly lower GPU memory than direct RL training, sometimes even yielding
better performance than the RL-trained counterparts. Our findings offer new
insights into the nature of RL-driven reasoning and practical strategies for scaling
its benefits without incurring its full computational cost. The project page of R AST
is available at https://ozyyshr.github.io/RAST/.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [25, 62] has emerged as a powerful and prevalent paradigm for enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) [16, 51, 70, 56]. Notably,
recent successes such as OpenAI’s o1 model [23] and Deepseek-R1 [14] have demonstrated substantial improvements through learning from oracle-verified feedback, employing advanced RL
algorithms including Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [55] and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [57]. However, RL is notoriously inefficient and resource-intensive [58] — it
requires loading multiple copies of the same-sized models (e.g., policy, critic, reference, reward)
with extensive training GPU memory workloads. Additionally, traditional RL algorithms (e.g., PPO)
typically require multiple iterations, each involving interdependent stages such as rollout, replay, and
optimization [32].
On the other hand, recently, there have been a bunch of works studying behaviors of RL-trained
models, aiming to answer the question, “how does RL elicit reasoning capabilities in LLMs?” [44, 57,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

