Vector Database Watermarking
Zhiwen Ren, Wei Fan, Qiyi Yao∗ , Jing Qiu, Weiming Zhang∗ , Nenghai Yu
School of Cyber Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

Abstract
Vector databases support machine learning tasks using Approximate Nearest Neighbour (ANN) query functionality, making them highly valuable digital assets. However, they also face security threats like unauthorized replication. By embedding
stealth information, watermarking technology can be used for ownership authentication. This paper introduces a watermarking scheme specifically designed for vector
databases. The scheme consists of four steps: generating identifiers, grouping,
cryptographic mapping, and modification. Since watermark embedding requires
modification of certain vectors, it may negatively affect the ANN query results.
Further investigation reveals that in the widely used Hierarchical Navigable Small
World (HNSW) indexing structure for vector databases, heuristic edge selection
and pruning strategies result in some vectors having fewer edges or even none at
all. These vectors exhibit significantly lower query frequencies than others, which
means that modifying these vectors incurs less impact on query results. Based on
this observation, we propose the Transparent Vector Priority (TVP) watermarking
scheme, which prioritizes embedding the watermark in these low-query-frequency
“transparent” vectors to minimize the impact of watermark embedding on query
results. Experimental results show that compared to the current most effective
and relevant watermarking schemes, the TVP scheme can significantly reduce the
number of missed and false queries by approximately 75%.

1

Introduction

A vector database [25] is a data management system specifically designed to store and retrieve vector
data. These vectors are generated by machine learning models and represent raw unstructured data
such as text, images, and audio. By converting unstructured data into vectors, we can measure the
similarity between different data by calculating the distance between the vectors. Vector databases can
be applied to scenarios such as retrieval augmentation generation (RAG) [22, 16, 8], recommender
systems, and similar case retrieval.
The applications of vector databases rely on approximate nearest neighbor(ANN) search. Nearest
neighbor (NN) search refers to finding multiple vectors in a vector dataset that are closest to a given
query vector. When the size of the vector dataset is large, the time cost of completely traversing all
vectors for an exact search is too high, so the researchers proposed the approximate nearest neighbor
search [34, 14, 31]. ANN algorithms can find multiple vectors that are close to the query vector in a
reasonable amount of time, and even though these vectors may not be the absolute nearest vectors,
they usually satisfy the practical requirements.
Criteria for evaluating ANN algorithms include recall, query response time, index construction
time, space occupation, etc. After a long period of development, a variety of ANN methods have
emerged, mainly including tree-based [3, 2, 37], graph-based [23, 9, 7], hash-based [32, 35, 21], and
∗

Corresponding author: {qyyao@mail., zhangwm@} ustc.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

