Principled Long-Tailed Generative Modeling via
Diffusion Models
Pranoy Das, Kexin Fu, Abolfazl Hashemi, Vijay Gupta
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, W. Lafayette, IN, 47906
{das211,fu448,abolfazl,gupta869}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Deep generative models, particularly diffusion models, have achieved remarkable
success but face significant challenges when trained on real-world, long-tailed
datasets- where few "head" classes dominate and many "tail" classes are underrepresented. This paper develops a theoretical framework for long-tailed learning via
diffusion models through the lens of deep mutual learning. We introduce a novel
regularized training objective that combines the standard diffusion loss with a mutual learning term, enabling balanced performance across all class labels, including
the underrepresented tails. Our approach to learn via the proposed regularized
objective is to formulate it as a multi-player game, with Nash equilibrium serving as the solution concept. We derive a non-asymptotic first-order convergence
result for individual gradient descent algorithm to find the Nash equilibrium. We
show that the Nash gap of the score network obtained from the algorithm is upper
bounded by O( √T 1
+ β) where β is the regularizing parameter and Ttrain is
train
the number of iterations of the training algorithm. Furthermore, we theoretically
establish hyper-parameters for training and sampling algorithm that ensure that we
find conditional score networks (under our model) with a worst case sampling error
O(ϵ + 1), ∀ϵ > 0 across all class labels. Our results offer insights and guarantees
for training diffusion models on imbalanced, long-tailed data, with implications for
fairness, privacy, and generalization in real-world generative modeling scenarios.

1

Introduction

Successful integration of deep learning models into society requires working with real-world data.
This comes with many challenges: data quality issues such as inaccurate data, data bias, ethical issues
such as breach in privacy, transparency, technical issues such as data integration, generalization,
scalability, etc. Furthermore, real world class-labeled datasets are not uniform, but follow a skewed or
sometimes referred to as "long-tailed" distribution. It is characterized by a "head" classes that occurs
with high probability while the probability of the rest of the classes, often referred to as "tail" classes
fall off very quickly. It is well known that the performance of traditional deep learning ([14, 18]) and
generative models ([30]) suffer significantly when trained on long-tailed distributions.
One might be curious to ask, "Should deep learning or generative models be concerned with class
labels which occur with very low frequency?" The answer is Yes! Even though individually each
class occurs with low frequency, collectively these classes may occur with high probability. Diffusion
models, which are the focus of this work, are no exception to this phenomenon. Diffusion models
are latent variable generative models which learn diffusion process for a given dataset, such that the
process can generate new elements that are distributed similarly as the original dataset (See section
3 for more details). They have become popular techniques in image generation beating traditional
models such as GANs [3, 7, 38], natural language processing [39], time series forecasting [26]
and in fields of applied chemistry [1], biology [9] and medicine [15] to name a few. However, the
study of diffusion models for long-tailed learning is limited. [23] showed that when the traditional
conditional Diffusion Denoising Probabilistic Model (DDPM) is trained on a long-tailed distribution,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

