Q♯: Provably Optimal Distributional RL
for LLM Post-Training
Jin Peng Zhou*1 , Kaiwen Wang*1 , Jonathan Chang4 , Zhaolin Gao1 ,
Nathan Kallus1,3 , Kilian Q. Weinberger1 , Kianté Brantley2 , and Wen Sun1
1

Cornell University

2

Harvard University

3

Netflix

4

Databricks

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) post-training is crucial for LLM alignment and
reasoning, but existing policy-based methods, such as PPO and DPO, can fall short
of fixing shortcuts inherited from pre-training. In this work, we introduce Q♯,
a value-based algorithm for KL-regularized RL that guides the reference policy
using the optimal regularized Q function. We propose to learn the optimal Q
function using distributional RL on an aggregated online dataset. Unlike prior
value-based baselines that guide the model using unregularized Q-values, our
method is theoretically principled and provably learns the optimal policy for the
KL-regularized RL problem. Empirically, Q♯ outperforms prior baselines in math
reasoning benchmarks while maintaining a smaller KL divergence to the reference
policy. Theoretically, we establish a reduction from KL-regularized RL to no-regret
online learning, providing the first bounds for deterministic MDPs under only
realizability. Thanks to distributional RL, our bounds are also variance-dependent
and converge faster when the reference policy has small variance. In sum, our
results highlight Q♯ as an effective approach for post-training LLMs, offering
both improved performance and theoretical guarantees. The code can be found at
https://github.com/jinpz/q_sharp.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) post-training is a crucial step in training large language models (LLMs),
aligning their generations with human preferences [1] and enhancing their reasoning capabilities
[2, 3]. This stage typically follows supervised learning (next-token prediction), where the model
is further trained to maximize expected cumulative reward while minimizing KL divergence from
the reference policy π ref obtained via supervised learning. The KL penalty plays a critical role by
keeping the model close to π ref , mitigating issues such as reward hacking and catastrophic forgetting.
Most state-of-the-art LLMs [4, 5, 6] are post-trained using policy-based RL methods, which update
model weights via stochastic gradient descent using algorithms like RLOO [7], PPO [8], and DPO
[9]. However, these methods are computationally expensive, requiring full backpropagation through
the LLM during training. In this paper, we propose a more efficient alternative: a value-based RL
approach that guides the generations of the reference policy π ref using a learned value function,
without modifying π ref model weights. This approach is particularly attractive because, for many
tasks, evaluating generations is easier than producing them [4, 10], suggesting we can use much
smaller models to learn value functions for guidance. For instance, in our experiments (Section 3.2),
we show that a 1B parameter value model can effectively steer and improve a 70B parameter LLM.
Existing value-based methods for LLM post-training, such as CD [11] and VAS [12], fall short of
ref
faithfully optimizing the KL-constrained RL objective. These approaches guide π ref using Qπ —the
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to {jz563,kw437}@cornell.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

