SCoT: Unifying Consistency Models and Rectified
Flows via Straight-Consistent Trajectories

Xuhui Fan∗
School of Computing
Macquarie University
xuhui.fan@mq.edu.au

Zhangkai Wu
School of Computing
Macquarie University
zhangkai.wu@mq.edu.au
Hongyu Wu
School of Computing
Macquarie University
hongyu.wu@students.mq.edu.au

Longbing Cao
School of Computing
Macquarie University
longbing.cao@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Pre-trained diffusion models are commonly used to generate clean data (e.g.,
images) from random noises, effectively forming pairs of noises and corresponding
clean images. Distillation on these pre-trained models can be viewed as the process
of constructing advanced trajectories within the pair to accelerate sampling. For
instance, consistency model distillation develops consistent projection functions
to regulate trajectories, although sampling efficiency remains a concern. Rectified
flow method enforces straight trajectories to enable faster sampling, yet relies
on numerical ODE solvers, which may introduce approximation errors. In this
work, we bridge the gap between the consistency model and the rectified flow
method by proposing a Straight-Consistent Trajectories (SCoT) model. SCoT
enjoys the benefits of both approaches for fast sampling, producing trajectories
with consistent and straight properties simultaneously. These dual properties
are strategically balanced by targeting two critical objectives: (1) regulating the
gradient of SCoT’s mapping function to a constant and (2) ensuring trajectory
consistency. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and
efficiency of SCoT.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained diffusion models Ho et al. (2020); Song et al. (2021b); Rombach et al. (2022); Poole
et al. (2023); Esser et al. (2024) have demonstrated impressive performance in real-world tasks such
as high-quality image synthesis and image editing. However, such practical models usually require
extensive computational resources to train, as well as a large number of model evaluations to generate
high-quality samples (e.g. images). Using these pre-trained teacher models to generate pairs of
random noises and their corresponding clean images, a popular choice for low-cost training and fast
sampling is to train a student distillation model with advanced “trajectories” within the pair Salimans
and Ho (2022); Wang et al. (2023, 2024); Yin et al. (2024b); Luo et al. (2024); Xie et al. (2024);
Nguyen and Tran (2024); Yin et al. (2024a); Sauer et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024); Zhu et al. (2025);
Frans et al. (2025a); Sauer et al. (2025).
We can group these trajectory-based distillation methods into two categories: consistency model
distillation Song et al. (2023); Kim et al. (2024); Lu and Song (2025) and rectified flow distillation Liu
∗

Corresponding author: xuhui.fan@mq.edu.au

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

