Enhancing Tactile-based Reinforcement Learning
for Robotic Control
Elle Miller

Trevor McInroe

David Abel

Oisin Mac Aodha

Sethu Vijayakumar

University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Achieving safe, reliable real-world robotic manipulation requires agents to evolve
beyond vision and incorporate tactile sensing to overcome sensory deficits and
reliance on idealised state information. Despite its potential, the efficacy of tactile
sensing in reinforcement learning (RL) remains inconsistent. We address this
by developing self-supervised learning (SSL) methodologies to more effectively
harness tactile observations, focusing on a scalable setup of proprioception and
sparse binary contacts. We empirically demonstrate that sparse binary tactile
signals are critical for dexterity, particularly for interactions that proprioceptive
control errors do not register, such as decoupled robot-object motions. Our agents
achieve superhuman dexterity in complex contact tasks (ball bouncing and Baoding
ball rotation). Furthermore, we find that decoupling the SSL memory from the onpolicy memory can improve performance. We release the Robot Tactile Olympiad
(RoTO) benchmark to standardise and promote future research in tactile-based
manipulation. Project page: https://elle-miller.github.io/tactile_rl

1

Introduction

Imagine a humanoid robot gently lifting an elderly person out of their bed with the same delicacy as
a human caregiver, or a person with severe motor impairments using a re-enabling robotic arm to
brush their teeth. These scenarios represent critical pathways toward enhancing human independence,
dignity, and quality of life. For this future to safely materialise, robots must evolve beyond merely
seeing their environment; they must possess some capacity to feel it.
Due to the scalability challenges associated with collecting dexterous demonstrations with tactile data,
reinforcement learning (RL) is a primary candidate for enabling tactile-based manipulation. While
RL has facilitated breakthroughs in locomotion, yielding robust agents that can traverse complex
terrains [49], manipulation lags significantly behind. This deficit stems from multiple challenges,
including inaccuracies in contact simulation, the need for complex reward functions, and critically, a
heavy reliance on idealised state information (e.g., prior work required 19 cameras for object and
fingertip localisation [5]). In this work, we tackle this reliance by suggesting that tactile data can
effectively replace idealised state information. Given that manipulation is fundamentally defined
by control through selective contact [37], we argue that tactile sensing provides a sufficiently rich
information stream to localise and control objects, paving the way for more scalable robotic systems.
Despite a decade of focused interest in tactile-based RL [33, 40, 53, 61, 62, 68], the hoped-for
breakthrough manipulation capabilities have yet to fully materialise. We posit that progress in this
domain remains stymied by two critical, interrelated challenges. First, a lack of hardware and data
convergence (sensor type, placement strategy, information representation) has hindered systematic
progress. Second, the published literature provides conflicting evidence regarding the utility of
tactile feedback in RL. Some studies report marginal performance gains when incorporating tactile
information to the observations [40, 41], while others do not [24, 44, 62]. For instance, [45, 54]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

