FACT-R1: Towards Explainable Video
Misinformation Detection with Deep Reasoning
Fanrui Zhang1,2∗ , Dian Li3† , Qiang Zhang1∗ , Jun Chen3 , Gang Liu3 ,
Junxiong Lin4 , Jiahong Yan3 , Jiawei Liu1∗ , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, USTC
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 Tencent QQ 4 Fudan University
{zfr888, zq_126}@mail.ustc.edu.cn {jwliu6, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn
{goodli, albertjchen, sinbadliu, redyan}@tencent.com linjx23@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapid spread of multimodal misinformation on social media has raised growing concerns, while research on video misinformation detection remains limited
due to the lack of large-scale, diverse datasets. Existing methods often overfit
to rigid templates and lack deep reasoning over deceptive content. To address
these challenges, we introduce FakeVV, a large-scale benchmark comprising over
100,000 video-text pairs with fine-grained, interpretable annotations. In addition,
we further propose Fact-R1, a novel framework that integrates deep reasoning
with collaborative rule-based reinforcement learning. Fact-R1 is trained through a
three-stage process: (1) misinformation long-Chain-of-Thought (CoT) instruction
tuning, (2) preference alignment via Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), and
(3) Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) using a novel verifiable reward
function. This enables Fact-R1 to exhibit emergent reasoning behaviors comparable
to those observed in advanced text-based reinforcement learning systems, but in
the more complex multimodal misinformation setting. Our work establishes a new
paradigm for misinformation detection, bridging large-scale video understanding,
reasoning-guided alignment, and interpretable verification.

1

Introduction

Platforms such as TikTok and YouTube have significantly reshaped the landscape of news consumption by enabling the rapid and large-scale dissemination of short-form videos. While this
shift facilitates fast and wide-reaching information exchange, it also dramatically accelerates the
spread of misinformation, thereby eroding the credibility and integrity of public discourse. As
manual fact-checking struggles to keep pace with the overwhelming volume and velocity of content,
automated approaches have become increasingly essential for timely identification and mitigation of
misinformation on social platforms [5, 24, 45, 47].
While recent advances in multimodal misinformation detection have focused primarily on image-text
modalities [47, 7], the growing dominance of video content introduces new challenges. Video-text
misinformation is not only more engaging and fast-spreading but also harder to detect due to the
complexity of heterogeneous and temporally dynamic modalities [9, 48, 51]. The inherent complexity
of video collection and annotation introduces several limitations in existing datasets [5]: (1) Limited
scale and topic diversity, typically with only a few thousand videos collected over narrow timeframes
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

