Active Seriation: Efficient Ordering Recovery with
Statistical Guarantees
James Cheshire

Yann Issartel

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris

Abstract
Active seriation aims at recovering an unknown ordering of n items by adaptively
querying pairwise similarities. The observations are noisy measurements of entries
of an underlying n × n permuted Robinson matrix, whose permutation encodes
the latent ordering. The framework allows the algorithm to start with partial
information on the latent ordering, including seriation from scratch as a special
case. We propose an active seriation algorithm that provably recovers the latent
ordering with high probability. Under a uniform separation condition on the
similarity matrix, optimal performance guarantees are established, both in terms
of the probability of error and the number of observations required for successful
recovery.

1

Introduction

The seriation problem involves ordering n items based on noisy measurements of pairwise similarities.
This reordering problem originates in archaeology, where it was used for the chronological dating
of graves [Robinson, 1951]. More recently, it has found applications in data science across various
domains, including envelope reduction for sparse matrices [Barnard et al., 1995], read alignment in
de novo sequencing [Garriga et al., 2011, Recanati et al., 2017], time synchronization in distributed
networks [Elson et al., 2004, Giridhar and Kumar, 2006], and interval graph identification [Fulkerson
and Gross, 1965].
In many of these settings, pairwise measurements can be made in an adaptive fashion, leveraging
information from previously chosen pairs. Motivated by these applications, we study the problem of
recovering an accurate item ordering from a sequence of actively selected pairwise measurements.
The classical seriation problem has attracted substantial attention in the theoretical literature [Atkins
et al., 1998, Fogel et al., 2013, Janssen and Smith, 2022, Giraud et al., 2023, Cai and Ma, 2023, Issartel
et al., 2024]. In this line of work, the learner receives a single batch of observations, whereas in the
active setting considered in this paper, the algorithm can adaptively select which pairs to observe; to
the best of our knowledge, this active seriation setting has not been previously analyzed.
Related problems include adaptive ranking and sorting under noisy observations [Jamieson and
Nowak, 2011, Braverman and Mossel, 2009, Heckel et al., 2019]. However, these problems typically
rely on pairwise comparisons (e.g., is item i preferred to item j?) to infer a total order. In contrast,
seriation builds on pairwise similarity scores that encode proximity in the underlying ordering. This
distinction leads to different statistical and algorithmic challenges.
Problem setup. In the seriation paradigm, we assume the existence of an unknown symmetric
matrix M representing pairwise similarities between a collection of n items. The matrix M is
structured so that the similarities Mij are correlated with an unknown underlying ordering of the
items, which is encoded by a permutation π = (π1 , . . . , πn ) of [n]. The similarity Mij between
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

