Selective Omniprediction and Fair Abstention

Varun Kanade
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
varun.kanade@cs.ox.ac.uk

Sílvia Casacuberta
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
scasac@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose new learning algorithms for building selective classifiers, which are
predictors that are allowed to abstain on some fraction of the domain. We study
the model where a classifier may abstain from predicting at a fixed cost. Building
on the recent framework on multigroup fairness and omniprediction, given a prespecified class of loss functions, we provide an algorithm for building a single
classifier that learns abstentions and predictions optimally for every loss in the entire
class, where the abstentions are decided efficiently for each specific loss function by
applying a fixed post-processing function. Our algorithm and theoretical guarantees
generalize the previously-known algorithms for learning selective classifiers in
formal learning-theoretic models.
We then extend the traditional multigroup fairness algorithms to the selective
classification setting and show that we can use a calibrated and multiaccurate
predictor to efficiently build selective classifiers that abstain optimally not only
globally but also locally within each of the groups in any pre-specified collection
of possibly intersecting subgroups of the domain, and are also accurate when they
do not abstain. We show how our abstention algorithms can be used as conformal
prediction methods in the binary classification setting to achieve both marginal and
group-conditional coverage guarantees for an intersecting collection of groups. We
provide empirical evaluations for all of our theoretical results, demonstrating the
practicality of our learning algorithms for abstaining optimally and fairly.

1

Introduction

Selective classification has long been proposed as a way of achieving higher accuracy at the cost of
abstaining from making predictions on certain points[12, 19, 43, 41, 42, 23]. Such behavior is often
desirable, e.g. when stakes of mistakes (of one type or another) can be very costly, such as medical
diagnoses. There has been a wide range of theoretical and empirical work in this area. The most
relevant one to our work is the learning-theoretic reliable learning framework [43] of Kalai, Kanade,
and Mansour, where they introduce a framework that gives guarantees on error and abstention rate in
an agnostic learning framework. Their work focuses on binary classification problems using only the
zero-one loss function. A more general learning framework for selective classification is to consider
the Chow loss [12] and its generalizations, where one can consider loss functions for predictions as
well as a fixed penalty for abstention, and a weighted combination of these should be minimized.
Separately, recent work has studied the question of whether training from scratch is required for
every loss function. Gopalan et al. introduce the notion of a (L, C)-omnipredictor for a class of loss
functions L and a concept class C, which is a single classifier that can be efficiently post-processed
to compete with a class of models for the large family L [25]. Omnipredictors turn out to be
efficiently constructable from a multigroup fairness notion called multicalibration [32, 50, 16]. Here
predictors are required to be calibrated, even conditioned on group membership from a large, possiblyintersecting, collection of groups. While (multi)calibration is a desirable property, these notions
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

