ExPO: Unlocking Hard Reasoning with
Self-Explanation-Guided Reinforcement Learning

Ruiyang Zhou♠
University of Texas at Austin
ruiyang.zhou@utexas.edu

Shuozhe Li♠
University of Texas at Austin
shuozhe.li@utexas.edu

Amy Zhang
University of Texas at Austin

Liu Leqi♠
University of Texas at Austin
leqiliu@utexas.edu∗

Abstract
Self-improvement via RL often fails on complex reasoning tasks because GRPOstyle post-training methods rely on the model’s initial ability to generate positive
samples. Without guided exploration, these approaches merely reinforce what
the model already knows (distribution-sharpening) rather than enabling the model
to solve problems where it initially generates no correct solutions. To unlock
reasoning ability in such settings, the model must explore new reasoning trajectories beyond its current output distribution. Such exploration requires access to
sufficiently good positive samples to guide the learning.
While expert demonstrations seem like a natural solution, we find that they are often
ineffective in RL post-training. Instead, we identify two key properties of effective
positive samples: they should (1) be likely under the current policy, and (2) increase
the model’s likelihood of predicting the correct answer. Based on these insights, we
propose Self-Explanation Policy Optimization (ExPO)—a simple and modular
framework that generates such samples by conditioning on the ground-truth answer.
It can be integrated with popular RL training methods like GRPO and DPO.
ExPO enables efficient exploration and guides the model to produce reasoning
trajectories more aligned with its policy than expert-written CoTs, while ensuring
higher quality than its own (incorrect) samples. Experiments show that ExPO
improves both learning efficiency and final performance on reasoning benchmarks,
surpassing expert-demonstration-based methods in challenging settings such as
MATH level-5, where the model initially struggles the most. Code available in
https://github.com/HumainLab/ExPO_rl_reasoning_by_explanation.

1

Introduction

The development of reinforcement learning (RL)-style post-training methods has been a pivotal factor
in the advances of large language models on complex reasoning tasks. RL training optimizes model
outputs using reward signals derived from human preferences, model comparisons, or automated
verifiers [16, 25, 27, 24]. RL-style post-training encompasses a broad family of algorithms, including
reward-maximizing reinforcement learning (e.g., GRPO) [20, 1], contrastive preference optimization
methods [23, 38, 34, 39], and supervised fine-tuning on expert demonstrations or high-quality selfgenerated samples [8]. Despite differences in algorithmic formulation, all these methods share a
central mechanism: increasing the likelihood of generating preferred/positive responses and reducing
that of dispreferred/negative ones.
∗

♠: Leading Contributors (Equal Contribution).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

