Logic.py: Bridging the Gap between LLMs and
Constraint Solvers
Pascal Kesseli
Meta
pkesseli@meta.com

Peter O’Hearn
Meta
peteroh@meta.com

Ricardo Silveira Cabral
Meta
rdsc@meta.com

Abstract
We present a novel approach to formalise and solve search-based problems using
large language models, which significantly improves upon previous state-of-theart results. We demonstrate the efficacy of this approach on benchmarks like
the logic puzzles tasks in ZebraLogicBench. Instead of letting the LLM attempt
to directly solve the puzzles, our method prompts the model to formalise the
problem in a logic-focused, human-readable, domain-specific language (DSL)
called Logic.py. This formalised representation is then solved using a constraint
solver, leveraging the strengths of both the language model and the solver. Our
approach achieves a remarkable 65% absolute improvement over the baseline
performance of Llama 3.1 70B on ZebraLogicBench, increasing its accuracy to
over 90%. This significant advancement demonstrates the potential of combining
language models with domain-specific languages and auxiliary tools on traditionally
challenging tasks for LLMs.

1

Introduction

Large language models have revolutionised the field of natural language processing, achieving stateof-the-art results in various tasks such as language translation, text summarisation, and question
answering. However, despite their impressive performance, LLMs have historically struggled with
certain tasks that require a deeper understanding of mathematical and logical concepts. For instance,
Kambhampati et al. [2024] demonstrated that LLMs are unable to plan and reason about complex
problems, highlighting the need for further research in this area. In this paper, we focus on improving
the performance of LLMs in solving Logic Grid Puzzles, which we explain in more detail in Sec. 1.2,
as well as first order logic tasks. We present the following research contributions:
1. Logic.py: We introduce a domain-specific, human-readable language called Logic.py, which
facilitates expressing logic and search-based problems by LLMs, and simplifies human
annotation processes for fine-tuning.
2. Polymath Logic Agent: We implement an agentic solver engine called polymath which
accepts search-based, informal problem statements, formalises them in Logic.py and solves
them using a constraint sovler.
3. ZebraLogicBench and FOLIO Evaluation: We evaluate the efficacy of this approach on
the logic puzzle benchmark ZebraLogicBench Lin et al. [2024] and the first order logic
benchmark FOLIO Han et al. [2022].
The general case for a DSL is not unlike that for intermediate languages in compilation. Given a new
programming language it is “obvious” from the Church-Turing thesis that a mapping to assembly
language exists, but is not necessarily obvious if a mapping with good efficiency properties (say)
exists, and the compilation research community has found it helpful to use intermediate languages
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

