GeoCAD: Local Geometry-Controllable CAD
Generation with Large Language Models

Zhanwei Zhang1∗, Kaiyuan Liu1 , Junjie Liu2 , Wenxiao Wang4 , Binbin Lin4†,
Liang Xie3 , Chen Shen2 , Deng Cai1
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba Cloud Computing, 3 Zhejiang University of Technology
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
zhanweizhang@zju.edu.cn

an irregular
quadrilateral

a right
trapezoid

an isosceles
trapezoid

a parallelogram

a rhombus

a rectangle

a square

a circle

a semicircle

a quarter-circle

an obtuse
triangle

an acute
triangle

a right
triangle

an isosceles
right triangle

a rounded
rectangle

a shape that
looks like a
letter L

a quadrilateral a shape that looks an annular a rectangle with a an crescent
with one
like a rectangle with
notch cut out from
sector
shape
curved side
one corner cut off
one of its sides

Figure 1: Local geometry-controllable CAD generation achieved by GeoCAD. The input comprises:
(1) an original CAD model (the left side), (2) the local part to be modified (highlighted in blue), and
(3) user-specific geometric instructions. Subsequently, GeoCAD outputs the revised CAD models
where only the target part is altered while adhering to the provided geometric instructions.

Abstract
Local geometry-controllable computer-aided design (CAD) generation aims to
modify local parts of CAD models automatically, enhancing design efficiency. It
also ensures that the shapes of newly generated local parts follow user-specific
geometric instructions (e.g., an isosceles right triangle or a rectangle with one
corner cut off). However, existing methods encounter challenges in achieving
this goal. Specifically, they either lack the ability to follow textual instructions
or are unable to focus on the local parts. To address this limitation, we introduce
GeoCAD, a user-friendly and local geometry-controllable CAD generation method.
Specifically, we first propose a complementary captioning strategy to generate
geometric instructions for local parts. This strategy involves vertex-based and
VLLM-based captioning for systematically annotating simple and complex parts,
respectively. In this way, we caption ∼221k different local parts in total. In the
training stage, given a CAD model, we randomly mask a local part. Then, using its
geometric instruction and the remaining parts as input, we prompt large language
models (LLMs) to predict the masked part. During inference, users can specify
any local part for modification while adhering to a variety of predefined geometric
∗
†

Internship work at Hangzhou YunQi Academy of Engineering and Alibaba Cloud Computing.
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

