3D Human Pose Estimation with Muscles
Kevin Zhu

AliAsghar MohammadiNasrabadi Alexander Wong John McPhee
University of Waterloo
{k79zhu, aa27moha, a28wong, mcphee}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We introduce MusclePose as an end-to-end learnable physics-infused 3D human
pose estimator that incorporates muscle-dynamics modeling to infer human dynamics from monocular video. Current physics pose estimators aim to predict
physically plausible poses by enforcing the underlying dynamics equations that
govern motion. Since this is an underconstrained problem without force-annotated
data, methods often estimate kinetics with external physics optimizers that may
not be compatible with existing learning frameworks, or are too slow for real-time
inference. While more recent methods use a regression-based approach to overcome these issues, the estimated kinetics can be seen as auxiliary predictions, and
may not be physically plausible. To this end, we build on existing regressionbased approaches, and aim to improve the biofidelity of kinetic inference with a
multihypothesis approach — by inferring joint torques via Lagrange’s equations
and via muscle dynamics modeling with muscle torque generators. Furthermore,
MusclePose predicts detailed human anthropometrics based on values from biomechanics studies, in contrast to existing physics pose estimators that construct their
human models with shape primitives. We show that MusclePose is competitive with
existing 3D pose estimators in positional accuracy, while also able to infer plausible human kinetics and muscle signals consistent with values from biomechanics
studies, without requiring an external physics engine.

1

Introduction

3D human pose estimation (HPE) is a fundamental task in computer vision that involves the localization of 3D human joints from images, which allows the user to track human movement from videos,
leading to a plethora of potential downstream applications. However, since many pose estimators
are purely data-driven, the inferred motion is modeled implicitly, which may lead to physically
impossible poses and movements.
Physics-based human pose estimation (PHPE) methods aim to mitigate these artifacts by enforcing
the underlying dynamics equations that govern the kinematic state K = {q, q̇, q̈},
M(q, A) · q̈ + C(q, q̇, A) = τq + F

(1)

where q are generalized coordinates that describe motion, often in terms of translational (e.g. 3D
position of the root) and rotational (e.g. joint rotations) degrees of freedom (DoF). We denote “dot"
( ˙ ) as the time derivative and “double dot" (¨) as the 2nd time derivative of a variable. M is the
mass matrix and C contains the Coriolis, centrifugal, and gravitational forces, for a human with
anthropometric features A at a given state K. Here, we loosely lump together a human’s dimensions,
mass and inertia properties, and other intrinsic and mobility features using the anthropometrics term
A. On the right hand side, τq describes the human joint torques generated by each DoF, and F are
external forces, both in the generalized space.
In this paper, we deal with monocular pose estimation, where our only input source is a monocular
video, without force sensors. When only one unknown external force F is applied on the human,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

