Imagine Beyond! Distributionally Robust
Auto-Encoding for State Space Coverage in Online
Reinforcement Learning

Nicolas Castanet
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, F-75005 Paris, France
nicolas.castanet@isir.upmc.fr
Olivier Sigaud
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, F-75005 Paris, France
olivier.sigaud@isir.upmc.fr
Sylvain Lamprier
Univ Angers, LERIA, Angers, France
sylvain.lamprier@univ-angers.fr

Abstract
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) enables agents to autonomously acquire diverse behaviors, but faces major challenges in visual environments due to high-dimensional, semantically sparse observations. In the online
setting, where agents learn representations while exploring, the latent space evolves
with the agent’s policy, to capture newly discovered areas of the environment.
However, without incentivization to maximize state coverage in the representation,
classical approaches based on auto-encoders may converge to latent spaces that
over-represent a restricted set of states frequently visited by the agent. This is
exacerbated in an intrinsic motivation setting, where the agent uses the distribution
encoded in the latent space to sample the goals it learns to master. To address
this issue, we propose to progressively enforce distributional shifts towards a
uniform distribution over the full state space, to ensure a full coverage of skills
that can be learned in the environment. We introduce DRAG (Distributionally
Robust Auto-Encoding for GCRL), a method that combines the β-VAE framework
with Distributionally Robust Optimization. DRAG leverages an adversarial neural
weighter of training states of the VAE, to account for the mismatch between the
current data distribution and unseen parts of the environment. This allows the
agent to construct semantically meaningful latent spaces beyond its immediate
experience. Our approach improves state space coverage and downstream control
performance on hard exploration environments such as mazes and robotic control
involving walls to bypass, without pre-training nor prior environment knowledge.

1

Introduction

Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) enables agents to master diverse behaviors in
complex environments without requiring predefined reward functions. This capability is particularly
valuable for building autonomous systems that can adapt to various tasks, especially in navigation
and robotics manipulation environments [Plappert et al., 2018, Rajeswaran et al., 2018, Tassa et al.,
2018, Yu et al., 2021]. However, when working with visual inputs, agents face significant challenges:
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

