ReCon-GS: Continuum-Preserved Gaussian
Streaming for Fast and Compact Reconstruction of
Dynamic Scenes

Jiaye Fu1,2 , Qiankun Gao1 , Chengxiang Wen1 , Yanmin Wu1 ,
Siwei Ma2 , Jiaqi Zhang2∗ , Jian Zhang1,3∗
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, Peking University
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Peking University

HiCoM

Storage: 0.45MB
PSNR: 33.91dB
SSIM: 0.9684
LPIPS: 0.1118
FPS: 261

33.0
32.5

PSNR (dB)

Ours

32.0
31.5
31.0
30.5
0.10.2

0.5

1.0

Storage (MB)

3.0

10.0

(a) Qualitative
Real-time Rendering
(c) Comparison
Quality and Storage
Figure
1: TheComparison
proposed ReCon-GS(b)framework
for streamable dynamic
scene on
reconstruction
achieves
superior rendering qualty with substantially reduced storage. The left figures show the high-quality
rendering results of ReCon-GS in a streaming fashion. The right figure is the performance comparison
with previous SOTA [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], where the radius of circle corresponds to the rendering speed.

HiCoM

Abstract

Online free-viewpoint video (FVV) reconstruction is challenged by slow per-frame
optimization, inconsistent motion estimation, and unsustainable storage demands.
To address these challenges, we propose the Reconfigurable Continuum Gaussian
Stream, dubbed ReCon-GS, a novel storage-aware framework that enables highfidelity online dynamic scene reconstruction and real-time rendering. Specifically,
we dynamically allocate multi-level Anchor Gaussians in a density-adaptive fashion to capture inter-frame geometric deformations, thereby decomposing scene
motion into compact coarse-to-fine representations. Then, we design a dynamic
hierarchy reconfiguration strategy that preserves localized motion expressiveness
through on-demand anchor re-hierarchization, while ensuring temporal consistency through intra-hierarchical deformation inheritance that confines transformation priors to their respective hierarchy levels. Furthermore, we introduce a
storage-aware optimization mechanism that flexibly adjusts the density of Anchor Gaussians at different hierarchy levels, enabling a controllable trade-off
between reconstruction fidelity and memory usage. Extensive experiments on
three widely used datasets demonstrate that, compared to state-of-the-art methods, ReCon-GS improves training efficiency by approximately 15% and achieves
superior FVV synthesis quality with enhanced robustness and stability. Moreover, at equivalent rendering quality, ReCon-GS slashes memory requirements
by over 50% compared to leading state-of-the-art methods. Code is avaliable at:
https://github.com/jyfu-vcl/ReCon-GS/.
∗

corresponding to: zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn, jqzhang@pku.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

