Unlearned but Not Forgotten: Data Extraction after
Exact Unlearning in LLM

Xiaoyu Wu∗
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
xw105@rice.edu

Yifei Pang
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
yifeip@andrew.cmu.edu

Terrance Liu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
terrancl@andrew.cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models are typically trained on datasets collected from the web,
which may inadvertently contain harmful or sensitive personal information. To address growing privacy concerns, unlearning methods have been proposed to remove
the influence of specific data from trained models. Of these, exact unlearning—
which retrains the model from scratch without the target data—is widely regarded
as the gold standard for mitigating privacy risks in deployment. In this paper, we
revisit this assumption in a practical deployment setting where both the pre- and
post-unlearning logits API are exposed, such as in open-weight scenarios. Targeting this setting, we introduce a novel data extraction attack that leverages signals
from the pre-unlearning model to guide the post-unlearning model, uncovering
patterns that reflect the removed data distribution. Combining model guidance with
a token filtering strategy, our attack significantly improves extraction success rates—
doubling performance in some cases—across common benchmarks such as MUSE,
TOFU, and WMDP. Furthermore, we demonstrate our attack’s effectiveness on a
simulated medical diagnosis dataset to highlight real-world privacy risks associated
with exact unlearning. In light of our findings, which suggest that unlearning
may, in a contradictory way, increase the risk of privacy leakage during realworld deployments, we advocate for evaluation of unlearning methods to consider
broader threat models that account not only for post-unlearning models but also
for adversarial access to prior checkpoints. Code is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/Nicholas0228/unlearned_data_extraction_llm.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a rapid surge in the development of large language models (LLMs) [31,
20]. Despite their remarkable success, modern LLMs are typically trained on massive datasets
scraped from the web, which often contain private or copyrighted content [30]. As a result, these
models are susceptible to memorizing harmful knowledge or sensitive personal information, raising
significant privacy and security concerns [3, 25, 24]. Furthermore, data privacy regulations such
as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [4] and the California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA) [26] explicitly state that individuals have the “right to be forgotten,” motivating the need to
remove specific data from trained models.
∗

Work done during internship at CMU.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

