Beyond Prediction: Managing the Repercussions of
Machine Learning Applications

Aline Weber∗
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
alineweber@cs.umass.edu
Yuriy Brun
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
brun@cs.umass.edu

Blossom Metevier∗
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
bmetevier@umass.edu

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Bruno Castro da Silva
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
bsilva@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are often designed to maximize a primary goal, such as
accuracy. However, as these models are increasingly used to inform decisions that
affect people’s lives or well-being, it is often unclear what the real-world repercussions of their deployment might be— making it crucial to understand and manage
such repercussions effectively. Models maximizing user engagement on social
media platforms, e.g., may inadvertently contribute to the spread of misinformation
and content that deepens political polarization. This issue is not limited to social media — it extends to other applications where machine learning-informed decisions
can have real-world repercussions, such as education, employment, and lending.
Existing methods addressing this issue require prior knowledge or estimates of
analytical models describing the relationship between a classifier’s predictions and
their corresponding repercussions. We introduce T HEIA, a novel classification algorithm capable of optimizing a primary objective, such as accuracy, while providing
high-confidence guarantees about its potential repercussions. Importantly, T HEIA
solves the open problem of providing such guarantees based solely on existing data
with observations of previous repercussions. We prove that it satisfies constraints
on a model’s repercussions with high confidence and that it is guaranteed to identify
a solution, if one exists, given sufficient data. We empirically demonstrate, using
real-life data, that T HEIA can identify models that achieve high accuracy while
ensuring, with high confidence, that constraints on their repercussions are satisfied.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are widely applied to real-life tasks, ranging from high-stakes
applications such as lending, hiring, and criminal sentencing, to everyday applications, such as
product recommendations and personalized advertisements. These models are often designed with
the primary goal of maximizing the accuracy of their predictions. However, in applications where
such models inform decisions that have an impact on people’s lives or well-being, it is crucial to
effectively manage the potential real-life repercussions of their deployment.
Models designed to maximize user engagement on social media, for example, have been shown to contribute to political polarization and the spread of misinformation [32, 15]. This issue extends beyond
*

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

