msf-CNN: Patch-based Multi-Stage Fusion with
Convolutional Neural Networks for TinyML
Zhaolan Huang ∗1 and Emmanuel Baccelli1, 2, 3
2

1
Freie Universität Berlin
Einstein Center Digital Future
3
Inria, France

Abstract
AI spans from large language models to tiny models running on microcontrollers
(MCUs). Extremely memory-efficient model architectures are decisive to fit within
an MCU’s tiny memory budget e.g., 128kB of RAM. However, inference latency
must remain small to fit real-time constraints. An approach to tackle this is patchbased fusion, which aims to optimize data flows across neural network layers. In
this paper, we introduce msf-CNN, a novel technique that efficiently finds optimal
fusion settings for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) by walking through the
fusion solution space represented as a directed acyclic graph. Compared to previous
work on CNN fusion for MCUs, msf-CNN identifies a wider set of solutions. We
published an implementation of msf-CNN running on various microcontrollers
(ARM Cortex-M, RISC-V, ESP32). We show that msf-CNN can achieve inference
using 50% less RAM compared to the prior art (MCUNetV2 and StreamNet). We
thus demonstrate how msf-CNN offers additional flexibility for system designers.

1

Introduction

Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) is a domain aiming to embed AI in the smallest networked
devices [11]. As such AIoT is pushing the miniaturization of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to
fit microcontroller-based hardware, which enables various applications at the edge of the network.
Use-cases include vision/audio recognition, environmental monitoring, personalized medical care,
etc. However, imbalance between the increasing resource requirements of DNNs and the very limited
computation capacity (CPU in MHz) and memory resource of Microcontroller Units (MCUs) remains
a challenge in deploying DNNs on Internet of Things (IoT) devices. For instance, as described
in RFC7228 [5], billions of IoT devices are resource-constrained devices, with Random Access
Memory (RAM) smaller than 50 KiB, and Flash memory smaller than 250 KiB. On the other hand,
even a single convolutional layer in quantized ResNet-34 [21, 14] consumes around 414.72 KiB in
RAM. This example highlights the huge gap between memory budgets on IoT devices and RAM
usage of DNNs.
A technique aimed at decreasing this gap is patch-based layer fusion, introduced in [2]. Initially
targeting FPGAs, patch-based fusion reduces off-chip Dynamic RAM (DRAM) requirements and
communication bus transfer costs for inference with CNNs. Fusion is great for low-memory devices because it can save up to 95% of RAM usage. Moreover, Fusion decouples input size from
memory usage, allowing for larger input. Recent work has thus explored the use of fusion on
MCUs, for example, to improve the memory consumption of the first few convolutional layers of
MobileNetV2 [26].
∗

Corresponding Author. E-mail: zhaolan.huang@fu-berlin.de

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

