Multimodal 3D Genome Pre-training
Minghao Yang1 , Pengteng Li1 , Yan Liang2 , Qianyi Cai1 , Zhihang Zheng3 , Shichen Zhang3 , Pengfei
Zhang1 , Zhi-An Huang4,* , and Hui Xiong1,5,*
1

Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou), China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, South China Normal University, China
3
Thrust of Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou), China
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong (Dongguan), China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract
Deep learning techniques have driven significant progress in various analytical tasks
within 3D genomics in computational biology. However, a holistic understanding
of 3D genomics knowledge remains underexplored. Here, we propose MIX-HIC,
the first multimodal foundation model of 3D genome that integrates both Hi-C
contact maps and epigenomic tracks, which obtains unified and comprehensive
semantics. For accurate heterogeneous semantic fusion, we design the cross-modal
interaction and mapping blocks for robust unified representation, yielding the
accurate aggregation of 3D genome knowledge. Besides, we introduce the first
large-scale dataset comprising over 1 million pairwise samples of Hi-C contact
maps and epigenomic tracks for high-quality pre-training, enabling the exploration
of functional implications in 3D genomics. Extensive experiments show that MIXHIC significantly surpasses existing state-of-the-art methods in diverse downstream
tasks. This work provides a valuable resource for advancing 3D genomics research.

1

Introduction

The three-dimensional (3D) organization of chromosomes within the nucleus plays a pivotal role
in gene regulation and cellular function [1, 2]. Key topological features of the 3D genome, such as
chromatin loops that bring distant regulatory elements into close physical proximity with their target
genes, are essential for cell-type-specific transcriptional regulation. High-resolution 3D chromatin
interactions can be quantified through high-throughput chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C)
technique [3]. Understanding the mechanisms of how the 3D genome influences gene expression can
unveil pivotal insights into cellular functionality, developmental biology, and disease mechanisms [4].
Recently, computational models have emerged as a powerful tool to unravel the intricate associations
between the 3D chromatin structure, epigenome, and transcriptome. Existing approaches predict
various genomic features, including 3D chromatin contact maps [5, 6, 7], chromatin loops [8, 9, 10],
and gene expression [11, 12], often leveraging DNA sequences, Hi-C contact maps and epigenomic
tracks. Though successful, most of these methods are limited to a single specific task and struggle to
integrate the diverse and heterogeneous information of the 3D genome, hindering a comprehensive
understanding of its complex organization.
Recent progress in large-scale foundation models has demonstrated remarkable success in various
fields of computational biology, such as molecular representations [13, 14], medical imaging [15, 16],
proteomics [17, 18], and genomics [19, 20]. Inspired by these advancements, we aim to develop a
*

Correspondence to Zhi-An Huang <huang.za@cityu-dg.edu.cn>, Hui Xiong <xionghui@ust.hk>.
The source code of MIX-HIC is available at https://github.com/myang998/MIX-HIC.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

