Beyond Token Probes: Hallucination Detection via
Activation Tensors with ACT-ViT
Guy Bar-Shalom∗
Technion
guybs99@gmail.com
Yaniv Galron
Technion

Fabrizio Frasca∗
Technion
fabriziof@campus.technion.ac.il

Yftah Ziser
University of Groningen, Nvidia Research

Haggai Maron
Technion, Nvidia Research

Abstract
Detecting hallucinations in Large Language Model-generated text is crucial for
their safe deployment. While probing classifiers show promise, they operate on
isolated layer–token pairs and are LLM-specific, limiting their effectiveness and
hindering cross-LLM applications. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to
address these shortcomings. We build on the natural sequential structure of activation data in both axes (layers × tokens) and advocate treating full activation tensors
akin to images. We design ACT-ViT, a Vision Transformer-inspired model that can
be effectively and efficiently applied to activation tensors and supports training on
data from multiple LLMs simultaneously. Through comprehensive experiments encompassing diverse LLMs and datasets, we demonstrate that ACT-ViT consistently
outperforms traditional probing techniques while remaining extremely efficient for
deployment. In particular, we show that our architecture benefits substantially from
multi-LLM training, achieves strong zero-shot performance on unseen datasets,
and can be transferred effectively to new LLMs through fine-tuning. Full code is
available at https://github.com/BarSGuy/ACT-ViT.

1

Introduction

Despite their remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks, the inner workings of Large
Language Models (LLMs) remain poorly understood. This lack of transparency is particularly
problematic in high-stakes scenarios, where LLMs are prone to “hallucinations” – cases in which the
model generates false or fabricated content [62, 38, 22, 26, 54]. Accurate Hallucination Detection
(HD) is critical for the safe and reliable deployment of LLMs [51, 35, 55]. While existing methods
for detecting such hallucinations often rely on auxiliary LLMs or repeated prompting [34, 48], these
approaches tend to be slow and computationally intensive (up to several seconds per instance [6]).
A prominent class of methods suggest to overcome this additional computational cost via probing
classifiers: simple models trained on internal LLM representations to predict certain attributes [7].
These techniques have been central to interpretability research [20, 31, 58, 15, 1, 13, 8], with linear
probes gaining popularity for their transparency and simplicity [4, 25, 37, 44, 48].
Unfortunately, traditional probing classifiers exhibit two fundamental limitations. First, they operate
on isolated layer–token pairs, neglecting information from other activations within the model. This is
critical: while predictive hallucination signals might indeed appear at specific “exact tokens”, their positions vary across responses, making the position-finding a difficult problem on its own—practically
requiring (multiple) LLM queries [48]. In addition to this, these signals may also peak at different
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

