Accelerating Block Coordinate Descent for LLM
Finetuning via Landscape Expansion

Qijun Luo1† Yifei Shen2∗ Liangzu Peng3
1

Dongsheng Li2

Xiao Li1∗

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
3

Microsoft Research Asia

University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Finetuning large language models (LLMs) is a resource-intensive task for researchers in academia, with memory constraints posing a key bottleneck. A classic
optimization method, block coordinate descent (BCD), significantly reduces memory cost by segmenting the trainable parameters into multiple blocks and optimizing
one active block at a time while freezing the others. However, we identify that
blindly applying BCD to train LLMs can be inefficient for two reasons. First,
optimizing only the active block requires backpropagating through multiple deeper
yet inactive blocks, resulting in wasteful computations. Second, the frozen blocks,
when they are not quite close to optimality, can narrow the optimization landscape,
potentially misguiding the training of the active block. To address these issues
simultaneously, we propose integrating BCD with landscape expansion, which
unfreezes the inactive blocks and updates them in a cost-efficient manner during
the same backpropagation as the update to the active block. Experiments on 8B
and 70B models demonstrate that our proposed method surpasses memory-efficient
baselines and matches Adam’s downstream performance while requiring only 24
GB of memory for the 8B model and 300 GB for the 70B model.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have gained significant popularity within the research community
and industry. To drive progress in this field and satisfy a wide range of application needs, researchers
most commonly finetune LLMs on diverse datasets tailored to various tasks and objectives. However, finetuning LLMs demands extensive computational resources, with memory being a primary
constraint. For instance, optimizing a model with N billion parameters using Adam requires at least
18N gigabytes of GPU memory (see Section 2). This memory limitation often prevents researchers
from experimenting with larger models.
To address this practical challenge, researchers have developed memory efficient algorithms for
LLM finetuning such as parameter efficient finetuning (PEFT), including Adapter [11], LoRA [13],
prompt tuning [16], prefix tuning [17], etc. These techniques focus on training a small set of
additional parameters while maintaining the original pretrained model unchanged. Other memory
efficient methods for full parameter training have also been investigated. For example, Galore [43]
applies a low-rank space projection to both the gradient and the optimizer’s states to reduce memory
consumption. For more related works, please refer to Section A.
†

Work done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

* Correspondence to Yifei Shen <yifeishen@microsoft.com>, Xiao Li <lixiao@cuhk.edu.cn>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

