Flux4D: Flow-based Unsupervised 4D Reconstruction

Jingkang Wang1,2∗ Henry Che1,3∗† Yun Chen1,2∗ Ze Yang1,2
Lily Goli1,2† Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
Waabi1 University of Toronto2 UIUC3
https://waabi.ai/flux4d

Abstract
Reconstructing large-scale dynamic scenes from visual observations is a fundamental challenge in computer vision. While recent differentiable rendering methods
such as NeRF and 3DGS have achieved impressive photorealistic reconstruction,
they suffer from scalability limitations and require annotations to decouple moving
actors from the static scene, such as in autonomous driving scenarios. Existing selfsupervised methods attempt to eliminate explicit annotations by leveraging motion
cues and geometric priors, yet they remain constrained by per-scene optimization
and sensitivity to hyperparameter tuning. In this paper, we introduce Flux4D,
a simple and scalable framework for 4D reconstruction of large-scale dynamic
driving scenes. Flux4D directly predicts 3D Gaussians and their motion dynamics
to reconstruct sensor observations in a fully unsupervised manner. By adopting
only photometric losses and enforcing an “as static as possible” regularization,
Flux4D learns to decompose dynamic elements directly from raw data without
requiring pre-trained supervised models or foundational priors simply by training
across many scenes. Our approach enables efficient reconstruction of dynamic
scenes within seconds, scales effectively to large datasets, and generalizes well
to unseen environments, including rare and unknown objects. Experiments on
outdoor driving datasets show Flux4D significantly outperforms existing methods
in scalability, generalization, and reconstruction quality.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing the 4D physical world from visual observations captured in the wild is a key goal
in computer vision, with applications in virtual reality and robotics, including autonomous driving.
High-quality reconstructions provide the foundation for scalable simulation environments that enable
safer and more efficient autonomy development. Unlike artist-created environments, environments
built automatically with data collected by sensor-equipped vehicles are more realistic, are more
cost-efficient, and capture the diversity of the real world.
Advances in differentiable rendering approaches such as Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [26] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17] have enabled high-quality reconstruction of dynamic scenes [53, 50,
62, 39, 18]. These methods decompose scenes into a static background and a set of dynamic actors
using human annotations such as 3D tracklets or dynamic masks, and then perform rendering on
the composed representation, optimizing to reconstruct the input observations. While they achieve
impressive visual fidelity, their reliance on manual annotations to decompose static and dynamic
elements increases costs and time, preventing these methods from scaling to large sets of unlabelled
data. Some approaches leverage pre-trained perception models to generate annotations automatically,
but this can cause artifacts when the model predictions are noisy or incorrect, which can be difficult
to recover from during reconstruction. Moreover, these methods typically require hours to reconstruct
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Work done while a research intern at Waabi.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

