Normalize Filters! Classical Wisdom for Deep Vision

1

Gustavo Perez1
Stella X. Yu1,2
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
2
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
{gperezs, stellayu}@berkeley.edu, stellayu@umich.edu

Abstract
Classical image filters, such as those for averaging or differencing, are carefully
normalized to ensure consistency, interpretability, and to avoid artifacts like intensity shifts, halos, or ringing. In contrast, convolutional filters learned end-to-end
in deep networks lack such constraints. Although they may resemble wavelets
and blob/edge detectors, they are not normalized in the same or any way. Consequently, when images undergo atmospheric transfer, their responses become
distorted, leading to incorrect outcomes. We address this limitation by proposing filter normalization, followed by learnable scaling and shifting, akin to batch
normalization. This simple yet effective modification ensures that the filters are
atmosphere-equivariant, enabling co-domain symmetry. By integrating classical
filtering principles into deep learning (applicable to both convolutional neural
networks and convolution-dependent vision transformers), our method achieves significant improvements on artificial and natural intensity variation benchmarks. Our
ResNet34 could even outperform CLIP by a large margin. Our analysis reveals that
unnormalized filters degrade performance, whereas filter normalization regularizes
learning, promotes diversity, and improves robustness and generalization.

1

Introduction

Image filtering is a cornerstone of classical computer vision; averaging and differencing filters play
a fundamental role in noise reduction, edge detection, and feature extraction. These filters are
meticulously designed and normalized to ensure consistent and interpretable results (Fig. 1).
image

normalized
filtering

+ extra
blurring

=unnormali
zed filtering

filters

0.08

Un-normalized derivative filter
Normalized derivative filter
Difference: extra blur filter

0.06

unnormalized
0.04

normalized

0.02
0.00

difference

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 1: Filter normalization is critical in classical computer vision for consistency and
interpretability, while unnormalized filters obtained by deep learning lack this property. Left:
For a checkerboard (Column 1) under uniform (Row 1) and varied (Row 2) illumination, we compare
responses from normalized (Column 2) and unnormalized (Column 4) filters; the latter equals the sum
of the former and extra blurring (Column 3). Right: For normalized and unnormalized Differenceof-Gaussian (DoG) filters, we show their horizontal profiles at the center row and their difference.
Normalized DoG detects edges despite illumination changes, while unnormalized DoG introduces
blurring that varies with illumination, overpowering edges with mean response shifts.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

