Split Gibbs Discrete Diffusion Posterior Sampling

Wenda Chu1
Zihui Wu1
Yifan Chen2
Yang Song3
1
2
California Institute of Technology
New York University

Yisong Yue1
OpenAI

3

Abstract
We study the problem of posterior sampling in discrete-state spaces using discrete
diffusion models. While posterior sampling methods for continuous diffusion models have achieved remarkable progress, analogous methods for discrete diffusion
models remain challenging. In this work, we introduce a principled plug-and-play
discrete diffusion posterior sampling algorithm based on split Gibbs sampling,
which we call SGDD. Our algorithm enables reward-guided generation and solving inverse problems in discrete-state spaces. We demonstrate the convergence
of SGDD to the target posterior distribution and verify this through controlled
experiments on synthetic benchmarks. Our method enjoys state-of-the-art posterior
sampling performance on a range of benchmarks for discrete data, including DNA
sequence design, discrete image inverse problems, and music infilling, achieving
more than 30% improved performance compared to existing baselines.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of posterior sampling in finite spaces with discrete diffusion models. Given a
pretrained discrete diffusion model [35, 1, 4, 29] that models the prior distribution ppxq, our goal
is to sample from the posterior ppx|yq in a plug-and-play fashion, where y represents a guiding
signal of interest. This setting encompasses both solving inverse problems (e.g., if y is an incomplete
measurement of x), and conditional or guided generation (e.g., sampling from ppxq exppβrpxqqq{Z
according to a reward function rp¨q).
Existing works on diffusion posterior sampling [7, 37, 30, 51] primarily focus on continuous diffusion
models operating in the Euclidean space for x. These methods have achieved remarkable success
in applications including natural image restorations [24, 7, 57], medical imaging [20, 42, 6], and
various scientific inverse problems [14, 51, 55]. However, posterior sampling with discrete diffusion
models in discrete-state spaces remains a challenging problem, mainly due to not having well-defined
gradients of the likelihood function ppy|xq. Initial work to address this gap for discrete diffusion
models relies on approximating value functions (similar to reinforcement learning) for derivative-free
sampling [27], which can be difficult to tune for good performance, particularly when the guidance y
is complicated.
In this paper, we develop a rigorous plug-and-play method based on the principle of split Gibbs
sampling [47], which we refer to as SGDD. Our method addresses the posterior sampling problem
x „ ppx|yq by introducing an auxiliary variable z along with a regularization potential function
Dpx, z; ηq to relax the original problem. The relaxed formulation enables efficient sampling via
Gibbs sampling, which alternates between a likelihood sampling step and a prior sampling step using
a pretrained discrete diffusion model. As regularization increases, both variables x and z converge to
the target posterior distribution. Our method generalizes split Gibbs samplers with ℓ2 regularizers to
any potential functions with certain limiting conditions, making it compatible with discrete diffusion
models by carefully designing the potential function. We provide a rigorous stationary guarantee
on the convergence of SGDD, with error bounds that account for imperfect score function and
discretization errors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

