Data-Adaptive Exposure Thresholds under Network
Interference
Vydhourie Thiyageswaran
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
vrtt@uw.edu

Tyler H. McCormick
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
tylermc@uw.edu

Jennifer Brennan
Google Research
Kirkland, WA, USA
jrbrennan@google.com

Abstract
Randomized controlled trials often suffer from interference, a violation of the Stable
Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA), where a unit’s outcome is influenced
by its neighbors’ treatment assignments. This interference biases naive estimators
of the average treatment effect (ATE). A popular method to achieve unbiasedness
pairs the Horvitz-Thompson estimator of the ATE with a known exposure mapping,
a function that identifies units in a given randomization unaffected by interference.
For example, an exposure mapping may stipulate that a unit experiences no further
interference if at least an h-fraction of its neighbors share its treatment status.
However, selecting this threshold h is challenging, requiring domain expertise;
in its absence, fixed thresholds such as h = 1 are often used. In this work, we
propose a data-adaptive method to select the h-fractional threshold that minimizes
the mean-squared-error (MSE) of the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. Our approach
estimates the bias and variance of the Horvitz-Thompson estimator paired with
candidate thresholds by leveraging a first-order approximation, specifically, linear
regression of potential outcomes on exposures. We present simulations illustrating
that our method improves upon non-adaptive threshold choices, and an adapted
Lepski’s method. We further illustrate the performance of our estimator by running
experiments with synthetic outcomes on a real village network dataset, and on a
publicly-available Amazon product similarity graph. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that our method remains robust to deviations from the linear potential outcomes
model.

1

Introduction

Estimating the Average Treatment Effect (ATE), the difference in the average outcomes of units when
all units are treated versus when none are, is challenging in the presence of network interference.
Under interference, the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA) [Cox, 1958, Rubin, 1978,
Manski, 1990] is violated, as a unit’s outcome is influenced by its neighbors’ treatment assignments.
This problem is salient in randomized controlled trials, the setting we examine. For example,
estimating the adoption of a new idea through random assignment of people to advertisements is
complicated by the dissemination of information through social interactions. Consider a social media
platform seeking to estimate the efficacy of a product innovation in increasing user engagement.
Measuring outcomes for users in the control group is complicated by their interactions with treated
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

