Generalized Gradient Norm Clipping
& Non-Euclidean (L0, L1)-Smoothness
Thomas Pethick∗
EPFL (LIONS)
thomas.pethick@epfl.ch

Wanyun Xie∗
EPFL (LIONS)
wanyun.xie@epfl.ch

Kimon Antonakopoulos
EPFL (LIONS)
kimon.antonakopoulos@epfl.ch

Mete Erdogan
EPFL (LIONS)
mete.erdogan@epfl.ch

Antonio Silveti-Falls
Université Paris-Saclay (CVN)
tonys.falls@gmail.com

Volkan Cevher
EPFL (LIONS)
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
This work introduces a hybrid non-Euclidean optimization method which generalizes gradient norm clipping by combining steepest descent and conditional
gradient approaches. The method achieves the best of both worlds by establishing
a descent property under a generalized notion of (L0 ,L1 )-smoothness. Weight
decay is incorporated in a principled manner by identifying a connection to the
Frank-Wolfe short step. In the stochastic case, we show an order optimal O(n−1/4 )
convergence rate by leveraging a momentum based gradient estimator. We discuss
how to instantiate the algorithms for deep learning, which we dub Clipped Scion,
and demonstrate their properties on image classification and language modeling.
The code is available at https://github.com/LIONS-EPFL/ClippedScion.

1

Introduction

Recent work [Pethick et al., 2025] has shown that conditional gradient methods2 , traditionally used for
constrained optimization, can also solve unconstrained problems—offering an alternative to steepest
descent. From their analysis it becomes apparent that the two methods have distinct properties:
whereas steepest descent requires the stepsize γ for L-smooth objectives to be taken as γ < 2/L,
conditional gradient methods have no such requirement, thus allowing for large stepsizes, while
remaining stable.
The price to pay for the stability is that conditional gradient based methods are not descent methods
and thus eventually needs a diminishing stepsize to converge, even in the deterministic case. The
problem becomes very apparent if the iterates are close to the solution, since the iterates always move
by a fixed magnitude and are thus pushed away from the solution. Steepest descent does not suffer
from the same problem since the effective stepsize automatically becomes smaller as the iterates
approach a solution. This observation naturally raises the following question:
∗

Equal contribution.
By conditional gradient based methods, we mean those methods which leverage a linear minimization oracle
lmo(d) = arg min⟨d, x⟩ when updating their parameters with an open-loop stepsize.
2

x∈D

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

