RDD: Retrieval-Based Demonstration Decomposer for
Planner Alignment in Long-Horizon Tasks

Mingxuan Yan1

Yuping Wang1,2

Zechun Liu3

Jiachen Li1∗

1

2
3
University of California, Riverside
University of Michigan
Meta AI
{myan035, yuping.wang, jiachen.li}@ucr.edu zechunliu@meta.com

Abstract
To tackle long-horizon tasks, recent hierarchical vision-language-action (VLAs)
frameworks employ vision-language model (VLM)-based planners to decompose
complex manipulation tasks into simpler sub-tasks that low-level visuomotor policies can handle. Typically, the VLM planner needs finetuning to learn to decompose
a new task, which requires target task demonstrations segmented into sub-tasks by
either human annotation or heuristic rules. However, without prior knowledge, the
heuristic sub-tasks can deviate significantly from the visuomotor policy’s training
data, thereby degrading task performance. To address these issues, we propose a
Retrieval-based Demonstration Decomposer (RDD) that automatically decomposes
video demonstrations into sub-tasks with prior by aligning the visual features of the
decomposed sub-task intervals with those from the training data of the low-level
visuomotor policies. RDD outperforms the state-of-the-art sub-task decomposer
on both simulation and real-world tasks, demonstrating robustness across diverse
settings. Code and more results are available at rdd-neurips.github.io.

1

Introduction

Developing generalist robots that are capable of executing complex, long-horizon tasks in unstructured
environments has become one of the central goals of current robotics research. Traditional robotic
programming and learning methods often struggle with the variability and complexity inherent in realworld scenarios. Building upon the success of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and Large Language
Models (LLMs), a new class of multi-modal foundation models known as Vision-Language-Action
models (VLAs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] has emerged specifically for embodied AI applications. As recent
studies [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] have shown, integrating high-level planners above the low-level
visuomotor policies vastly improves the performance for long-horizon robotic tasks. This has led
to the hierarchical VLA paradigm [14, 15, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. The planner, often a powerful
VLM, performs task planning and reasoning to break down complex tasks into simpler sub-tasks
with step-by-step language instructions. A learning-based visuomotor policy, trained on datasets with
short-horizon sub-tasks and conditioned on the generated sub-task instructions, performs precise
manipulation to complete the sub-tasks one by one, thereby completing long-horizon tasks.
Despite its versatility, a vanilla VLM planner typically needs to be finetuned with human demonstrations when deploying to a given task [18, 14, 16]. To build the dataset for planner finetuning,
demonstrations are temporally decomposed to sub-tasks by human annotation [14, 16, 18, 19, 15] or
heuristics [13, 15, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. However, these methods are neither scalable nor efficient, and,
most importantly, they could generate sub-tasks that deviate significantly from the training data of
the low-level visuomotor policy. Figure 1 illustrates this dilemma. The state-of-the-art sub-task decomposer UVD [25], which uses a heuristic decomposition rule based on visual feature change-point
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

