FastLongSpeech: Enhancing Large Speech-Language
Models for Efficient Long-Speech Processing

Shoutao Guo1,3 , Shaolei Zhang1,3 , Qingkai Fang1,3 , Zhengrui Ma1,3 ,
Min Zhang4 , Yang Feng1,2,3∗
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University
guoshoutao22z@ict.ac.cn,zhangshaolei20z@ict.ac.cn,fengyang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has spurred significant
progress in Large Speech-Language Models (LSLMs), enhancing their capabilities
in both speech understanding and generation. While existing LSLMs often concentrate on augmenting speech generation or tackling a diverse array of short-speech
tasks, the efficient processing of long-form speech remains a critical yet underexplored challenge. This gap is primarily attributed to the scarcity of long-speech
training datasets and the high computational costs associated with long sequences.
To address these limitations, we introduce FastLongSpeech, a novel framework
designed to extend LSLM capabilities for efficient long-speech processing without
necessitating dedicated long-speech training data. FastLongSpeech incorporates
an iterative fusion strategy that can compress excessively long-speech sequences
into manageable lengths. To adapt LSLMs for long-speech inputs, it introduces a
dynamic compression training approach, which exposes the model to short-speech
sequences at varying compression ratios, thereby transferring the capabilities of
LSLMs to long-speech tasks. To assess the long-speech capabilities of LSLMs, we
develop a long-speech understanding benchmark called LongSpeech-Eval. Experiments show that our method exhibits strong performance in both long-speech and
short-speech tasks, while greatly improving inference efficiency 2 .

1

Introduction

Benefiting from the advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–3], Large Speech-Language
Models (LSLMs) have also made significant strides by extending the speech capabilities of LLMs.
By harnessing the knowledge and reasoning abilities of LLMs, LSLMs can directly comprehend
speech signals, perform analysis and reasoning, and achieve superior performance in a diverse of
tasks such as speech recognition, speech translation, and speech understanding [4–6]. The ability to
process and understand diverse speech signals has emerged as a key research focus in LSLMs [7].
To handle speech inputs, traditional methods [8, 9] typically employ a cascaded pipeline, where
speech is first transcribed into text and then processed by LLMs. However, these approaches suffer
from error propagation and discard valuable paralinguistic information [10]. To overcome these
drawbacks, recent research [11–13] has shifted towards an end-to-end paradigm, enabling LSLMs
∗
2

Corresponding author: Yang Feng.
The Code is at https://github.com/ictnlp/FastLongSpeech.git.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

