Generalizable Reasoning through Compositional
Energy Minimization

Alexandru Oarga
University of Barcelona

Yilun Du
Harvard University

Abstract
Generalization is a key challenge in machine learning, specifically in reasoning
tasks, where models are expected to solve problems more complex than those
encountered during training. Existing approaches typically train reasoning models
in an end-to-end fashion, directly mapping input instances to solutions. While
this allows models to learn useful heuristics from data, it often results in limited
generalization beyond the training distribution. In this work, we propose a novel
approach to reasoning generalization by learning energy landscapes over the solution spaces of smaller, more tractable subproblems. At test time, we construct a
global energy landscape for a given problem by combining the energy functions
of multiple subproblems. This compositional approach enables the incorporation
of additional constraints during inference, allowing the construction of energy
landscapes for problems of increasing difficulty. To improve the sample quality
from this newly constructed energy landscape, we introduce Parallel Energy Minimization (PEM). We evaluate our approach on a wide set of reasoning problems.
Our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating its ability
to generalize to larger and more complex problems. Project website can be found
at: https://alexoarga.github.io/compositional_reasoning/

1

Introduction

Being able to solve complex reasoning problems, such as logical reasoning, combinatorial puzzles
and symbolic manipulation, is one of the key challenges in machine learning. This is particularly
interesting because it requires models to go beyond pattern recognition. For a model to successfully
perform reasoning tasks, it is expected to be able to generalize to unseen distributions during test time.
That is, they are expected to solve not only problems similar to those encountered during training, but
also to be able to generalize to novel conditions and distributions [9].
The standard paradigm in machine learning for solving reasoning tasks is to train models end-to-end
to map inputs to outputs. During training, models are exposed to a large number of solutions and
learn statistical heuristics that allow them to solve similar problems. This contrasts with human
reasoning, where we first learn the rules and constraints governing a problem, and then apply them
in a compositional manner to arrive at a solution. Notably, humans are able to solve such problems
without having seen an exact solution before. Moreover, when prompted with harder tasks, we can
invest more time, effectively searching for a solution, rather than relying on heuristics [1, 37].
In this work, we present an approach to reasoning where the overall process is cast as an optimization
problem [22]. Specifically, we learn an energy function Eθ (x, y) across all possible solutions y
of the problem, where x are the given conditions of the problem. This energy function is learned
such that valid solutions are assigned lower energy, while invalid solutions receive higher energy.
Corresponding author: ydu@seas.harvard.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

