Balancing Performance and Costs in Best Arm Identification

Michael O. Harding
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
moharding@wisc.edu

Kirthevasan Kandasamy
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Madison
kandasamy@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of identifying the best arm in a multi-armed bandit model.
Despite a wealth of literature in the traditional fixed budget and fixed confidence
regimes of the best arm identification problem, it still remains a mystery to most
practitioners as to how to choose an approach and corresponding budget or confidence parameter. We propose a new formalism to avoid this dilemma altogether by
minimizing a risk functional which explicitly balances the performance of the recommended arm and the cost incurred by learning this arm. In this framework, a cost
is incurred for each observation during the sampling phase, and upon recommending an arm, a performance penalty is incurred for identifying a suboptimal arm.
The learner’s goal is to minimize the sum of the penalty and cost. This new regime
mirrors the priorities of many practitioners, e.g. maximizing profit in an A/B testing
framework, better than classical fixed budget or confidence settings. We derive
theoretical lower bounds for the risk of each of two choices for the performance
penalty, the probability of misidentification and the simple regret, and propose an
algorithm called DBCARE to match these lower bounds up to polylog factors on
nearly all problem instances. We then demonstrate the performance of DBCARE on a
number of simulated models, comparing to fixed budget and confidence algorithms
to show the shortfalls of existing BAI paradigms on this problem.

1

Introduction

Best Arm Identification (BAI) in multi-armed bandits is a fundamental problem in decision-making
under uncertainty. The objective is to identify the arm with the highest expected reward by adaptively
drawing samples from distributions associated with each arm. BAI arises in many real-world applications. In advertising, arms represent different ads, and the aim is to find the ad which maximizes
revenue generated [18]. In statistical model selection, arms represent different hyperparameter configurations, and the aim is to find the best-performing one with minimal computational resources [20].
Traditionally, BAI has been studied under two paradigms: the fixed budget setting [2, 8], which seeks
to maximize performance—i.e. the ability of a policy to recover the optimal arm—within a given
sampling budget, and the fixed performance (e.g., fixed confidence [33, 15]) setting, which aims to
minimize the number of samples needed to meet a target performance level. While algorithms for
these settings have been successfully deployed in many real-world settings [32, 35, 51, 18], these
settings are not a natural fit for all use cases. For instance, while determining the best arm is desirable,
a slightly suboptimal choice may be acceptable if the cost of distinguishing between top candidates is
prohibitively high. On the other hand, it is often unnecessary to continue sampling until reaching
some pre-specified horizon when there is already enough evidence to determine the optimal arm.
To this end, we propose a novel paradigm for BAI, in which a policy should explicitly balance
performance and sampling cost on the fly, without being constrained by a fixed performance level or
a pre-specified sampling budget. This framework allows policies to adaptively terminate according to
the difficulty of the problem. The following is an example where such a framework would be natural.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

