LLM-PySC2: Starcraft II learning environment for
Large Language Models

Zongyuan Li1 ,Yanan Ni2 ,Runnan Qi2 ,Chang Lu1 ,Lumin Jiang2 ,Xiaojie Xu1 ,
Xiangbei Liu1 , Pengfei Li1 ,Yunzheng Guo1 ,Zhe Ma1 ,Huanyu Li1 ,Wu Hui1 ,
Xian Guo1, * , Kuihua Huang2, * , Xuebo Zhang1∗
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense, Changsha, China

Abstract
The tremendous potential has been demonstrated by large language models (LLMs)
in intelligent decision-making problems, with unprecedented capabilities shown
across diverse applications ranging from gaming AI systems to complex strategic
planning frameworks. However, the StarCraft II platform, which has been widely
adopted for validating decision-making algorithms in the past decade, has not yet
provided substantial support for this emerging domain. To address issues that LLMs
cannot interface with the hundreds of actions of the pysc2 backend and the lack of
native support for multi-agent (MA) collaboration, we propose the LLM-PySC2
environment. This is the first environment that offers LLMs the complete pysc2
action space with sufficient multi-modal information and game Wiki knowledge.
With an asynchronous query architecture, the environment efficiently interacts
with LLMs that maintain a constant latency regardless of the scale of the agents’
population. In the experiments, we evaluated LLMs’ decision-making performance
in both the macro-decision and micro-operation scenarios, with traditional StarCraft
II Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) tasks and a series of new proposed. Results
indicate that LLMs possess the potential to achieve victories in complex scenarios
but cannot constantly generate correct decisions, especially in the recovered pysc2
action space and MA settings. Without task-relevant instructions, the pre-trained
models suffer from issues such as hallucinations and inefficient collaboration. Our
findings suggest that StarCraft II still challenges in the era of large models, revealing
that there is a lot to do to develop an advanced LLM decision-making system, and
the proposed LLM-PySC2 environment will support future development of LLMbased decision-making solutions.

1

Introduction

The remarkable progress of LLMs has not only enhanced their reasoning capabilities but also
positioned them as multitask strategists, even without post-training on specialized domains. Unlike
reinforcement learning (RL) based agents, LLMs exhibit advantages in better context understanding,
knowledge utilization, and human-AI interactions, acting in a wider range of zero-shot scenarios like
gaming (1)-(12) , robot manipulation/navigation (13)-(17) , financial and trading (18)-(20).
However, there is still a lot to do to release the potential of LLM decision systems. Current works are
mostly limited to prompt engineering (6)(7) , reflection (4)(8)(9)(22) , LLM workflow (3)(18)(21) to
dismantle tasks into smaller tasks. These works enable LLMs to act better in diverse scenarios, but
the knowledge-learning problem for a specific domain remains unsolved.
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

