DyMoDreamer: World Modeling with Dynamic
Modulation
Boxuan Zhang1 , Runqing Wang1 , Wei Xiao1 , Weipu Zhang1 ,
Jian Sun1 , Gao Huang2 , Jie Chen1 , Gang Wang1∗
1

2

School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University

Abstract
A critical bottleneck in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is sample inefficiency,
as training high-performance agents often demands extensive environmental interactions. Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) mitigates this by building
world models that simulate environmental dynamics and generate synthetic experience, improving sample efficiency. However, conventional world models process
observations holistically, failing to decouple dynamic objects and temporal features
from static backgrounds. This approach is computationally inefficient, especially
for visual tasks where dynamic objects significantly influence rewards and decisionmaking performance. To address this, we introduce DyMoDreamer, a novel MBRL
algorithm that incorporates a dynamic modulation mechanism to improve the extraction of dynamic features and enrich the temporal information. DyMoDreamer
employs differential observations derived from a novel inter-frame differencing
mask, explicitly encoding object-level motion cues and temporal dynamics. Dynamic modulation is modeled as stochastic categorical distributions and integrated
into a recurrent state-space model (RSSM), enhancing the model’s focus on rewardrelevant dynamics. Experiments demonstrate that DyMoDreamer sets a new stateof-the-art on the Atari 100k benchmark with a 156.6% mean human-normalized
score, establishes a new record of 832 on the DeepMind Visual Control Suite, and
gains a 9.5% performance improvement after 1M steps on the Crafter benchmark.
Our code is released at https://github.com/Ultraman-Tiga1/DyMoDreamer.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved significant breakthroughs in sequential decisionmaking tasks [1, 2, 3, 4]. State-of-the-art methods such as DQN [5], PPO [6], MuZero [7], and
EfficientZero [8] have demonstrated impressive performance across various benchmarks. However,
these methods often suffer from low sample efficiency, requiring hundreds of millions of interactions
with the environment [9], thus limiting their practicality for real-world applications where data
collection is costly or infeasible. A key approach to addressing this challenge is the general framework
of world models, which learns compact latent dynamics for planning and decision-making. One early
instantiation of this framework [10], combines a VAE with an RNN and uses evolutionary strategies
to optimize policies in the learned latent space. This framework combines a VAE with a recurrent
neural network (RNN) and uses evolutionary strategies to optimize the policy within a latent space.
By generating synthetic interaction data or “imagination trajectories” [11, 12], world models allow
agents to learn behaviors entirely within the learned model. This model-based approach reduces the
reliance on direct environment interactions, significantly improving sample efficiency.
∗

Corresponding author: gangwang@bit.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

