BaRISTA: Brain Scale Informed Spatiotemporal
Representation of Human Intracranial Neural Activity

Lucine L. Oganesian†1 Saba Hashemi†2 Maryam M. Shanechi ∗1−4
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
{loganesi,saba.hashemi,shanechi}@usc.edu

Abstract
Intracranial recordings have opened a unique opportunity to simultaneously measure activity across multiregional networks in the human brain. Recent works have
focused on developing transformer-based neurofoundation models of such recordings that can generalize across subjects and datasets. However, these recordings
exhibit highly complex spatiotemporal interactions across diverse spatial scales,
from the single-channel scale to the scale of brain regions. As such, there remain
critical open questions regarding how best to encode spatial information and how
to design self-supervision tasks that enable the learning of brain network patterns
and enhance downstream decoding performance using such high-dimensional,
multiregional recordings. To allow for exploring these questions, we propose a
new spatiotemporal transformer model of multiregional neural activity and a corresponding self-supervised masked latent reconstruction task, designed to enable
flexibility in the spatial scale used for token encoding and masking. Applying this
model on publicly available multiregional intracranial electrophysiology (iEEG)
data, we demonstrate that adjusting the spatial scale for both token encoding and
masked reconstruction significantly impacts downstream decoding. Further, we
find that spatial encoding at larger scales than channel-level encoding, which is
commonly used in existing iEEG transformer models, improves downstream decoding performance. Finally, we demonstrate that our method allows for region-level
token encoding while also maintaining accurate channel-level neural reconstruction. Taken together, our modeling framework enables exploration of the spatial
scales used for token encoding and masking, reveals their importance towards
self-supervised pretraining of neurofoundation models of multiregional human
brain activity, and enhances downstream decoding performance.

1

Introduction

Intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) provides a direct window into the human brain by enabling the simultaneous recording of high-dimensional neural activity across multiple brain regions,
thus measuring diverse spatial scales from single channels to large-scale brain networks. Enabling
the modeling of such recordings can provide a unique opportunity to study functional brain networks
associated with complex behavioral and cognitive processes [1–4] and develop translational technologies such as brain-computer interfaces [5, 6]. Compared with non-invasive approaches such as fMRI
∗

Corresponding author: shanechi@usc.edu.
† Equal contribution.
1
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California
2
Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
3
Alfred E. Mann Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Southern California
4
Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

