LightFair: Towards an Efficient Alternative for Fair
T2I Diffusion via Debiasing Pre-trained Text Encoders
Boyu Han1,2

Qianqian Xu1,3∗
Kangli Zi1

1

2

Shilong Bao2
Zhiyong Yang2
2,1∗
Qingming Huang

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{hanboyu23z,xuqianqian,zikangli}@ict.ac.cn,
{baoshilong,yangzhiyong21,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
This paper explores a novel lightweight approach LightFair to achieve fair textto-image diffusion models (T2I DMs) by addressing the adverse effects of the text
encoder. Most existing methods either couple different parts of the diffusion model
for full-parameter training or rely on auxiliary networks for correction. They incur
heavy training or sampling burden and unsatisfactory performance. Since T2I DMs
consist of multiple components, with the text encoder being the most fine-tunable
and front-end module, this paper focuses on mitigating bias by fine-tuning text
embeddings. To validate feasibility, we observe that the text encoder’s neutral
embedding output shows substantial skewness across image embeddings of various
attributes in the CLIP space. More importantly, the noise prediction network
further amplifies this imbalance. To finetune the text embedding, we propose
a collaborative distance-constrained debiasing strategy that balances embedding
distances to improve fairness without auxiliary references. However, mitigating
bias can compromise the original generation quality. To address this, we introduce
a two-stage text-guided sampling strategy to limit when the debiased text encoder
intervenes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that LightFair is effective and
efficient. Notably, on Stable Diffusion v1.5, our method achieves SOTA debiasing
at just 1/4 of the training burden, with virtually no increase in sampling burden.
The code is available at https://github.com/boyuh/LightFair.

1

Introduction

Recently, with the rapid progress of machine learning [108, 5, 101, 104, 103] and computer vision [54,
33, 32, 96, 93], text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [38, 9, 44], such as Stable Diffusion (SD) [78],
have gained widespread attention. These models effectively combine text-based inputs with image
generation, delivering remarkable performance across a broad range of applications [86, 55, 17, 11,
49]. However, research [13, 82, 92] has revealed that these models often produce biased content
regarding various demographic factors, say gender, race, and age. Such biases pose significant
societal risks, particularly when these models are deployed in real-world scenarios [10, 13, 62, 112].
Many efforts have been made to mitigate attribute bias, which can generally be divided into two
camps. The first camp [84, 27] involves retraining or fine-tuning diffusion models to adjust the
generated distribution. However, most of them rely on a strategy that couples different parts of the
diffusion model for full-parameter training. It leads to highly complex gradient chains [84], resulting
in a significant computational burden, as shown by the solid-lined method in Fig. 1. Moreover,
tuning a large number of parameters may lead to excessive debiasing, which lowers generation quality.
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

