A Unified Framework for Provably Efficient
Algorithms to Estimate Shapley Values

Tyler Chen∗ Akshay Seshadri∗ Mattia J. Villani∗ Pradeep Niroula
Shouvanik Chakrabarti Archan Ray Pranav Deshpande Romina Yalovetzky
Marco Pistoia Niraj Kumar†
Global Technology Applied Research, JPMorganChase, New York, NY 10001, USA

Abstract
Shapley values have emerged as a critical tool for explaining which features impact
the decisions made by machine learning models. However, computing exact Shapley values is difficult, generally requiring an exponential (in the feature dimension)
number of model evaluations. To address this, many model-agnostic randomized
estimators have been developed, the most influential and widely used being the
KernelSHAP method (Lundberg & Lee, 2017). While related estimators such as
unbiased KernelSHAP (Covert & Lee, 2021) and LeverageSHAP (Musco & Witter,
2025) are known to satisfy theoretical guarantees, bounds for KernelSHAP have
remained elusive. We describe a broad and unified framework that encompasses
KernelSHAP and related estimators constructed using both with and without replacement sampling strategies. We then prove strong non-asymptotic theoretical
guarantees that apply to all estimators from our framework. This provides, to
the best of our knowledge, the first theoretical guarantees for KernelSHAP and
sheds further light on tradeoffs between existing estimators. Through comprehensive benchmarking on small and medium dimensional datasets for Decision-Tree
models, we validate our approach against exact Shapley values, consistently achieving low mean squared error with modest sample sizes. Furthermore, we make
specific implementation improvements to enable scalability of our methods to highdimensional datasets. Our methods, tested on datasets such MNIST and CIFAR10,
provide consistently better results compared to the KernelSHAP library.

1

Introduction

Explaining the prediction of a machine learning model is as important as building the model itself,
since it helps determine whether the model can be trusted to give meaningful predictions when
deployed in real world [RSG16]. Such explanations of black-box decisions are all the more important
in sensitive applications, such as medicine, finance, and law [Bur+16].
In the quest of explaining models, recent line of research has focused on developing local explanation
methods with the objective to identify the degree of influence of each feature that a specific data
point has on the model prediction. These include Explanation vectors [Bae+10], LIME [RSG16], and
Shapley values [ŠK14]. When local methods are expressed as additive feature attribution methods,
i.e., the feature influence linearly adds up to provide the model prediction, [LL17] provided game
theoretic results guaranteeing that Shapley values provide a unique solution to additive feature
attribution. For these reasons, it has emerged as a front-runner model agnostic explanation tool.
∗
†

Equal contribution. Email: {akshay.seshadri, tyler.chen, mattia.villani}@jpmchase.com.
Principal Investigator. Email: niraj.x7.kumar@jpmchase.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

