Orbis: Overcoming Challenges of Long-Horizon
Prediction in Driving World Models

Arian Mousakhan∗
Silvio Galesso∗

Sudhanshu Mittal∗
Karim Farid∗

Thomas Brox

University of Freiburg, Germany
{mousakha,mittal,galessos,faridk,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Existing world models for autonomous driving struggle with long-horizon generation and generalization to challenging scenarios. In this work, we develop a model
using simple design choices, and without additional supervision or sensors, such as
maps, depth, or multiple cameras. We show that our model yields state-of-the-art
performance, despite having only 469M parameters and being trained on 280h of
video data. It particularly stands out in difficult scenarios like turning maneuvers
and urban traffic. We test whether discrete token models possibly have advantages
over continuous models based on flow matching. To this end, we set up a hybrid
tokenizer that is compatible with both approaches and allows for a side-by-side
comparison. Our study concludes in favor of the continuous autoregressive model,
which is less brittle on individual design choices and more powerful than the
model built on discrete tokens. Project page with code, model checkpoints and
visualization can be found here: https://lmb-freiburg.github.io/orbis.github.io

1

Introduction

Intelligent agents operate in complex environments by simulating plausible future states based on
past observations. This capacity for imagination allows them to plan toward long-term goals [22, 4].
Humans naturally acquire this ability through passive observation and minimal interactions, enabling
them to adapt quickly to new and unseen scenarios. Emphasizing the passive observation component
of such world models has become particularly popular for the driving world, since large amounts
of data exists for this domain. It is attractive to circumvent the manual setup of many perception
components by learning the visual representation for decision making via the predictive loss of a
world model.
Recent driving world models [17, 1, 25] built on video diffusion models [6] have made major strides
towards generating detailed content in high definition and at high frame-rates. However, Fig. 2
highlights that these models only work well for few frames, especially in case of maneuvers that
require generating new content, such as turning. Our evaluation, conducted on the generated videos
as well as on the estimated ego-trajectories, reveals substantial limitations in how all public driving
world models capture state transitions – the key feature of a world model – even though the quality of
the generated videos is excellent at first.
While realistic video generation can be a valuable product, it is not the primary objective of world
models. As demonstrated in a number of influential works (e.g. World Models [22], Dreamer [23],
Cosmos [1], VJEPA-2 [2]), their main purpose is representation learning, planning, and policy
learning. The quality of state representations and the accuracy of next-state predictions are therefore
paramount, with decoded videos serving primarily as an indicator, e.g. of whether the model can
∗

Main Contributors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

