One Prompt Fits All: Universal Graph Adaptation for
Pretrained Models
Yongqi Huang1†, Jitao Zhao1†, Dongxiao He1∗, Xiaobao Wang1 , Yawen Li2 ,
Yuxiao Huang3 , Di Jin1 , Zhiyong Feng1
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
2
School of Economics and Management, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
3
Department of Data Science, George Washington University,
1
{yqhuang, zjtao, hedongxiao, wangxiaobao, jindi, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn
2
warmly0716@126.com, 3 yuxiaohuang@gwu.edu

Abstract
Graph Prompt Learning (GPL) has emerged as a promising paradigm that bridges
graph pretraining models and downstream scenarios, mitigating label dependency
and the misalignment between upstream pretraining and downstream tasks. Although existing GPL studies explore various prompt strategies, their effectiveness
and underlying principles remain unclear. We identify two critical limitations:
(1) Lack of consensus on underlying mechanisms: Despite current GPLs have
advanced the field, there is no consensus on how prompts interact with pretrained
models, as different strategies intervene at varying spaces within the model, i.e.,
input-level, layer-wise, and representation-level prompts. (2) Limited scenario
adaptability: Most methods fail to generalize across diverse downstream scenarios, especially under data distribution shifts (e.g., homophilic-to-heterophilic
graphs). To address these issues, we theoretically analyze existing GPL approaches
and reveal that representation-level prompts essentially function as fine-tuning
a simple downstream classifier, proposing that graph prompt learning should focus on unleashing the capability of pretrained models, and the classifier should
adapt to downstream scenarios. Based on our findings, we propose UniPrompt, a
novel GPL method that adapts any pretrained models, unleashing the capability of
pretrained models while preserving the input graph. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can effectively integrate with various pretrained models and
achieve strong performance across in-domain and cross-domain scenarios.

1

Introduction

Graph Prompt Learning (GPL) [1, 2], which aims to design diverse graph prompt strategies, has
emerged as a promising and effective alternative paradigm that bridges between graph pretraining [3, 4] and downstream scenarios [5], overcoming the limitations of label dependency and the
misalignment between upstream pretraining and downstream tasks [6]. Most GPLs freeze the parameters of the pretrained model and tune specific prompt module. Due to its compatibility with
various types of graphs, such as general graphs [6, 7], Knowledge Graphs (KGs) [8, 9, 10] and TextAttribute Graphs (TAGs) [11, 12], GPL demonstrates strong universality and transferability, thereby
improving the fields of few/zero-shot graph learning [12, 13], unified task learning [14, 15, 16],
cross-domain graph learning [17, 18], and promoting the development of Graph Foundation Models
(GFMs) [19, 20, 21].
†

Equal contribution.

* Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

