Progressive Inference-Time Annealing of Diffusion
Models for Sampling from Boltzmann Densities

Tara Akhound-Sadegh1,2∗, Jungyoon Lee3,2∗, Avishek Joey Bose4,2 , Valentin De Bortoli5 ,
Arnaud Doucet5 , Michael M. Bronstein4,6 , Dominique Beaini7,3,2 , Siamak Ravanbakhsh1,2 ,
Kirill Neklyudov3,2,8† , Alexander Tong6,3,2†
1
McGill University, 2 Mila – Quebec AI Institute, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 University of Oxford,
5
Google DeepMind, 6 AITHYRA, 7 Valence Labs, 8 Institut Courtois

Abstract
Sampling efficiently from a target unnormalized probability density remains a core
challenge, with relevance across countless high-impact scientific applications. A
promising approach towards this challenge is the design of amortized samplers that
borrow key ideas, such as probability path design, from state-of-the-art generative
diffusion models. However, all existing diffusion-based samplers remain unable
to draw samples from distributions at the scale of even simple molecular systems.
In this paper, we propose P ROGRESSIVE I NFERENCE -T IME A NNEALING (PITA)
a novel framework to learn diffusion-based samplers that combines two complementary interpolation techniques: I.) Annealing of the Boltzmann distribution and
II.) Diffusion smoothing. PITA trains a sequence of diffusion models from high
to low temperatures by sequentially training each model at progressively lower
temperatures, leveraging engineered easy access to samples of the temperatureannealed target density. In the subsequent step, PITA enables simulating the
trained diffusion model to procure training samples at a lower temperature for the
next diffusion model through inference-time annealing using a novel Feynman-Kac
PDE combined with Sequential Monte Carlo. Empirically, PITA enables, for the
first time, equilibrium sampling of N -body particle systems, Alanine Dipeptide,
and Tripeptide in Cartesian coordinates with dramatically fewer energy function
evaluations. Code available at: https://github.com/taraak/pita.

1

Introduction

The problem of sampling from an unnormalized target probability distribution arises in numerous
areas of natural sciences, including computational biology, chemistry, physics, and materials science
(Frenkel and Smit, 2023; Liu, 2001; Ohno et al., 2018; Stoltz et al., 2010; Noé et al., 2019). In many
of these high-impact scientific settings, the problem’s complexity stems from operating in molecular
systems where the unnormalized target (Boltzmann) distribution at a low temperature of interest is
governed by a highly non-convex and non-smooth energy function, under which there is limited to no
available data (Hénin et al., 2022). As a result, the sampling problem necessitates solving an equally
hard exploration problem: finding the modes—in correct proportion—of the target distribution.
To address the general sampling problem, extensive research has been dedicated to Markov chain
Monte Carlo methods (MCMC), Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC), and, particularly in physical
systems, Molecular Dynamics (MD) (Leimkuhler and Matthews, 2015). To enhance scalability,
Monte Carlo approaches often employ an interpolating sequence of probability distributions that
∗
Equal contribution † Equal advising.
Correspondence to tara.akhoundsadegh@mila.quebec,
k.necludov@gmail.com, atong@aithyra.at

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

