Multitask Learning with
Stochastic Interpolants

Hugo Negrel
Capital Fund Management
23 Rue de l’Université, 75007 Paris
hugonegrel13@gmail.fr

Florentin Coeurdoux
Capital Fund Management
23 Rue de l’Université, 75007 Paris
florentin.coeurdoux@cfm.com

Michael S Albergo
Society of Fellows, Harvard University
malbergo@fas.harvard.edu

Eric Vanden-Eijnden
Machine Learning Lab
Capital Fund Management
23 Rue de l’Université, 75007 Paris
eric.vanden-eijnden@cfm.com ∗

Abstract
We propose a framework for learning maps between probability distributions that
broadly generalizes the time dynamics of flow and diffusion models. To enable
this, we generalize stochastic interpolants by replacing the scalar time variable with
vectors, matrices, or linear operators, allowing us to bridge probability distributions
across multiple dimensional spaces. This approach enables the construction of
versatile generative models capable of fulfilling multiple tasks without task-specific
training. Our operator-based interpolants not only provide a unifying theoretical perspective for existing generative models but also extend their capabilities.
Through numerical experiments, we demonstrate the zero-shot efficacy of our
method on conditional generation and inpainting, fine-tuning and posterior sampling, and multiscale modeling, suggesting its potential as a generic task-agnostic
alternative to specialized models.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed remarkable advances in generative modeling, with transport-based
approaches such as normalizing flows (Lipman et al., 2022; Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden, 2022;
Liu et al., 2022) and diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song and Ermon, 2020; De Bortoli et al.,
2021; Albergo et al., 2023a) emerging as state-of-the-art techniques across various application
domains (Rombach et al., 2022; Mazé and Ahmed, 2023; Alverson et al., 2024). These methods
have revolutionized our ability to generate high-quality images, text, and other complex data types by
viewing these data as samples from an unknown target distribution and learning to transform simple
(e.g., noise) distributions into this target. This transformation is effectively achieved via transport of
the samples by a flow or diffusion process with a drift (or score) parameterized by neural networks
and estimated via simulation-free quadratic regression, enabling highly efficient training.
Despite their impressive performance, these generative frameworks face a fundamental limitation:
they are typically designed and trained for specific, predetermined tasks, with the generative objective
specified before training. For example, a diffusion model trained to generate images cannot easily be
repurposed to perform inpainting or other editing tasks without substantial modification or retraining.
∗
also at: Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY 10012, USA,
eve2@cims.nyu.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

