Learning Efficient Fuse-and-Refine for Feed-Forward
3D Gaussian Splatting

Yiming Wang
ETH Zurich

Lucy Chai
Google

Stephen Lombardi
Google

Xuan Luo
Google

Michael Niemeyer
Google

Siyu Tang
ETH Zurich

Manuel Lagunas
Google

Tiancheng Sun
Google

Abstract
Recent advances in feed-forward 3D Gaussian Splatting have led to rapid improvements in efficient scene reconstruction from sparse views. However, most existing
approaches construct Gaussian primitives directly aligned with the pixels in one
or more of the input images. This leads to redundancies in the representation
when input views overlap and constrains the position of the primitives to lie along
the input rays without full flexibility in 3D space. Moreover, these pixel-aligned
approaches do not naturally generalize to dynamic scenes, where effectively leveraging temporal information requires resolving both redundant and newly appearing
content across frames. To address these limitations, we introduce a novel Fuseand-Refine module that enhances existing feed-forward models by merging and
refining the primitives in a canonical 3D space. At the core of our method is an
efficient hybrid Splat-Voxel representation – from an initial set of pixel-aligned
Gaussian primitives, we aggregate local features into a coarse-to-fine voxel hierarchy, and then use a sparse voxel transformer to process these voxel features and
generate refined Gaussian primitives. By fusing and refining an arbitrary number
of inputs into a consistent set of primitives, our representation effectively reduces
redundancy and naturally adapts to temporal frames, enabling history-aware online
reconstruction of dynamic scenes. Trained on large-scale static scene datasets, our
model learns an effective global strategy to process around 200k primitives within
15ms and significantly enhances reconstruction quality compared to pixel-aligned
reconstruction approaches. Without additional training, our model generalizes to
video by fusing primitives across time, yielding a more temporally coherent result
compared to baseline methods with graceful handling of occluded content. Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in both static and streaming scene
reconstructions while running at interactive rates (15 fps with 350ms delay) on a
single H100 GPU.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis from sparse views is a core problem for augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR)
applications, where practical constraints require the reconstruction to be fast and accurate for a
positive user experience. Recent feed-forward 3D Gaussian Splatting methods [78, 4, 84] trained with
large-scale scene datasets offer efficient solutions for the sparse-view reconstruction problem. The
key idea of these approaches is to learn a large feed-forward network, typically Transformer-based,
to predict Gaussian primitives and use splatting as a fast renderer [22].
The common approach taken by these methods is to regress per-pixel Gaussian primitives that lie
along the input camera rays. However, this leads to redundancy in the representation when input
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

