miniF2F-Lean Revisited: Reviewing Limitations and
Charting a Path Forward

Azim Ospanov ∗†
aospanov9@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Farzan Farnia †
farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Roozbeh Yousefzadeh ∗
roozbeh.yz@gmail.com

Abstract
We perform a thorough analysis of the formal and informal statements in the
miniF2F benchmark from the perspective of an AI system that is tasked to participate in a math Olympiad consisting of the problems in miniF2F. In such setting,
the model has to read and comprehend the problems in natural language, formalize
them in Lean language, then proceed with proving the problems, and it will get
credit for each problem if the formal proof corresponds to the original informal
statement presented to the model. Our evaluation results reveal that the best accuracy of such pipeline can be about 36% using the SoTA models in the literature,
considerably lower than the individual SoTA accuracies, 97% and 69% reported in
the autoformalization and theorem proving literature. Analyzing the failure modes,
we trace back a considerable portion of this drop to discrepancies between the
formal and informal statements for more than half of the problems in miniF2F. We
proceed with correcting all the errors, discrepancies and simplifications in formal
and informal statements, and present the miniF2F-v2 with fully verified formal and
informal statements and proofs. Evaluating the full theorem proving pipeline on
miniF2F-v2 leads to the best accuracy of 70%, a significant improvement from the
40% on the original miniF2F, yet indicating considerable misalignment between
the autoformalization models and theorem provers. Our deep analysis suggests
that a higher quality benchmark can help the community better evaluate progress
in the field of formal reasoning and also better diagnose the failure and success
modes of autoformalization and theorem proving models. Our dataset is available
at https://github.com/roozbeh-yz/miniF2F_v2.

1

Introduction

Automated reasoning with computers has a long and rich history [1], and with the rise of AI, it has had
major advancements in the past decades, notably DeepBlue [2], AlphaGo [3], etc. Shortly after the
rise of Large Language Models (LLMs), [4] showed the remarkable ability of these models to learn
the language of formal verification systems such as Lean [5] and automatically prove mathematical
theorems in formal language, building on prior work such as [6]. This gave rise to the subfield of
Automated Theorem Proving (ATP) in the machine learning literature which has seen considerable
advancements in the past few years [7]. The shared progress in this field was partly made possible by
the miniF2F benchmark [8] which consists of 488 theorems in formal and informal languages drawn
from prestigious mathematical competitions and Olympiads.
Writing mathematical proofs in formal language makes the verification of proofs automated and
reliable, however, learning and writing the language of formal verification systems is not easy for
humans nor for the LLMs. For a human, it might take 10 times longer to write a proof in formal
language compared to an informal one. LLMs, on the other hand, are likely to excel at learning these
∗
†

Huawei Hong Kong Research Center
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

