Optimal community detection in dense bipartite
graphs

Julien Chhor∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Toulouse School of Economics
Toulouse, France
julien.chhor@tse-fr.eu

Parker Knight
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard University
Boston, MA, USA
pknight@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of detecting a community of densely connected vertices in
a high-dimensional bipartite graph of size n1 × n2 . Under the null hypothesis, the
observed graph is drawn from a bipartite Erdős-Renyi distribution with connection
probability p0 . Under the alternative hypothesis, there exists an unknown bipartite
subgraph of size k1 × k2 in which edges appear with probability p1 = p0 + δ for
some δ > 0, while all other edges outside the subgraph appear with probability p0 .
Specifically, we provide non-asymptotic upper and lower bounds on the smallest
signal strength δ ∗ that is both necessary and sufficient to ensure the existence
of a test with small enough Type I and Type II errors. We also derive novel
minimax-optimal tests achieving these fundamental limits when the underlying
graph is sufficiently dense. Our proposed tests involve a combination of hardthresholded nonlinear statistics of the adjacency matrix, the analysis of which may
be of independent interest. In contrast with previous work, our non-asymptotic
upper and lower bounds match for any configuration of n1 , n2 , k1 , k2 .

1

Introduction

The analysis of community structure is a fundamental task in statistical network science [27, 24].
In the 2000’s, a series of striking works including (but not limited to) [3, 9, 30, 53, 56] observe the
ubiquity of community-based organization in real world network data. Inspired by these observations,
a vast literature has emerged over the past two decades attempting to understand the statistical
limits of detecting and recovering planted communities in random graphs [20, 48, 50, 59, 4, 8, 49],
detecting geometry in graphs defined via latent metric spaces [14, 13, 44, 25], and establishing
fundamental computational limits for the community detection and recovery problems [31, 16, 60,
46, 12]. Here, we draw a careful distinction between community detection and community recovery.
In the community detection problem, also sometimes referred to as the Planted Dense Subgraph
(PDS) problem, the statistician observes a random graph and aims to determine whether the graph
was drawn from an Erdős-Renyi family, or if it contains a densely connected community of vertices
(i.e., a dense subgraph). In contrast, the community recovery problem involves assigning each vertex
in the observed graph to a latent community, under the assumption that such community structure
exists. We focus on community detection in the present work, and we refer readers to [1] for a
comprehensive review of the results pertaining to the recovery problem in the stochastic block model.
Existing work studying community detection can be divided into two categories. The first camp,
including [4, 59, 57, 61], focuses on detecting the presence of a small community of k nodes in a
high-dimensional graph of n nodes, typically in an asymptotic setting with k = o(n). In these papers,
the authors focus on deriving sufficient and necessary conditions on the difference in connection
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work and are ordered alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

