When Does Curriculum Learning Help? A
Theoretical Perspective

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Yunjuan Wang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
ywang509@jhu.edu

Kaibo Zhang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
kzhang90@jhu.edu

Abstract
Curriculum learning has emerged as an effective strategy to enhance the training
efﬁciency and generalization of machine learning models. However, its theoretical underpinnings remain relatively underexplored. In this work, we develop a
theoretical framework for curriculum learning based on biased regularized empirical risk minimization (RERM), identifying conditions under which curriculum
learning provably improves generalization. We introduce a sufﬁcient condition
that characterizes a “good” curriculum and analyze a multi-task curriculum framework, where solving a sequence of convex tasks can facilitate better generalization.
We also demonstrate how these theoretical insights translate to practical beneﬁts
when using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) as an optimization method. Beyond
convex settings, we explore the utility of curriculum learning for non-convex tasks.
Empirical evaluations on synthetic datasets and MNIST validate our theoretical
ﬁndings and highlight the practical efﬁcacy of curriculum-based training.

1

Introduction

In standard supervised learning, achieving a low generalization error often requires a large number of labeled training examples and signiﬁcant computational resources. In contrast, humans can
rapidly learn new concepts from only a few examples by leveraging prior knowledge. This humanlike ability to relate new a new concept to the knowledge they have previously learned motivates the
use of prior knowledge in a new learning problem. In paradigms such as multi-task learning [Caruana, 1997], transfer learning [Weiss et al., 2016], and meta-learning [Baxter, 2000], the assumption
is that related tasks share information, allowing learners to generalize more effectively. In parameter transfer frameworks [Kuzborskij and Orabona, 2013, Pentina and Lampert, 2014], this shared
structure is reﬂected in the assumption that tasks have similar optimal parameter vectors, enabling
efﬁcient learning through initialization and ﬁne-tuning.
Curriculum learning [Bengio et al., 2009] draws inspiration from the structured manner in which humans acquire knowledge – starting with easier concepts and gradually progressing to more difﬁcult
ones. This paradigm proposes decomposing complex learning problems into a sequence of simpler
sub-tasks ordered by increasing difﬁculty. The central idea is that such a learning progression can
improve both optimization and generalization. Bengio et al. [2009] demonstrated how learning can
beneﬁt from gradual progression of the hardness of training data. Subsequent works extend the idea
to other aspects of learning, such as increasing model capacity [Karras et al., 2017, Sinha et al., 2020,
Morerio et al., 2017] and increasing task difﬁculty [Caubrière et al., 2019, Florensa et al., 2017, Lotter et al., 2017, Saraﬁanos et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2017]. We focus on curriculum learning across
tasks, where parameters are transferred from simpler tasks to more complex ones.
In contrast to traditional transfer learning, which assumes all tasks are closely related, curriculum learning introduces an ordering over tasks based on their difﬁculty. However, such
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

