Quantifying and Alleviating Co-Adaptation in
Sparse-View 3D Gaussian Splatting

Kangjie Chen1∗ Yingji Zhong2 Zhihao Li3 Jiaqi Lin1
Youyu Chen4 Minghan Qin1 Haoqian Wang1†
1

Tsinghua University 2 HKUST 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Harbin Institute of Technology

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated impressive performance in novel
view synthesis under dense-view settings. However, in sparse-view scenarios,
despite the realistic renderings in training views, 3DGS occasionally manifests
appearance artifacts in novel views. This paper investigates the appearance artifacts
in sparse-view 3DGS and uncovers a core limitation of current approaches: the
optimized Gaussians are overly-entangled with one another to aggressively fit
the training views, which leads to a neglect of the real appearance distribution
of the underlying scene and results in appearance artifacts in novel views. The
analysis is based on a proposed metric, termed Co-Adaptation Score (CA), which
quantifies the entanglement among Gaussians, i.e., co-adaptation, by computing
the pixel-wise variance across multiple renderings of the same viewpoint, with
different random subsets of Gaussians. The analysis reveals that the degree of coadaptation is naturally alleviated as the number of training views increases. Based
on the analysis, we propose two lightweight strategies to explicitly mitigate the coadaptation in sparse-view 3DGS: (1) random gaussian dropout; (2) multiplicative
noise injection to the opacity. Both strategies are designed to be plug-and-play, and
their effectiveness is validated across various methods and benchmarks. We hope
that our insights into the co-adaptation effect will inspire the community to achieve
a more comprehensive understanding of sparse-view 3DGS.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [1] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities for
photorealistic novel view synthesis in dense-view settings. However, under sparse-view supervision,
3DGS often suffers significant performance degradation in novel view rendering, manifesting as
artifacts caused by incorrect geometry or appearance distribution due to limited supervision from
training views. Existing works mainly improve sparse-view 3DGS through geometry regularization,
such as monocular depth constraints [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], matching-based point initialization [10],
and dense point initialization [11, 12]. Although these methods achieve improvements by enhancing
geometric accuracy, few have investigated appearance artifacts in sparse-view 3DGS. These artifacts,
often overlooked, are common in novel view rendering and typically manifest as occasional color
outliers—colors not belonging to the scene—as illustrated in Figure 1. In this paper, we focus on
analyzing and mitigating appearance artifacts in the novel view rendering of sparse-view 3DGS.
We begin our analysis by revisiting the rendering characteristics of 3DGS. In the splatting process,
each pixel receives contributions from multiple Gaussians projected onto its corresponding tile on the
∗
†

This work was done while he was an intern at Huawei.
Corresponding author. E-mail: wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

