Reinforcement Learning Teachers of Test Time Scaling

Edoardo Cetin, Tianyu Zhao, Yujin Tang
Sakana AI, Japan
{edo,tianyu,yujintang}@sakana.ai

Abstract
Training reasoning language models (LMs) with reinforcement learning (RL) for
one-hot correctness inherently relies on the LM being able to explore and solve its
task with some chance at initialization. Furthermore, a key use case of reasoning
LMs is to act as teachers for distilling new students and cold-starting future RL
iterations rather than being deployed themselves. From these considerations, we
introduce a new framework that avoids RL’s exploration challenge by training a
new class of Reinforcement-Learned Teachers (RLTs) focused on yielding the most
effective downstream distillation. RLTs are prompted with both the question and
solution to each problem, and tasked to simply “connect-the-dots” with detailed
explanations tailored for their students. We train RLTs with dense rewards obtained
by feeding each explanation to the student and testing its understanding of the
problem’s solution. In practice, the raw outputs of a 7B RLT provide higher final
performance on competition and graduate-level tasks than existing distillation and
cold-starting pipelines that collect and postprocess the reasoning traces of orders
of magnitude larger LMs. Furthermore, RLTs maintain their effectiveness when
training larger students and when applied zero-shot to out-of-distribution tasks,
unlocking new levels of efficiency and re-usability for the RL reasoning framework.

§ github.com/SakanaAI/RLT
1

Introduction

Exploration is one of the critical challenges in reinforcement learning (RL)
and has been a core focus of its literature [1–3]. Sparse rewards cannot
yield any learning signal unless the
agent is already capable of solving
the given task at initialization. With
the rise of RL for open-ended reasoning (RL reasoning) inducing a new
form of language model (LM) scaling [4–6] beyond prompt-engineering
and search [7, 8], exploration has reemerged as a key challenge. A canonical motivation for RL is the potential to bootstrap from partial solutions,
guided by an informative reward function, and learn entirely new tasks from
scratch. However, the nature of onehot correctness rewards used in the RL

Figure 1: RLTs provide better student distillation and RL
cold-starts than orders of magnitude larger LMs across competition and graduate-level tasks (AIME, MATH, GPQA).
This holds when distilling students of the same size (Left) and
also 32B students, much larger than the RLT itself (Right).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

