Learning Neural Exposure Fields for View Synthesis

Michael Niemeyer∗ Fabian Manhardt Marie-Julie Rakotosaona Michael Oechsle
Christina Tsalicoglou Keisuke Tateno Jonathan T. Barron Federico Tombari
Google

Abstract
Recent advances in neural scene representations have led to unprecedented quality
in 3D reconstruction and view synthesis. Despite achieving high-quality results for
common benchmarks with curated data, outputs often degrade for data that contain
per image variations such as strong exposure changes, present, e.g., in most scenes
with indoor and outdoor areas or rooms with windows. In this paper, we introduce
Neural Exposure Fields (NExF), a novel technique for robustly reconstructing
3D scenes with high quality and 3D-consistent appearance from challenging realworld captures. In the core, we propose to learn a neural field predicting an optimal
exposure value per 3D point, enabling us to optimize exposure along with the
neural scene representation. While capture devices such as cameras select optimal
exposure per image/pixel, we generalize this concept and perform optimization in
3D instead. This enables accurate view synthesis in high dynamic range scenarios,
bypassing the need of post-processing steps or multi-exposure captures. Our
contributions include a novel neural representation for exposure prediction, a
system for joint optimization of the scene representation and the exposure field via
a novel neural conditioning mechanism, and demonstrated superior performance
on challenging real-world data. We find that our approach trains faster than prior
works and produces state-of-the-art results on several benchmarks improving by
over 55% over best-performing baselines.

1

Introduction

Neural scene representations [8, 24, 33, 50] have revolutionized 3D vision due to their simple
design, stable optimization, and state-of-the-art performance. As a result, they have now become
the predominant representation for many 3D vision tasks ranging from 3D and 4D reconstruction
[19, 30, 34–36, 53], to generative modeling [20, 29, 38, 44, 46], to view synthesis [3, 4, 26, 28].
While these methods have achieved unprecedented performance on existing view synthesis datasets,
the majority of these benchmarks [3, 25] factor out several conditions that might occur in real world
captures leading to a performance gap on such data. Among different phenomena, in particular strong
exposure and appearance changes can lead to drastically degraded results (see Fig. 1a).
Prior works that consider exposure information during the optimization have explored this from a
computer graphics perspective and usually aim to either reproduce images with certain exposures
or recover a high dynamic range (HDR) representations that can be tonemapped via professional
software [6, 13, 15, 47]. However, the goal of many applications is not only to reproduce input views
at the same exposure, but to reconstruct scenes from RGB images in a 3D consistent manner and
with an appearance that is most faithful to the real world. Another line of work does not consider
input exposure and aim to recover a 3D consistent scene by explaining away per-image variations.
For example, what has been widely adopted in practice is to use generative latent optimization (GLO)
embeddings [5], e.g., as done in the pioneering work NeRF-W [21]. While being a robust solution
∗

Corresponding author: mniemeyer@google.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

