Novel Exploration via Orthogonality

Özgür Şimşek
University of Bath
United Kingdom
o.simsek@bath.ac.uk

Andreas Theophilou
University of Bath
United Kingdom
ajt80@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
Efficient exploration remains one of the most important open problems in reinforcement learning. Discovering novel states or transitions requires policies that
efficiently direct the agent away from the regions of the state space that are already
well explored. We introduce Novel Exploration via Orthogonality (NEO), an approach that automatically uncovers not only which regions of the environment are
novel but also how to reach them by leveraging Laplacian representations. NEO
uses the eigenvectors of a modified graph Laplacian to induce gradient flows from
states that are frequently visited (less novel) to states that are seldom visited (more
novel). We show that NEO’s modified Laplacian yields eigenvectors whose extreme
values align with the most novel regions of the state space. We provide bounds
for the eigenvalues of the modified Laplacian; and we show that the smoothest
eigenvectors with real eigenvalues below certain thresholds provide guaranteed
gradients to novel states for both undirected and directed graphs. In an empirical
evaluation in online, incremental settings, NEO outperformed related state-of-theart approaches, including eigen-options and cover options, in a large collection of
undirected and directed environments with varying connectivity structures.

1

Introduction

Temporal abstraction has been widely studied as an approach to efficient exploration, which remains
one of the key research challenges in reinforcement learning. State of the art methods include
eigen-options [1, 2] and cover time options [3]. In symmetric settings, both of these methods can
produce policies that push the agent toward the far reaches of the state space. However, such regions
may already be heavily visited, and policies that push the agent naively to far away reaches of the
environment are not always effective explorers.
An alternative approach is count-based exploration [4, 5, 6, 7]. This approach addresses novelty
through pseudo-rewards, for example, by giving the agent a novelty bonus proportional to √1n for
having visited a state-action pair n times. Some algorithms that take this approach come with
theoretical guarantees [4]. However, these algorithms do not provide explicit gradient guidance to
the agent. Rather than providing explicit policies for exploration, they rely on primitive actions and
standard reinforcement update rules, such as Q-value learning, to propagate their intrinsic rewards,
which can introduce a lag in exploration until the agent’s value estimates have sufficiently propogated.
A natural alternative is to construct policies that explicitly drive the agent toward the most novel
states [8]. With access to an oracle solver for shortest paths in the transition graph, in symmetric
settings, such policies can guarantee reaching a maximally novel state within a given horizon.
However, this approach focuses exploration very narrowly on a single target, rather than diversifying
across multiple novel regions.
We introduce Novel Exploration via Orthogonality (NEO), a method that maintains the strengths of
prior approaches whilst addressing their weaknesses. As with related spectral methods, NEO uses the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

