Monotone and Separable Set Functions:
Characterizations and Neural Models
Soutrik Sarangi∗
IIT Bombay

Yonatan Sverdlov∗
Technion

Nadav Dym
Technion

Abir De
IIT Bombay

Abstract
Motivated by applications for set containment problems, we consider the following
fundamental problem: can we design set-to-vector functions so that the natural
partial order on sets is preserved, namely S ⊆ T if and only if F (S) ≤ F (T ).
We call functions satisfying this property Monotone and Separating (MAS) set
functions. We establish lower and upper bounds for the vector dimension necessary
to obtain MAS functions, as a function of the cardinality of the multisets and
the underlying ground set. In the important case of an infinite ground set, we
show that MAS functions do not exist, but provide a model called MASN ET
which provably enjoys a relaxed MAS property we name “weakly MAS” and
is stable in the sense of Holder continuity. We also show that MAS functions
can be used to construct universal models that are monotone by construction
and can approximate all monotone set functions. Experimentally, we consider
a variety of set containment tasks. The experiments show the benefit of using
our MASN ET model, in comparison with standard set models which do not
incorporate set containment as an inductive bias. Our implementation is available
in https://github.com/structlearning/MASNET.

1

Introduction

A multiset {{x1 , . . . , xn }} is an unordered collection of vectors, where order does not matter (like sets)
and repetitions are allowed (unlike sets). In recent years, there has been increased interest in neural
networks that can map multisets to vectors, with applications for physical simulations [1], processing
point clouds [2], and graph neural networks [3]. Another important application of multiset-to-vector
maps is set-containment search [4, 5, 6]. Here the goal is to check whether a given multiset S is
(approximately) a subset of T , and this is often carried out by learning a multiset-to-vector mapping
F , and then checking whether F (S) ≤ F (T ) (element-wise), in which case, one deduces that S is a
subset of T . In this paper, we look into this problem from a theoretical perspective.
Monotone and Separable functions We begin our analysis with some definitions: we say that
a function F mapping sets to vectors is monotone if S ⊆ T ⊆ V implies that F (S) ≤ F (T ), and
we will say that F is separable if F (S) ≤ F (T ) implies that S ⊆ T . When F is simultaneously
monotone and separable, we call it a MAS function. When F is a MAS function, we can safely test
whether F (S) ≤ F (T ), and this will be fully equivalent to checking whether S ⊆ T .
Motivation for MAS functions It is natural to ask why we’re interested in functions that are
MAS instead of just being monotone or just separable. For this, we begin with a couple of real-life
applications based on the set-containment task: (I) In recommendation system design, one problem is
to recommend item having a particular set of features, S. Here, we represent each item as a set of
corresponding features T , and the problem is to find all sets T such that approximately, S ⊆ T . (II)
Text entailment where we are given a small query sentence q nd the goal is to find the set of corpus
items c from a large corpus C, where q =⇒ c or c entails q. Here, q and c are typically represented
as sets of contextual embeddings (S for q and T for c) and the entailment problem can be cast as the
problem of checking if S ⊂ T .
*

Soutrik and Yonatan contributed equally. Contact emails of the authors: soutriksarangi14@gmail.com,
yonatans@campus.technion.ac.il, nadavdym@technion.ac.il, abir@cse.iitb.ac.in
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

