LARGO: Latent Adversarial Reflection through
Gradient Optimization for Jailbreaking LLMs

Ran Li
Columbia University
rl3424@columbia.edu

Hao Wang
Rutgers University
hw488@cs.rutgers.edu

Chengzhi Mao
Rutgers University
cm1838@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Efficient red-teaming method to uncover vulnerabilities in Large Language Models (LLMs) is crucial. While recent attacks often use LLMs as optimizers, the
discrete language space make gradient-based methods struggle. We introduce
LARGO (Latent Adversarial Reflection through Gradient Optimization), a novel
latent self-reflection attack that reasserts the power of gradient-based optimization
for generating fluent jailbreaking prompts. By operating within the LLM’s continuous latent space, LARGO first optimizes an adversarial latent vector and then
recursively call the same LLM to decode the latent into natural language. This
methodology yields a fast, effective, and transferable attack that produces fluent
and stealthy prompts. On standard benchmarks like AdvBench and JailbreakBench,
LARGO surpasses leading jailbreaking techniques, including AutoDAN, by 44
points in attack success rate. Our findings demonstrate a potent alternative to
agentic LLM prompting, highlighting the efficacy of interpreting and attacking
LLM internals through gradient optimization.
Warning: This paper contains potentially harmful text.

1

Introduction

Despite Large Language Models’ widespread adoption in applications ranging from chatbot (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Team et al., 2023), code generation (Roziere et al., 2023; Team et al., 2024) to medical
advice (Haupt and Marks, 2023; Qiu et al., 2024), their weakness can cause significant security and
ethical concerns (Kumar et al., 2024; Mirzaei et al., 2024). Efficient and novel white-hat jailbreaking
method can be crucial in exposing the weakness of LLMs and build safe LLMs.
Early jailbreaks were often hand-crafted by community users. For example, the “DAN” (Do Anything
Now) prompt manually coerce the model into ignoring its safety instructions (Shen et al., 2024;
Nabavirazavi et al., 2025), but these manual exploits are ad hoc and brittle. One line of work optimizes
such adversarial suffixes at the token level. Zou et al. (2023) introduced the Greedy Coordinate
Gradient (GCG) method, which uses gradient-based search to construct an universal adversarial
suffix, but it appears to be an “amalgamation of tokens” with no coherent meaning and can be easily
flagged by perplexity-based defenses (Alon and Kamfonas, 2023). Another direction uses search and
learning to produce more fluent jailbreak prompts. Notably, AutoDAN (Liu et al., 2024) applies a
hierarchical genetic algorithm to evolve DAN-style prompts automatically. Similarly, PAIR (Chao
et al., 2023) and AdvPrompter (Paulus et al., 2024) employ an LLM attacker and an LLM-based
judge to refine prompts iteratively, yielding natural language attacks with far fewer queries than
GCG. Nonetheless, they introduce additional nuances in human prototyping, prompt engineering, or
training of attack models, and can still benefit from more direct optimization of the attack objective.
In addition, existing jailbreak focus on break the output of the model, yet the internal’s of the LLM
can also be unsafe but remains underexplored (Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

