Non-stationary Bandit Convex Optimization:
A Comprehensive Study
Xiaoqi Liu→ Dorian Baudry→† Julian Zimmert‡ Patrick Rebeschini→

Arya Akhavan→§

Abstract
Bandit Convex Optimization is a fundamental class of sequential decision-making
problems, where the learner selects actions from a continuous domain and observes
a loss (but not its gradient) at only one point per round. We study this problem in
non-stationary environments, and aim to minimize the regret under three standard
measures of non-stationarity: the number of switches S in the comparator sequence,
the total variation ! of the loss functions, and the path-length P of the comparator
sequence. We propose a polynomial-time algorithm, Tilted Exponentially Weighted
Average with Sleeping Experts (TEWA-SE), which adapts the sleeping experts
framework from online convex optimization to the bandit setting. For strongly convex losses, we prove that TEWA-SE is minimax-optimal with respect to known S
and ! by establishing matching upper and lower bounds. By equipping TEWA-SE
with the Bandit-over-Bandit framework, we extend our analysis to environments
with unknown non-stationarity measures. For general convex losses, we introduce a second algorithm, clipped Exploration by Optimization (cExO), based on
exponential weights over a discretized action space. While not polynomial-time
computable, this method achieves minimax-optimal regret with respect to known
S and !, and improves on the best existing bounds with respect to P .

1

Introduction

Many real-world decision-making problems, such as resource allocation, experimental design, or hyperparameter tuning require repeatedly selecting an action from a continuous space under uncertainty
and limited feedback. These settings are naturally modeled as Bandit Convex Optimization (see [1] for
an introduction), in which an adversary fixes a sequence of T loss functions f1 , f2 , . . . , fT : Rd → R
beforehand, and a learner sequentially interacts with the adversary for T rounds. At each round t, the
learner selects an action z t from a continuous arm set ” ↑ Rd , assumed to be convex and compact.
The learner then incurs a loss ft (z t ) and observes a noisy feedback:
yt = ft (z t ) + ωt ,

(1)

where ωt is a sub-Gaussian noise variable (Definition 1). The goal is to minimize the learner’s
regret with respect to (w.r.t.) a performance benchmark. In the online learning literature [2, 3], the
!T
benchmark is typically the best static action in hindsight, with cumulative loss minz↑! t=1 ft (z).
However, non-stationarity arises in many applications where different actions may work well during
different time intervals. Hence, a line of works [4–8] propose to compare the learner’s actions against
→

University of Oxford. Correspondence to: {shirley.liu, arya.akhavan}@stats.ox.ac.uk.
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France.
‡
Google Research.
§
École Polytechnique de Paris, IP Paris.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

