You Only Spectralize Once: Taking a Spectral Detour
to Accelerate Graph Neural Network

Yi Liα , Zhichun Guoβ , Guanpeng Liγ , and Bingzhe Liα
α
University of Texas at Dallas
β
University of Washington
γ
University of Florida
{Yi.Li3 ,bingzhe.li}@utdallas.edu
zcguo@uw.edu
liguanpeng@ufl.edu

Abstract
Training Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) often relies on repeated, irregular, and
expensive message-passing operations over all nodes (e.g., N ), leading to high
computational overhead. To alleviate this inefficiency, we revisit the GNNs training
from the spectral perspective. Node features and embeddings in many real-world
graph exhibit sparse representation in Graph Fourier domain. This inherent sparsity
aligns well with the Compressed Sensing principles, which posits that sparse signals
can be accurately reconstructed from significantly fewer measurements (e.g., M
and M ≪ N ). This observation motivates designing efficient GNNs that operates
predominantly in a compressed spectral subspace. In this paper, we propose You
Only Spectralize Once (YOSO), a GNN training scheme that first performing a
single projection of features onto a learnable orthonormal Graph Fourier basis Uℓ ,
and after compressed sensing is used, retaining only M spectral coefficients where
M ≪ N . The entire GNN computation then performs in this reduced/compressed
spectral domain. Finally, the full graph embeddings are recovered back to original
domain at output layer by solving a compressed sensing bounded ℓ2,1 -regularized
optimization problem. Theoretically, drawing upon the compressed sensing theory,
we prove that stable recovery by showing that this whole process can satisfy the
Restricted Isometry Property when M = O(k(log N/k)). Empirically, YOSO
achieves an average 74% training time reduction across five benchmark datasets
compared to state-of-the-art baseline schemes, while maintaining the competitive
model accuracy.

1

Introduction

Graphs effectively capture the relational structures in diverse data [27, 51, 26, 39], offering advantages
over Euclidean representations [7]. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [36, 28, 72, 15] leverage this
via localized message passing (LMP) [19], achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in tasks
such as link prediction [25, 67] and node classification [71, 69]. However, LMP on the large-scale
graphs leads to prohibitively long training time, e.g., billion-scale graphs can demand hours or even
days of computation [38, 58]. To mitigate these costs, prior works explored the strategies like graph
pruning/condensation [50, 33, 60] and various sampling techniques [13, 31, 66, 15]. By discarding
parts of the graph or limiting nodes neighbors exploration, these methods might miss crucial relational
information, thus often leading to a notable degradation in model accuracy [12]. Consequently, GNN
training faces a fundamental efficiency-accuracy trade-off.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

