RAPID Hand: A Robust, Affordable,
Perception-Integrated, Dexterous Manipulation
Platform for Generalist Robot Autonomy

Zhaoliang Wan1
Lu Qi3
1

Zetong Bi1

Zida Zhou2

Xu Yang4

Sun Yat-sen University

2

Hao Ren1

Yiming Zeng1

Ming-Hsuan Yang3

Orbot Ltd

3

Yihan Li1

Hui Cheng1∗

University of California, Merced

4

CASIA

https://rapid-hand.github.io
Ontology Design

Whole-Hand Perception
Ring

Middle

Index

Pinky

Tactile sensor

Motor Encoder

Temporal Sync

Affordable

Thumb

Wrist Camera

Robust

Dexterous

Multi-modal Integration

Spatial Align

Figure 1: RAPID Hand is an open-source, low-cost, fully direct-driven robotic hand platform with
stable integrated, synchronized, and aligned multi-modal whole-hand perception.

Abstract
This paper addresses the scarcity of low-cost but high-dexterity platforms for collecting real-world multi-fingered robot manipulation data towards generalist robot
autonomy. To achieve it, we propose the RAPID Hand, a co-optimized hardware
and software platform where the compact 20-DoF hand, robust whole-hand perception, and high-DoF teleoperation interface are jointly designed. Specifically,
RAPID Hand adopts a compact and practical hand ontology and a hardware-level
perception framework that stably integrates wrist-mounted vision, fingertip tactile
sensing, and proprioception with sub-7 ms latency and spatial alignment. Collecting
high-quality demonstrations on high-DoF hands is challenging, as existing teleoperation methods struggle with precision and stability on complex multi-fingered
systems. We address this by co-optimizing hand design, perception integration, and
teleoperation interface through a universal actuation scheme, custom perception
electronics, and two retargeting constraints. We evaluate the platform’s hardware,
perception, and teleoperation interface. Training a diffusion policy on collected
data shows superior performance over prior works [1, 2], validating the system’s
capability for reliable, high-quality data collection. The platform is constructed
from low-cost and off-the-shelf components and will be made public to ensure
reproducibility and ease of adoption.
∗

Correspondence to: chengh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

