InvisibleInk: High-Utility and Low-Cost
Text Generation with Differential Privacy

Vishnu Vinod1
1

CeRAI, IIT Madras

Krishna Pillutla1,2
2

WSAI, IIT Madras

Abhradeep Thakurta3
3

Google DeepMind

Abstract
As major progress in LLM-based long-form text generation enables paradigms such
as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and inference-time scaling, safely incorporating private information into the generation remains a critical open question.
We present I NVISIBLE I NK, a highly scalable long-form text generation framework
satisfying rigorous differential privacy guarantees with respect to the sensitive
reference texts. It interprets sampling from the LLM’s next-token-distribution as
the exponential mechanism over the LLM logits with two innovations. First, we
reduce the privacy cost by isolating and clipping only the sensitive information in
the model logits (relative to the public logits). Second, we improve text quality
by sampling without any privacy cost from a small superset of the top-k private
tokens. Empirical evaluations demonstrate a consistent 8× (or more) reduction
in computation cost over state-of-the-art baselines to generate long-form private
text of the same utility across privacy levels. I NVISIBLE I NK is able to generate,
for the first time, high-quality private long-form text at less than 4-8× times the
computation cost of non-private generation, paving the way for its practical use.
We open-source a pip-installable Python package (invink) for InvisibleInk at
https://github.com/cerai-iitm/invisibleink.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable inference-time capabilities, synthesizing information from multiple sources into coherent responses via retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG), and generating increasingly long and sophisticated outputs via the recent “deep research” and
inference-time scaling paradigms [1–3]. Larger token budgets also allow these models to effectively
“think,” enabling self-reflection and correction of potential errors during generation [4–8].
The power of these models, however, often relies on their ability to process and reason over vast
amounts of information, including potentially sensitive data provided at inference time. This context
might come from user prompts containing private details or documents retrieved by RAG systems
from confidential knowledge bases. There is some risk that the model’s outputs, particularly in detailed
long-form generation [9], could inadvertently leak sensitive details from this private context [10].
Differential Privacy (DP) [11] can mitigate such risks by providing provable guarantees that the
output distribution is statistically indistinguishable whether or not any single piece of sensitive
information was included in the input context. This guarantee is not just desirable but often essential
in sensitive domains like healthcare and finance, where information leakage carries severe regulatory
(e.g., HIPAA, GDPR) and ethical consequences and merely anonymizing personally identifiable
information (PII) is not sufficient [12] Therefore, developing effective DP mechanisms for inferencetime generation is critical for the responsible application of LLMs in privacy-sensitive applications.
We tackle the challenge of achieving high-fidelity, long-form text generation under the rigorous DP
guarantees on sensitive source text(s) used as references for generation.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

