Generating and Checking DNN Verification Proofs

Hai Duong
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
hduong22@gmu.edu

ThanhVu Nguyen
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
tvn@gmu.edu

Matthew B. Dwyer
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
matthewbdwyer@virginia.edu

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have emerged as an effective approach to implementing challenging subproblems. They are increasingly being used as components in
critical transportation, medical, and military systems. However, like human-written
software, DNNs may have flaws that can lead to unsafe system performance. To
confidently deploy DNNs in such systems, strong evidence is needed that they
do not contain such flaws. This has led researchers to explore the adaptation
and customization of software verification approaches to the problem of neural
network verification (NNV). Many dozens of NNV tools have been developed
in recent years and as a field these techniques have matured to the point where
realistic networks can be analyzed to detect flaws and to prove conformance with
specifications. NNV tools are highly-engineered and complex may harbor flaws
that cause them to produce unsound results.
We identify commonalities in algorithmic approaches taken by NNV tools to define
a verifier independent proof format—activation pattern tree proofs (APTP)—and
design an algorithm for checking those proofs that is proven correct and optimized
to enable scalable checking. We demonstrate that existing verifiers can efficiently
generate APTP proofs, and that an APTPchecker significantly outperforms prior
work on a benchmark of 16 neural networks and 400 NNV problems, and that it
is robust to variation in APTP proof structure arising from different NNV tools.
APTPchecker is available at: https://github.com/dynaroars/APTPchecker.

1

Introduction

As deep neural networks (DNNs) become integral components of critical systems such as autonomous
vehicles [1], medical decision-making [2], and robotics [3], it is imperative to rigorously verify their
behavior. In recent years, the research community has developed a wide-range of algorithmic
techniques to verify DNN properties and incorporated them into tools that now scale to realistic
DNN models millions of neurons [4]. These advances have enabled verification of properties such as
robustness to input perturbations and conformance to safety specifications [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
However, despite the progress in algorithmic advances, a fundamental question remains: “How can
we trust the results produced by DNN verification tools?” While existing tools emit counterexamples
when properties are violated (i.e., SAT results), there is no mechanism to independently validate
results when properties are proven to hold (i.e., UNSAT claims). Recent competitions such as
VNN-COMP [4] have revealed correctness issues in multiple tools, including cases where a verifier
incorrectly declared a property to be proven even when a counterexample exists. These errors are
difficult to detect and debug due to the complexity of verifier implementations, which often exceed
tens of thousands of lines of code and employ intricate optimization techniques, e.g., top of the line
DNN verification tools such as αβ-CROWN [7] and NeuralSAT [9] have 20k SLOC implementations
with complex algorithms that may harbor bugs. Without a mechanism to independently validate
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

