MIBP-Cert: Certified Training against Data
Perturbations with Mixed-Integer Bilinear Programs

Tobias Lorenz
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
Saarbrücken, Germany
tobias.lorenz@cispa.de

Marta Kwiatkowska
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
marta.kwiatkowska@cs.ox.ac.uk

Mario Fritz
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
Saarbrücken, Germany
fritz@cispa.de

Abstract
Data errors, corruptions, and poisoning attacks during training pose a major threat
to the reliability of modern AI systems. While extensive effort has gone into
empirical mitigations, the evolving nature of attacks and the complexity of data
require a more principled, provable approach to robustly learn on such data—and to
understand how perturbations influence the final model. Hence, we introduce MIBPCert, a novel certification method based on mixed-integer bilinear programming
(MIBP) that computes sound, deterministic bounds to provide provable robustness
even under complex threat models. By computing the set of parameters reachable
through perturbed or manipulated data, we can predict all possible outcomes and
guarantee robustness. To make solving this optimization problem tractable, we
propose a novel relaxation scheme that bounds each training step without sacrificing
soundness. We demonstrate the applicability of our approach to continuous and
discrete data, as well as different threat models—including complex ones that were
previously out of reach.

1

Introduction

Data poisoning attacks are among the most significant threats to the integrity of machine learning
models. Attackers can exert far-reaching influence by targeting systems in sensitive domains such
as finance, healthcare, or autonomous decision-making. These attacks inject malicious data into
the training process, causing models to make incorrect or harmful predictions after deployment.
Government agencies across the US and Europe have recognized poisoning as one of the fundamental
threats to AI systems and highlight the need for robust defenses in their respective reports [9, 30] and
legislation [10].
To counter this threat, many empirical defenses have been proposed [7], relying on data filtering,
robust training, or heuristic inspection to mitigate the effect of adversarial data. However, these
methods offer no formal guarantees: they may reduce the harm of specific perturbations but cannot
ensure robustness in general. As a result, increasingly sophisticated poisoning attacks have been
developed to bypass these defenses [29].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

