RoMA: Scaling up Mamba-based Foundation Models
for Remote Sensing

Our

ViT

Fengxiang Wang1 , Yulin Wang2 , Mingshuo Chen 3 , Haiyan Zhao2 , Yangang Sun2 ,
Shuo Wang2 , Hongzhen Wang2 , Di Wang4,5∗, Long Lan1 , Wenjing Yang 1∗, Jing Zhang4∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Tsinghua University, China 3 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
4
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China 5 Zhongguancun Academy, China

Figure 1: Comparison of ViT [1] (pretrained with MAE [2]) and our Mamba model (pretrained with
RoMA) in scene classification, change detection, and semantic segmentation. Mamba outperforms
ViT while being more computationally and memory efficient for high-resolution images. Notably,
Mamba-B achieves 1.56× faster inference and reduces GPU memory usage by 78.9% on 1248×1248
resolution images (6084 tokens per image) on a single NVIDIA 4090 GPU (batch size = 2).

Abstract
Recent advances in self-supervised learning for Vision Transformers (ViTs) have
fueled breakthroughs in remote sensing (RS) foundation models. However, the
quadratic complexity of self-attention poses a significant barrier to scalability, particularly for large models and high-resolution images. While the linear-complexity
Mamba architecture offers a promising alternative, existing RS applications of
Mamba remain limited to supervised tasks on small, domain-specific datasets. To
address these challenges, we propose RoMA, a framework that enables scalable
self-supervised pretraining of Mamba-based RS foundation models using largescale, diverse, unlabeled data. RoMA enhances scalability for high-resolution
images through a tailored auto-regressive learning strategy, incorporating two key
innovations: 1) a rotation-aware pretraining mechanism combining adaptive cropping with angular embeddings to handle sparsely distributed objects with arbitrary
orientations, and 2) multi-scale token prediction objectives that address the extreme
variations in object scales inherent to RS imagery. Systematic empirical studies
validate that Mamba adheres to RS data and parameter scaling laws, with performance scaling reliably as model and data size increase. Furthermore, experiments
across scene classification, changing detection, and semantic segmentation tasks
demonstrate that RoMA-pretrained Mamba models consistently outperform ViTbased counterparts in both accuracy and computational efficiency. The source code
and pretrained models were released at RoMA.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, advancements in remote sensing (RS) technology and more efficient data
acquisition have significantly enhanced applications in ecosystem monitoring [3], and natural disaster
management [4]. These applications rely on crucial model capabilities such as scene classification [5],
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

