CyIN: Cyclic Informative Latent Space for Bridging
Complete and Incomplete Multimodal Learning

Ronghao Lin1,2 , Qiaolin He1 , Sijie Mai3 , Ying Zeng1 , Aolin Xiong1 ,
Li Huang1,4 , Yap-peng Tan2 , Haifeng Hu1,5∗
1
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science, South China Normal University, China
4
Desay SV Automotive Co., Ltd, China
5
Pazhou Laboratory, China
{linrh7,heqlin5,zengy268,xiongaolin}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
sijiemai@m.scnu.edu.cn,Li.Huang@desaysv.com
eyptan@ntu.edu.sg, huhaif@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal machine learning, mimicking the human brain’s ability to integrate
various modalities has seen rapid growth. Most previous multimodal models are
trained on perfectly paired multimodal input to reach optimal performance. In
real-world deployments, however, the presence of modality is highly variable and
unpredictable, causing the pre-trained models in suffering significant performance
drops and fail to remain robust with dynamic missing modalities circumstances. In
this paper, we present a novel Cyclic INformative Learning framework (CyIN) to
bridge the gap between complete and incomplete multimodal learning. Specifically,
we firstly build an informative latent space by adopting token- and label-level Information Bottleneck (IB) cyclically among various modalities. Capturing task-related
features with variational approximation, the informative bottleneck latents are purified for more efficient cross-modal interaction and multimodal fusion. Moreover,
to supplement the missing information caused by incomplete multimodal input,
we propose cross-modal cyclic translation by reconstruct the missing modalities
with the remained ones through forward and reverse propagation process. With
the help of the extracted and reconstructed informative latents, CyIN succeeds in
jointly optimizing complete and incomplete multimodal learning in one unified
model. Extensive experiments on 4 multimodal datasets demonstrate the superior
performance of our method in both complete and diverse incomplete scenarios. 1

1

Introduction

To obtain the optimal multimodal performance, previous methods implicitly assume that every
modality present at training will also be available at inference time. However, in real-world scenarios,
multimodal data may be missing due to numerous factors such as fail sensors, causing uncertainty
of the presence of input modalities [1]. The multimodal model exhibit pronounced sensitivity to
such incomplete multimodal input, resulting in severe performance degradation when deploying the
pre-trained multimodal model in downstream inference, especially for Transformer-based models [2].
This issue is summarized as missing modality issue [3–5], and the methods devoted to addressing it
are called incomplete multimodal learning methods [6–8].
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Code is released at https://github.com/RH-Lin/CyIN.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

