ThinkAct: Vision-Language-Action Reasoning via
Reinforced Visual Latent Planning

Chi-Pin Huang1,2
Yueh-Hua Wu1
Min-Hung Chen1
1,2
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang
Fu-En Yang1
1

NVIDIA

2

National Taiwan University

{chipinh, krisw, minhungc, frankwang, fredy}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Vision-language-action (VLA) reasoning tasks require agents to interpret multimodal instructions, perform long-horizon planning, and act adaptively in dynamic
environments. Existing approaches typically train VLA models in an end-to-end
fashion, directly mapping inputs to actions without explicit reasoning, which hinders their ability to plan over multiple steps or adapt to complex task variations. In
this paper, we propose ThinkAct, a dual-system framework that bridges high-level
reasoning with low-level action execution via reinforced visual latent planning.
ThinkAct trains a multimodal LLM to generate embodied reasoning plans guided
by reinforcing action-aligned visual rewards based on goal completion and trajectory consistency. These reasoning plans are compressed into a visual plan latent
that conditions a downstream action model for robust action execution on target environments. Extensive experiments on embodied reasoning and robot manipulation
benchmarks demonstrate that ThinkAct enables few-shot adaptation, long-horizon
planning, and self-correction behaviors in complex embodied AI tasks. Project
page: https://jasper0314-huang.github.io/thinkact-vla/

1

Introduction

Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [44, 25, 2, 41, 23, 1, 17, 8, 27, 56,
22, 6] have led to impressive progress on various tasks requiring the understanding of multimodal
inputs, such as visual question answering and image/video captioning. However, while multimodal
content can now be effectively perceived and interpreted, conducting multi-step planning for longhorizon user goals and then interacting with dynamic environments remains challenging for frontier
MLLMs. Therefore, enabling the vision-language foundation models with action awareness and
embodied reasoning capabilities unleashes a wide range of physical AI applications (e.g., robotics
and AR assistance), and draws significant attention from both academics and industry.
To bridge action with vision-language modalities, several works [4, 16, 55, 3, 45] learn visionlanguage-action (VLA) models by initializing from pre-trained MLLMs and training on large-scale
robotic demonstrations (e.g., Open X-Embodiment Dataset [33]). For example, OpenVLA [16] builds
upon MLLMs with post-training on large-scale robot demonstrations, while TraceVLA [55] further
applies visual traces prompting to enhance spatial understanding. Despite promising on short-horizon
skills, the crucial capabilities to reason in diverse visual scenes and enable long-horizon planning
remain limited due to the end-to-end fashion from visual and textual inputs to low-level actions.
To equip VLAs with the ability to solve complex embodied tasks, recent works [52, 10, 54, 40]
have explored incorporating explicit chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [47] as an intermediate
step-by-step guidance. For instance, ECoT [52] and RAD [10] introduce data curation pipelines to
generate intermediate steps and decomposed plans by prompting off-the-shelf MLLMs. Once the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

