Towards a Pairwise Ranking Model with Orderliness
and Monotonicity for Label Enhancement

Yunan Lu1,2 , Xixi Zhang1 , Yaojin Lin3 , Weiwei Li4 , Lei Yang2 , Xiuyi Jia1∗
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Minnan Normal University, Fujian, China
4
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{luyn,zhangxixi,jiaxy}@njust.edu.cn, yjlin@mnnu.edu.cn,
liweiwei@nuaa.edu.cn, ray.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Label distribution in recent years has been applied in a diverse array of complex
decision-making tasks. To address the availability of label distributions, label
enhancement has been established as an effective learning paradigm that aims
to automatically infer label distributions from readily available multi-label data,
e.g., logical labels. Recently, numerous works have demonstrated that the label
ranking is significantly beneficial to label enhancement. However, these works still
exhibit deficiencies in representing the probabilistic relationships between label
distribution and label rankings, or fail to accommodate scenarios where multiple
labels are equally important for a given instance. Therefore, we propose PROM,
a pairwise ranking model with orderliness and monotonicity, to explain the probabilistic relationship between label distributions and label rankings. Specifically,
we propose the monotonicity and orderliness assumptions for the probabilities of
different ranking relationships and derive the mass functions for PROM, which are
theoretically ensured to preserve the monotonicity and orderliness. Further, we
propose a generative label enhancement algorithm based on PROM, which directly
learns a label distribution predictor from the readily available multi-label data.
Finally, extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed model.

1

Introduction

Label polysemy, i.e., the cases where an instance is associated with multiple labels simultaneously, is a common phenomenon in real-world tasks. To preserve label polysemy, multi-label
learning (Tsoumakas and Katakis, 2006) employs binary values to indicate the presence or absence
of each label for a given instance. However, multi-label learning cannot directly handle a further
question with more polysemy: How much is each label associated with an instance? Hence, Geng
(2016) introduced LDL (Label Distribution Learning). Unlike multi-label learning, LDL assigns a
real-valued vector to each instance, resembling probability distributions, where each element, called
label description degree, represents the extent to which the label describes the instance. By providing
richer label information, LDL has been applied in various fields, including age estimation (Gao et al.,
2018, Geng et al., 2013) and affective analysis (Jia et al., 2019, Machajdik and Hanbury, 2010).
A significant bottleneck hindering the broader application of LDL is the challenge of acquiring
ground-truth label distributions, as accurately quantifying these distributions can be costly. To address
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

