Convergent Functions, Divergent Forms

Hyeonseong Jeon * 1,2

Ainaz Eftekhar * 1,3 Aaron Walsman 4
Ali Farhadi1,3
Ranjay Krishna1,3

Kuo-Hao Zeng 3

1

University of Washington
Seoul National University
3
Allen Institute for AI
4
Kempner Institute at Harvard University
2

loki-codesign.github.io
(A) Clustering the space of designs

(B) Multi-Design
Control Policies
(Convergent Functions)

(C) Sampling Designs using Dynamic Local Search
(Divergent Forms)

Evaluate with π ck
Reward ↑

Cluster-Specific
Locomotion Policy π ck

Cluster ck

Find top designs

Dynamic pool of Elites for
cluster ck

Random designs
sampled from Ck

Figure 1: We introduce L OKI

, a compute-efficient co-design framework that discovers diverse, highperforming robot morphologies (divergent forms) using shared control policies (convergent functions) and
dynamic local search instead of mutation. (A) The design space is clustered in a learned latent space so that
morphologies within each cluster share structural similarities and exhibit similar behaviors. (B) A shared control
policy is trained within each cluster on a dynamic pool of elite morphologies. (C) Morphologies co-evolve with
the shared policy as elites are iteratively refined through dynamic local search.

Abstract
We introduce L OKI, a compute-efficient framework for co-designing morphologies
and control policies that generalize across unseen tasks. Inspired by biological
adaptation—where animals quickly adjust to morphological changes—our method
overcomes the inefficiencies of traditional evolutionary and quality-diversity algorithms. We propose learning convergent functions: shared control policies trained
across clusters of morphologically similar designs in a learned latent space, drastically reducing the training cost per design. Simultaneously, we promote divergent
forms by replacing mutation with dynamic local search, enabling broader exploration and preventing premature convergence. The policy reuse allows us to explore
∼ 780× more designs using 78% fewer simulation steps and 40% less compute per
design. Local competition paired with a broader search results in a diverse set of
high-performing final morphologies. Using the UNIMAL design space and a flatterrain locomotion task, L OKI discovers a rich variety of designs—ranging from
quadrupeds to crabs, bipedals, and spinners—far more diverse than those produced
by prior work. These morphologies also transfer better to unseen downstream tasks
* Equal contribution
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

