Objective Soups: Multilingual Multi-Task Modeling
for Speech Processing

A F M Saif1 Lisha Chen1,4 Xiaodong Cui2 Songtao Lu3 Brian Kingsbury2 Tianyi Chen1,5
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 2 IBM Research 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
University of Rochester 5 Cornell Tech∗
1
1,4
saifa@rpi.edu,
lisha.chen@rochester.edu, 2 {cuix, bedk}@us.ibm.com,
3
stlu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, 1,5 chentianyi19@gmail.com

Abstract
Training a single model for multilingual, multi-task speech processing (MSP) is
severely hampered by conflicting objectives between tasks like speech recognition and translation. While multi-objective optimization (MOO) aims to align
gradient updates, its effectiveness diminishes as the number of tasks grows, making it difficult to find a common descent direction. This raises a fundamental
question: should highly conflicting objectives be optimized jointly or separated
into a hierarchical structure? To address this question, this paper investigates
three multi-objective MSP formulations, which we refer to as objective soup
recipes. These formulations apply multi-objective optimization at different optimization levels to mitigate potential conflicts among all objectives. To ensure
efficiency, we introduce a lightweight layer-selection mechanism that computes
the conflict-avoiding gradient using only the most problematic layers, minimizing computational and memory overhead. Extensive experiments on CoVoST
v2, LibriSpeech, and AISHELL-1 reveal that a bi-level recipe separating recognition and translation tasks consistently outperforms standard flat optimization.
Our work demonstrates that hierarchical MOO is a more effective and scalable
approach for building state-of-the-art MSP models. Our code has been released at
https://github.com/afmsaif/Objective_Soups.

1

Introduction

Multilingual speech processing is the backbone of voice-driven applications, from virtual assistants to
voice search [25, 28]. Modern deployments increasingly demand a single model that can (1) transcribe
speech in many languages, and (2) perform an auxiliary speech-to-text translation task [55, 8].
Unifying these capabilities simplifies maintenance and reduces inference costs, yet joint training
remains difficult due to language diversity, task heterogeneity, and model complexity [30, 21, 46].
A common approach is to introduce one loss term for each task or requirement, for example, a
self-supervised learning loss to learn robust representations across languages [41, 48, 3, 4, 29],
language-specific Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss for transcription [34], crossentropy for translation [60], and fairness constraints for underrepresented languages [10, 11], and
then optimize them simultaneously. We refer to this methodology as objective soups, where the idea is
to leverage multiple objectives to learn a single model that satisfies the above requirements. A related
line of work is rewarded soups [44], where the goal is to achieve multi-reward alignment for a model
by interpolating weights fine-tuned on diverse reward objectives. Although simple and efficient, such
∗

This work was conducted when L. Chen and T. Chen were at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and when S.
Lu was at IBM Research, United States. The work was supported by IBM through the IBM-Rensselaer Future
of Computing Research Collaboration.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

