AutoToM: Scaling Model-based Mental Inference via
Automated Agent Modeling

Zhining Zhang∗
Peking University
zzn_nzz@stu.pku.edu.cn

Chuanyang Jin∗†
Johns Hopkins University
cjin33@jhu.edu

Shunchi Zhang∗
Johns Hopkins University
szhan256@jhu.edu

Mung Yao Jia∗
Johns Hopkins University
mjia8@jhu.edu

Tianmin Shu
Johns Hopkins University
tianmin.shu@jhu.edu

Abstract
Theory of Mind (ToM), the ability to understand people’s minds based on their behavior, is key to developing socially intelligent agents. Current approaches to ToM
reasoning either rely on prompting Large Language Models (LLMs), which are
prone to systematic errors, or use handcrafted, rigid agent models for model-based
inference, which are more robust but fail to generalize across domains. In this work,
we introduce AutoToM , an automated agent modeling method for scalable, robust,
and interpretable mental inference. Given a ToM problem, AutoToM first proposes
an initial agent model and then performs automated Bayesian inverse planning
based on this model, leveraging an LLM backend. Guided by inference uncertainty,
it iteratively refines the model by introducing additional mental variables and/or
incorporating more timesteps in the context. Across five diverse benchmarks,
AutoToM outperforms existing ToM methods and even large reasoning models.
Additionally, we show that AutoToM can produce human-like confidence estimates
and enable online mental inference for embodied decision-making.
Links:

1

Project Page

|

Code

Introduction

To successfully engage in rich and complex social interactions such as cooperation, communication,
and social learning, humans must adequately understand one another’s mental states (e.g., goals,
beliefs, desires). This ability is termed Theory of Mind (ToM) [49]. Prior works have demonstrated
that like human interactions, Theory of Mind is also crucial for the success of human-AI interactions
[7, 14, 28]. To safely and productively interact with humans in an open-ended manner, AI systems
need to interpret humans’ mental states from observed human behavior [5, 45, 44, 31, 33, 53, 51, 21].
There are two primary approaches to developing machine Theory of Mind in recent works. First,
with the rapid progress of large language models (LLMs), there has been an increasing interest in
directly applying LLMs to reason about people’s mental states with prompting strategies such as
perspective-taking [48, 37, 22], change-tracking [18], and temporal-spatial reasoning [17]. However,
even with these advanced prompting techniques, state-of-the-art LLMs still make systematic errors in
complex scenarios [20]. Second, cognitive studies have demonstrated that model-based inference,
in particular, Bayesian inverse planning (BIP), can reverse engineer human-like theory of Mind
reasoning [4, 43, 3, 52]. BIP relies on Bayesian Theory of Mind (BToM) models [3] to approximate
rational agent behaviors. Inspired by this, recent works have proposed to combine BIP and LLMs to
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Project Lead.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

