Joint-Embedding vs Reconstruction:
Provable Benefits of Latent Space Prediction
for Self-Supervised Learning

Hugues Van Assel∗1,2 , Mark Ibrahim 3 , Tommaso Biancalani 1 ,
Aviv Regev 1 , Randall Balestriero 2,3
1

Genentech, 2 Brown University, 3 Meta AI, FAIR

Abstract
Reconstruction and joint-embedding have emerged as two leading paradigms
in Self-Supervised Learning (SSL). Reconstruction methods focus on recovering the original sample from a different view in input space. On the other
hand, joint-embedding methods align the representations of different views
in latent space. Both approaches offer compelling advantages, yet practitioners lack clear guidelines for choosing between them. In this work, we
unveil the core mechanisms that distinguish each paradigm. By leveraging
closed-form solutions for both approaches, we precisely characterize how
the view generation process, e.g. data augmentation, impacts the learned
representations. We then demonstrate that, unlike supervised learning,
both SSL paradigms require a minimal alignment between augmentations
and irrelevant features to achieve asymptotic optimality with increasing
sample size. Our findings indicate that in scenarios where these irrelevant
features have a large magnitude, joint-embedding methods are preferable
because they impose a strictly weaker alignment condition compared to
reconstruction-based methods. These results not only clarify the trade-offs
between the two paradigms but also substantiate the empirical success of
joint-embedding approaches on real-world challenging datasets.

1

Introduction

Training deep neural networks to extract informative data representations is central to
AI. Numerous families of methods pursue this goal [52]. In supervised learning, one does
so by prescribing labels that encode what is considered informative in the data. While
this has been the dominant approach to representation learning over the past decades,
it has become clear that labels are often overly specialized. Such specialization prevents
learning representations that transfer across an ever-increasing diversity of downstream tasks
[24, 37]. Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has emerged as an alternative that moves away
from labels [4, 50, 14]. In SSL, one does not assume a priori what is informative; instead,
one specifies which variations are uninformative and should be disregarded. Identifying, a
priori, the invariances a representation should satisfy is a broadly applicable principle. For
instance, many downstream tasks involving natural images, such as recognition, counting, and
segmentation, are inherently robust to minor changes in color or illumination. Consequently,
these tasks benefit from representations that exhibit such invariances, typically encoded
through a data-augmentation process. Two primary families of methods have emerged to learn
representations using this principle: reconstruction-based and joint-embedding approaches.
∗

Contact: van_assel.hugues@gene.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

