Generative Data Augmentation via Diffusion
Distillation, Adversarial Alignment, and Importance
Reweighting

1

Ruyi An1∗ Haicheng Huang2∗ Huangjie Zheng3 Mingyuan Zhou1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Apple
ruyian@utexas.edu mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Generative data augmentation (GDA) leverages generative models to enrich training sets with entirely new samples drawn from the modeled data distribution to
achieve performance gains. However, the usage of the mighty contemporary diffusion models in GDA remains impractical: i) their thousand-step sampling loop
inflates wall-time and energy cost per image augmentation; and ii) the divergence
between synthetic and real distributions is unknown–classifier trained on synthetic
receive biased gradients. We propose DAR-GDA, a three-stage augmentation
pipeline that unites model Distillation, Adversarial alignment, and importance
Reweighting that makes diffusion-quality augmentation both fast and optimized
for improving downstream learning outcomes. In particular, a teacher diffusion
model is compressed into a one-step student via score distillation, slashing the time
per-image cost by > 100× while preserving FID. During this distillation (D), the
student model additionally undergoes adversarial alignment (A) by receiving direct
training signals against real images, supplementing the teacher’s guidance to better
match the true data distribution. The discriminator from this adversarial process
inherently learns to assess the synthetic-to-real data gap. Its calibrated probabilistic
outputs are then employed in reweighting (R) by importance weights that quantify
the distributional gap and adjust the empirical loss when training downstream
models; we show that reweighting yields an unbiased stochastic estimator of the
real-data risk, fostering training dynamics akin to those of genuine samples. Experiments validate DAR-GDA’s synergistic design through progressive accuracy
gains with each D-A-R stage. Our approach not only surpasses conventional nonfoundation-model GDA baselines but also remarkably matches or exceeds the GDA
performance of large, web-pretrained text-to-image models, despite using solely
in-domain data. DAR-GDA thus offers diffusion-fidelity GDA samples efficiently,
while correcting synthetic-to-real bias to benefit downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

From early datasets of a few hundred instances [23, 22, 63] to today’s web-scale corpora [17, 57, 74],
data has always been the engine of machine learning. Discriminative models are only as good as the
quantity, quality, and diversity of the samples they see. Data augmentation eases this dependency by
synthesizing additional training examples, aiming to improve the generalization and robustness of
models by exposing them to a more varied set of training instances. Classic hand-crafted transforms,
such as geometric warps, color jitter, flips, exploit invariances of natural images [51, 78] but cannot
create entirely new content. Generative data augmentation (GDA) closes this gap by sampling fresh,
high-fidelity images that improve downstream performance and unlock learning under privacy [112,
95, 35], security [108, 88], or copyright constraints [56, 76].
∗

These authors contributed equally.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

