Taming Adversarial Constraints in CMDPs

Francesco Emanuele Stradi
Politecnico di Milano
francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it

Anna Lunghi
Politecnico di Milano
anna.lunghi@polimi.it

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract
In constrained MDPs (CMDPs) with adversarial rewards and constraints, a known
impossibility result prevents any algorithm from attaining sublinear regret and
constraint violation, when competing against a best-in-hindsight policy that satisfies
the constraints on average. In this paper, we show how to ease such a negative result,
by considering settings that generalize both stochastic CMDPs and adversarial
ones. We provide algorithms whose performances smoothly degrade
√ as the level of
e T + C) regret
environment adverseness increases. Specifically, they attain O(
and positive constraint violation under bandit feedback, where C measures the
adverseness of rewards and constraints. This is C = Θ(T ) in the worst case,
coherently with the impossibility result for adversarial CMDPs. First, we design
an algorithm with the desired guarantees when C is known. Then, in the case C
is unknown, we obtain the same results by embedding multiple instances of such
an algorithm in a general meta-procedure, which suitably selects them so as to
balance the trade-off between regret and constraint violation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning [Sutton and Barto, 2018] is concerned with settings where a learner sequentially interacts with an environment modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP) [Puterman, 2014].
Most of the works in the field focus on learning policies that maximize learner’s rewards. However,
in most of the real-world applications of interest, the learner also has to meet some additional requirements. For instance, bidding agents in ad auctions must not deplete their budget [Wu et al., 2018, He
et al., 2021], users of recommender systems must not be exposed to offending content [Singh et al.,
2020], and online companies must ensure a minimum number of items are sold while maximizing the
associated profits [Stradi et al., 2024a]. Requirements of this kind can be usually captured by means
of constrained MDPs (CMDPs) [Altman, 1999], which generalize MDPs by specifying constraints
that the learner has to satisfy while maximizing their rewards.
In this paper, we study online learning problems in episodic CMDPs (see, e.g., [Efroni et al., 2020]),
where the goal of the learner is twofold. On the one hand, the learner wants to minimize their regret,
which measures how much reward they lost over the episodes compared to what they would have
obtained by always using a best-in-hindsight constraint-satisfying policy. On the other hand, the
learner wants to ensure that the (cumulative) constraint violation is minimized during the learning
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

