MetaGS: A Meta-Learned Gaussian-Phong Model for
Out-of-Distribution 3D Scene Relighting

Yumeng He
Yunbo Wang∗
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, School of Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ymhe, yunbow}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) 3D relighting requires novel view synthesis under unseen lighting conditions that differ significantly from the observed images. Existing
relighting methods, which assume consistent light source distributions between
training and testing, often degrade in OOD scenarios. We introduce MetaGS to
tackle this challenge from two perspectives. First, we propose a meta-learning
approach to train 3D Gaussian splatting, which explicitly promotes learning generalizable Gaussian geometries and appearance attributes across diverse lighting
conditions, even with biased training data. Second, we embed fundamental physical
priors from the Blinn-Phong reflection model into Gaussian splatting, which enhances the decoupling of shading components and leads to more accurate 3D scene
reconstruction. Results on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of MetaGS in challenging OOD relighting tasks, supporting efficient
point-light relighting and generalizing well to unseen environment lighting maps.

1

Introduction

3D scene relighting generates novel lighting effects that interact with the observed 3D environment,
with recent advances in learning-based volume rendering offering effective solutions [21, 36, 23, 40,
24, 22, 3, 30]. A typical approach captures a substantial number of multi-view images of a scene
under individual lighting conditions, then trains a NeRF or 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) model to
generalize to new point light positions [28, 13, 9, 41, 8]. Notably, such idealized data requirements
are often impractical in real-world scenarios. To simulate a more realistic capturing process, we
build on prior work using a One Light At a Time (OLAT) setup [34, 14, 1], where training data
is collected with a moving point light and a moving camera. Recent studies have further explored
low-cost OLAT capture using a smartphone flashlight as the moving light source [5].
While most OLAT methods assume a coherent lighting distribution between training and testing,
real-world scenarios often involve light sources that are randomly distributed around the scene, which
may result in biased training data. This leads to an out-of-distribution (OOD) issue where test-time
light sources deviate from the training distribution. This OOD relighting presents a more natural and
challenging task, serving as a robust test for evaluating a model’s performance under “truly” novel
lighting conditions. Compared with the standard OLAT setup, it complicates the learning of true
object illumination properties and geometries due to a limited training corpus with entangled, timevarying lighting and viewing directions and, more critically, spatially biased lighting. As shown in
Figure 1, existing OLAT methods struggle with the OOD relighting task, often producing unrealistic
lighting effects, such as chaotic specular highlights and shadows, due to overfitting to the training
samples. Also, because of the lack of generalizability, when new lighting distributions are introduced,
they typically require full retraining or finetuning to adapt.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

