ComRank: Ranking Loss for Multi-Label
Complementary Label Learning

Jing-Yi Zhu1,2 , Yi Gao1,2∗, Miao Xu3 , Min-Ling Zhang1,2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
3
The University of Queensland, Australia
{zhujingyi, gao_yi, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn,
{miao.xu}@uq.edu.au

1

Abstract
Multi-label complementary label learning (MLCLL) is a weakly supervised
paradigm that addresses multi-label learning (MLL) tasks using complementary
labels (i.e., irrelevant labels) instead of relevant labels. Existing methods typically
adopt an unbiased risk estimator (URE) under the assumption that complementary labels follow a uniform distribution. However, this assumption fails in realworld scenarios due to instance-specific annotation biases, making URE-based
methods ineffective under such conditions. Furthermore, existing methods underutilize label correlations inherent in MLL. To address these limitations, we
propose ComRank, a ranking loss framework for MLCLL, which encourages
complementary labels to be ranked lower than non-complementary ones, thereby
modeling pairwise label relationships. Theoretically, our surrogate loss ensures
Bayes consistency under both uniform and biased cases. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in MLCLL tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/JellyJamZhu/ComRank.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning (MLL) refers to a task where an instance is associated with multiple relevant
labels, which has broad applications in real-world scenarios [Zhang and Zhou, 2014, Tang et al.,
2023, Kou et al., 2024]. However, accurately labeling a large number of instances with all their true
labels incurs high labor costs. To address this issue, weakly supervised learning for MLL has gained
widespread attention in recent years, including semi-supervised multi-label learning [Liu et al., 2006,
Niu et al., 2019], multi-label learning with missing labels [Sun et al., 2010, Wu et al., 2014], and
partial multi-label learning (PML) [Xie and Huang, 2018, Zhang and Fang, 2020].
Multi-label complementary label learning (MLCLL) has recently emerged as a weakly supervised
learning paradigm, which enables algorithms to learn from complementary labels instead of relevant labels to address the MLL problem. In MLCLL, each training instance is associated with a
complementary label rather than relevant labels, where the complementary label specifies a label
that the instance does not belong to. One application for MLCLL is privacy preservation, such as
in sensitive surveys where respondents may hesitate to provide all truthful answers. By only asking
them to exclude certain options, data collection becomes easier and more privacy-friendly, while also
reducing labeling costs.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

