COS3D: Collaborative Open-Vocabulary
3D Segmentation

Runsong Zhu1

Ka-Hei Hui2 Zhengzhe Liu3 Qianyi Wu4 Weiliang Tang1
Shi Qiu1 Pheng-Ann Heng1 Chi-Wing Fu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Autodesk AI Lab
3
Lingnan University 4 Monash University

Abstract
Open-vocabulary 3D segmentation is a fundamental yet challenging task, requiring
a mutual understanding of both segmentation and language. However, existing
Gaussian-splatting-based methods rely either on a single 3D language field, leading
to inferior segmentation, or on pre-computed class-agnostic segmentations, suffering from error accumulation. To address these limitations, we present COS3D, a
new collaborative prompt-segmentation framework that contributes to effectively
integrating complementary language and segmentation cues throughout its entire
pipeline. We first introduce the new concept of collaborative field, comprising an
instance field and a language field, as the cornerstone for collaboration. During
training, to effectively construct the collaborative field, our key idea is to capture
the intrinsic relationship between the instance field and language field, through a
novel instance-to-language feature mapping and designing an efficient two-stage
training strategy. During inference, to bridge distinct characteristics of the two
fields, we further design an adaptive language-to-instance prompt refinement, promoting high-quality prompt-segmentation inference. Extensive experiments not
only demonstrate COS3D’s leading performance over existing methods on two
widely-used benchmarks but also show its high potential to various applications, i.e.,
novel image-based 3D segmentation, hierarchical segmentation, and robotics.

1

Introduction

Open-vocabulary 3D segmentation (OV3DS) aims to predict 3D segmentation of scenes according to
given natural language queries. Beyond traditional 3D segmentation, which is often restricted to fixed
object categories [1–8], the OV3DS task supports flexible text queries, allowing for diverse semantic
categories, physical properties, affordance, and more. This flexibility is crucial to making OV3DS a
practical and valuable tool for applications in fields such as AR, VR, and robotics.
Recent efforts focus on transferring 2D vision-language models (VLMs) to 3D scenes represented
by learned radiance fields. These works can be roughly divided into two classes: language-based
and segmentation-based. Specifically, language-based methods [9–13] propose to distill language
features (e.g., CLIP [14]) from the 2D image space to a 3D language field by leveraging differentiable
rendering to support OV3DS; see Fig. 1 (a). However, directly learning language features through a
pixel-wise language distillation demonstrates limited distinctiveness, leading to severe artifacts and
errors around boundaries in the segmentation results.
On the other hand, segmentation-based methods, e.g., [15–17], directly decompose the OV3DS task
into two sub-tasks: (i) a class-agnostic 3D segmentation, followed by (ii) a post-selection of the
best-matched 3D segments, using a 2D vision-language model [14, 18]; see Fig. 1 (b). Though
this approach bypasses direct language distillation, it faces two major challenges, leading to limited
performance. First, without semantic cues, accurately segmenting all objects in a 3D scene is highly
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

