Robust Distortion-Free Watermark for Autoregressive
Audio Generation Models
Yihan Wu∗, Georgios Milis∗ , Ruibo Chen∗ , Heng Huang†
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
{ywu42, milis, rbchen, heng}@umd.edu

Abstract
The rapid advancement of next-token-prediction models has led to widespread
adoption across modalities, enabling the creation of realistic synthetic media. In the
audio domain, while autoregressive speech models have propelled conversational
interactions forward, the potential for misuse, such as impersonation in phishing
schemes or crafting misleading speech recordings, has also increased. Security
measures such as watermarking have thus become essential to ensuring the authenticity of digital media. Traditional statistical watermarking methods used for
autoregressive language models face challenges when applied to autoregressive
audio models, due to the inevitable “retokenization mismatch” - the discrepancy
between original and retokenized discrete audio token sequences. To address
this, we introduce A LIGNED -IS, a novel, distortion-free watermark, specifically
crafted for audio generation models. This technique utilizes a clustering approach
that treats tokens within the same cluster equivalently, effectively countering the
retokenization mismatch issue. Our comprehensive testing on prevalent audio
generation platforms demonstrates that A LIGNED -IS not only preserves the quality
of generated audio but also significantly improves the watermark detectability compared to the state-of-the-art distortion-free watermarking adaptations, establishing
a new benchmark in secure audio technology applications. We release the code in
https://github.com/g-milis/AlignedIS.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive audio generation models (Lakhotia et al., 2021; Rubenstein et al., 2023; Borsos et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2025; Zhan et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024), such
as those enabling sophisticated voice synthesis, have significantly advanced in mimicking human-like
speech. As these models become integral to various applications, from virtual assistants to real-time
translation, their potential misuse also escalates. Malicious uses include impersonating individuals
in phishing attacks, fabricating audio for misinformation, and automating scam calls with naturalsounding voices. Additionally, the spread of synthetic audio can undermine the authenticity of digital
communication and pose challenges in legal contexts where recording verification is crucial. To
address these concerns, implementing robust and detectable watermarks in synthetic audio becomes
essential, ensuring traceability and accountability in the use of generative models while safeguarding
against their unauthorized exploitation.
Statistical watermarking techniques are a promising method to identify machine-generated content
from autoregressive language models (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Liu & Bu, 2024; Chen et al., 2025a).
∗

Equal contribution
This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 2347592, 2348169, DBI 2405416, CCF 2348306, CNS
2347617, RISE 2536663.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

