Efficient Multimodal Dataset Distillation via
Generative Models
Zhenghao Zhao1 Haoxuan Wang1 Junyi Wu1
Yuzhang Shang2
Gaowen Liu3
Yan Yan1∗
1
2
University of Illinois Chicago
University of Central Florida 3 Cisco Research
{zzhao72, hwang339, jwu834, yyan55}@uic.edu
yuzhang.shang@ucf.edu, gaoliu@cisco.com

Abstract
Dataset distillation aims to synthesize a small dataset from a large dataset, enabling
the model trained on it to perform well on the original dataset. With the blooming
of large language models and multimodal large language models, the importance
of multimodal datasets, particularly image-text datasets, has grown significantly.
However, existing multimodal dataset distillation methods are constrained by
the Matching Training Trajectories algorithm, which significantly increases the
computing resource requirement, and takes days to process the distillation. In this
work, we introduce EDGE, a generative distillation method for efficient multimodal
dataset distillation. Specifically, we identify two key challenges of distilling
multimodal datasets with generative models: 1) The lack of correlation between
generated images and captions. 2) The lack of diversity among generated samples.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel generative model training
workflow with a bi-directional contrastive loss and a diversity loss. Furthermore,
we propose a caption synthesis strategy to further improve text-to-image retrieval
performance by introducing more text information. Our method is evaluated on
Flickr30K, COCO, and CC3M datasets, demonstrating superior performance and
efficiency compared to existing approaches. Notably, our method achieves results
18× faster than the state-of-the-art method. Our code will be made public at
https://github.com/ichbill/EDGE.

1

Introduction

Dataset distillation [53] seeks to synthesize a compact dataset from a larger one, enabling a model
trained on the distilled dataset to achieve strong performance on the original dataset. Typical kernelbased dataset distillation [53, 64] aims to match the performance of the synthetic dataset with the
original dataset. The matching training trajectories (MTT) approaches [2, 19, 5, 9, 63, 12] have been
proven effective for the distillation of small datasets. Some works [12, 63] even achieve a lossless
performance from the original dataset. Recently, aiming the large-scale dataset, decoupled dataset
distillation methods [45, 57], and generative distillation methods [44, 11, 49] have been proposed,
which enhances scalability by improving the distillation efficiency.
With the emergence of large language models (LLM) and multimodal large language models
(MLLM) [25, 23, 24, 16, 38], multimodal datasets become essential, especially image-text datasets.
The first work on Vision Language Dataset Distillation (VLDD) [55] matches the expert training
trajectories for both the image and text encoders and applies Low-Rank Adaptation [14] to reduce
the computing requirements. The following work, LoRS [56], utilizes similarity mining during the
distillation to improve the performance. However, these MTT-based methods require substantial time
∗

Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

