Bernstein–von Mises for Adaptively Collected Data

Kevin Du
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
kevindu@college.harvard.edu

Yash Nair
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
yashnair@stanford.edu

Lucas Janson
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
ljanson@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) for adaptively collected data, such as that coming
from adaptive experiments, bandits, or reinforcement learning, is necessary for
critical elements of data collection such as ensuring safety and conducting afterstudy inference. The data’s adaptivity creates significant challenges for frequentist
UQ, yet Bayesian UQ remains the same as if the data were independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.), making it an appealing and commonly used approach.
Bayesian UQ requires the (correct) specification of a prior distribution while
frequentist UQ does not, but for i.i.d. data the celebrated Bernstein–von Mises
theorem shows that as the sample size grows, the prior ‘washes out’ and Bayesian
UQ becomes frequentist-valid, implying that the choice of prior need not be a
major impediment to Bayesian UQ as it makes no difference asymptotically. This
paper for the first time extends the Bernstein–von Mises theorem to adaptively
collected data, proving asymptotic equivalence between Bayesian UQ and Waldtype frequentist UQ in this challenging setting. Our result showing this asymptotic
agreement does not require the standard stability condition required by works
studying validity of Wald-type frequentist UQ; in cases where stability is satisfied,
our results combined with these prior studies of frequentist UQ imply frequentist
validity of Bayesian UQ. Counterintuitively however, they also provide a negative
result that Bayesian UQ is not asymptotically frequentist valid when stability fails,
despite the fact that the prior washes out and Bayesian UQ asymptotically matches
standard Wald-type frequentist UQ. We empirically validate our theory (positive
and negative) via a range of simulations.

1

Introduction

Data in applications such as robotics [19], healthcare [32], clinical trials [5], online education [27],
mobile health [2, 31], and online advertising [22, 10] is routinely being collected adaptively. This
means that the data is collected sequentially, with decisions about the data collection itself being
made online based on all the data observed up to that time point. In particular, the online decisions
often try to focus on actions or interventions that prior data indicates will produce large values of
some reward function, and this type of data collection includes adaptive experiments, multi-armed
bandits, and reinforcement learning.
Two important elements of adaptive data collection are (1) assessing at the end of the data collection
what has been learned (e.g., to assess confidence in a putatively optimal clinical treatment or inform
a future online advertising campaign) [33, 14] and (2) making sure to avoid certain bad outcomes
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

