TF-MAS: Training-free Mamba2 Architecture Search

Yi Fan
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University
Nanjing 210023, China
fanyiplus@smail.nju.edu.cn
Yu-Bin Yang∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University
Nanjing 210023, China
yangyubin@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The Mamba-type neural networks have gained significant popularity recently. To
effectively and efficiently establish model architectures of Mamba, it is natural
to introduce Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods into Mamba. However,
existing NAS methods tailored for Mamba are training-based, leading to substantial
time and computational resource expenditure. To address this issue, and considering
that Mamba2 is an improved version of the original Mamba, we propose a trainingfree NAS method specifically designed for Mamba2. Based on rank collapse in
stacked State Space Duality (SSD) blocks, we design a proxy that only requires
the computation of the transformation matrix and its gradient between two tensors
within the network. Additionally, we develop a corresponding search space and
introduce a novel approach for determining adjustable hyperparameter ranges.
Experimental results show that our method outperforms all existing training-free
NAS approaches in terms of both ranking correlation and the performance of search
results for Mamba2 architecture. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
training-free NAS method designed for Mamba-type architectures. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/fanyi-plus/tf-nas.

1

Introduction

Recently, the introduction of Mamba has provided new impetus for research in State Space Models
(SSM) [24], and Mamba-type models possess potential to partially replace Transformer [61, 64, 29].
Subsequently, Mamba2 [13], developed as an enhancement of the original Mamba, further improves
network performance. However, similar to other types of networks, the practical use of Mambatype networks still necessitates the manual specification of hyperparameters to determine the actual
model architecture [14]. This process often involves trial-and-error, which can be time-consuming
and labor-intensive. Therefore, it is logical to apply Neural Architecture Search (NAS) techniques
[52] to the design of Mamba-type architectures. Currently, among the limited work, [50] explores
hyperparameters such as network depth and width, while [27, 19] search for scanning orders of image
patches for vision-oriented Mamba.
However, these methods rely heavily on extensive training of the networks during the search process.
In fact, recent research in the NAS is increasingly leaning towards training-free NAS [35], also known
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

