Scaling Up Active Testing to Large Language Models

Gabrielle Berrada1∗ Jannik Kossen1∗ Freddie Bickford Smith2
Yarin Gal1
1

Muhammed Razzak1

Tom Rainforth2†

OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford

Abstract
Active testing enables label-efficient evaluation of predictive models through careful
data acquisition, but it can pose a significant computational cost. We identify
cost-saving measures that enable active testing to be scaled up to large language
models (LLMs). In particular we show that the surrogate model used to guide
data acquisition can be constructed cheaply using in-context learning, does not
require updating within an active-testing loop, and can be smaller than the target
model. We even find we can make good data-acquisition decisions without making
predictions with the target model. As a result we are able to achieve much more
accurate evaluations of LLM performance relative to using randomly acquired data.
We additionally introduce a bootstrap estimator of evaluation error, which we show
to be a useful indicator of how well active testing is working within a single run.

1

Introduction

Evaluating frontier models is becoming more expensive as they become more sophisticated (Burden,
2024; OpenAI, 2023). At the same time, with new models arriving in quick succession, and everpresent scope for data to leak from evaluations to training (Ganguli et al, 2023), the evaluation
problem is a dynamic one: it requires ongoing, adaptive gathering of new evaluation data.
Active testing (Kossen et al, 2021, 2022) is an attractive solution to this problem. Motivated by
the observation that some labels are more informative than others about the behaviour of a target
model, it involves carefully deciding which test inputs to acquire labels for. The foundation for data
acquisition is a surrogate model of the test-time label distribution, which is typically updated on the
labels acquired during testing. Making a data-acquisition decision requires making predictions with
the surrogate model and often also the target model. The computational cost of this process is often
justifiable in light of high labelling costs, but it limits the scope of active testing’s applicability.
In this work we show how active testing can be scaled up to large language models (LLMs), allowing
us to more effectively evaluate them with limited labelling budgets. We begin by highlighting three
computational bottlenecks in the predominant approach to active testing: updating the surrogate
model as labels are acquired, making predictions with the surrogate model, and making predictions
with the target model. The first of these is particularly important: it has traditionally involved
repeatedly running gradient-based training on the acquired test data within an active-testing loop.
We then identify simple and surprisingly effective ways to address each of these key bottlenecks.
First, we strip back the training of the surrogate model to a single step of in-context learning (Brown
et al, 2020) on a small amount of initial test data, removing the need for repeated gradient-based
training. Second, we show it is possible to use a surrogate model that is smaller than the target model,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to rainforth@stats.ox.ac.uk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

