Discretization-free Multicalibration through Loss
Minimization over Tree Ensembles
Hongyi Henry Jin∗
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Dung Daniel Ngo∗
J.P. Morgan Chase AI Research
New York, NY, USA

Zijun Ding
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Abstract
In recent years, multicalibration has emerged as a desirable learning objective
for ensuring that a predictor is calibrated across a rich collection of overlapping
subpopulations. Existing approaches typically achieve multicalibration by discretizing the predictor’s output space and iteratively adjusting its output values.
However, this discretization approach departs from the standard empirical risk
minimization (ERM) pipeline, introduces rounding error and an additional sensitive hyperparameter, and may distort the predictor’s outputs in ways that hinder
downstream decision-making.
In this work, we propose a discretization-free multicalibration method that directly optimizes an empirical risk objective over an ensemble of depth-two decision trees. Our ERM approach can be implemented using off-the-shelf tree ensemble learning methods such as LightGBM. Our algorithm provably achieves
multicalibration, provided that the data distribution satisfies a technical condition
we term as loss saturation. Across multiple datasets, our empirical evaluation
shows that this condition is always met in practice. Our discretization-free algorithm consistently matches or outperforms existing multicalibration approaches—
even when evaluated using a discretization-based multicalibration metric that
shares its discretization granularity with the baselines. Code to replicate the
results in this work is available at https://github.com/hjenryin/
Discretization-free-MC.

1

Introduction

In many applications, machine learning predictors are at the heart of the decision-making process,
from finance (Fuster et al., 2022) to healthcare diagnostics (Rajkomar et al., 2018). Despite its
ubiquity, there is growing concern that these predictors might discriminate against individuals in
protected groups. In recent years, multicalibration (Hebert-Johnson et al., 2018) has emerged from
the algorithmic fairness literature as a learning objective to mitigate the risk of algorithmic discrimination. Informally, multicalibration requires a predictor to be calibrated on average over a family
of groups G: for all groups g ∈ G and for all v in the range of f ,
E[(y − f (x)) · g(x)|f (x) = v] = 0
where g : X → {0, 1} is a group indicator function.
∗

Part of the work was done at CMU.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

