Lifelong Test-Time Adaptation via Online Learning in
Tracked Low-Dimensional Subspace

Dexin Duan, Rui Xu, Peilin Liu, and Fei Wen∗
School of Integrated Circuits, School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 200240
{jumpywizard,Rui_Xu,liupeilin,wenfei}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to adapt a source model to a target domain using
only test data. Existing methods predominantly rely on unsupervised entropy
minimization or its variants, which suffer from degeneration, leading to trivial
solutions with low-entropy but inaccurate predictions. In this work, we identify
entropy-deceptive (ED) samples, instances where the model makes highly confident
yet incorrect predictions, as the underlying cause of degeneration. Further, we
reveal that the gradients of entropy minimization in TTA have an intrinsic lowdimensional structure, driven primarily by entropy-truthful (ET) samples whose
gradients are highly correlated. In contrast, ED samples have scattered, less correlated gradients. Leveraging this observation, we show that the detrimental impact of
ED samples can be suppressed by constraining model updates within the principal
subspace of backward gradients. Building on this insight, we propose LCoTTA,
a lifelong continual TTA method that tracks the principal subspace of gradients
online and utilizes their projections onto this subspace for adaptation. Further, we
provide theoretical analysis to show that the proposed subspace-based method can
enhance the robustness against detrimental ED samples. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that LCoTTA effectively overcomes degeneration and significantly
outperforms existing methods in long-term continual adaptation scenarios. Code is
available at https://github.com/ThunderDavid/LCoTTA.

1

Introduction

Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to address domain shifts by adapting the model to the target domain
during inference, without requiring access to source data [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. This need for on-the-fly
adaptation arises broadly across other tasks under distribution shifts[9, 10, 11, 12, 13], motivating
TTA as a general deployment-time solution. Unlike traditional domain adaptation methods, TTA
operates in a fully unsupervised manner. It leverages only the unlabeled test data received during
inference, enabling the model to adaptively improve its performance when faced with domain shift
on-the-fly. As a fully unsupervised online learning paradigm, TTA methods predominantly rely on
unsupervised learning objectives, such as entropy minimization or its variants [2, 14]. However, such
methods are prone to instability. For instance, entropy minimization suffers from a trivial solution
that assigns all predicted probability to the most probable (but may be incorrect) class. Consequently,
these methods are susceptible to performance degeneration during continual adaptation.
To address this, various methods have been proposed. For example, [2] leverages entropy minimization at the batch level while restricting updates to only the normalization parameters. Moreover,
some approaches employs teacher-student networks, where a teacher model provides stable guidance through a moving average of parameters to prevent collapse [8, 6, 4]. Furthermore, model
∗

Corresponding author: Fei Wen, email:wenfei@sjtu.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

