Towards a Golden Classifier-Free Guidance Path via
Foresight Fixed Point Iterations

1

Kaibo Wang1 , Jianda Mao1 , Tong Wu1 , Yang Xiang1,2∗
Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Shenzhen-Hong Kong Collaborative Innovation Research Institute, HKUST
{kwangbi, jmaoao, twubi}@connect.ust.hk, maxiang@ust.hk

Abstract
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) is an essential component of text-to-image diffusion models, and understanding and advancing its operational mechanisms remains
a central focus of research. Existing approaches stem from divergent theoretical
interpretations, thereby limiting the design space and obscuring key design choices.
To address this, we propose a unified perspective that reframes conditional guidance
as fixed point iterations, seeking to identify a golden path where latents produce
consistent outputs under both conditional and unconditional generation. We demonstrate that CFG and its variants constitute a special case of single-step short-interval
iteration, which is theoretically proven to exhibit inefficiency. To this end, we
introduce Foresight Guidance (FSG), which prioritizes solving longer-interval subproblems in early diffusion stages with increased iterations. Extensive experiments
across diverse datasets and model architectures validate the superiority of FSG over
state-of-the-art methods in both image quality and computational efficiency. Our
work offers novel perspectives for conditional guidance and unlocks the potential
of adaptive design.1

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [14, 27, 16] have emerged as a transformative paradigm for conditional generation, achieving remarkable success in synthesizing high-fidelity images from text prompts [24, 22].
Classifier-free guidance (CFG) [15] serves as a key component, steering the generation towards
prompt alignment by amplifying the conditional outputs of a model. However, its over-amplified
guidance introduces critical trade-offs, including compromised image quality and limited diversity [5],
which highlight the necessity for deeper theoretical and practical insights into guidance mechanisms.
Existing efforts to mitigate the limitations of CFG are typically based on distinct conditional sampling
perspectives. For example, some methods conceptualize CFG as sampling from sharpened probability
distributions [8, 9], while others mitigate off-manifold deviations through posterior sampling [5]
or improve semantic alignment through reflective sampling [1, 20]. Although these approaches are
theoretically sound, the absence of a unified interpretation narrows the design space of guidance
mechanisms, rendering each method a tightly coupled framework where components cannot be
independently modified. To integrate the effective components of existing approaches and further
unlock the potential of guidance mechanisms, a critical question arises:
How can we systematically explore the design space for conditional guidance and
develop more effective algorithms from a unified perspective?
∗
1

Corresponding author
The codes are available at https://github.com/Ka1b0/Foresight-Guidance.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

