Neural Networks for Learnable and Scalable Influence
Estimation of Instruction Fine-Tuning Data

Ishika Agarwal & Dilek Hakkani-Tür
Department of Computer Science
UIUC
Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801, USA
{ishikaa2, dilek}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Influence functions provide crucial insights into model training, but existing methods suffer from large computational costs and limited generalization. Particularly,
recent works have proposed various metrics and algorithms to calculate the influence of data using language models, which do not scale well with large models and
datasets. This is because of the expensive forward and backward passes required
for computation, substantial memory requirements to store large models, and poor
generalization of influence estimates to new data. In this paper, we explore the
use of small neural networks – which we refer to as the InfluenceNetwork – to
estimate influence values, achieving up to 99% cost reduction. Our evaluation
demonstrates that influence values can be estimated with models just 0.0007% the
size of full language models (we average across 1.5B-22B versions). We apply our
algorithm of estimating influence values (called NN-CIFT: Neural Networks for
effiCient Instruction Fine-Tuning) to the downstream task of subset selection for
general instruction fine-tuning. In our study, we include four state-of-the-art influence functions and show no compromise in performance, despite large speedups,
between NN-CIFT and the original influence functions. We provide an in-depth
hyperparameter analyses of NN-CIFT. The code for our method can be found here:
https://github.com/agarwalishika/NN-CIFT.

1

Introduction

The strong instruction-following abilities of large language models (LLMs) can be attributed to
instruction fine-tuning (IFT) [Zhang et al., 2024]. IFT builds on top of current language modeling
capabilities and strengthens the instruction following abilities of models. Recent works have taken
data efficient approaches for IFT. The goal is to select a small subset of samples on which to fine-tune
a model Agarwal et al. [2025], Mirzasoleiman et al. [2020], Das and Khetan [2024], Xia et al. [2024],
Renduchintala et al. [2024], Liu et al. [2024c] that emulates the full dataset.
Data efficient pipelines typically consist of two stages: (1) data valuation: designing functions to
estimate the influence of data points, and (2) data selection: using influence estimates to choose
a balanced set of influential data. Usually, data selection is cheaper than valuation – for instance,
DELIFT (SE)1 [Agarwal et al., 2025] computes the similarity of sentence embeddings between pairs
of data (expensive) for valuation and selects representative data using a submodular function (cheap).
Formally, influence functions estimate the value of data. For instance, brute force influence functions
use leave-one-out (LOO) training to measure impact by omitting each data point and evaluating
performance Scanlon [1982]. More recent influence functions use LLMs to estimate influence. Table
1

Short for "Sentence Embedding".

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

