DUET: Dual-Perspective Pseudo Labeling and
Uncertainty-aware Exploration & Exploitation
Training for Source-Free Domain Adaptation

Jae Yun Lee1
Min Hee Cha3 ,

JaeHyeon Park2 ,
Gyoomin Lee2 ,
1
Hyeok Nam ,
Joo Hyeon Jeon1 ,
Sung In Cho1∗

Bogyeong Kim3 ,
Hyunse Lee2 ,

1
Department of Artificial Intelligence at Sogang University
35 Baekbeom-ro, Mapo-gu, Seoul 04107, Republic of Korea
{stcaft, skagur10, jhbox7, csi2267}@sogang.ac.kr
2,3

Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence at Dongguk University
30 Pildong-ro 1-gil, Jung-gu, Seoul 04620, Republic of Korea
2
{pjh0011, exceleaf, sae4394}@dongguk.edu
3
{qhruddl51, rninicha}@dgu.ac.kr

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) aims to adapt a pre-trained source model
to an unlabeled target domain without requiring labeled source data. In a selfsupervised setting, relying on pseudo labels on target domain samples facilitates
the domain adaptation performance providing strong supervision. However, a critical problem of this approach is the inherent instability of the pre-trained source
model in the target domain, leading to unreliable pseudo labels for the target domain data. To tackle this, we propose a novel Dual-perspective pseudo labeling
strategy that jointly leverages a task-specific perspective and a domain-invariant
perspective, assigning pseudo labels only to target samples on which the target
model’s predictions and CLIP’s predictions agree. To further enhance representation learning without introducing noisy supervision, we apply consistency training
to uncertain samples. Additionally, we introduce a Tsallis mutual information
(TMI)-based vision optimization strategy guided by an Uncertainty-based adaptation index (UAI), which dynamically modulates entropy sensitivity based on the
model’s adaptation uncertainty. The UAI-based training paradigm enables stable
and adaptive domain alignment by effectively balancing exploration and exploitation processes during the optimization process. Our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on domain adaptation benchmark datasets, improving
adaptation accuracy by 1.6% on Office-Home, 1.4% on VisDA-C, and 2.9% on
DomainNet-126, demonstrating its effectiveness in SFDA. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/l3umblee/duet-sfda.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)[26, 3, 15, 6] explores training strategies or model architectures that enable a model trained on labeled source domain data to achieve high task accuracy on the
unlabeled target domain data. Traditionally, UDA assumes access to both labeled source domain data
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

