When Do Transformers Outperform Feedforward and
Recurrent Networks? A Statistical Perspective

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini1 , Clayton Sanford2 , Denny Wu3 , Murat A. Erdogdu1
1

University of Toronto and Vector Institute, 2 Google Research,
3
New York University and Flatiron Institute

{mousavi,erdogdu}@cs.toronto.edu, chsanford@google.com, dennywu@nyu.edu

Abstract
Theoretical efforts to prove advantages of Transformers in comparison with classical architectures such as feedforward and recurrent neural networks have mostly
focused on representational power. In this work, we take an alternative perspective
and prove that even with infinite compute, feedforward and recurrent networks
may suffer from larger sample complexity compared to Transformers, as the latter
can adapt to a form of dynamic sparsity. Specifically, we consider a sequence-tosequence data generating model on sequences of length N , where the output at each
position only depends on q ≪ N relevant tokens, and the positions of these tokens
are described in the input prompt. We prove that a single-layer Transformer can
learn this model if and only if its number of attention heads is at least q, in which
case it achieves a sample complexity almost independent of N , while recurrent
networks require N Ω(1) samples on the same problem. If we simplify this model,
recurrent networks may achieve a complexity almost independent of N , while
feedforward networks still require N samples. Our proposed sparse retrieval model
illustrates a natural hierarchy in sample complexity across these architectures.

1

Introduction

The Transformer [VSP+ 17], a neural network architecture that combines attention and feedforward
blocks, forms the backbone of large language models and machine learning approaches across
many domains [RNSS18, DBK+ 20, BMR+ 20]. The theoretical efforts surrounding the success
of Transformers have so far demonstrated various capabilities like in-context learning [ASA+ 23,
VONR+ 23, BCW+ 23, ZFB24, KNS24, and others] and chain-of-thought prompting along with
its benefits [FZG+ 23, MS24, LLZM24, KS24, and others] in various settings. There are fewer
works that provide specific benefits of Transformers in comparison with feedforward and recurrent
architectures. On the approximation side, there are tasks that Transformers can solve with size
logarithmic in the input, while alternative architectures require polynomial size [SHT23, SHT24].
Based on these results, [WWHL24] showed a separation between Transformers and feedforward
networks by providing further optimization guarantees for gradient-based training of Transformers
on a sparse token selection task.
While most prior works focused on the approximation separation between Transformers and feedforward networks (FFNs), in this work we focus on a purely statistical separation, and ask:
What function class can Transformers learn with fewer samples compared to
feedforward and recurrent networks, even with infinite computational resources?
[FGBM23] approached the above problem with random features, where the query-key matrix for
the attention and the first layer weights for the two-layer feedforward network were fixed at random
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

