LMFusion: Adapting Pretrained Language Models
for Multimodal Generation
Weijia Shi ∗w Xiaochuang Han ∗w Chunting Zhou f Weixin Liang s Xi Victoria Lin f
Luke Zettlemoyer wf Lili Yu f
w

University of Washington
swj0419@uw.edu

f

FAIR at Meta

xhan77@uw.edu

s

Stanford University

liliyu@meta.com

Abstract
We present LMFusion, a framework for empowering pretrained text-only large
language models (LLMs) with multimodal generative capabilities, enabling them
to understand and generate both text and images in arbitrary sequences. LMFusion
leverages existing Llama-3’s weights for processing texts autoregressively while
introducing additional and parallel transformer modules for processing images
with diffusion. During training, the data from each modality is routed to its dedicated modules: modality-specific feedforward layers, query-key-value projections,
and normalization layers process each modality independently, while the shared
self-attention layers allow interactions across text and image features. By freezing
the text-specific modules and only training the image-specific modules, LMFusion
preserves the language capabilities of text-only LLMs while developing strong
visual understanding and generation abilities. Compared to methods that pretrain
multimodal generative models from scratch, our experiments demonstrate that LMFusion improves image understanding by 20% and image generation by 3.6% while
maintaining Llama-3’s language capabilities. We also show that this framework
can adapt existing vision-language models with multimodal generation ability.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, we have seen significant progress in multimodal generative models capable
of understanding and generating interleaved text and images in arbitrary sequences [1, 2, 3]. Models
like Transfusion [4], Chameleon [5], and Unified-IO [6, 7] demonstrate the potential of unified
architectures that seamlessly handle both image and text modalities. However, these models typically
train from scratch, demanding significant computational resources to achieve proficiency across all
modalities. The computational cost of mastering even a single modality is substantial—training a
state-of-the-art text-only large language models (LLMs) like Llama-3 [8] requires training over 15
trillion tokens.
Given these computational demands, we investigate an alternative paradigm that reuses and adapts
existing pretrained LLMs [9, 10, 11]. We address a fundamental research question: How to preserve
the text-only performance of pretrained LLMs while equipping them with visual understanding and
generation abilities? Our experiments show that naive finetuning of text-only LLMs on multimodal
data leads to significant degradation of their language processing capabilities.
To address this challenge, we introduce LMFusion, a framework that enhances a pretrained text-only
LLM, Llama-3 [8] with multimodal capabilities by building upon the recipe of Transfusion [4].
Drawing from recent and parallel work on modality separation [12, 13, 14, 15], LMFusion integrates
the original Llama modules pretrained for language processing while introducing additional dedicated
transformer modules for visual understanding and generation tasks. As shown in Figure 1, we
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

