Understanding protein function with a multimodal
retrieval-augmented foundation model

Timothy F. Truong Jr
OpenProtein.AI
NY, USA
ttruong@openprotein.ai

Tristan Bepler
OpenProtein.AI
NY, USA
tbepler@openprotein.ai

Abstract
Protein language models (PLMs) learn probability distributions over natural protein
sequences. By learning from hundreds of millions of natural protein sequences, protein understanding and design capabilities emerge. Recent works have shown that
scaling these models improves structure prediction, but does not seem to improve
mutation understanding and representation quality for protein function prediction.
We introduce PoET-2, a multimodal, retrieval-augmented protein foundation model
that incorporates in-context learning of family-specific evolutionary constraints
with optional structure conditioning to learn generative distributions over protein
sequences. PoET-2 uses a hierarchical transformer encoder that is equivariant to
sequence context ordering and a dual decoder architecture with both causal and
masked language modeling objectives, allowing PoET-2 to operate in both fully
generative and bidirectional representation learning modes. PoET-2 achieves stateof-the-art performance on zero-shot variant effect prediction, excelling at scoring
variants with multiple mutations and challenging indel mutations. In supervised
settings, PoET-2 embeddings outperform previous methods for learning sequencefunction relationships, especially with small datasets. This work highlights the
benefits of combining retrieval augmentation with multimodal, family-centric
modeling for advancing protein foundation models. 1

1

Introduction

Proteins are polymer chains of amino acids that fold into 3-dimensional structures and carry out the
vast majority of functions at the molecular level of life. Proteins catalyze chemical reactions, sense
and respond to environmental signals, and defend against pathogens, among countless other functions.
Their vast functional diversity arises from the astronomical space of possible amino acid sequences,
which evolution has explored over billions of years through mutation and selection.
Accurate prediction of the effect of mutations on protein function is crucial for disease understanding,
drug development, and protein engineering. Recent advances in protein language models (PLMs)
have enabled more accurate zero-shot prediction of variant effects [1–4]. By learning to model
probability distributions over natural protein sequences, PLMs output sequence likelihoods that
capture relative fitness information and achieve remarkable correlation with functional and structural
properties of proteins in deep mutational scanning and clinical mutation benchmarks [5]. However,
several key challenges remain.
• Most PLMs use masked language model-based approaches that are limited to prediction of
single substitution mutations. These approaches are unable to predict the effect of insertions
and deletions (indels), as well as epistatic effects in higher order mutations.
1

PoET-2 code and model weights available at: https://github.com/OpenProteinAI/PoET-2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

