Inference-Time Text-to-Video Alignment with
Diffusion Latent Beam Search
Yuta Oshima1 Masahiro Suzuki1 Yutaka Matsuo1 Hiroki Furuta2†
1
The University of Tokyo 2 Google DeepMind
yuta.oshima@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The remarkable progress in text-to-video diffusion models enables the generation of
photorealistic videos, although the content of these generated videos often includes
unnatural movement or deformation, reverse playback, and motionless scenes.
Recently, an alignment problem has attracted huge attention, where we steer the
output of diffusion models based on some measure of the content’s goodness.
Because there is a large room for improvement of perceptual quality along the
frame direction, we should address which metrics we should optimize and how
we can optimize them in the video generation. In this paper, we propose diffusion
latent beam search with lookahead estimator, which can select a better diffusion
latent to maximize a given alignment reward at inference time. We then point
out that improving perceptual video quality with respect to alignment to prompts
requires reward calibration by weighting existing metrics. This is because when
humans or vision language models evaluate outputs, many previous metrics to
quantify the naturalness of video do not always correlate with the evaluation. We
demonstrate that our method improves the perceptual quality evaluated on the
calibrated reward, VLMs, and human assessment, without model parameter update,
and outputs the best generation compared to greedy search and best-of-N sampling
under much more efficient computational cost. The experiments highlight that our
method is beneficial to many capable generative models, and provide a practical
guideline: we should prioritize the inference-time compute allocation into enabling
the lookahead estimator and increasing the search budget, rather than expanding
the denoising steps. 1 2

1

Introduction

The remarkable progress in text-to-video diffusion models enables photorealistic, high-resolution
video generation [1–4]. Many future applications are anticipated, such as creating novel games [5],
movies [6], or simulators to control real-world robots [7]. However, the detailed contents of the
generated video often include unnatural movement or deformation, reverse playback, and motionless
scenes, which should not happen in the real world. For instance, simulating factual physics in the
generated video is still challenging [8, 9]. Recently, it has attracted a lot of attention to steering the
output of diffusion models based on reward evaluation, quantifying the goodness of the content, which
is studied as an alignment problem [10, 11]. There is a large room for improvement of perceptual
quality along the frame direction in the video, and to align models with our preferences, we should
address which metrics to optimize and how to optimize them.
†

Work done as an advisory role only.
Website: https://sites.google.com/view/t2v-dlbs
2
Code: https://github.com/shim0114/T2V-Diffusion-Search
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

