Technical Debt in In-Context Learning: Diminishing
Efficiency in Long Context

Taejong Joo & Diego Klabjan
Department of Industrial Engineering & Management Sciences
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, USA
{taejong.joo,d-klabjan}@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Transformers have demonstrated remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capabilities,
adapting to new tasks by simply conditioning on demonstrations without parameter
updates. Compelling empirical and theoretical evidence suggests that ICL, as
a general-purpose learner, could outperform task-specific models. However, it
remains unclear to what extent the transformers optimally learn in-context compared to principled learning algorithms. To investigate this, we employ a meta
ICL framework in which each prompt defines a distinctive regression task whose
target function is drawn from a hierarchical distribution, requiring inference over
both the latent model class and task-specific parameters. Within this setup, we
benchmark sample complexity of ICL against principled learning algorithms, including the Bayes optimal estimator, under varying performance requirements. Our
findings reveal a striking dichotomy: while ICL initially matches the efficiency of
a Bayes optimal estimator, its efficiency significantly deteriorates in long context.
Through an information-theoretic analysis, we show that the diminishing efficiency
is inherent to ICL. These results clarify the trade-offs in adopting ICL as a universal problem solver, motivating a new generation of on-the-fly adaptive methods
without the diminishing efficiency. 1

1

Introduction

Transformers, particularly large language models (LLMs), are able to perform in-context learning
(ICL) [1]; they can adapt to new tasks simply by conditioning on demonstrations in their input prompt
[2]. Not only conveniently operated without any explicit parameter updates, but ICL even with just
a few demonstrations (a.k.a. few-shot ICL) surprisingly outperforms task-specific state-of-the-art
models in diverse tasks, from question answering to common sense reasoning [3, 4, 1].
This raises a fundamental question whether ICL can act as a universal learner, replacing task-specific
models. To answer this, we must first address a more precise question: How optimal is ICL as a
learning algorithm, compared to principled learning algorithms? In principle, this could be answered
by exhaustively benchmarking ICL against principled learning algorithm across varied data and
model scales [5, 6] and task types [7, 8]. However, the computational demands for training modern
LLMs pose significant challenges for such direct comparisons. The goal of this work is to answer the
question without such prohibitive computational demands.
To answer the question, theoretical studies have analyzed asymptotic behavior of ICL using rich tools
from statistics and learning theory, such as regret and generalization bounds [9–12]. However, these
asymptotic results fall short of fully characterizing real-world LLM behavior. For instance, the regret
1

Our source code is available at https://github.com/tjoo512/technical-debt-in-icl.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

