T-norm Selection for Object Detection in
Autonomous Driving with Logical Constraints

Thomas Eiter1

Nelson Higuera Ruiz1 Katsumi Inoue2 Sota Moriyama2,3
1
Vienna University of Technology, Austria
2
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
3
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, Japan
{thomas.eiter,nelson.ruiz}@tuwien.ac.at, {inoue,sotam}@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Integrating logical constraints into object detection models for autonomous driving
(AD) is a promising way to enhance their compliance to rules and thus increase the
safety of the system. In this, t-norms have been utilized to calculate the constrained
loss, i.e., the violations of logical constraints as losses. While prior works have
statically selected few t-norms, we conduct an extensive experimental study to
identify the most effective choices, as suboptimal t-norms can lead to undesired
model behavior. For this, we present MOD-ECL, a neurosymbolic framework that
implements a wide range of t-norms and can use them in an adaptive manner, with
an algorithm that selects well-performing t-norms during training and a scheduler
that regulates the impact of the constrained loss. We evaluate its effectiveness on the
ROAD-R and ROAD-Waymo-R datasets for object detection in AD with attached
common-sense constraints. Our results show that careful selection of parameters is
crucial for good behavior of the constrained loss and that our framework allows
us to obtain not only lower constraint violation but in some cases also an increase
in detection performance. Furthermore, our methods allow fine control over the
tradeoff between accuracy and violation.1

1

Introduction

Object detection models [33] have become essential for autonomous driving (AD) applications [17]
due to their efficiency and accuracy [34], and a variety of datasets have been created to evaluate these
models [2, 18, 27, 9]. However, standard data-driven models do not consider formal symbolic knowledge, and they often fail to satisfy logical constraints that reflect real-world rules and relationships
between detected objects; for example, in an AD scenario pedestrians usually should not be detected
on top of a moving vehicle. The consistent satisfaction of this and similar kinds of constraints is
crucial for creating safe and reliable autonomous driving systems.
Neurosymbolic methods [5] have emerged as a promising solution to this problem, supporting
different ways to integrate knowledge into deep learning models, cf. [4, 8]. An effective approach for
autonomous driving is to embed logical constraints into loss functions using t-norms [1], with the
constrained loss [7] as a representative. The latter is aggregated with a regularization term λ to the
loss functions of a neural network, driving the model to simultaneously learn satisfying the logical
constraints and solving the detection task.
Recent research has considered the inclusion of requirements for AD scenarios expressed as logical
constraints in datasets [12, 15]. It appeared that using constrained loss can increase constraint
satisfaction as wells as model performance of the overall AD system. On the other hand, the results
1

All our code is contained in an online repository: https://github.com/pudumagico/MOD-ECL/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

