Learning Human-Object Interaction as Groups

Jiajun Hong∗ ,

Jianan Wei∗ , Wenguan Wang†
Zhejiang University

https://github.com/JiajunHong1/GroupHOI

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction Detection (HOI-DET) aims to localize human-object
pairs and identify their interactive relationships. To aggregate contextual cues,
existing methods typically propagate information across all detected entities via
self-attention mechanisms, or establish message passing between humans and objects with bipartite graphs. However, they primarily focus on pairwise relationships,
overlooking that interactions in real-world scenarios often emerge from collective
behaviors (i.e., multiple humans and objects engaging in joint activities). In light
of this, we revisit relation modeling from a group view and propose GroupHOI, a
framework that propagates contextual information in terms of geometric proximity
and semantic similarity. To exploit the geometric proximity, humans and objects
are grouped into distinct clusters using a learnable proximity estimator based on
spatial features derived from bounding boxes. In each group, a soft correspondence is computed via self-attention to aggregate and dispatch contextual cues.
To incorporate the semantic similarity, we enhance the vanilla transformer-based
interaction decoder with local contextual cues from HO-pair features. Extensive experiments on HICO-DET and V-COCO benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
GroupHOI over the state-of-the-art methods. It also exhibits leading performance
on the more challenging Nonverbal Interaction Detection (NVI-DET) task, which
involves varied forms of higher-order interactions within groups.

1

Introduction
No man is an island, entire of itself.
– John Donne, Meditation XVII Devotions

Human-Object Interaction Detection (HOI-DET), as a critical pillar in visual relationship understanding, identifies entities (i.e., humans and objects) as basic building blocks, and leverages relationships
as the connective glue that weaves them into meaningful patterns. Early works [1, 2] typically recognize HO-pairs, which are cropped from natural images by manually obtained bounding boxes, as
composites (i.e., visual phrases) in isolation. Recent efforts [3, 4] extend HOI reasoning to real-world
scenarios involving multiple entities with complex relational structures. Building upon object
detection frameworks, HOI-DET methods evolve alongside advancements in detector architectures
from Faster R-CNN [5] to DETR-like variants [6, 7]. As a semantic interpretation task, HOI-DET can
also benefit from large visual-linguistic models (e.g., CLIP [8] and BLIP [9]) pre-trained on extensive
image-text corpora. Despite architectural innovations and multi-modal knowledge transfer, the core
challenge remains unchanged: ❶how to structure and reason about relationships among entities?
Current methods [3, 10, 11] primarily reason over global context via the self-attention mechanism
(Fig. 1(a)), while another strand of research constrains information exchange within homogeneous
entities (i.e., human-human, object-object) [12, 13] or heterogeneous neighborhoods (i.e., humanobject, object-human) [11] via bipartite graph (Fig. 1(b)). Despite achieving impressive performance,
* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author: Wenguan Wang.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

