Differentially Private Gomory-Hu Trees

Anders Aamand
BARC, University of Copenhagen
aa@di.ku.dk

Justin Y. Chen
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
justc@mit.edu

Mina Dalirrooyfard
Morgan Stanley
minad@mit.edu

Slobodan Mitrović
UC Davis
smitrovic@ucdavis.edu

Yuriy Nevmyvaka
Morgan Stanley
yuriy.nevmyvaka@morganstanley.com

Sandeep Silwal
UW-Madison
silwal@cs.wisc.edu

Yinzhan Xu
UC San Diego
xyzhan@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Given an undirected, weighted n-vertex graph G = (V, E, w), a Gomory-Hu tree T
is a weighted tree on V that preserves the Min-s-t-Cut between any pair of vertices
s, t ∈ V . Finding cuts in graphs is a key primitive in problems such as bipartite
matching, spectral and correlation clustering, and community detection. We design
a differentially private (DP) algorithm that computes an approximate Gomory-Hu
tree. Our algorithm is ε-DP, runs in polynomial time, and can be used to compute
s-t cuts that are Õ(n/ε)-additive approximations of the Min-s-t-Cuts in G for all
distinct s, t ∈ V with high probability. Our error bound is essentially optimal,
since [29] showed that privately outputting a single Min-s-t-Cut requires Ω(n)
additive error even with (ε, δ)-DP and allowing for multiplicative error. Prior to our
work, the best additive error bounds for approximate all-pairs Min-s-t-Cuts were
√
O(n3/2 /ε) for ε-DP [47] and Õ( mn/ε) for (ε, δ)-DP [66], both achieved by DP
algorithms that preserve all cuts in the graph. To achieve our result, we develop
an ε-DP algorithm for the Minimum Isolating Cuts problem with near-linear error,
and introduce a novel privacy composition technique combining elements of both
parallel and basic composition to handle ‘bounded overlap’ computational branches
in recursive algorithms, which maybe of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Over the last two decades, there has been a significant attention to privatizing graph algorithms (see
[70, 51, 57, 47, 10, 58, 37, 17, 78, 31, 39, 22, 32, 29, 66, 53] and references within). Graph algorithms
are often applied to large data sets, such as social networks, containing sensitive information. It
is well understood by now that even minor negligence in handling user data can severely impact
privacy; see [8, 74, 59, 82, 26] for a few examples. Differential privacy (DP), introduced by Dwork,
McSherry, Nissim, and Smith in their seminal work [36], is a widely adopted standard for formalizing
the privacy guarantees of algorithms. Informally, an algorithm is differentially private if the outputs
for two given neighboring inputs are statistically indistinguishable.
A major part of the literature on private graph algorithms has been approximating cuts which is
the setting of our paper. Given an undirected, weighted graph G = (V, E, w) with positive edge
weights, a cut is a bipartition of vertices (U, V \ U ), and the value of the cut is the sum of the
weights of edges crossing the bipartition. Given a pair of distinct vertices s, t ∈ V , the Min-s-t-Cut is
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

