Adaptive Sigmoid Clipping for Balancing the
Direction–Magnitude Mismatch Trade-off in
Differentially Private Learning

Faeze Moradi Kalarde
ECE Department
University of Toronto
faeze.moradi@mail.utoronto.ca
Ben Liang
ECE Department
University of Toronto
liang@ece.utoronto.ca

Ali Bereyhi
ECE Department
University of Toronto
ali.bereyhi@utoronto.ca
Min Dong
ECSE Department
Ontario Tech University
Min.Dong@ontariotechu.ca

Abstract
Differential privacy (DP) limits the impact of individual training data samples by
bounding their gradient norms through clipping. Conventional clipping operations
assign unequal scaling factors to sample gradients with different norms, leading
to a direction mismatch between the true batch gradient and the aggregation of
the clipped gradients. Applying a smaller but identical scaling factor to all sample
gradients alleviates this direction mismatch; however, it intensifies the magnitude
mismatch by excessively reducing the aggregation norm. This work proposes a
novel clipping method, termed adaptive sigmoid (AdaSig), which uses a sigmoid
function with an adjustable saturation slope to clip the sample gradients. The
slope is adaptively adjusted during the training process to balance the trade-off
between direction mismatch and magnitude mismatch, as the statistics of sample
gradients evolve over the training iterations. Despite AdaSig’s adaptive nature, our
convergence analysis demonstrates that differentially private stochastic gradient
descent (DP-SGD) with AdaSig clipping retains the best-known convergence
rate under non-convex loss functions. Evaluating AdaSig on sentence and image
classification tasks across different datasets shows that it consistently improves
learning performance compared with established clipping methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models can expose individual data samples to privacy risks and are vulnerable to
multiple types of practical attacks [2, 5, 26, 29]. To mitigate these risks, differential privacy (DP)
[10] has emerged as a widely adopted standard in machine learning. Differentially private training
constrains the impact of individual data samples on the training process, ensuring that the resulting
model statistically resembles the one trained by the exclusion of an arbitrary data sample. As a result,
inferring the presence of an individual data sample in the training set becomes challenging when
observing the model during training. Differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) is a
prominent privacy-preserving algorithm that incorporates DP into the SGD algorithm through two
steps: (i) bounding sensitivity through clipping, and (ii) introducing uncertainty by adding Gaussian
noise [1]. The first step limits the ℓ2 -sensitivity of the batch gradient against the addition or removal
of data samples by upper bounding the magnitude of the sample gradients using a clipping operation.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

