Hamiltonian Neural PDE Solvers through
Functional Approximation

Anthony Zhou
Carnegie Mellon University
ayz2@andrew.cmu.edu

Amir Barati Farimani
Carnegie Mellon University
barati@cmu.edu

Abstract
Designing neural networks within a Hamiltonian framework offers a principled
way to ensure that conservation laws are respected in physical systems. While
promising, these capabilities have been largely limited to discrete, analytically
solvable systems. In contrast, many physical phenomena are governed by PDEs,
which govern infinite-dimensional fields through Hamiltonian functionals and their
functional derivatives. Building on prior work, we represent the Hamiltonian
functional as a kernel integral parameterized by a neural field, enabling learnable
function-to-scalar mappings and the use of automatic differentiation to calculate
functional derivatives. This allows for an extension of Hamiltonian mechanics to
neural PDE solvers by predicting a functional and learning in the gradient domain.
We show that the resulting Hamiltonian Neural Solver (HNS) can be an effective
surrogate model through improved stability and conserving energy-like quantities
across 1D and 2D PDEs. This ability to respect conservation laws also allows HNS
models to better generalize to longer time horizons or unseen initial conditions.

1

Introduction

Physics is remarkably complex; a set of governing laws can produce endlessly diverse and interesting
phenomena. In an effort to unify governing laws, Hamiltonian mechanics describes physical phenomena under the Principle of Least Action, whereby the trajectory of a system evolves because it
has locally the least action. Remarkably, the minimization of action can derive nearly all physical
phenomena, from kinematics to quantum mechanics, suggesting an underlying, fundamental property
of nature. Rather than describing physics through forces and masses, such as in Newtonian mechanics,
using energy and symmetries allows for an elegant and unifying perspective of physical systems.
Despite the long history of Hamiltonian mechanics, most current numerical and neural PDE solvers
operate within a Newtonian framework. This has been very successful; forces and masses are easy
to intuitively understand, and both numerical and neural solvers have found important, practical
uses. However, motivated by natural conservation laws and symmetries that arise from Hamiltonian
mechanics, we seek to investigate neural PDE solvers that operate in this framework. We find that the
Hamiltonian framework brings inductive biases that improve model performance, especially when
conserving energy-like quantities.
Extending Hamiltonian mechanics to neural PDE solvers requires both theoretical and implementation
insights. In particular, most PDEs are used to describe continuum systems (fluids, waves, elastic
bodies, etc.); as such, infinite-dimensional Hamiltonian mechanics are needed. In this setup, the
Hamiltonian is defined as a functional that maps from input fields to a scalar, often interpreted as
the energy of the system. The variational or functional derivative of the Hamiltonian then contains
dynamical information that evolves the system. This introduces interesting modeling challenges; in
particular, the need to approximate infinite-dimensional to scalar mappings and for the approximation
to have functional derivatives.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

