StyleGuard: Preventing Text-to-Image-Model-based
Style Mimicry Attacks by Style Perturbations

Yanjie Li, Wenxuan Zhang, Xinqi Lyu, Yihao Liu, Bin Xiao ∗
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{yanjie.li, leo02.zhang, xinqi.lyu, yihao5.liu} @connect.polyu.hk
b.xiao@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, text-to-image diffusion models have been widely used for style mimicry
and personalized customization through methods such as DreamBooth and Textual Inversion. This has raised concerns about intellectual property protection
and the generation of deceptive content. Recent studies, such as Glaze and AntiDreamBooth, have proposed using adversarial noise to protect images from these
attacks. However, recent purification-based methods, such as DiffPure and Noise
Upscaling, have successfully attacked these latest defenses, showing the vulnerabilities of these methods. Moreover, present methods show limited transferability
across models, making them less effective against unknown text-to-image models.
To address these issues, we propose a novel anti-mimicry method, StyleGuard. We
propose a novel style loss that optimizes the style-related features in the latent space
to make it deviate from the original image, which improves model-agnostic transferability. Additionally, to enhance the perturbation’s ability to bypass diffusion-based
purification, we designed a novel upscale loss that involves ensemble purifiers
and upscalers during training. Extensive experiments on the WikiArt and CelebA
datasets demonstrate that StyleGuard outperforms existing methods in robustness against various transformations and purifications, effectively countering style
mimicry in various models. Moreover, StyleGuard is effective on different style
mimicry methods, including DreamBooth and Textual Inversion. The code is
available at https://github.com/PolyLiYJ/StyleGuard.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in various applications, such as image
generation [13], image editing [22], and text-to-image synthesis [43, 25]. The emergence of diffusion
models has significantly transformed the art industry [28]. These models allow users to create detailed
artwork from simple text prompts, a task that once required extensive time and skill from professional
artists. However, these technologies have also raised concerns about copyrights and ethics. For
example, Dreambooth [36] allows anyone to fine-tune an SD model to imitate an artist’s style with
just a few paintings and generate high-quality artwork. This seriously damages the intellectual
property rights of artists.
To tackle the challenges associated with unauthorized image usage in text-to-image generation, recent
perturbation-based approaches have emerged. These methods are designed to subtly modify user
images, rendering them "unlearnable" for malicious applications and disrupting the functionality
of targeted diffusion models. For example, Anti-Dreambooth [40] shows some effectiveness by
alternately training diffusion models and executing PGD attacks, but it is fragile against simple data
transformations. MetaCloak [29] builds on Anti-Dreambooth by incorporating simple transformations
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

