GaRA-SAM: Robustifying Segment Anything Model
with Gated-Rank Adaptation

Sohyun Lee1

Yeho Gwon1
1

POSTECH

Lukas Hoyer2
2

Suha Kwak1

Google

Abstract
Improving robustness of the Segment Anything Model (SAM) to input degradations is critical for its deployment in high-stakes applications such as autonomous
driving and robotics. Our approach to this challenge prioritizes three key aspects:
first, parameter efficiency to maintain the inherent generalization capability of
SAM; second, fine-grained and input-aware robustification to precisely address
the input corruption; and third, adherence to standard training protocols for ease
of training. To this end, we propose gated-rank adaptation (GaRA). GaRA introduces lightweight adapters into intermediate layers of the frozen SAM, where
each adapter dynamically adjusts the effective rank of its weight matrix based
on the input by selectively activating (rank-1) components of the matrix using
a learned gating module. This adjustment enables fine-grained and input-aware
robustification without compromising the generalization capability of SAM. Our
model, GaRA-SAM, significantly outperforms prior work on all robust segmentation benchmarks. In particular, it surpasses the previous best IoU score by up to
21.3%p on ACDC, a challenging real corrupted image dataset.

1

Introduction

The Segment Anything Model (SAM) [28] has proven to be a powerful tool for zero-shot image segmentation, exhibiting impressive generalization across unseen objects and images without additional
training. Nevertheless, its performance deteriorates considerably when faced with degraded input due
to noise, blur, low illumination, and adverse weather [8], as shown in Figure 1(b). This limitation
significantly restricts its use in high-stakes applications such as autonomous driving and robotics.
A seemingly straightforward approach to improving the robustness of SAM is to attach an existing
image restoration module to the front of SAM. However, this typically introduces significant computational overhead, and often yields suboptimal segmentation performance since image restoration
is optimized to enhance the perceptual quality of images, rather than to improve performance of
segmentation models like SAM [7, 12, 30, 33, 52, 57]. An alternative strategy involves fine-tuning
SAM entirely on degraded inputs, which, however, demands substantial computational resources and
diminishes its inherent zero-shot generalization capability [8].
Chen et al. [8] addressed these limitations by introducing anti-degradation modules into SAM; these
modules are trained to refine degraded features by promoting feature-level consistency between a
pair of clean and corrupted images of the same content. Despite effectively enhancing robustness,
their method, dubbed RobustSAM, has a couple of limitations. First, its requirement for paired
clean and degraded images, which cannot be captured by typical cameras, necessitates the use of
synthetic degradations in training, hindering its generalization to real-world degradations. Second,
since RobustSAM aims at learning representations invariant to various degradations, it struggles to
produce representations adapted to the specific degradation affecting the input at hand, restricting
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

