Spark Transformer: Reactivating Sparsity in
Transformer FFN and Attention
Chong You∗
Kan Wu∗†
Zhipeng Jia∗‡
Lin Chen∗
Srinadh Bhojanapalli
Jiaxian Guo
Utku Evci
Jan Wassenberg
Praneeth Netrapalli
Jeremiah J. Willcock
Suvinay Subramanian
Felix Chern
Alek Andreev
Shreya Pathak
Felix Yu
Prateek Jain
Henry M. Levy
David E. Culler
Sanjiv Kumar
Google

Abstract
The discovery of the lazy neuron phenomenon [54], where fewer than 10% of
the feedforward networks (FFN) parameters in trained Transformers are activated
per token, has spurred significant interests in activation sparsity for enhancing
large model efficiency. While notable progress has been made in translating such
sparsity to wall-time benefits across CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs, modern Transformers
have moved away from the ReLU activation function crucial to this phenomenon.
Existing efforts on re-introducing activation sparsity, e.g., by reverting to ReLU,
applying top-k masking or a sparse predictor, often degrade model quality, increase
parameter count, complicate training. Sparse attention, the application of sparse
activation to the attention mechanism, often face similar challenges.
This paper introduces the Spark Transformer, a novel architecture that achieves
high activation sparsity in both FFN and the attention mechanism while maintaining
model quality, parameter count, and standard training procedures. Our method
realizes sparsity via top-k masking for explicit control over sparsity level. Crucially, we introduce statistical top-k, a hardware-accelerator-friendly, linear-time
approximate algorithm that avoids costly sorting and mitigates significant training
slowdown from standard top-k operators. Furthermore, Spark Transformer reallocates existing FFN parameters and attention key embeddings to form a low-cost
predictor for identifying activated entries. This design not only mitigates quality
loss from enforced sparsity, but also enhances wall-time benefit. Pretrained with
the Gemma-2 recipe, Spark Transformer demonstrates competitive performance
on standard benchmarks while exhibiting significant sparsity: only 8% of FFN
neurons are activated, and each token attends to a maximum of 256 tokens. This
translates to a 2.5× reduction in FLOPs, leading to decoding wall-time speedups
of up to 1.79× on CPU and 1.40× on GPU.

1

Introduction

The machine learning field has experienced a rapid expansion in the scale of Transformer models
[4, 3, 27, 1], significantly advancing the state-of-the-art in language understanding and generation.
However, this pursuit of larger models is often constrained not by inherent limitations in model quality
[44], but by the soaring computational costs [76, 68] associated with the number of parameters. This
∗

Equal contribution
Now at xAI
‡
Now at Anthropic
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

