Thompson Sampling in Function Spaces
via Neural Operators

Rafael Oliveira∗
CSIRO’s Data61
Sydney, Australia

Xuesong Wang
CSIRO’s Data61
Sydney, Australia

Kian Ming A. Chai
DSO National Laboratories
Singapore

Edwin V. Bonilla
CSIRO’s Data61
Sydney, Australia

Abstract
We propose an extension of Thompson sampling to optimization problems over
function spaces where the objective is a known functional of an unknown operator’s
output. We assume that queries to the operator (such as running a high-fidelity
simulator or physical experiment) are costly, while functional evaluations on the
operator’s output are inexpensive. Our algorithm employs a sample-then-optimize
approach using neural operator surrogates. This strategy avoids explicit uncertainty
quantification by treating trained neural operators as approximate samples from a
Gaussian process (GP) posterior. We derive regret bounds and theoretical results
connecting neural operators with GPs in infinite-dimensional settings. Experiments
benchmark our method against other Bayesian optimization baselines on functional
optimization tasks involving partial differential equations of physical systems,
demonstrating better sample efficiency and significant performance gains.

1

Introduction

Neural operators have established themselves as versatile models capable of learning complex,
nonlinear mappings between function spaces [1]. They have demonstrated success across diverse
fields, including climate science [2], materials engineering [3], and computational fluid dynamics
[4]. Although their applications in supervised learning and physical system emulation are wellstudied, their potential for online learning and optimization within infinite-dimensional function
spaces remains relatively untapped.
In many scientific contexts, learning operators that map between function spaces naturally arises,
such as the task of approximating solution operators for a partial differential equation (PDE) [1].
However, adaptive methods that efficiently query these operators to optimize functional objectives
of their outputs (particularly in an active learning setting) are still underdeveloped. For example,
when designing porous structures, one is often interested in optimizing how liquids flow through the
structure using, e.g., Darcy flow PDEs [5], and, in the sciences, inverse problems can be solved by
optimization to infer initial conditions or parameters of a physical process from observations [6, 7].
To address this gap, we propose a framework that integrates neural operator surrogates with Thompson
sampling-based acquisition strategies [8] to actively optimize objectives of the form:
a∗ ∈ argmax f (G∗ (a)),
a∈A

where G∗ : A → U is an unknown operator between function spaces A and U, and f : U → R is a
known functional. We follow the steps of Bayesian optimization frameworks for composite functions
[9, 10], which leverage knowledge of the composite structure to speed-up optimization, extending
these frameworks to functional domains. Applying the theoretical results for the infinite-width limit
∗

Corresponding author: rafael.dossantosdeoliveira@data61.csiro.au

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

