The Nuclear Route: Sharp Asymptotics of ERM in
Overparameterized Quadratic Networks

Vittorio Erba
Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Emanuele Troiani
Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Lenka Zdeborová
Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Florent Krzakala
Information, Learning & Physics Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
We study the high-dimensional asymptotics of empirical risk minimization (ERM)
in over-parametrized two-layer neural networks with quadratic activations trained
on synthetic data. We derive sharp asymptotics for both training and test errors
by mapping the ℓ2 -regularized learning problem to a convex matrix sensing task
with nuclear norm penalization. This reveals that capacity control in such networks
emerges from a low-rank structure in the learned feature maps. Our results characterize the global minima of the loss and yield precise generalization thresholds,
showing how the width of the target function governs learnability. This analysis
bridges and extends ideas from spin-glass methods, matrix factorization, and convex optimization and emphasizes the deep link between low-rank matrix sensing
and learning in quadratic neural networks.

Modern machine learning relies heavily on training highly over-parameterized neural networks,
which often generalize well despite having far more parameters than data points [Zhang et al., 2021].
While it is known that large non-linear networks can approximate many functions [Cybenko, 1989],
it remains unclear what these models actually learn in practice, and why training succeeds so often.
In particular, we lack a precise understanding of how the structure of the data and the target function
affects learnability, and how many samples are needed. Developing such an understanding remains a
central theoretical challenge.
A promising route toward addressing these questions is to study models that go beyond the linear case—already well understood, eg. [Lee et al., 2018, Ji and Telgarsky, 2019, Pesme et al.,
2021]—while remaining simple enough for rigorous analysis. Two-layer networks with quadratic
activations are then the next natural candidate that captures some nonlinear behavior while still
allowing for mathematical treatment [Gamarnik et al., 2019, Arjevani et al., 2025, Maillard et al.,
2024]. On top of that working with synthetic data helps isolate the core mechanisms of learning
and generalization [Mei et al., 2018, Aubin et al., 2020, Mei and Montanari, 2022, Xiao et al., 2022,
Damian et al., 2024], free from the confounding factors of real-world datasets.
In this paper, we thus study learning by empirical risk minimization with quadratic networks from
data that is also generated by a quadratic network. Consider a dataset D = {xµ , y µ }nµ=1 where the
data xµ ∈ Rd are standard Gaussian xµ ∼ N (0, Id ) (though our results allow for some universality)
for µ = 1, . . . , n, and the labels y µ ∈ R are generated by an unknown target function f ⋆ (x). We
aim at learning this unknown function using a quadratic neural network fˆ(x; W ) with a number of

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

