High-Order Flow Matching:
Unified Framework and Sharp Statistical Rates

Maojiang Su∗†

Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu∗†
Shang Wu†

†

Northwestern University

‡

Zhao Song♮

Yi-Chen Lee∗‡

Ning Zhu§

Minshuo Chen†

Jui-Hui Chung♯

Han Liu†

National Taiwan University § University of Glasgow
♮
Simon Institute of Computing, UC Berkeley

♯

Princeton University

{smj,jhu,shangwu2028}@u.northwestern.edu, b10202055@ntu.edu.tw
zhuning0519@gmail.com, juihui@princeton.edu, {minshuo.chen, hanliu}@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Flow matching is an emerging generative modeling framework that learns
continuous-time dynamics to map noise into data. To enhance expressiveness
and sampling efficiency, recent works have explored incorporating high-order trajectory information. Despite the empirical success, a holistic theoretical foundation
is still lacking. We present a unified framework for standard and high-order flow
matching that incorporates trajectory derivatives up to an arbitrary order K. Our
key innovation is establishing the marginalization technique that converts the intractable K-order loss into a simple conditional regression with exact gradients
and identifying the consistency constraint. We establish sharp statistical rates of
the K-order flow matching implemented with transformer networks. With n same −Θ(1/d) ),
ples, flow matching estimates nonparametric distributions at a rate O(n
matching minimax lower bounds up to logarithmic factors.

1

Introduction

We present a unified theoretical framework and establish sharp statistical rates for standard and variant
flow-matching generative models with high-order velocity fields. A rigorous theoretical understanding
of such models is crucial in the current era of rapidly advancing generative AI. Flow-based generative
models, particularly those employing Flow Matching (FM) principles [Lipman et al., 2022, Liu et al.,
2022], have emerged as a powerful class of methods, achieving state-of-the-art performance across
diverse domains such as image, speech, and video generation [Esser et al., 2024, Le et al., 2023,
Polyak et al., 2024]. Standard flow matching has focused on learning first-order trajectory dynamics
by matching the instantaneous velocity field [Lipman et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2022, Lipman et al.,
2024, Gat et al., 2024, Chen and Lipman, 2023].
However, there is a growing interest in leveraging richer dynamical information, such as high-order
time derivatives of the trajectory, with the intuition that this could lead to more expressive models,
smoother generation paths, improved physical plausibility, or more efficient sampling strategies. This
trend is evident in recent empirical works. For instance, High-Order Matching for One-Step Shortcut
Diffusion (HOMO) [Chen et al., 2025] and Force Matching (ForM) [Cao et al., 2025] have shown
that supervising on acceleration and jerk leads to improved smoothness, stability, and precision in
generative tasks, particularly in high-curvature regions where first-order methods falter.
∗

Equal contribution. Version: October 28, 2025. Please see arXiv for the full and latest version.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

