Hadamax Encoding: Elevating Performance in
Model-Free Atari
Zhao Yang ∗
z.yang3@vu.nl
Department of Computer Science
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Jacob E. Kooi
jacobkooi92@gmail.com
Department of Computer Science
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Vincent François-Lavet
vincent.francoislavet@vu.nl
Department of Computer Science
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Abstract
Neural network architectures have a large impact in machine learning. However, in
the specific case of reinforcement learning, network architectures have remained
notably simple, as changes often lead to small gains in performance. This work
introduces a novel encoder architecture for pixel-based model-free reinforcement
learning. The Hadamax (Hadamard max-pooling) encoder achieves state-of-the-art
performance by max-pooling Hadamard products between GELU-activated parallel
hidden layers. Based on the recent PQN algorithm, the Hadamax encoder achieves
state-of-the-art model-free performance in the Atari-57 benchmark. Specifically,
without applying any algorithmic hyperparameter modifications, Hadamax-PQN
achieves an 80% performance gain over vanilla PQN and significantly surpasses
Rainbow-DQN. For reproducibility, the full code is available on GitHub.

Introduction

Ever since reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms [53] surpassed human players on the Atari-57 benchmark [6, 37,
38], progress has been driven mainly
by various algorithmic innovations [15,
50].
Compared with the field of supervised
learning (SL), the deep learning components of RL have remained relatively
simple, usually consisting of a few
convolutional layers (for image-based
tasks) followed by fully connected layers [38, 27]. So far, the most common
encoder modification in image-based
RL tasks has been the integration of
a ResNet encoder [13], inspired by its
wide use in supervised learning architec∗

Runtime (GPU hours)

1

64

8

Rainbow
DQN

DDQN

C51

Hadamax-PQN

PQN (Resnet-15)
PQN

1
1

2

3

Median Human-Normalized Score

Figure 1: Performance versus GPU hours in the full Atari57 domain at 200M environment frames. The application
of our Hadamard max-pooling encoder on PQN yields
significant performance improvements over a current stateof-the-art model-free method, Rainbow, while remaining
more than an order of magnitude faster.

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

