On the Relation between Rectified Flows and Optimal
Transport

Johannes Hertrich
Université Paris Dauphine - PSL
& Inria Mokaplan, Paris
johannes.hertrich@dauphine.psl.eu

Antonin Chambolle
Université Paris Dauphine - PSL
& Inria Mokaplan, Paris
chambolle@ceremade.dauphine.fr

Julie Delon
ENS Paris
julie.delon@ens.fr

Abstract
This paper investigates the connections between rectified flows, flow matching,
and optimal transport. Flow matching is a recent approach to learning generative
models by estimating velocity fields that guide transformations from a source to a
target distribution. Rectified flow matching aims to straighten the learned transport
paths, yielding more direct flows between distributions. Our first contribution
is a set of invariance properties of rectified flows and explicit velocity fields. In
addition, we also provide explicit constructions and analysis in the Gaussian (not
necessarily independent) and Gaussian mixture settings and study the relation to
optimal transport. Our second contribution addresses recent claims suggesting that
rectified flows, when constrained such that the learned velocity field is a gradient,
can yield (asymptotically) solutions to optimal transport problems. We study
the existence of solutions for this problem and demonstrate that they only relate
to optimal transport under assumptions that are significantly stronger than those
previously acknowledged. In particular, we present several counterexamples that
invalidate earlier equivalence results in the literature, and we argue that enforcing
a gradient constraint on rectified flows is, in general, not a reliable method for
computing optimal transport maps.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport is the problem of transporting a probability distribution µ0 to another distribution
µ1 such that a given cost function has minimal expected value. More precisely, we aim to find a
coupling (X0 , X1 ) of random variables X0 ∼ µ0 and X1 ∼ µ1 such that E[c(X0 , X1 )] is minimal,
where c is a cost function, most commonly c(x, y) = ∥x−y∥ (1-Wasserstein or earth-mover distance)
or c(x, y) = ∥x − y∥2 (squared 2-Wasserstein distance). The problem was originally formulated
by Monge [39] in terms of optimal transport maps and later generalized by Kantorovich [25] using
more general couplings. We refer to [42, 45, 51] for an overview. Nowadays, it is heavily used in
machine learning for clustering [23, 38], domain adaptation [12], generative modeling [5, 27] or
model selection [6], to cite just a few references.
Computing solutions to the optimal transport problem can be very challenging in practice. In the
discrete case, it amounts to solving a linear program and can be efficiently accelerated using entropic
regularization and the Sinkhorn algorithm [13, 47]. A dynamic formulation of optimal transport,
introduced by Benamou and Brenier [7], characterizes optimal solutions as those induced by a velocity
field vt of minimal L2 -norm (for the 2-Wasserstein distance) among fields transporting µ0 to µ1 via
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

