Nested Learning: The Illusion of Deep Learning
Architectures
Ali Behrouz
Google Research
USA
alibehrouz@google.com

Meisam Razaviyayn
Google Research
USA
razaviyayn@google.com

Peiling Zhong
Google Research
USA
peilinz@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
USA
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Over the last decades, developing more powerful neural architectures and simultaneously designing optimization algorithms to effectively train them have been
the core of research efforts to enhance the capability of machine learning models.
Despite the recent progresses, particularly in developing Language Models (LMs),
there are fundamental challenges and unanswered questions about how such models
can continually learn/memorize, self-improved, and find “effective solutions,”. In
this paper, we present a new learning paradigm, called Nested Learning (NL), that
coherently represents a model with a set of nested, multi-level, and/or parallel
optimization problems, each of which with its own “context flow”. NL reveals
that existing deep learning methods learns from data through compressing their
own context flow, and explain how in-context learning emerges in large models.
NL suggests a path (a new dimension to deep learning) to design more expressive
learning algorithms with more “levels”, resulting in higher-order in-context learning abilities. In addition to its neuroscientifically plausible and mathematically
white-box nature, we advocate for its importance by presenting three core contributions: (1) Deep Optimizers: Based on NL, we show that well-known gradient-based
optimizers (e.g., Adam, SGD with Momentum, etc.) are in fact associative memory
modules that aim to compress the gradients with gradient descent. Building on this
insight, we present a set of more expressive optimizers with deep memory and/or
more powerful learning rules; (2) Self-Modifying Titans: Taking advantage of NL’s
insights on learning algorithms, we present a novel sequence model that learns
how to modify itself by learning its own update algorithm; and (3) Continuum
Memory System: We present a new formulation for memory system that generalizes the traditional viewpoint of “long-term/short-term memory”. Combining our
self-modifying sequence model with the continuum memory system, we present a
learning module, called H OPE, showing promising results in language modeling,
continual learning, and long-context reasoning tasks.

1

Introduction

This version of the paper has been extensively summarized to fit the page limit of NeurIPS camera
ready, and some materials, experiments, better baselines, discussions, and methods are in the full
version, which might make some parts of this version hard to follow or cause inconsistencies. To
avoid such cases, please read our arXiv version [1].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

