Toward Artificial Palpation: Representation Learning
of Touch on Soft Bodies
Zohar Rimon∗

Elisei Shafer

Tal Tepper

Efrat Shimron

Aviv Tamar

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
Palpation, the use of touch in medical examination, is almost exclusively performed
by humans. We investigate a proof of concept for an artificial palpation method
based on self-supervised learning. Our key idea is that an encoder-decoder framework can learn a representation from a sequence of tactile measurements that
contains all the relevant information about the palpated object. We conjecture that
such a representation can be used for downstream tasks such as tactile imaging and
change detection. With enough training data, it should capture intricate patterns in
the tactile measurements that go beyond a simple map of forces – the current state
of the art. To validate our approach, we both develop a simulation environment and
collect a real-world dataset of soft objects and corresponding ground truth images
obtained by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). We collect palpation sequences
using a robot equipped with a tactile sensor, and train a model that predicts sensory
readings at different positions on the object. We investigate the representation
learned in this process, and demonstrate its use in imaging and change detection.

1

Introduction

Palpation, the use of touch in medical examination, is a centuries-old practice that is still important
today. In woman’s breast cancer – a case that motivates our work, a large fraction of cases (over
40% in the US, per Roth et al. 2011) are discovered by palpation, either via self-examination or by a
physician, although screening tests based on mammography (X-ray) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) are designed to detect tumors that are not yet palpable. The recommendations of the American
Cancer Society [2023] for women to be familiar with how their breasts normally feel and report any
changes promptly indicate that tactile information is still relevant for early detection.
Artificial palpation has the potential to better exploit tactile information by detecting patient-specific
temporal changes that physicians typically cannot keep track of, and by improving palpation precision
beyond what untrained patients can achieve. Tactile imaging methods [Sarvazyan et al., 2012]
typically involve pressing a force sensor array against soft tissue to generate a force map, which can
then be analyzed either visually or via computer vision algorithms. In contrast, elastography [Sarvazyan et al., 2011] infers the elastic properties and stiffness of soft tissue by measuring variations
in ultrasound (US) or magnetic resonance (MR) signals in response to applied forces. Additionally,
several studies have investigated the use of tactile sensors for classifying tissue based on stiffness [Jia
et al., 2013, Nichols and Okamura, 2015, Di et al., 2024].
Aimed at improving tactile imaging and detection accuracy, we propose to go beyond direct stiffness
estimation and view palpation as an inference process of mechanical structures in a soft body, given
a sequence of partial, noisy, tactile force measurements. Indeed, a physician performing a breast
examination tries to infer the existence of lumps, cysts, and other anatomical structures from touch.
The medical literature that characterizes, for example, benign masses as ‘smooth, soft to firm, and
∗
Correspondence to zohar.rimon@campus.technion.ac.il.
github.com/zoharri/ArtificialPalpation

Code and data are available at

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

