Encoder-Decoder Diffusion Language Models for
Efficient Training and Inference

Marianne Arriola∗

Yair Schiff∗

Hao Phung

Aaron Gokaslan

Volodymyr Kuleshov

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
{marriola,yairschiff,hao}@cs.cornell.edu, {akg87,kuleshov}@cornell.edu
∗
Equal contribution; corresponding authors

Abstract
Discrete diffusion models enable parallel token sampling for faster inference than
autoregressive approaches. However, prior diffusion models use a decoder-only
architecture, which requires sampling algorithms that invoke the full network at
every denoising step and incur high computational cost. Our key insight is that
discrete diffusion models perform two types of computation: 1) representing clean
tokens and 2) denoising corrupted tokens, which enables us to use separate modules
for each task. We propose an encoder-decoder architecture to accelerate discrete
diffusion inference, which relies on an encoder to represent clean tokens and a
lightweight decoder to iteratively refine a noised sequence. We also show that
this architecture enables faster training of block diffusion models, which partition
sequences into blocks for better quality and are commonly used in diffusion language model inference. We introduce a framework for Efficient Encoder-Decoder
Diffusion (E2D2), consisting of an architecture with specialized training and sampling algorithms, and we show that E2D2 achieves superior trade-offs between
generation quality and inference throughput on summarization, translation, and
mathematical reasoning tasks. We provide the code1 , model weights, and blog post
on the project page: https://m-arriola.com/e2d2.

1

Introduction

Discrete diffusion models [4], originally proposed as an extension of Gaussian diffusion [28, 59],
have steadily improved in quality on tasks, such as language modeling [24, 40, 55], music generation
[62], and biological sequence design [56, 68]. Recent successes include diffusion models at the 7-8B
parameter scale, which outperform or match comparably sized autoregressive (AR) models [46, 78].
To generate samples, diffusion models iteratively refine a sequence consisting of both clean and
corrupted tokens. We observe that this process consists of: 1) producing useful representations of
clean tokens and 2) using these representations as context for denoising corrupted tokens. However,
prior diffusion language models jointly perform both tasks within the same decoder-only architecture.
As a result, these models must invoke the full network at every denoising step, incurring high
computational cost.
In this work, we propose an encoder-decoder transformer architecture to separate the computation
for representing clean tokens and denoising corrupted tokens. In particular, we use an encoder to
represent clean tokens and a lightweight decoder to iteratively refine a noised sequence conditioned
on the encoder’s representation. This enables faster inference, as we call the lightweight decoder
multiple times to iteratively denoise tokens and invoke the encoder only periodically to update its
1

Code: https://github.com/kuleshov-group/e2d2

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

