DeepVideo-R1: Video Reinforcement Fine-Tuning
via Difficulty-aware Regressive GRPO

Jinyoung Park1∗ Jeehye Na1∗ Jinyoung Kim2 Hyunwoo J. Kim1†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 2 Korea University
{jinyoung.park, jeehyena, hyunwoojkim}@kaist.ac.kr
k012100@korea.ac.kr
https://github.com/mlvlab/DeepVideoR1

1

Abstract
Recent works have demonstrated the effectiveness of reinforcement learning (RL)based post-training for enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language
models (LLMs). In particular, Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) has
shown impressive success using a PPO-style reinforcement learning algorithm
with group-normalized rewards. However, the effectiveness of GRPO in Video
Large Language Models (VideoLLMs) remains underexplored. In this paper, we
explore GRPO and identify two issues that hinder effective learning: (1) reliance on
safeguards, and (2) vanishing advantage. To mitigate these challenges, we propose
DeepVideo-R1, a video large language model trained with Reg-GRPO (Regressive
GRPO) and difficulty-aware data augmentation. Reg-GRPO reformulates the
GRPO loss function as a regression task that directly predicts the advantage in
GRPO, eliminating the need for safeguards such as clipping and min operations.
This directly aligns the model with the advantages, providing guidance to prefer
better outputs. The difficulty-aware data augmentation strategy augments input
prompts/videos to target solvable difficulty levels, enabling diverse reward signals.
Our experimental results show that our approach significantly improves video
reasoning performance across multiple benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–4] have demonstrated remarkable abilities in understanding,
reasoning, and generating text across diverse domains. Their success stems from next-token prediction
over vast corpora, which enables the emergence of complex reasoning patterns and world knowledge.
Building on this progress, recent research has extended LLMs into the video domain, giving rise to
Video Large Language Models (VideoLLMs) [5–9]. These models aim to unify video understanding
and language generation, enabling capabilities such as temporal event reasoning, video question
answering, and video-to-text summarization.
Despite their rapid evolution, current VideoLLMs still struggle with complex reasoning tasks, which
require temporal, spatial, and semantic understanding over video sequences. Since standard supervised fine-tuning fits instruction data rather than reasoning processes, it is limited in improving
reasoning capabilities. To address this, reinforcement learning (RL)-based post-training [10, 11] has
emerged as a compelling paradigm. RL provides a mechanism to optimize models beyond likelihood objectives, aligning them with reward signals that encode human preference or task-specific
success. Recently, Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [12, 13] has shown promise by using
group-based advantages and relative preference signals to enhance reasoning capabilities.
∗
†

Work was done at Korea University.
corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

