Reasoning as an Adaptive Defense for Safety

Taeyoun Kim

Fahim Tajwar

Aditi Raghunathan

Aviral Kumar

Carnegie Mellon University
{taeyoun3, ftajwar, aditirag, aviralku}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Reasoning methods that adaptively allocate test-time compute have advanced LLM
performance on easy to verify domains such as math and code. In this work, we
study how to utilize this approach to train models that exhibit a degree of robustness
to safety vulnerabilities, and show that doing so can provide benefits. We build
a recipe called TARS (Training Adaptive Reasoners for Safety), a reinforcement
learning (RL) approach that trains models to reason about safety using chainof-thought traces and a reward signal that balances safety with task completion.
To build TARS, we identify three critical design choices: (1) a “lightweight”
warmstart SFT stage, (2) a mix of harmful, harmless, and ambiguous prompts to
prevent shortcut behaviors such as too many refusals, and (3) a reward function
to prevent degeneration of reasoning capabilities during training. Models trained
with TARS exhibit adaptive behaviors by spending more compute on ambiguous
queries, leading to better safety-refusal trade-offs. They also internally learn to
better distinguish between safe and unsafe prompts and attain greater robustness
to both white-box (e.g., GCG) and black-box attacks (e.g., PAIR). Overall, our
work provides an effective, open recipe1 for training LLMs against jailbreaks and
harmful requests by reasoning per prompt.

1

Introduction

Training large language models (LLMs) to utilize more test-time compute for reasoning [15, 12, 53]
has led to substantial advances in problem solving capabilities [39, 3, 51, 20, 62]. The hallmark of
reasoning models is that they spend additional compute to solve problems, and in many cases, are able
to adaptively decide on the required total compute depending on the anticipated complexity of the
prompt. This provides a seemingly natural paradigm to also defend against safety vulnerabilities, with
more test-time compute potentially enabling the capability to better handle complex or ambiguously
harmless requests without refusals. How can we (if at all) realize such a training paradigm?
While some proprietary concurrent work has focused on utilizing reasoning for safety through
explicit guidelines and training via reinforcement learning (RL) [11], the details of this procedure
remain undisclosed. Researchers have also focused on utilizing supervised fine-tuning (SFT) without
guidelines [72, 50, 71], but there is little systematic study on recipes or best practices for training
LLMs to reason about safety. Some key questions include: How should we design the training data?
Should we use SFT or RL, or even both? Does RL induce shortcuts such as refusing to answer every
prompt, and if so, how do we mitigate them? In this paper, we aim to answer these questions by
building an RL framework for training models to adaptively reason about safety through similar
training processes of reasoning models such as DeepSeek-R1 [12] and Kimi-1.5 [53]. In the process,
we identify three core design choices derived from first principles and illustrate that training LLMs to
use test-time compute result in better safety-refusal trade-offs and handling of complex prompts.
The core ingredient of our recipe is post-training via reinforcement learning (RL) with long chain-ofthought (CoT) [61] on specific data mixtures. However, utilizing RL to train for long-form safety
1

We release our model and code at: https://training-adaptive-reasoners-safety.github.io

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

