Multi-Agent Learning under Uncertainty:
Recurrence vs. Concentration
Kyriakos Lotidis
Stanford University
klotidis@stanford.edu

Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
bambos@stanford.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP
LIG 38000 Grenoble, France
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr
Jose Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we examine the convergence landscape of multi-agent learning under
uncertainty. Specifically, we analyze two stochastic models of regularized learning
in continuous games—one in continuous and one in discrete time—with the aim
of characterizing the long-run behavior of the induced sequence of play. In stark
contrast to deterministic, full-information models of learning (or models with a
vanishing learning rate), we show that the resulting dynamics do not converge in
general. In lieu of this, we ask instead which actions are played more often in
the long run, and by how much. We show that, in strongly monotone games, the
dynamics of regularized learning may wander away from equilibrium infinitely
often, but they always return to its vicinity in finite time (which we estimate),
and their long-run distribution is sharply concentrated around a neighborhood
thereof. We quantify the degree of this concentration, and we show that these
favorable properties may all break down if the underlying game is not strongly
monotone—underscoring in this way the limits of regularized learning in the
presence of persistent randomness and uncertainty.

1

Introduction

In its most abstract form, the standard model for online learning in games unfolds as follows: (i ) at
each stage of the process, every participating agent selects an action; (ii ) the agents receive a reward
determined by their chosen actions and their individual payoff functions; (iii) the agents update their
actions, and the process repeats. In this general context, the agents have to contend with various—and
varying—degrees of uncertainty: (a) uncertainty about the game, the strategic interests of other
players, and/or who else is involved in the game; (b) uncertainty about the outcomes of their actions,
and which update directions may lead to better outcomes; and (c) uncertainty stemming from the
environment, manifesting as random shocks to the players’ payoffs and / or other disturbances. In this
regard, uncertainty could be either endogenous or exogenous; but, in either case, it leads to players
having to take decisions with very limited information at their disposal.
Our goal in this paper is to quantify the impact of uncertainty on multi-agent learning—and, more
precisely, to understand the differences that arise in the players’ long-run behavior when such
uncertainty is present versus when it is not. A natural framework for exploring this question is within
the greater setting of no-regret learning and, in particular, the family of “follow-the-regularizedleader” (FTRL) algorithms and dynamics [38, 64, 65]. This class contains several mainstay learning
methods—like online gradient descent (or, in our case, ascent) [74], the exponential / multiplicative
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

