Risk-Averse Total-Reward Reinforcement Learning

Jia Lin Hau
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
jialin.hau@unh.edu

Xihong Su
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
xihong.su@unh.edu
Gersi Doko
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
gersi.doko@unh.edu

Kishan Panaganti
Department of Computing & Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
(now at Tencent AI Lab, Seattle, WA)
kpb.research@gmail.com

Marek Petrik
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
marek.petrik@unh.edu

Abstract
Risk-averse total-reward Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) offer a promising
framework for modeling and solving undiscounted infinite-horizon objectives.
Existing model-based algorithms for risk measures like the entropic risk measure
(ERM) and entropic value-at-risk (EVaR) are effective in small problems, but
require full access to transition probabilities. We propose a Q-learning algorithm to
compute the optimal stationary policy for total-reward ERM and EVaR objectives
with strong convergence and performance guarantees. The algorithm and its
optimality are made possible by ERM’s dynamic consistency and elicitability. Our
numerical results on tabular domains demonstrate quick and reliable convergence
of the proposed Q-learning algorithm to the optimal risk-averse value function.

1

Introduction

Risk-averse reinforcement learning (RL) is an essential framework for practical and high-stakes
applications, such as self-driving, robotic surgery, healthcare, and finance [6, 12, 16, 17, 19, 22,
25, 26, 29, 30, 34, 41, 42, 45, 47]. A risk-averse policy prefers actions with more certainty even
if it means a lower expected return [30, 38]. The goal of risk-averse RL is to compute risk-averse
policies. To this end, risk-averse RL specifies the objective using monetary risk measures, such
as value-at-risk (VaR), conditional value-at-risk (CVaR), entropic risk measure (ERM), or entropic
value-at-risk (EVaR). These risk measures penalize the variability of returns interpretably and yield
policies with stronger guarantees on the probability of catastrophic losses [14].
A major challenge in deriving practical RL algorithms is that the model of the environment is often
unknown. This challenge is even more salient in risk-averse RL because computing the risk of random
return involves evaluating the full distribution of the return rather than just its expectation [17, 40].
Traditional definitions of risk measures assume a known discounted [6, 18, 19, 22, 25, 26, 29] or
transient [44] MDP model and use learning to approximate a global value or policy function [32].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

