The Complexity of Symmetric Equilibria in Min-Max
Optimization and Team Zero-Sum Games∗
Ioannis Anagnostides1 , Ioannis Panageas2 , Tuomas Sandholm1,3 , and Jingming Yan2
1
Carnegie Mellon University
University of California, Irvine
3
Strategy Robot, Inc.
3
Strategic Machine, Inc.
3
Optimized Markets, Inc.
{ianagnos,sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu, {ipanagea,jingmy1}@uci.edu
2

Abstract
We consider the problem of computing stationary points in min-max optimization, with a focus on the special case of Nash equilibria in (two-)team zero-sum
games. We first show that computing ϵ-Nash equilibria in 3-player adversarial
team games—wherein a team of 2 players competes against a single adversary—
is CLS-complete, resolving the complexity of Nash equilibria in such settings.
Our proof proceeds by reducing from symmetric ϵ-Nash equilibria in symmetric,
identical-payoff, two-player games, by suitably leveraging the adversarial player so
as to enforce symmetry—without disturbing the structure of the game. In particular,
the class of instances we construct comprises solely polymatrix games, thereby
also settling a question left open by Hollender, Maystre, and Nagarajan (2024).
Moreover, we establish that computing symmetric (first-order) equilibria in symmetric min-max optimization is PPAD-complete, even for quadratic functions.
Building on this reduction, we show that computing symmetric ϵ-Nash equilibria
in symmetric, 6-player (3 vs. 3) team zero-sum games is also PPAD-complete,
even for ϵ = poly(1/n). As a corollary, this precludes the existence of symmetric
dynamics—which includes many of the algorithms considered in the literature—
converging to stationary points. Finally, we prove that computing a non-symmetric
poly(1/n)-equilibrium in symmetric min-max optimization is FNP-hard.

1

Introduction

We consider computing local equilibria in constrained min-max optimization problems of the form
min max f (x, y),

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where X ⊆ Rdx and Y ⊆ Rdy are convex and compact constraint sets, and f : X ×Y → R is a smooth
objective function. Tracing all the way back to Von Neumann’s celebrated minimax theorem [von
Neumann, 1928] and the inception of game theory, such problems are attracting renewed interest in
recent years propelled by a variety of modern machine learning applications, such as generative modeling [Goodfellow et al., 2014], reinforcement learning [Daskalakis et al., 2020, Bai and Jin, 2020, Wei
et al., 2021], and adversarial robustness [Madry et al., 2018, Cohen et al., 2019, Bai et al., 2021, Carlini et al., 2019]. Another prominent class of problems encompassed by (1) concerns computing Nash
equilibria in (two-)team zero-sum games [Zhang et al., 2023, 2021, Basilico et al., 2017, von Stengel
∗

The authors are ordered alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

