Generalization or Hallucination?
Understanding Out-of-Context Reasoning in
Transformers
Yixiao Huang∗
UC Berkeley
yixiaoh@berkeley.edu

Hanlin Zhu∗
UC Berkeley
hanlinzhu@berkeley.edu

Tianyu Guo∗
UC Berkeley
tianyu_guo@berkeley.edu

Jiantao Jiao
UC Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Somayeh Sojoudi
UC Berkeley
sojoudi@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Stuart Russell
UC Berkeley
russell@cs.berkeley.edu

Song Mei
UC Berkeley
songmei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) can acquire new knowledge through fine-tuning,
but this process exhibits a puzzling duality: models can generalize remarkably from
new facts, yet are also prone to hallucinating incorrect information. However, the
reasons for this phenomenon remain poorly understood. In this work, we argue that
both behaviors stem from a single mechanism known as out-of-context reasoning
(OCR): the ability to deduce implications by associating concepts, even those
without a causal link. Our experiments across five prominent LLMs confirm that
OCR indeed drives both generalization and hallucination, depending on whether
the associated concepts are causally related. To build a rigorous theoretical understanding of this phenomenon, we then formalize OCR as a synthetic factual recall
task. We empirically show that a one-layer single-head attention-only transformer
with factorized output and value matrices can learn to solve this task, while a model
with combined weights cannot, highlighting the crucial role of matrix factorization.
Our theoretical analysis shows that the OCR capability can be attributed to the
implicit bias of gradient descent, which favors solutions that minimize the nuclear
norm of the combined output-value matrix. This structure explains why the model
learns to associate facts and implications with high sample efficiency, regardless of
whether the correlation is causal or merely spurious. Ultimately, our work provides
a theoretical foundation for understanding the OCR phenomenon, offering a new
lens for analyzing and mitigating undesirable behaviors from knowledge injection.

1

Introduction

Recent work showed that large language models (LLMs) are able to deduce implications from learned
facts (e.g., a model that learned a new fact that “Alice lives in Paris” during fine-tuning can generalize
to deduce “Alice speaks French” during test, which is an implication of the newly-injected fact
assuming “people living in Paris speak French”), showing strong generalization capabilities [Feng
∗

Equal contributions.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

