On the Edge of Memorization in Diffusion Models

Sam Buchanan∗
TTIC

Druv Pai∗
UC Berkeley

Yi Ma
UC Berkeley, HKU

Valentin De Bortoli
Google DeepMind

Abstract
When do diffusion models reproduce their training data, and when are they able to
generate samples beyond it? A practically relevant theoretical understanding of
this interplay between memorization and generalization may significantly impact
real-world deployments of diffusion models with respect to issues such as copyright
infringement and data privacy. In this work, to disentangle the different factors that
influence memorization and generalization in practical diffusion models, we introduce a scientific and mathematical “laboratory” for investigating these phenomena
in diffusion models trained on fully synthetic or natural image-like structured
data. Within this setting, we hypothesize that the memorization or generalization
behavior of an underparameterized trained model is determined by the difference in
training loss between an associated memorizing model and a generalizing model.
To probe this hypothesis, we theoretically characterize a crossover point wherein
the weighted training loss of a fully generalizing model becomes greater than
that of an underparameterized memorizing model at a critical value of model (under)parameterization. We then demonstrate via carefully-designed experiments that
the location of this crossover predicts a phase transition in diffusion models trained
via gradient descent, validating our hypothesis. Ultimately, our theory enables us
to analytically predict the model size at which memorization becomes predominant.
Our work provides an analytically tractable and practically meaningful setting
for future theoretical and empirical investigations. Code for our experiments is
available at https://github.com/DruvPai/diffusion_mem_gen.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models are one of the premier methodologies for deep generative modeling. They exhibit
great capabilities across modalities and are state-of-the-art at synthesizing images [Saharia et al.,
2022, Podell et al., 2023], videos [Ho et al., 2022, Blattmann et al., 2023], or proteins [Watson et al.,
2023]. Despite significant success when used in practice, in the context of large-scale commercial
deployment [Ramesh et al., 2022] diffusion models are often plagued with data privacy and copyright
infringement issues [Ghalebikesabi et al., 2023, Carlini et al., 2023, Nasr et al., 2023, Cui et al., 2023,
Wang et al., 2024a, Vyas et al., 2023, Franceschelli and Musolesi, 2022], which may have significant
long-term consequences. These issues stem from the possibility and (sometimes) propensity for
diffusion models to memorize their training data. Namely, in some cases, trained diffusion models
generate outputs which are verbatim copies of the training samples [Zhang et al., 2023, Kadkhodaie
et al., 2023]. Yet, in many other cases, these models can generate outputs which appear natural but
are not present in the training set; this behavior is often described as creativity [Kamb and Ganguli,
2024] or generalization [Zhang et al., 2023, Kadkhodaie et al., 2023, Niedoba et al., 2024].
In general, memorization and generalization are difficult to disambiguate. There has been significant
empirical work focusing on building heuristic approaches to detect and study memorization in largescale diffusion models [Zhang et al., 2023, Gu et al., 2023, Yoon et al., 2023, Carlini et al., 2023,
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

