Learning Orthogonal Multi-Index Models: A
Fine-Grained Information Exponent Analysis

Yunwei Ren
Princeton University
yunwei.ren@princeton.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Abstract
The information exponent ([BAGJ21]) and its extensions — which are equivalent
to the lowest degree in the Hermite expansion of the link function (after a potential
label transform) for Gaussian single-index models — have played an important role
in predicting the sample complexity of online stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in
various learning tasks. In this work, we demonstrate that, for multi-index models,
focusing solely on the lowest degree can miss key structural details of the model
and result in suboptimal rates.
Specifically, we consider the task of learning target functions of form f∗ (x) =
PP
∗
∗ P
k=1 ϕ(vk · x), where P ≪ d, the ground-truth directions {vk }k=1 are orthonormal, and the information exponent of ϕ is L. Based on the theory of information
exponent, when L = 2, only the relevant subspace (not the exact directions) can
be recovered due to the rotational invariance of the second-order terms, and when
L > 2, recovering the directions using online SGD require Õ(P dL−1 ) samples. In
this work, we show that by considering both second- and higher-order terms, we
can first learn the relevant space using the second-order terms, and then the exact
directions using the higher-order terms, and the overall sample and complexity of
online SGD is Õ(dP L−1 ).

1

Introduction

In many learning problems, the target function exhibits or is assumed to exhibit a low-dimensional
structure. A classical model of this type is the multi-index model, where the target function depends
only on a P -dimensional subspace of the ambient space Rd , with P typically much smaller than d.
When the relevant dimension P = 1, the model is known as the single-index model, which dates
back to at least [Ich93]. Both single- and multi-index models have been widely studied, especially in
the context of neural network and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in recent years, sometimes under
the name “feature learning” [BAGJ21, BBSS22, DLS22, AAM22, AAM23, DKPS24, DPVLB24,
OSSW24, DTA+ 24].
In [BAGJ21], the authors show that for single-index models, the behavior of online SGD can be
split into two phases: an initial “searching” phase, where most of the samples are used to boost the
correlation with the relevant (one-dimensional) subspace to a constant, and a subsequent “descending”
phase, where the correlation further increases to 1. They introduce the concept of the information
exponent (IE), defined as the index of the first nonzero coefficient in the Taylor expansion of the
population loss around 0, which also corresponds to the lowest degree in the Hermite expansion of the
link function in Gaussian single-index models. They prove that the sample complexity of online SGD
is Õ(d(IE−1)∨1 ). After that, various lower and upper bounds have been established for single-index
models in [BBSS22, DNGL23, DPVLB24]. Similar results for certain multi-index models have also
been derived in [AAM22, AAM23, BBPV23, OSSW24]. In all cases, the sample complexity of
online SGD scales with dIE−1 when IE ≥ 3.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

