Disentangling Hyperedges through the Lens of
Category Theory
Yoonho Lee
KAIST

Junseok Lee
KAIST

Sangwoo Seo
KAIST

sml0399benbm@kaist.ac.kr

junseoklee@kaist.ac.kr

sangwooseo@kaist.ac.kr

Sungwon Kim
KAIST

Yeongmin Kim
KAIST

Chanyoung Park˚
KAIST

swkim@kaist.ac.kr

cytotoxicity8@kaist.ac.kr

cy.park@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite the promising results of disentangled representation learning in discovering
latent patterns in graph-structured data, few studies have explored disentanglement for hypergraph-structured data. Integrating hyperedge disentanglement into
hypergraph neural networks enables models to leverage hidden hyperedge semantics, such as unannotated relations between nodes, that are associated with labels.
This paper presents an analysis of hyperedge disentanglement from a categorytheoretical perspective and proposes a novel criterion for disentanglement derived
from the naturality condition. Our proof-of-concept model experimentally showed
the potential of the proposed criterion by successfully capturing functional relations
of genes (nodes) in genetic pathways (hyperedges). Our implementation is available
at https://github.com/Yoonho-Lee-AI4Science/Natural-HNN.

1

Introduction

Disentangled representation learning, which aims to identify underlying factors behind observed data,
has been applied to graph neural networks (GNNs) to capture hidden semantics or mechanisms in
graph-structured data. In molecular graphs, for example, molecular properties are determined by
underlying graph-level mechanisms, where specific substructures play distinct roles in shaping these
properties. To reflect such graph-level mechanisms, graph-level disentanglement can be designed
to capture multiple substructures, each corresponding to different molecular properties. As another
example, in opinion dynamics [54, 29, 28], which studies how individuals’ opinions evolve through
interactions within a social network, an individual’s opinion can change after engaging in discussions
with neighbors. These discussions act as edge-level mechanisms that influence opinion updates. To
reflect edge-level mechanisms, edge-level disentanglement can be designed to capture multiple topics
underlying discussions, each affecting different aspects of individual opinions. Depending on the
type of mechanism, several types of disentanglement, including node-level [47], edge-level [85], and
graph-structure-level [77] approaches, have been proposed.
A fundamental challenge lies in designing a criterion for disentanglement, which determines how
relevant each factor is to each mechanism (e.g., each node, edge, or subgraph). Since the representation reflects each factor in proportion to its relevance determined by the criterion, the criterion
should be designed in accordance with the type of disentanglement to ensure that the intended type
of mechanism is properly captured in the representation. Thus, many disentanglement models strive
to identify fundamental characteristics associated with the type of disentanglement and incorporate
them into the design of the criterion.
˚

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

