PaTH Attention: Position Encoding via
Accumulating Householder Transformations

Songlin Yang1 Yikang Shen2 Kaiyue Wen3 Shawn Tan2
Mayank Mishra2 Liliang Ren4 Rameswar Panda2 Yoon Kim1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3
Stanford University 4 Microsoft
yangsl66@mit.edu

Abstract
The attention mechanism is a core primitive in modern large language models
(LLMs) and AI more broadly. Since attention by itself is permutation-invariant,
position encoding is essential for modeling structured domains such as language.
Rotary position encoding (RoPE) has emerged as the de facto standard approach
for position encoding and is part of many modern LLMs. However, in RoPE the
key/query transformation between two elements in a sequence is only a function of
their relative position and otherwise independent of the actual input. This limits
the expressivity of RoPE-based transformers. This paper describes PaTH, a flexible data-dependent position encoding scheme based on accumulated products of
Householder(like) transformations, where each transformation is data-dependent,
i.e., a function of the input. We derive an efficient parallel algorithm for training
through exploiting a compact representation of products of Householder matrices, and implement a FlashAttention-style blockwise algorithm. Across both
targeted synthetic benchmarks and moderate-scale real-world language modeling
experiments, we find that PaTH improves upon RoPE and other recent baselines.
Finally, we show that we can convert pretrained RoPE transformers into PaTH with
continued pretraining.

1

Introduction

Attention mechanisms form the backbone of transformer architectures that power contemporary AI
systems. Attention is inherently permutation-invariant, and thus encoding positional information into
attention is important for effective sequence modeling. Since the original sinusoidal embeddings [77],
various position encoding schemes have been proposed over the years [16, 63, 28, 25, 45, 58, 72, inter
alia]; see Dufter et al. [17] for a comprehensive survey. Among these, rotary position embedding
[RoPE; 72] has emerged as the de facto standard, adopted in most recent state-of-the-art LLMs.
RoPE works by transforming the key (kj ) and query (qi ) embeddings through a rotation matrix
R whose rotation angle is a function of the difference in positions, resulting in the bilinear form
i−j
q⊤
kj for the attention logits. The rotation matrix R itself is a block-diagonal matrix composed
i R
of two-by-two rotation matrices, which enables efficient computation. However, the rotation matrix
in RoPE is data-independent and only a function of the relative position (i.e., R applied i − j times),
which limits its expressivity; indeed, recent work [7] demonstrates that RoPE-based transformers
are still computationally constrained to the TC0 complexity class, the complexity class of ordinary
transformers with absolute position embeddings [49]. As a potential consequence, RoPE-based
transformers have been empirically found to have difficulty with simple synthetic tasks that require
a form of sequential reasoning, such as flip-flop language modeling [41] and certain state-tracking
tasks [51]. Insofar as such simple sequential reasoning underlie real-world capabilities that we want
The implementation of the PaTH attention layer is also made available as part of the F LASH L INEAR ATTENTION
library [80, 79]: https://github.com/fla-org/flash-linear-attention
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

