Greedy Sampling Is Provably Efficient for RLHF

Di Wu
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
ckk8dy@virginia.edu

Chengshuai Shi
Princeton Language and Intelligence
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
cs1083@princeton.edu

Jing Yang
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
yangjing@virginia.edu

Cong Shen
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
cong@virginia.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a key technique for post-training large language models. Despite its empirical success, the
theoretical understanding of RLHF is still limited, as learning the KL-regularized
target with only preference feedback poses additional challenges compared with
canonical RL. Existing works mostly study the reward-based Bradley-Terry (BT)
preference model, and extend classical designs utilizing optimism or pessimism.
This work, instead, considers the general preference model (whose practical relevance has been observed recently) and obtains performance guarantees with major,
order-wise improvements over existing ones. Surprisingly, these results are derived
from algorithms that directly use the empirical estimates (i.e., greedy sampling),
as opposed to constructing optimistic or pessimistic estimates in previous works.
This insight has a deep root in the unique structural property of the optimal policy
class under the KL-regularized target, and we further specialize it to the BT model,
highlighting the surprising sufficiency of greedy sampling in RLHF.

1

Introduction

In recent years, a growing amount of attention has been given to Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF), an essential component in the post-training stage of large language models
(LLMs) (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023; Zhao et al.,
2023). Specifically, RLHF has been one of the key techniques powering the most widely used LLMs
(Achiam et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023). With its tremendous
empirical success, researchers have started to seek a deeper theoretical understanding of RLHF (Zhu
et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023).
Compared with canonical reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton et al., 2018), RLHF has two key
characteristics. First, rather than the absolute reward signals, the learning agent in RLHF commonly
observes preference feedback, since during LLM training, it is easier for human annotators to
compare answers than to provide absolute scores. Second, RLHF commonly considers a target with
an additional penalty term as the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the learned policy and a
reference policy. This target is often referred to as the KL-regularized RL and in the most common
single-turn scenario, KL-regularized contextual bandits (CB).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

