Bifrost-1: Bridging Multimodal LLMs and Diffusion
Models with Patch-level CLIP Latents
Han Lin1

Jaemin Cho1
1

Amir Zadeh2

UNC Chapel Hill

Chuan Li2
2

Mohit Bansal1

Lambda

Abstract
There is growing interest in integrating high-fidelity visual synthesis capabilities
into large language models (LLMs) without compromising their strong reasoning
capabilities. Existing methods that directly train LLMs or bridge LLMs and
diffusion models usually suffer from costly training since the backbone LLMs have
not seen image representations during pretraining. We present B IFROST-1, a unified
framework that bridges pretrained multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) and diffusion
models using patch-level CLIP image embeddings as latent variables, which are
natively aligned with the MLLM’s CLIP visual encoder. These patch-level image
embeddings are integrated into the diffusion model with a lightweight adaptation
of its ControlNet. To retain the original multimodal reasoning capabilities of
MLLMs, we equip the MLLM with a visual generation branch initialized from the
original MLLM parameters when predicting the patch-level image embeddings. By
seamlessly integrating pretrained MLLMs and diffusion models with patch-level
CLIP latents, our framework enables high-fidelity controllable image generation
with significant training efficiency. Our experiments demonstrate that B IFROST-1
achieves comparable or better performance than previous methods in terms of visual
fidelity and multimodal understanding, with substantially lower compute during
training. We also provide comprehensive ablation studies showing the effectiveness
of our design choices. Project page: https://bifrost-1.github.io.

1

Introduction

Humans can naturally process and generate multimodal information such as language, vision, and
sound. This ability stems from our integrated cognitive system capable of reasoning, organization, and
expression. Inspired by this, building a unified AI system that supports both multimodal understanding
and generation has become an active area of research [48, 10, 80, 62, 73, 68]. On the one hand, large
language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive results across diverse tasks, including natural
language understanding [17, 40, 6, 54], mathematical reasoning [33, 58], and code generation [9, 46],
demonstrating strong planning and reasoning abilities [49, 26]. On the other hand, recent advances
in image and video generation models have enabled high-fidelity visual synthesis [50, 74, 19, 47].
Therefore, effectively and efficiently integrating visual generation capabilities into LLMs, while
preserving their reasoning capabilities, has become an active research direction in the pursuit of
unified AI systems that bridges language understanding and visual synthesis.
Existing LLM-based image generation methods fall into two main paradigms. First, singlearchitecture approaches (see Fig. 1 (a)) employ an LLM/MLLM that takes concatenated image
and text tokens as inputs. The model is then finetuned, either by updating all LLM parameters [12, 67, 42, 41, 62, 71, 10, 68] or via an auxiliary visual generation branch [44, 37, 59], to
generate images directly. While this offers unified reasoning and native image synthesis, it typically
incurs very expensive computational costs to achieve high-fidelity results. Moreover, without careful
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

