Quantifying Cross-Modality Memorization in
Vision-Language Models

Yuxin Wen1∗, Yangsibo Huang2 , Tom Goldstein1
Ravi Kumar2 , Badih Ghazi2 , Chiyuan Zhang2
1
University of Maryland, College Park
2
Google

Abstract
Understanding what and how neural networks memorize during training is crucial,
both from the perspective of unintentional memorization of potentially sensitive
information and from the standpoint of effective knowledge acquisition for realworld, knowledge-intensive tasks. While previous studies primarily investigate
memorization within a single modality, such as text memorization in large language
models or image memorization in diffusion models, unified multimodal models are
becoming increasingly prevalent in practical applications. In this work, we focus on
the unique characteristics of cross-modality memorization and conduct a systematic
study centered on vision-language models. To facilitate controlled experiments,
we first introduce a synthetic persona dataset comprising diverse synthetic person
images and textual descriptions. We quantify factual knowledge memorization and
cross-modal transferability by training models on a single modality and evaluating
their performance in the other. Our results reveal that facts learned in one modality
transfer to the other, but a significant gap exists between recalling information in
the “source” and “target” modalities. Furthermore, we observe that this gap exists
across various scenarios, including more capable models, machine unlearning, and
the multi-hop case. At the end, we propose a baseline method to mitigate this
challenge. We hope our study can inspire future research on developing more
robust multimodal learning techniques to enhance cross-modal transferability.

1

Introduction

Modern foundation models are continuing to benefit from scaling with more training data. Large
volumes of diverse, high-quality data allow the models to develop fundamental capabilities like
language understanding and reasoning, and are critically important for the models to acquire world
knowledge required in many problem-solving benchmarks [Zellers et al., 2019, Hendrycks et al.,
2021, Wei et al., 2024], and even more specialized knowledge required for solving math and coding
problems [Jain et al., 2025, Rein et al., 2023]. However, the dynamics of knowledge acquisition
from training data are extremely complex, and various unintended biases [Zheng et al., 2024] and
behaviors [Nasr et al., 2023] can arise, such as the “reverse curse” [Berglund et al., 2024] and
increased hallucination [Gekhman et al., 2024]. Moreover, previous work also shows that in addition
to learning generalizable knowledge, large language models (LLMs) can unintentionally memorize
training text verbatim, which may then be extracted through simple prompting [Carlini et al., 2019,
2021, 2022]. This raises concerns about privacy, copyright, and the trustworthiness of AI systems.
As a result, developing a better understanding of memorization in foundation models has become a
central focus of recent research.
∗

Work done during an internship at Google.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

