Causal Differentiating Concepts: Interpreting LM
Behavior via Causal Representation Learning

Navita Goyal
University of Maryland
navita@umd.edu

Hal Daumé III
University of Maryland
hal3@umd.edu

Alexandre Drouin
ServiceNow Research
Mila-Quebec AI Institute
alexandre.drouin@service.now

Dhanya Sridhar
Mila-Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
dhanya-sridhar@mila.quebec

Abstract
Language model activations entangle concepts that mediate their behavior, making
it difficult to interpret these factors, which has implications for generalizability
and robustness. We introduce an approach for disentangling these concepts without supervision. Existing methods for concept discovery often rely on external
labels, contrastive prompts, or known causal structures, which limits their scalability and biases them toward predefined, easily annotatable features. In contrast,
we propose a new unsupervised algorithm that identifies causal differentiating
concepts—interpretable latent directions in LM activations that must be changed to
elicit a different model behavior. These concepts are discovered using a constrained
contrastive learning objective, guided by the insight that eliciting a target behavior
requires only sparse changes to the underlying concepts. We formalize this notion
and show that, under a particular assumption about the sparsity of these causal
differentiating concepts, our method learns disentangled representations that align
with human-interpretable factors influencing LM decisions. We empirically show
the ability of our method to recover ground-truth causal factors in synthetic and
semi-synthetic settings. Additionally, we illustrate the utility of our method through
a case study on refusal behavior in language models. Our approach offers a scalable
and interpretable lens into the internal workings of LMs, providing a principled
foundation for interpreting language model behavior.

1

Introduction

As language models (LMs) grow more capable and complex, there is an increasing need for interpretability methods to shed light on human-interpretable factors that mediate LM behavior on a given
task. Consider the following running example:
Example 1 (Income prediction using LMs). In a set of prompts, each prompt xn consists of a
candidate’s bio followed by an instruction asking an LM to assess whether the candidate earns a
six-figure salary. Suppose p(yes|xn ) is high for bios corresponding to high-income occupations
(e.g., lawyers and doctors) and low for bios corresponding to low-income occupations (e.g., painters
and teachers). But for medium-income occupations (e.g., accountants and lecturers), the model’s
behavior varies by gender, leading to higher p(yes|xn ) for male-associated bios and lower p(yes|xn )
for female-associated ones.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

