Channel Simulation and Distributed Compression
with Ensemble Rejection Sampling

Buu Phan1 Ashish Khisti 1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
truong.phan@mail.utoronto.ca, akhisti@ece.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We study channel simulation and distributed matching, two fundamental problems with several applications to machine learning, using a recently introduced
generalization of the standard rejection sampling (RS) algorithm known as Ensemble Rejection Sampling (ERS). For channel simulation, we propose a new
coding scheme based on ERS that achieves a near-optimal coding rate. In this
process, we demonstrate that standard RS can also achieve a near-optimal coding
rate and generalize the result of Braverman and Garg (2014) to the continuous
alphabet setting. Next, as our main contribution, we present a distributed matching
lemma for ERS, which serves as the rejection sampling counterpart to the Poisson
Matching Lemma (PML) introduced by Li and Anantharam (2021). Our result
also generalizes a recent work on importance matching lemma (Phan et al, 2024)
and, to our knowledge, is the first result on distributed matching in the family
of rejection sampling schemes where the matching probability is close to PML.
We demonstrate the practical significance of our approach over prior works by
applying it to distributed compression. The effectiveness of our proposed scheme is
validated through experiments involving synthetic Gaussian sources and distributed
image compression using the MNIST dataset.

1

Introduction

One-shot channel simulation is a task of efficiently compressing a finite collection of noisy samples.
Specifically, this can be described as a two-party communication problem where the encoder obtains
a sample X ∼ PX and wants to transmit its noisy version Y ∼ PY |X to the decoder, with the
communication efficiency measured by the coding cost R (bits/sample), see Figure 1 (left). Since
the conditional distribution PY |X can be designed to target different objectives, channel simulation
is a generalized version of lossy compression. As a result, it has been widely adopted in various
machine learning tasks such as data/model compression [1, 4, 46, 19], differential privacy [37, 42],
and federated learning [23]. While much of the prior work has focused on the point-to-point
setting described above, recent research has extended channel simulation techniques to more general
distributed compression scenarios [27, 35]. These scenarios often follow a canonical setup, shown
in Figure 1 (middle, right), in which the encoder (party A) and the decoder (party B) each aim to
generate samples YA and YB , respectively, according to their own target distributions PYA and PYB ,
using a shared source of randomness W . Although their sampling goals may differ, the selection
processes are coupled through W , resulting in a non-negligible probability that both parties select
the same output. We refer to this quantity as the distributed matching probability, which can be
leveraged to reduce communication overhead in distributed coding schemes. For example, in the
Wyner-Ziv setup [45], where the decoder has access to side information unavailable to the encoder,
this framework enables the design of efficient one-shot compression protocols [35].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

