Tight High-Probability Bounds for Nonconvex
Heavy-Tailed Scenario under Weaker Assumptions

Weixin An1 , Yuanyuan Liu1∗, Fanhua Shang2∗, Han Yu3 , Junkang Liu2 , Hongying Liu4,5∗
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, China
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Medical School, Tianjin University, China
5
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
weixinanut@163.com, yyliu@xidian.edu.cn, fhshang@tju.edu.cn
han.yu@ntu.edu.sg, junkangliukk@gmail.com, hyliu2009@tju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Gradient clipping is increasingly important in centralized learning (CL) and federated learning (FL). Many works focus on its optimization properties under strong
assumptions involving Gaussian noise and standard smoothness. However, practical
machine learning tasks often only satisfy weaker conditions, such as heavy-tailed
noise and (L0 , L1 )-smoothness. To bridge this gap, we propose a high-probability
analysis for clipped Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) under these weaker assumptions. Our findings show a better convergence rate than existing ones can be
achieved, and our high-probability analysis does not rely on the bounded gradient
assumption. Moreover, we extend our analysis to FL, where a gap remains between
expected and high-probability convergence, which the naive clipped SGD can not
bridge. Thus, we design a new Federated Clipped Batched Gradient (FedCBG)
algorithm, and prove the convergence and generalization bounds with high probability for the first time. Our analysis reveals the trade-offs between the optimization
and generalization performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FedCBG
can generalize better to unseen client distributions than state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Gradient clipping has proven effective in training vision and language models [53, 56]. Many studies
1
demonstrated an optimal convergence rate of O(T − 2 ) under a finite-variance assumption, where T
is the number of iterations or communication rounds. However, recent studies [54, 14] pointed out
that assuming finite-variance noise is overly optimistic for modern machine learning tasks. Instead, it
is more appropriate to assume that the noise has a bounded p-th moment, as stated in Assumption 3
below (the first weaker assumption), which is called heavy-tailed regime. This assumption brings
significant challenges for theoretical analysis. Attempts to establish the convergence rate under this
assumption have been made. For example, Zhang et al. [54] showed that clipped SGD achieves the
state-of-the-art convergence rate in expectation. In practice, models are usually trained only once due
to the long training process. Thus, Cutkosky and Mehta [7], Nguyen et al. [35], Puchkin et al. [37]
studied high-probability convergence, offering a stronger guarantee for each individual run.
However, the above high-probability results are achievable only under standard smoothness. Works
have demonstrated that some language and vision models [53, 46] can not satisfy the standard
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

