Attention (as Discrete-Time Markov) Chains

Yotam Erel1∗ Olaf Dünkel2∗ Rishabh Dabral2
Vladislav Golyanik2 Christian Theobalt2 Amit H. Bermano1
1
Tel Aviv University 2 MPI for Informatics, SIC
https://yoterel.github.io/attention_chains/

Abstract
We introduce a new interpretation of the attention matrix as a discrete-time Markov
chain. Our interpretation sheds light on common operations involving attention
scores such as selection, summation, and averaging in a unified framework. It
further extends them by considering indirect attention, propagated through the
Markov chain, as opposed to previous studies that only model immediate effects.
Our key observation is that tokens linked to semantically similar regions form
metastable states, i.e., regions where attention tends to concentrate, while noisy
attention scores dissipate. Metastable states and their prevalence can be easily
computed through simple matrix multiplication and eigenanalysis, respectively.
Using these lightweight tools, we demonstrate state-of-the-art zero-shot segmentation. Lastly, we define TokenRank—the steady state vector of the Markov chain,
which measures global token importance. We show that TokenRank enhances
unconditional image generation, improving both quality (IS) and diversity (FID),
and can also be incorporated into existing segmentation techniques to improve their
performance over existing benchmarks. We believe our framework offers a fresh
view of how tokens are being attended in modern visual transformers.
Token Select
Cat

TokenRank

Tie
Column

Figure 1: Attention Chains interprets attention matrices as Markov chains. The 1st order bounce
(n = 1) corresponds to a common row-select operation from an attention matrix (top: the token “cat”,
bottom: “tie”). Iteratively computing the nth order attention bounce models higher-order attention
effects, eventually yielding a stationary vector (n → ∞) that globally captures the flow of attention
into each token (TokenRank). Intermediate iterations result in sharper segmentation maps.

1

Introduction

The attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) is arguably the most dominant computational
primitive in modern deep learning, particularly in the image domain. It has sparked widespread
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

