DOVE: Efficient One-Step Diffusion Model for
Real-World Video Super-Resolution

Zheng Chen1∗, Zichen Zou2∗, Kewei Zhang1 , Xiongfei Su3 ,
Xin Yuan4 , Yong Guo5 , Yulun Zhang1†
1
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Zhiyuan College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 China Mobile Research Institute,
4
Westlake University, 5 Huawei Consumer Business Group

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated promising performance in real-world video
super-resolution (VSR). However, the dozens of sampling steps they require, make
inference extremely slow. Sampling acceleration techniques, particularly singlestep, provide a potential solution. Nonetheless, achieving one step in VSR remains challenging, due to the high training overhead on video data and stringent fidelity demands. To tackle the above issues, we propose DOVE, an efficient one-step diffusion model for real-world VSR. DOVE is obtained by finetuning a pretrained video diffusion model (i.e., CogVideoX). To effectively train
DOVE, we introduce the latent-pixel training strategy. The strategy employs a
two-stage scheme to gradually adapt the model to the video super-resolution task.
Meanwhile, we design a video processing pipeline to construct a high-quality
dataset tailored for VSR, termed HQ-VSR. Fine-tuning on this dataset further
enhances the restoration capability of DOVE. Extensive experiments show that
DOVE exhibits comparable or superior performance to multi-step diffusion-based
VSR methods. It also offers outstanding inference efficiency, achieving up to
a 28× speed-up over existing methods such as MGLD-VSR. Code is available
at: https://github.com/zhengchen1999/DOVE.

1

Introduction

Video super-resolution (VSR) is a long-standing task that aims to reconstruct high-resolution (HR)
videos from low-resolution (LR) inputs [11, 16]. With the rapid growth of smartphone photography
and streaming media, real-world VSR has become increasingly critical. Unlike the synthetic degradations (e.g., bicubic), real-world videos often suffer from complex and unknown degradation. This
makes high-quality video restoration difficult. To tackle this issue, numerous methods have been
proposed [51, 26, 37, 47, 60]. Among them, generative models, e.g., generative adversarial networks
(GANs), are widely adopted for their ability to synthesize fine details [8, 23, 5].
Recently, a new generative model, the diffusion model (DM), has rapidly gained popularity [10].
Compared with GANs, diffusion models exhibit stronger generative capabilities, especially those
pretrained on large-scale datasets [28, 27, 2, 59, 52]. Therefore, leveraging pretrained diffusion
models for VSR has become an increasingly popular direction. For instance, some methods adopt
pretrained text-to-image (T2I) models [50, 63] and incorporate temporal layers and optical flow
constraints to ensure consistency across frames. Meanwhile, some approaches directly employ the
text-to-video (T2V) model [9, 48], and use ControlNet to constrain video generation. By exploiting
the natural priors in pretrained models, these methods can realize more realistic restorations.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Yulun Zhang, yulun100@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

