Constrained Sampling for Language Models Should
Be Easy: An MCMC Perspective

Emmanuel Anaya Gonzalez1∗ Sairam Vaidya1∗ Kanghee Park1 Ruyi Ji2
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick1 Loris D’Antoni1
1
UCSD 2 Peking University
{fanayagonzalez,smahadevaganapathy,kap022,tberg,ldantoni}@ucsd.edu
jiruyi910387714@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Constrained decoding enables Language Models (LMs) to produce samples that
provably satisfy hard constraints. However, existing constrained-decoding approaches often distort the underlying model distribution, a limitation that is especially problematic in applications like program fuzzing, where one wants to
generate diverse and valid program inputs for testing purposes. We propose a new
constrained sampling framework based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
that simultaneously satisfies three core desiderata: constraint satisfying (every
sample satisfies the constraint), monotonically converging (the sampling process
converges to the true conditional distribution), and efficient (high-quality samples emerge in few steps). Our method constructs a proposal distribution over
valid outputs and applies a Metropolis-Hastings acceptance criterion based on the
LM’s likelihood, ensuring principled and efficient exploration of the constrained
space. Empirically, our sampler outperforms existing methods on both synthetic
benchmarks and real-world program fuzzing tasks 1 .

1

Introduction

Language Models (LMs) have revolutionized a wide range of domains, from code generation [12] to
automated reasoning [59]. Yet, ensuring that their outputs satisfy hard structural constraints—such
as syntactic validity in domain-specific languages—remains a significant challenge [18]. While
constrained decoding methods [9, 13, 19, 45, 50, 52, 53, 55, 44, 2, 36, 57] can enforce these
constraints, they often distort the underlying generative distribution learned by the model, degrading
performance in downstream tasks [54, 43].
This tradeoff is particularly detrimental in applications that rely not on a single high-quality sample,
but on diverse samples from the constrained distribution. A compelling example is program fuzzing, a
technique for discovering software bugs by automatically generating test inputs that explore different
execution paths in a program. Modern fuzzers bootstrap this process using a small set of seed
inputs, and the effectiveness of these seeds hinges on both their correctness—the seeds should be
syntactically valid inputs that the program will not reject—and their distributional diversity—the
seeds should exercise different execution paths. LMs offer a powerful mechanism to generate such
seeds—but only if we can sample efficiently and faithfully from the constrained distribution.
Can we design constrained sampling algorithms that when executed for a given amount of time t are
(i) Constraint satisfying: produce a sample within t time and that sample satisfies the constraint; (ii)
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Code available at https://github.com/large-loris-models/casa

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

