Computable universal online learning

Dariusz Kalociński
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences
d.kalocinski@ipipan.waw.pl

Tomasz Steifer
Institute of Fundamental Technological Research
Polish Academy of Sciences
tsteifer@ippt.pan.pl

Abstract
Understanding when learning is possible is a fundamental task in the theory of
machine learning. However, many characterizations known from the literature deal
with abstract learning as a mathematical object and ignore the crucial question:
when can learning be implemented as a computer program? We address this
question for universal online learning, a generalist theoretical model of online
binary classification, recently characterized by Bousquet et al. (STOC´21). In this
model, there is no hypothesis fixed in advance; instead, Adversary—playing the
role of Nature—can change their mind as long as local consistency with the given
class of hypotheses is maintained. We require Learner to achieve a finite number
of mistakes while using a strategy that can be implemented as a computer program.
We show that universal online learning does not imply computable universal online
learning, even if the class of hypotheses is relatively easy from a computabilitytheoretic perspective. We then study the agnostic variant of computable universal
online learning and provide an exact characterization of classes that are learnable in
this sense. We also consider a variant of proper universal online learning and show
exactly when it is possible. Together, our results give a more realistic perspective
on the existing theory of online binary classification and the related problem of
inductive inference.

1

Introduction

The quest to understand the fundamental limits of machine learning has led to the development of
powerful theoretical frameworks, such as PAC learning or multi-armed bandits. These frameworks
provide a high-level abstraction of machine learning, capable of capturing a broad class of learning
problems within a single unified theoretical model. A good theoretical model should at least be
able to say when learning is possible and when it is not. Take, for example, the online version
of binary classification. The seminal papers by Littlestone (1988) and Angluin (1988) studied the
question of when Learner has a strategy that guarantees a uniform bound on mistakes. Littlestone
(1988) famously gave a combinatorial characterization—now known as the Littlestone dimension—of
hypothesis classes that are learnable with a uniform mistake bound. Under such a restriction, one
can equivalently assume that Adversary fixes one true function in advance. Recently, Bousquet et al.
(2021) extended this work to a more general adversarial setting, where Learner makes finitely many
mistakes (but possibly not uniformly bounded) and where Adversary can adapt dynamically. This
setting is in line with real-world scenarios where uniform bounds are not always available. We call it
universal online learning.1
The notion of the Littlestone dimension was generalized to ordinal numbers by Bousquet et al. (2021),
who used it to give a characterization of universal online learnability: a class is universally online
1
Please note that Bousquet et al. (2021) describe two related settings: one probabilistic (universal learning)
and one adversarial (universal online learning). This paper is uniquely concerned with the latter (see Bousquet
et al., 2020, Section 3).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

