Generalization vs Specialization under Concept Shift

Alex Nguyen
Princeton University

David J. Schwab*
CUNY Graduate Center

Vudtiwat Ngampruetikorn*
University of Sydney

Abstract
Machine learning models are often brittle under distribution shift, i.e., when data
distributions at test time differ from those during training. Understanding this
failure mode is central to identifying and mitigating safety risks of mass adoption
of machine learning. Here we analyze ridge regression under concept shift—a
form of distribution shift in which the input-label relationship changes at test time.
We derive an exact expression for prediction risk in the thermodynamic limit. Our
results reveal nontrivial effects of concept shift on generalization performance,
including a phase transition between weak and strong concept shift regimes and
nonmonotonic data dependence of test performance even when double descent is
absent. Our theoretical results are in good agreement with experiments based on
transformers pretrained to solve linear regression; under concept shift, too long
context length can be detrimental to generalization performance of next token
prediction. Finally, experiments on MNIST and FashionMNIST further validate
our theoretical predictions, suggesting these phenomena represent a fundamental
aspect of learning under distribution shift.

1

Distribution shift

It is unsurprising that a model trained on one distribution does not perform well when applied to data
from a different distribution. Yet, this out-of-distribution setting is relevant to many practical applications from scientific research [1, 2] to medicine and healthcare [3–6]. A quantitative understanding of
out-of-distribution generalization is key to developing safe and robust machine learning techniques.
A model that generalizes to arbitrary distribution shifts of course does not exist. The generalization
scope of a model, however, needs not be limited to the training data distribution. A question then
arises as to how much a model’s scope extends beyond its training distribution.
Answering this question requires assumptions on the test distribution. For example, covariate shift,
a well-studied setting for distribution shift, assumes a fixed input-label relationship while allowing
changes in the input distribution (see, e.g., Refs [7–11]).
We consider concept shift—a relatively less-studied setting, in which the input-label relationship
becomes different at test time1 [13, 14], see Fig 1. While many works have studied how to detect
and mitigate concept shift [15, 16], characterizing how concept shift affects generalization behavior
in neural networks has remained underexplored. In our work, we formulate a minimal model
which enables continuous modulation of the input-label function, based on high dimensional ridge
regression—a solvable setting that has helped develop intuitions for some of the most interesting
phenomena of modern machine learning (see, e.g., Refs [17–25]). We derive an analytical expression
for prediction risk under concept shift in the high-dimensional limit and demonstrate that its behavior
can change from monotonically decreasing with data for the in-distribution case to monotonically
* DJS and VN contributed to this work equally.
1 Concept shift or concept drift is sometimes defined to be equivalent to distribution shift [12]. Here, we adopt
a narrower definition in which concept shift describes only the change in the input-label relationship [13, 14].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

