Continuous Soft Actor-Critic: An Off-Policy Learning
Method Robust to Time Discretization
Huimin Han
Zhongtai Securities Institute for Financial Studies
Shandong University
Jinan, 250100 P. R. China
hanhuiminhhm@mail.sdu.edu.cn
Shaolin Ji ∗
Zhongtai Securities Institute for Financial Studies
Shandong University
Jinan, 250100 P. R. China
jsl@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Many Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms are sensitive to time discretization, which reduces their performance in real-world scenarios. We propose
Continuous Soft Actor-Critic, an off-policy actor-critic DRL algorithm in continuous time and space. It is robust to environment time discretization. We also extend
the framework to multi-agent scenarios. This Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) algorithm is suitable for both competitive and cooperative settings. Policy
evaluation employs stochastic control theory, with loss functions derived from
martingale orthogonality conditions. We establish scaling principles for hyperparameters of the algorithm as the environment time discretization δt changes
(δt → 0). We provide theoretical proofs for the relevant theorems. To validate
the algorithm’s effectiveness, we conduct comparative experiments between the
proposed algorithm and other mainstream methods across multiple tasks in Virtual
Multi-Agent System (VMAS). Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
algorithm achieves robust performance across various environments with different
time discretization parameter settings, outperforming other methods.

1

Introduction

Recently, reinforcement learning algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO, Schulman
et al. [2017]), Soft Actor-Critic (SAC, Haarnoja et al. [2018a]), and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG, Lillicrap et al. [2016]) have demonstrated remarkable success in domains such as large
language models, robotics, autonomous driving, and so on. However, there remains little research on
the continuous-time learning algorithms for stochastic environments and multi-agent reinforcement
learning. And the achievements of deep reinforcement learning studies under the discrete-time
frameworks may lack robustness to time discretization. Experimental studies by Henderson et al.
[2018] and Tallec et al. [2019] verify that many DRL algorithms developed under discrete-time
frameworks lack robustness to the hyperparameters, particularly the time step. Furthermore, Tallec
et al. [2019] formally prove that Q-learning does not exist in continuous time, though their analysis
is conducted under deterministic environment. These findings raise the following question:
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

