Mamba Only Glances Once (MOGO): A Lightweight
Framework for Efficient Video Action Detection
Yunqing Liu1 , Nan Zhang1 , Fangjun Wang1 , Kengo Murata2 , Takuma Yamamoto2 ,
Osafumi Nakayama2 , Genta Suzuki2 , Zhiming Tan1∗
1
Fujitsu R&D Center 2 Fujitsu Research Japan

Abstract
Mamba, a lightweight sequence modeling framework offering near-linear complexity, presents a promising alternative to Transformers. In this work, we introduce
MOGO (Mamba Only Glances Once), an end-to-end framework for efficient video
action detection built entirely on the Mamba architecture. In MOGO, our newly
designed Mamba-based decoder can even use just one Mamba layer to effectively
perform action detection. It uses neither Transformer structures nor RCNN-like
methods for proposal detection. Our framework introduces two key innovations.
First, we propose a pure Mamba-based encoder-decoder architecture. The encoder
processes cross-frame video information, while the decoder incorporates two novel
Mamba-based structures that leverage Mamba’s intrinsic capabilities to detect
actions. Theoretical analysis and ablation experiments confirm their synergy and
the necessity of each structure. Second, we design a video token construction
mechanism to improve the model’s performance. The token importance block can
ensure that the retained token information is highly relevant to the predicted targets.
These two innovations make MOGO both efficient and accurate, as demonstrated
on the JHMDB and UCF101-24 benchmark datasets. Compared to SOTA action
detection methods, MOGO achieves superior performance in terms of GFLOPs,
model parameters, and inference speed (latency) with comparable detection precision. Additionally, it requires significantly less GPU memory than some SOTA
token reconstruction methods. Code is available at https://github.com/YunqingLiuML/MOGO.

1

Introduction

The goal of video action detection is to localize and classify actions within video sequences, requiring models to capture spatiotemporal dependencies. Recently, Sia and Rawat [1] address this by
introducing a lightweight encoder-only model for open-vocabulary detection. Other advancements in
this field, such as DETR [2] and TubeR [3], have relied on Transformer-based architectures. These
models leverage the attention mechanism to model long-range dependencies across video frames,
achieving SOTA performance in capturing temporal context and action semantics. However, the
self-attention mechanism incurs quadratic computational complexity with respect to sequence length,
making it computationally expensive for long video sequences. For instance, the methods proposed in
[4] and [5] achieved significant performance improvements but are reported to have relatively high
GFLOPs. This inefficiency makes such models less practical for resource-constrained environments.
The Mamba framework [6] emerges as a promising alternative to Transformers. Unlike the attentionbased paradigm, Mamba employs state-space modeling to achieve near-linear complexity, offering a
scalable solution for processing spatiotemporal data. Recent adoptions, such as VideoMamba [7]
for video classification and MS-Temba [8] for temporal action localization, demonstrate Mamba’s
∗

Corresponding author: zhmtan@fujitsu.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

