Provable Watermarking for Data Poisoning Attacks

Yifan Zhu1, 2 , Lijia Yu3∗ , Xiao-Shan Gao1, 2∗
State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Sciences,
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of AI for Industries, Nanjing, China
zhuyifan@amss.ac.cn, ljyu@iaii.ac.cn, xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn
1

Abstract
In recent years, data poisoning attacks have been increasingly designed to appear harmless and even beneficial, often with the intention of verifying dataset
ownership or safeguarding private data from unauthorized use. However, these
developments have the potential to cause misunderstandings and conflicts, as data
poisoning has traditionally been regarded as a security threat to machine learning
systems. To address this issue, it is imperative for harmless poisoning generators
to claim ownership of their generated datasets, enabling users to identify potential
poisoning to prevent misuse. In this paper, we propose the deployment of watermarking schemes as a solution to this challenge. We introduce two provable and
practical watermarking approaches for data poisoning: post-poisoning watermarking and poisoning-concurrent watermarking.
Our analyses demonstrate that when
√
the watermarking length is Θ( d/ϵ
)
for
post-poisoning
watermarking, and falls
√w
2
within the range of Θ(1/ϵw ) to O( d/ϵp ) for poisoning-concurrent watermarking,
the watermarked poisoning dataset provably ensures both watermarking detectability and poisoning utility, certifying the practicality of watermarking under data
poisoning attacks. We validate our theoretical findings through experiments on
several attacks, models, and datasets.

1

Introduction

Data poisoning [7, 43, 71] is a well-established security concern for modern ML systems. Its
significance has become increasingly pronounced in the era of large-scale models, where many
models are trained on web-crawl or synthetic data without rigorous selection [66, 10, 77]. There are
two representative data poisoning attacks, backdoor attacks [13, 75] and availability attacks [37, 22].
Backdoor attacks involve creating poisoned datasets that cause models trained on them to predict the
specific targets when a particular trigger is injected into test instances. Availability attacks aim to
compromise model generalization by ensuring that models trained on poisoned datasets have low
test accuracy. Deploying models on backdoor and availability attacked datasets poses severe security
risks. For instance, in autonomous driving systems, triggered road signs created by backdoor attacks
could be misclassified by object detectors, leading to potentially catastrophic accidents [27, 31].
Availability attacks directly undermine model utility, rendering AI-based systems nonfunctional [8].
However, interestingly, things are always two-faced. Modern data poisoning attacks are increasingly
being designed to be harmless and purposeful. For example, backdoor attacks have been employed
for black-box dataset ownership verification [50, 51], availability attacks have been utilized to prevent
the unauthorized use of data [37, 23]. More recently, methods like NightShade [65] and Glaze [64]
have been developed to protect artists’ intellectual property from generative AI models. These
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

