VisDiff: SDF-Guided Polygon Generation for Visibility
Reconstruction, Characterization and Recognition

Rahul Moorthy
University of Minnesota
mahes092@umn.edu

Jun-Jee Chao
University of Minnesota
chao0107@umn.edu

Volkan Isler
The University of Texas at Austin
isler@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
The ability to capture rich representations of combinatorial structures has enabled
the application of machine learning to tasks such as analysis and generation of
floorplans, terrains, images, and animations. Recent work has primarily focused on
understanding structures with well-defined features, neighborhoods, or underlying
distance metrics, while those lacking such characteristics remain largely unstudied.
Examples of these combinatorial structures can be found in polygons, where a
small change in the vertex locations causes a significant rearrangement of the
combinatorial structure, expressed as a visibility or triangulation graphs. Current
representation learning approaches fail to capture structures without well-defined
features and distance metrics.
In this paper, we study the open problem of Visibility Reconstruction: Given
a visibility graph G, construct a polygon P whose visibility graph is G. We
introduce VisDiff, a novel diffusion-based approach to generate polygon P from
the input visibility graph G. The main novelty of our approach is that, rather than
generating the polygon’s vertex set directly, we first estimate the signed distance
function (SDF) associated with the polygon. The SDF is then used to extract
the vertex location representing the final polygon. We show that going through
the SDF allows VisDiff to learn the visibility relationship much more effectively
than generating vertex locations directly. In order to train VisDiff, we create
a carefully curated dataset. We use this dataset to benchmark our method and
achieve 26% improvement in F1- Score over standard methods as well as state
of the art approaches. We also provide preliminary results on the harder visibility
graph recognition problem in which the input G is not guaranteed to be a visibility
graph. To demonstrate the applicability of VisDiff beyond visibility graphs, we
extend it to the related combinatorial structure of triangulation graph. Lastly,
leveraging these capabilities, we show that VisDiff can perform high-diversity
sampling over the space of all polygons. In particular, we highlight its ability to
perform both polygon-to-polygon interpolation and graph-to-graph interpolation,
enabling diverse sampling across the polygon space.

1

Introduction

Polygons are widely used as geometric representations in domains such as cartography [1], architectural design [2], and robotic motion planning [3]. Applications across these domains require
understanding the combinatorial structure of polygons for analysis, reasoning, and generation. The
combinatorial structure captures the discrete relationships between polygon vertices, independent
of their specific coordinates, angles, or edge lengths. A key example of such a structure is the
visibility graph (Appendix A), which encodes mutual visibility between regions. Visibility graphs
enable privacy-aware floorplan design [2] and the extraction of topographic features in terrain analysis [4]. While generative models are increasingly used in these applications [5]. Most existing
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

