Elastic ViTs from Pretrained Models without
Retraining

Walter Simoncini1,2 * Michael Dorkenwald2 *
Tijmen Blankevoort3 Cees G.M. Snoek2 Yuki M. Asano1
1

University of Technology Nuremberg

2

University of Amsterdam

3

NVIDIA

Abstract
Vision foundation models achieve remarkable performance but are only available
in a limited set of pre-determined sizes, forcing sub-optimal deployment choices
under real-world constraints. We introduce SnapViT: single-shot network approximation for pruned Vision Transformers, a new post-pretraining structured pruning
method that enables elastic inference across a continuum of compute budgets. Our
approach efficiently combines gradient information with cross-network structure
correlations, approximated via an evolutionary algorithm, does not require labeled
data, generalizes to models without a classification head, and is retraining-free.
Experiments on DINO, SigLIPv2, DeIT, and AugReg models demonstrate superior performance over state-of-the-art methods across various sparsities, requiring
less than five minutes on a single A100 GPU to generate elastic models that can
be adjusted to any computational budget. Our key contributions include an efficient pruning strategy for pretrained Vision Transformers, a novel evolutionary
approximation of Hessian off-diagonal structures, and a self-supervised importance
scoring mechanism that maintains strong performance without requiring retraining
or labels. Code and pruned models are available at: https://elastic.ashita.nl/

1

Introduction

Recent advances in model architectures and training recipes have enabled the training of vision
foundation models with several billion parameters [12, 53, 16, 60], achieving state-of-the-art results
across a wide range of tasks. However, these models must operate under strict compute, latency, and
cost constraints when deployed in real-world settings. Yet, only a limited set of model sizes e.g., 21M,
29M, 86M, 300M, 840M and 6.7B parameter vision transformers (ViTs) for the DINOv3 family
[15, 59] are made available, forcing users to select the largest model that still fits their requirements,
a choice that can often be sub-optimal.
Traditionally, challenges related to model flexibility have been tackled using knowledge distillation
[27]. However, this strategy mandates a predetermined target architecture and relies on often nonpublic pretraining datasets, which can in turn undermine robustness and limit flexibility. In parallel,
methods for elastic inference [14, 7, 29, 70] have emerged to enable dynamic selection among
multiple sub-networks at inference time. Yet, these methods necessitate networks designed with
a predefined structure, such as nested Matryoshka [34], and require such structures to be present
during pretraining. This dependency restricts their applicability to existing or proprietarily pretrained
models.
An attractive alternative is structured pruning [37, 23, 24], a technique that reduces memory and
computational requirements, enabling models to be adapted to diverse deployment settings. Despite
their promise, most pruning techniques are tailored to specific compute constraints and tasks [35, 83]
*

Denotes equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

