True Impact of Cascade Length in Contextual
Cascading Bandits

Hyun-jun Choi
Seoul National University
nschj1@snu.ac.kr

Joongkyu Lee
Seoul National University
jklee0717@snu.ac.kr

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National University
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We revisit the contextual cascading bandit, where a learning agent recommends
an ordered list (cascade) of items, and a user scans the list sequentially, stopping
at the first attractive item. Although cascading bandits underpin various applications including recommender systems and search engines, the role of the cascade
length K in shaping regret has remained unclear. Contrary to prior results that
regret grows with K, we prove that regret actually decreases once K is large
enough. Leveraging this insight, we design a new upper-confidence-bound algorithm built on online mirror descent
√  that attains the sharpest known regret upper
bound, Õ min{K p̄K−1 , 1}d T for contextual cascading bandits. To complement this new regret upper
√  bound, we provide a nearly matching lower bound of
K−1
Ω min{Kp
, 1}d T , where 0 ≤ p ≤ p̄ < 1. Together, these results fully
characterize how regret truly scales with K, thereby closing the theoretical gap
for contextual cascading bandits. Finally, comprehensive experiments validate our
theoretical results and show the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Cascading bandits have broad applications in online recommender systems, search engines, and
social media. In this model, at each round, the agent selects an ordered list (a cascade) of K
items from a ground set of N items. The user examines each item in order and decides whether
to click it or skip to the next. The round stops at the first click or when all K items have been
examined without any click. Therefore, the agent receives the partial click feedback only for the
observed items in the given cascade. Cascading bandits have been extensively studied from the
non-contextual multi-armed formulation [11, 12, 26] to contextual variants incorporating item (and
user) features [19, 18, 28, 7, 26, 20, 21], providing a widely used framework for modeling sequential
user interactions with multiple items.
In contextual cascading bandits, the effect of the cascade length K on the regret bound remains
theoretically unclear. While previous studies suggest that the regret either scales polynomially or
logarithmically with K (see Table 1), this contradicts the intuition that a longer cascade provides
more opportunities to collect feedback and may therefore reduce regret. The gap between theory and
intuition regarding how the cascade length affects the regret has been recognized [28, 7, 20, 21], and
recent studies [7, 21] have narrowed this gap, though it has yet to be fully resolved.
Li et al. [19]√first introduced the contextual cascading bandits and derived a regret upper bound that
scales as Õ( K) by exploiting the Lipschitz continuity of the expected reward. Recent studies have
further refined the dependence of regret on the cascade length by analyzing different click feedback
models. Liu et al. [20] considered the case where the click feedback follows a linear model, whereas
Choi et al. [7] and Liu et al. [21] focused on the logistic model. These three works investigated a
common structural property that the gradient of the expected reward function can be expressed as
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

