A Learning-Augmented Dynamic Programming
Approach for Orienteering Problem with Time
Windows
Guansheng Peng1,2 Lining Xing3 Fuyan Ma4 Guopeng Song5∗
Aldy Gunawan6 Pieter Vansteenwegen7
1
School of Advanced Engineering, Great Bay University, China
2
Shenzhen International Center For Industrial And Applied Mathematics,
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, China
3
Research Institute of Intelligent Control and Manufacturing System,
Jiangsu University of Technology, China
4
Defense Innovation Institute, Chinese Academy of Military Science, China
5
College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China
6
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
7
KU Leuven Institute for Mobility – CIB, KU Leuven, Belgium
pengguansheng@gbu.edu.cn, guopeng.song@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in solving combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) using machine learning techniques. Motivated by this trend,
we propose a learning-augmented exact approach for tackling an NP-hard COP, the
Orienteering Problem with Time Windows, which aims to maximize the total score
collected by visiting a subset of vertices in a graph within their time windows. Traditional exact algorithms rely heavily on domain expertise and meticulous design,
making it hard to achieve further improvements. By leveraging deep learning models to learn effective relaxations of problem restrictions from data, our approach
enables significant performance gains in an exact dynamic programming algorithm.
We propose a novel graph convolutional network that predicts the directed edges
defining the relaxation. The network is trained in a supervised manner, using
optimal solutions as high-quality labels. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed learning-augmented algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art exact
algorithm, achieving a 38% speedup on Solomon’s benchmark and more than a
sevenfold improvement on the more challenging Cordeau’s benchmark.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) arise in a wide range of application domains, such as
logistics, telecommunications, manufacturing, and finance. Solving these problems efficiently can
result in significant cost reductions. Nevertheless, their NP-hard nature presents major computational
challenges. To handle these challenges, traditional approaches, including exact and heuristic methods,
have been developed over the past decades.
Recently, machine learning (ML) has emerged as a complementary approach, addressing the limitations of traditional approaches through data-driven learning [4]. A variety of studies adopt an
end-to-end framework that directly outputs solutions. Among these, graph neural network models has
been successfully applied to COPs defined over graphs, such as the Traveling Salesperson Problem
∗

Correspondence

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

