BEAST: Efficient Tokenization of B-Splines Encoded
Action Sequences for Imitation Learning

Hongyi Zhou† ∗ Weiran Liao† Xi Huang† Yucheng Tang† Fabian Otto§
Xiaogang Jia † Xinkai Jiang † Simon Hilber † Ge Li † Qian Wang †
Ömer Erdinç Yağmurlu † Nils Blank †,‡ Moritz Reuss † Rudolf Lioutikov†,‡
†
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology ‡ Robotics Institute Germany § Microsoft Research

Abstract
We present the B-spline Encoded Action Sequence Tokenizer (BEAST), a novel
action tokenizer that encodes action sequences into compact discrete or continuous
tokens using B-spline. In contrast to existing action tokenizers based on vector
quantization or byte pair encoding, BEAST requires no separate tokenizer training
and consistently produces tokens of uniform length, enabling fast action sequence
generation via parallel decoding. Leveraging our B-spline formulation, BEAST
inherently ensures generating smooth trajectories without discontinuities between
adjacent segments. We extensively evaluate BEAST by integrating it with three
distinct model architectures: a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with continuous
tokens, a decoder-only Transformer with discrete tokens, and Florence-2, a VisionLanguage Model with an encoder-decoder architecture, demonstrating BEAST’s
compatibility and scalability with large pretrained models. We evaluate BEAST
across three established benchmarks consisting of 166 simulated tasks and on
three distinct robot settings with a total of 8 real-world tasks. Experimental results
demonstrate that BEAST (i) significantly reduces both training and inference
computational costs, and (ii) consistently generates smooth, high-frequency control
signals suitable for continuous control tasks while (iii) reliably achieves competitive
task success rates compared to state-of-the-art methods. Videos and code are
available at https://intuitive-robots.github.io/beast_website/.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm for training robots to perform complex tasks
by learning from human demonstrations [1–3]. Early works [4, 5] in this field primarily focused
on predicting single-step actions based on the current observation. However, recent research [6]
highlights the importance of learning action sequences to capture the temporal coherence inherent in
human demonstrations. Moreover, by modeling action sequences, we can reduce compounding errors
[7] and create task demonstrations that more closely align with human methods [8]. Given the success
of autoregressive next-token prediction models in natural language processing and other domains
[9–11], it is compelling to explore similar techniques for modeling action sequences, leveraging their
ability to predict and generate coherent sequences effectively.
In natural language processing, tokens typically represent words, which are inherently discrete
elements. This discrete nature allows for effective next-token prediction, which extends well to the
generation and prediction of symbolic actions or in discrete action space. However, a significant
challenge arises when attempting to apply these approaches to sub-symbolic, continuous actions,
which are not inherently discrete. Discretization addresses this issue by compressing the continuous
∗

Correspondence to hongyi.zhou@kit.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

