Scaling Laws for Gradient Descent and Sign Descent
for Linear Bigram Models under Zipf’s Law

Frederik Kunstner
frederik.kunstner@inria.fr

Francis Bach
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
Recent works have highlighted optimization difficulties faced by gradient descent
in training the first and last layers of transformer-based language models, which are
overcome by optimizers such as Adam. These works suggest that the difficulty is
linked to the heavy-tailed distribution of words in text data, where the frequency of
the kth most frequent word πk is proportional to 1/k, following Zipf’s law. To better
understand the impact of the data distribution on training performance, we study
a linear bigram model for next-token prediction when the tokens follow a power
law πk ∝ 1/k α parameterized by the exponent α > 0. We derive optimization
scaling laws for deterministic gradient descent and sign descent as a proxy for Adam
as a function of the exponent α. Existing theoretical investigations in scaling laws
assume that the eigenvalues of the data decay as a power law with exponent α > 1.
This assumption effectively makes the problem “finite dimensional” as most of the
loss comes from a few of the largest eigencomponents. In comparison, we show
that the problem is more difficult when the data have heavier tails. The case α = 1
as found in language is “worst-case” for gradient descent, in that the number
of iterations required to reach a small relative error scales almost linearly with
dimension. While the performance of sign descent also depends on the dimension,
for Zipf-distributed data the number of iterations scales only with the square-root
of the dimension, leading to a large improvement for large vocabularies.

1

Introduction

Recent works have shown that one of the primary benefits of Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) in
training transformed-based language models (Vaswani et al., 2017) lies in how it handles the first
and last layers (Zhang et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2025). For language models, the input and output
dimensions correspond to distinct words in the vocabulary, where the kth most frequent word has
frequency πk ∝ 1/k following Zipf’s law (Piantadosi, 2014). Kunstner et al. (2024) provide evidence
that this heavy-tailed distribution leads to optimization difficulties for gradient descent that Adam is
able to overcome. They argue that Zipf’s law is “worst-case” in that it combines a large imbalance in
frequencies, while decaying slowly enough that most samples come from the tail.
Our objective is to formalize this empirical observation, and to describe the impact of the heavytailedness of the data distribution on the convergence of gradient descent (GD) and sign descent (SD)
as a proxy for Adam (Tieleman and Hinton, 2012; Bernstein et al., 2018; Balles et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2023). We consider a linear bigram model for next-token prediction trained with the square
loss, where the token frequencies πk follow a power law πk ∝ 1/k α with exponent α > 0. While
this problem could be solved directly rather than with iterative methods, it is a good starting point for
the theoretical investigation of optimization dynamics. Despite its apparent simplicity, this model
already reproduces the observation that GD performs poorly on Zipf-distributed data (see Fig. 1). The
behavior of gradient and sign descent are also not well described by current results, see Section 1.2.
Our approach is inspired by the line of work on theoretical scaling laws, also known as asymptotic
convergence as the dimensionality grows (e.g., Caponnetto and De Vito, 2007; Advani et al., 2020;
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

