Scalable inference of functional neural connectivity at
submillisecond timescales
Arina Medvedeva
Flatiron Institute
New York, NY
amedvedeva@flatironinstitute.org

Edoardo Balzani
Flatiron Institute
New York, NY
ebalzani@flatironinstitute.org

Alex H Williams
Flatiron Institute, New York University
New York, NY
awilliams@flatironinstitute.org

Stephen L Keeley
Fordham University
New York, NY
skeeley1@fordham.edu

Abstract
The Poisson Generalized Linear Model (GLM) is a foundational tool for analyzing
neural spike train data. However, standard implementations rely on discretizing
spike times into binned count data, limiting temporal resolution and scalability.
Here, we develop Monte Carlo (MC) methods and polynomial approximations
(PA) to the continuous-time analog of these models, and show them to be advantageous over their discrete-time counterparts. Further, we propose using a set of
exponentially scaled Laguerre polynomials as an orthogonal temporal basis, which
improves filter identification and yields closed-form integral solutions under the
polynomial approximation. Applied to both synthetic and real spike-time data from
rodent hippocampus, our methods demonstrate superior accuracy and scalability
compared to traditional binned GLMs, enabling functional connectivity inference
in large-scale neural recordings that are temporally precise on the order of synaptic dynamical timescales and in agreement with known anatomical properties of
hippocampal subregions. We provide open-source implementations of both MC
and PA estimators, optimized for GPU acceleration, to facilitate adoption in the
neuroscience community1 .

1

Introduction

As recording technologies in neuroscience advance, there is a growing need to improve the scalability
of statistical methods for analyzing neural spiking activity. A key challenge in understanding
neural computation lies in accurately estimating functional connectivity—the statistical dependencies
between neurons that reflect synaptic interactions. The Poisson Generalized Linear Model (GLM) is
a powerful tool for this purpose, capable of inferring both stimulus encoding properties and coupling
between spiking units. However, the standard implementation of the GLM requires binning the
timeseries data into a large design matrix, X, of discrete spike counts. The time resolution of this
binning is often coarse (∼ 1 to 10 ms) [1–5] compared to the timescale of synaptic dynamics, which
rise and fall at submillisecond timescales [6–8]. This means conventional GLM implementations fail
to capture synaptic coupling filters on a biophysically realistic scale [1, 3–5, 9]. Moreover, as the bin
size decreases, X grows in size, posing significant computational and memory storage challenges.
1

The Poisson point process GLM code is available at https://github.com/macari216/
poisson-process-glm.git
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

