Latent Chain-of-Thought for Visual Reasoning

Guohao Sun1,2,∗, Hang Hua2,3,+ , Jian Wang2,+ , Jiebo Luo3 ,
Sohail Dianat1 , Majid Rabbani1 , Raghuveer Rao4 , and Zhiqiang Tao1
3

1
Rochester Institute of Technology, 2 Snap Inc.,
University of Rochester, 4 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Abstract
Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning is critical for improving the interpretability
and reliability of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs). However, existing
training algorithms such as SFT, PPO, and GRPO may not generalize well across
unseen reasoning tasks and heavily rely on a biased reward model. To address
this challenge, we reformulate reasoning in LVLMs as posterior inference and
propose a scalable training algorithm based on amortized variational inference. By
leveraging diversity-seeking reinforcement learning algorithms, we introduce a
novel sparse reward function for token-level learning signals that encourage diverse,
high-likelihood latent CoT, overcoming deterministic sampling limitations and
avoiding reward hacking. Additionally, we implement a Bayesian inference-scaling
strategy that replaces costly Best-of-N and Beam Search with a marginal likelihood
to efficiently rank optimal rationales and answers. We empirically demonstrate
that the proposed method enhances the state-of-the-art LVLMs on seven reasoning
benchmarks, in terms of effectiveness, generalization, and interpretability. The
code is available at https://github.com/heliossun/LaCoT.

1

Introduction

Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning is critical for enhancing the interpretability and reliability of
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [11, 29, 7, 44, 15, 16]. These models combine visual
perception and natural language processing to perform intricate reasoning tasks that require explicit,
step-by-step rationalization. As LVLMs have expanded into more sophisticated applications, such as
visual question answering, commonsense reasoning, and complex task execution, the limitations of
current training methods, such as generalization, have become increasingly evident.
To enable visual CoT, mainstream training paradigms, such as Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT),
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [34], and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [12],
primarily focus on optimizing next-token distributions or scalar rewards. While effective for indistribution tasks, these methods often struggle to generalize across diverse reasoning questions due
to their inability to explicitly capture dependencies across trajectories [14]. Specifically, SFT heavily
depends on teacher-forced log-likelihood, only to parrot reference traces; meanwhile, PPO and GRPO
are constrained in exploration as their KL penalties enforce proximity to the SFT baseline, making
them fall short in finding novel rationales. Additionally, they may cause a reward hacking [36]
issue that achieves high scores without genuinely solving the intended problem. To address these
limitations, this work adopts a latent variable model to realize visual CoT as a probabilistic inference
problem [6] over latent variables, allowing us to work with rich, expressive probabilistic models that
better capture uncertainty and hidden structure, without needing direct supervision.
∗

Part of this work was conducted while Guohao Sun and Hang Hua were interns at Snap Inc. + Hang Hua
and Jian Wang contributed equally. Corresponding authors: Guohao Sun (gs4288@rit.edu) and Zhiqiang Tao
(zhiqiang.tao@rit.edu)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

