A Theoretical Framework for Grokking: Interpolation
followed by Riemannian Norm Minimisation

Etienne Boursier
INRIA
LMO, Université Paris-Saclay
Orsay, France
etienne.boursier@inria.fr

Scott Pesme
INRIA
Grenoble, France
scott.pesme@inria.fr

Radu-Alexandru Dragomir
Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Palaiseau, France
dragomir@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
We study the dynamics of gradient flow with small weight decay on general
training losses F : Rd → R. Under mild regularity assumptions and assuming
convergence of the unregularised gradient flow, we show that the trajectory with
weight decay λ exhibits a two-phase behaviour as λ → 0. During the initial fast
phase, the trajectory follows the unregularised gradient flow and converges to a
manifold of critical points of F . Then, at time of order 1/λ, the trajectory enters a
slow drift phase and follows a Riemannian gradient flow minimising the ℓ2 -norm
of the parameters. This purely optimisation-based phenomenon offers a natural
explanation for the grokking effect observed in deep learning, where the training
loss rapidly reaches zero while the test loss plateaus for an extended period before
suddenly improving. We argue that this generalisation jump can be attributed to
the slow norm reduction induced by weight decay, as explained by our analysis.
We validate this mechanism empirically on several synthetic regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Strikingly simple algorithms such as gradient methods are a driving force behind the success of
deep learning. Nonetheless, their remarkable performance remains mysterious, and a full theoretical
understanding is lacking. In particular: (i) convergence to low training loss solutions on non-convex
objectives is far from trivial, and (ii) it is unclear why the resulting solutions generalise well [Zhang
et al., 2017]. These questions are accompanied by a range of surprising phenomena that arise during
training. One such intriguing behaviour is known as the grokking phenomenon, which we explore
in this work. Coined by Power et al. [2022], this term describes a two-phase pattern in the learning
curves: first, the training loss rapidly decreases to zero, while the test loss plateaus at a certain value.
This is followed by a second phase, where the training loss remains zero, but the test loss steadily
decreases, leading to a final improved generalisation performance, as depicted in Figure 1 (left).
In this paper, we propose a novel theoretical perspective to explain this phenomenon. By examining
the gradient flow dynamics with weight decay, we show that, in the limit of vanishing weight decay,
we can fully describe the trajectory of the model parameters. Specifically, we prove that the training
process can be decomposed into two distinct phases. In the first phase, the gradient flow follows the
unregularised path, converging to a manifold of critical points of the training loss. In the second, the
trajectory enters a slow drift phase, where the weights move along this manifold, driven by weight
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

