Point3R: Streaming 3D Reconstruction with
Explicit Spatial Pointer Memory

Yuqi Wu1,∗ Wenzhao Zheng1,∗,† Jie Zhou1 Jiwen Lu1,2
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
https://ykiwu.github.io/Point3R/

Abstract
Dense 3D scene reconstruction from an ordered sequence or unordered image
collections is a critical step when bringing research in computer vision into practical scenarios. Following the paradigm introduced by DUSt3R, which unifies an
image pair densely into a shared coordinate system, subsequent methods maintain an implicit memory to achieve dense 3D reconstruction from more images.
However, such implicit memory is limited in capacity and may suffer from information loss of earlier frames. We propose Point3R, an online framework targeting
dense streaming 3D reconstruction. To be specific, we maintain an explicit spatial pointer memory directly associated with the 3D structure of the current scene.
Each pointer in this memory is assigned a specific 3D position and aggregates
scene information nearby in the global coordinate system into a changing spatial feature. Information extracted from the latest frame interacts explicitly with
this pointer memory, enabling dense integration of the current observation into the
global coordinate system. We design a 3D hierarchical position embedding to promote this interaction and design a simple yet effective fusion mechanism to ensure
that our pointer memory is uniform and efficient. Our method achieves competitive or state-of-the-art performance on various tasks with low training costs. Code:
https://github.com/YkiWu/Point3R.

1

Introduction

Dense 3D reconstruction from image collections has long been a fundamental task in computer
vision, with broad applications in fields such as autonomous driving [25, 78], medical modeling,
and cultural heritage preservation. Conventional approaches [1, 11, 48, 56, 67, 68] first conduct a
sequence of sub-tasks, including feature extraction and matching [33, 41], triangulation, and global
alignment to get sparse geometry and camera poses. Multi-view stereo [20, 22, 49] is then used
to obtain dense geometry. However, this tightly coupled pipeline is inefficient and tends to be
vulnerable to noise. To address these challenges, DUSt3R [64] proposes a data-driven paradigm
that directly reconstructs the input image pair as point maps within a unified coordinate system.
Due to the constraint of pair-wise input, DUSt3R requires an additional global alignment step when
performing dense reconstruction from multiple images, which is inefficient in multi-view settings.
To improve this, subsequent works [59, 60, 63, 71] can be categorized into two main paradigms. One
category of these works [60, 71] takes all input images simultaneously and employs global attention
to reconstruct them into a unified coordinate system, requiring substantial computational resources
and is misaligned with the incremental nature of real-world reconstruction scenarios. The second
category [59, 63] introduces an external memory mechanism to retain information from past frames,
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

