MobileUse: A Hierarchical Reflection-Driven GUI
Agent for Autonomous Mobile Operation

Ning Li1∗ † , Xiangmou Qu2∗ , Jiamu Zhou2∗ , Jun Wang2 , Muning Wen1 ,
Kounianhua Du1 , Xingyu Lou2 , Qiuying Peng2‡ , Jun Wang2‡ , Weinan Zhang1‡
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 OPPO Research Institute
{pengqiuying,wangjun7}@oppo.com, wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have enabled
the development of mobile agents that can understand visual inputs and follow
user instructions, unlocking new possibilities for automating complex tasks on
mobile devices. However, applying these models to real-world mobile scenarios
remains a significant challenge due to the long-horizon task execution, difficulty in
error recovery, and the cold-start problem in unfamiliar environments. To address
these challenges, we propose MobileUse, a GUI agent designed for robust and
adaptive mobile task execution. To improve resilience in long-horizon tasks and dynamic environments, we introduce a hierarchical reflection architecture that enables
the agent to self-monitor, detect, and recover from errors across multiple temporal scales—ranging from individual actions to overall task completion—while
maintaining efficiency through a Reflection-on-Demand strategy. To tackle coldstart issues, we further introduce a proactive exploration module, which enriches
the agent’s understanding of the environment through self-planned exploration.
Evaluations on the AndroidWorld and AndroidLab benchmarks demonstrate that
MobileUse establishes new state-of-the-art performance, achieving success rates of
62.9% and 44.2%, respectively. To facilitate real-world applications, we release
an out-of-the-box toolkit for automated task execution on physical mobile devices,
which is available at https://github.com/MadeAgents/mobile-use.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have significantly enhanced the
capability of AI systems to understand and interact with visual environments. By jointly processing
text and images, MLLMs such as GPT-4V (Achiam et al., 2023), Gemini (Team et al., 2024),
Claude (Anthropic, 2024), and Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2025) have demonstrated impressive performance
on a range of vision-language tasks, including visual question answering (Hu et al., 2023, 2024),
image captioning (Bianco et al., 2023; Rotstein et al., 2024), and GUI control (Müller and Žunič, 2024;
Qi et al., 2025). These developments open up promising opportunities for building general-purpose
agents capable of interleaved visual and textual contexts perceiving and instruction following.
Among various platforms, mobile devices present a promising option for building general-purpose
intelligent agents due to their vast scope and versatility. On one hand, the wide variety of apps
available on mobile platforms provides an expansive environment, making it an ideal domain for
developing agents capable of addressing diverse user needs. Moreover, with only a touchable screen,
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done during an internship at OPPO.
‡
Corresponding authors.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

