Trajectory Graph Learning: Aligning with
Long Trajectories in Reinforcement Learning
Without Reward Design

Yunfan Li∗
University of California, Los Angeles
yunfanli@g.ucla.edu

Eric Liu
University of Southern California
eliu4913@usc.edu

Lin F. Yang ∗
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) often relies on manually designed reward
functions, which are difficult to specify and can lead to issues such as
reward hacking and suboptimal behavior. Alternatives like inverse RL and
preference-based RL attempt to infer surrogate rewards from demonstrations
or preferences but suffer from ambiguity and distribution mismatch. A more
direct approach, inspired by imitation learning, avoids reward modeling
by leveraging expert demonstrations. However, most existing methods
align actions only at individual states, failing to capture the coherence of
long-horizon trajectories.
In this work, we study the problem of directly aligning policies with expertlabeled trajectories to preserve long-horizon behavior without relying on
reward signals. Specifically, we aim to learn a policy that maximizes the
probability of generating the expert trajectories. Nevertheless, we prove that,
in its general form, this trajectory alignment problem is NP-complete. To
address this, we propose Trajectory Graph Learning (TGL), a framework that
leverages structural assumptions commonly satisfied in practice—such as
bounded realizability of expert trajectories or a tree-structured MDP. These
enable a graph-based policy planning algorithm that computes optimal
policies in polynomial time under known dynamics. For settings with
unknown dynamics, we develop a sample-efficient algorithm based on UCBstyle exploration and establish sub-linear regret. Experiments on grid-world
tasks demonstrate that TGL substantially outperforms standard imitation
learning methods for long-trajectory planning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful tool with numerous successful
applications, ranging from early advancements in robotics and control [Lee et al., 2020]
to more recent breakthroughs in self-driving technology [Dosovitskiy et al., 2017] and the
fine-tuning of Large Language Models (LLMs) [Ouyang et al., 2022]. However, the success of
RL in real-world applications often relies heavily on the design of the reward function, which
typically requires significant prior knowledge. We face challenges such as reward hacking
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

