Uncoupled and Convergent Learning in Monotone
Games under Bandit Feedback
Jing Dong⇤
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
jingdong@link.cuhk.edu.cn
Baoxiang Wang⇤
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn
Yaoliang Yu⇤
University of Waterloo and Vector Institute
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We study the problem of no-regret learning algorithms for general monotone
and smooth games and their last-iterate convergence properties. Specifically, we
investigate the problem under bandit feedback and strongly uncoupled dynamics,
which allows modular development of the multi-player system that applies to a wide
range of real applications. We propose a mirror-descent-based algorithm, which
converges in O(T 1/4 ) under Bregman divergence and is also no-regret, where the
choice of Bregman divergence is determined by the convexity of the game. The
result is achieved by the dedicated use of two regularizations and the analysis of
the fixed point thereof. The convergence rate is further improved to O(T 1/2 ) in
the case of strongly monotone games. Motivated by practical tasks where the game
evolves over time, the algorithm is extended to time-varying monotone games. We
provide the first non-asymptotic result in converging monotone games and give
improved results for equilibrium tracking games.

1

Introduction

We consider multi-player online learning in games. In this problem, the cost function for each player
is unknown to the player, and they need to learn to play the game through repeated interaction with
other players. We focus on a class of monotone and smooth games, which was first introduced
by Rosen (1965). This encapsulates a wide array of common games, such as two-player zero-sum
games, convex-concave games, and zero-sum polymatrix games (Bregman and Fokin, 1987). Our
goal is to find algorithms that solve the problem under bandit feedback and strongly uncoupled
dynamics. Within this context, each player can only access information regarding the cost function
associated with their chosen actions without prior insight into their counterparts. This allows modular
development of the multi-player system in real applications and leverages existing single-agent
learning algorithms for reuse.
Many works have focused on the time-average convergence to a Nash equilibrium on learning in
monotone games (Even-Dar et al., 2009; Syrgkanis et al., 2015; Farina et al., 2022). However,
these works only guarantee the convergence of the time average of the joint action profile. Such
⇤

Authors are ordered alphabetically.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

