Privacy amplification by random allocation

Vitaly Feldman
Apple
vitaly.edu@gmail.com

Moshe Shenfeld∗
The Hebrew university of Jerusalem
moshe.shenfeld@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the privacy amplification properties of a sampling scheme in which
a user’s data is used in k steps chosen randomly and uniformly from a sequence
(or set) of t steps. This sampling scheme has been recently applied in the context
of differentially private optimization [Chua et al., 2024a, Choquette-Choo et al.,
2025] and is also motivated by communication-efficient high-dimensional private
aggregation [Asi et al., 2025]. Existing analyses of this scheme either rely on
privacy amplification by shuffling which leads to overly conservative bounds or
require Monte Carlo simulations that are computationally prohibitive in most
practical scenarios.
We give the first theoretical guarantees and numerical estimation algorithms for
this sampling scheme. In particular, we demonstrate that the privacy guarantees
of random k-out-of-t allocation can be upper bounded by the privacy guarantees
of the well-studied independent (or Poisson) subsampling in which each step uses
the user’s data with probability (1 + o(1))k/t. Further, we provide two additional
analysis techniques that lead to numerical improvements in several parameter
regimes. Altogether, our bounds give efficiently-computable and nearly tight
numerical results for random allocation applied to Gaussian noise addition.

1

Introduction

One of the central tools in the analysis of differentially private algorithms are so-called privacy
amplification guarantees, where amplification results from sampling of the inputs. In these results one
starts with a differentially private algorithms (or a sequence of such algorithms) and a randomized
selection (or sampling) to determine which of the n elements in a dataset to run each of the t
algorithms on. Importantly, the random bits of the sampling scheme and the selected data elements
are not revealed. For a variety of sampling schemes this additional uncertainty is known to lead to
improved privacy guarantees of the resulting algorithm, that is, privacy amplification.
In the simpler, single step case a DP algorithm is run on a randomly chosen subset of the dataset. As
first shown by Kasiviswanathan et al. [2011], if each element of the dataset is included in the subset
with probability λ (independently of other elements) then the privacy of the resulting algorithm is
better (roughly) by a factor λ. This basic result has found numerous applications, most notably in
the analysis of the differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) algorithm [Bassily
et al., 2014]. In DP-SGD gradients are computed on randomly chosen batches of data points and
then privatized through clipping and Gaussian noise addition. Privacy analysis of this algorithm
is based on the so called Poisson sampling: elements in each batch and across batches are chosen
randomly and independently of each other. The absence of dependence implies that the algorithm
can be analyzed relatively easily as a direct composition of single step amplification results. The
downside of this simplicity is that such sampling is less efficient and harder to implement within the
standard ML pipelines. As a result, in practice some form of shuffling is used to define the batches in
∗

Work partially done while author was an intern at Apple

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

