Linearly Constrained Diffusion Implicit Models

Vivek Jayaram1

Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1

Steven M. Seitz1

John Thickstun2
1

University of Washington 2 Cornell University

Abstract
We introduce Linearly Constrained Diffusion Implicit Models (CDIM), a fast and
accurate approach to solving noisy linear inverse problems using diffusion models.
Traditional diffusion-based inverse methods rely on numerous projection steps to
enforce measurement consistency in addition to unconditional denoising steps.
CDIM achieves a 10–50× reduction in projection steps by dynamically adjusting
the number and size of projection steps to align a residual measurement energy
with its theoretical distribution under the forward diffusion process. This adaptive alignment preserves measurement consistency while substantially accelerating constrained inference. For noise-free linear inverse problems, CDIM exactly
satisfies the measurement constraints with few projection steps, even when existing methods fail. We demonstrate CDIM’s effectiveness across a range of applications, including super-resolution, denoising, inpainting, deblurring, and 3D point
cloud reprojection. Code and an interactive demo can be found on our project
website. 1

1

Introduction

Recovering an unknown signal from noisy linear measurements is a fundamental challenge encompassing tasks like super-resolution, inpainting, and denoising. These are examples of linear inverse
problems, for which we observe a partial measurements y ∈ Rd that was generated through a linear
operator A ∈ Rd×n applied to a signal x ∈ Rn . In the noisy case, measurements y are corrupted
with noise sampled i.i.d. from a gaussian distribution with variance σy2 :
y = Ax + σ,

where σ ∼ N (0, σy2 I)

(1)

We aim to use a pretrained diffusion model [1] as a prior to solve these underdetermined inverse
problems. However, adapting diffusion models to solve inverse problems has traditionally presented
two key challenges. First, recovering the original signal from partial measurements is computationally expensive, requiring numerous additional network evaluations at each step to guide the diffusion
towards the measurement constraint. Second, we would like to guarantee that the constraints are met
to arbitrary precision in the noiseless case, a difficult task when trying to reduce overall steps.
A common approach to diffusion for inverse problems, used by methods like Diffusion Posterior
Sampling (DPS) [2] and others works [3, 4], is to alternate unconditional diffusion steps with projection steps on the measurement error: ∇xt ∥Ax̂0 (xt ) − y∥2 , where x̂0 (xt ) is an estimate of the
posterior mean E [x0 |xt ]. However, the optimal number and size of these projection steps is difficult to determine as care must be taken to ensure that (1) the steps are sufficient to converge on the
measurement criteria, (2) unnecessary projection steps do not increase inference time, and (3) large
1

https://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/cdim/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

