Predicting Functional Brain Connectivity with
Context-Aware Deep Neural Networks

Alexander Ratzan1,† , Sidharth Goel1 , Junhao Wen3 , Christos Davatzikos4 , Erdem Varol1,2,†
1

2

Department of Computer Science, New York University
Neuroscience Institute, Grossman School of Medicine, New York University
3
Department of Radiology, Columbia University
4
Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania
†

Correspondence: asr655@nyu.edu, ev2240@nyu.edu

Abstract
Spatial location and molecular interactions have long been linked to the connectivity patterns of neural circuits. Yet, at the macroscale of human brain networks,
the interplay between spatial position, gene expression, and connectivity remains
incompletely understood. Recent efforts to map the human transcriptome and
connectome have yielded spatially resolved brain atlases, however modeling the
relationship between high-dimensional transcriptomic data and connectivity while
accounting for inherent spatial confounds presents a significant challenge. In this
paper, we present the first deep learning approaches for predicting whole-brain
functional connectivity from gene expression and regional spatial coordinates, including our proposed Spatiomolecular Transformer (SMT). SMT explicitly models
biological context by tokenizing genes based on their transcription start site (TSS)
order to capture multi-scale genomic organization, and incorporating regional
3D spatial location via a dedicated context [CLS] token within its multi-head
self-attention mechanism. We rigorously benchmark context-aware neural networks, including SMT and a single-gene resolution Multilayer-Perceptron (MLP),
to established rules-based and bilinear methods. Crucially, to ensure that learned
relationships in any model are not mere artifacts of spatial proximity, we introduce
novel spatiomolecular null maps preserving key transcriptomic autocorrelation
structure. Context-aware neural networks outperform linear methods, significantly
exceed our stringent null map estimates, and generalize across diverse connectomic datasets and parcellation resolutions. Together, these findings demonstrate a
strong, predictable link between the spatial distributions of gene expression and
functional brain network architecture, and establish a rigorously validated deep
learning framework for decoding this relationship. Code to reproduce our results is
available at: github.com/neuroinfolab/GeneEx2Conn.

1

Introduction

Throughout development and into adulthood, the coordinated expression of thousands of genes shapes
the molecular and structural scaffold of the brain [1, 2]. Functional brain networks emerge from
this scaffold through the synchronous activity of multiscale neural components [3] . This emergent
organization is central to cognition, supporting processes such as vision, language, and memory with
disruptions to these networks linked to a range of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders
[4]. Understanding the spatiomolecular landscape that gives rise to functional brain networks is a
critical step towards uncovering the genetic basis of brain function and dysfunction. Thus, we set
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

