Discovering Compositional Hallucinations in LVLMs

Sibei Yang1† Ge Zheng2 Jiajin Tang2 Jiaye Qian2 Hanzhuo Huang2 Cheng Shi3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
ShanghaiTech University 3 School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (LVLMs) have driven
the paradigm shift towards general-purpose foundation models. However, both
of them are prone to hallucinations, which compromise their factual accuracy
and reliability. While existing research primarily focuses on isolated textual- or
visual-centric errors, a critical yet underexplored phenomenon persists in LVLMs:
Even neither of textual- or visual centric errors occur, LVLMs often struggle with
a new and subtle hallucination mode that arising from composition of them. In
this paper, we define this issue as Simple Compositional Hallucination (SCHall).
Through an preliminary analysis, we present two key findings: (1) visual abstraction fails under compositional questioning, and (2) visual inputs induce degradation
in language processing, leading to hallucinations. To facilitate future research on
this phenomenon, we introduce a custom benchmark, SCBench, and propose a
novel VLR-distillation method, which serves as the first baseline to effectively mitigate SCHall. Furthermore, experiment results on publicly available benchmarks,
including both hallucination-specific and general-purpose ones, demonstrate the
effectiveness of our VLR-distillation method.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [3, 62, 8] and large vision-language models (LVLMs) [2, 5, 7,
37, 78, 4, 9] have driven the paradigm shift from task-specific to general-purpose approaches,
cementing their role as the de-facto foundation in natural language processing and computer vision
research. However, both LLMs and LVLMs are prone to hallucinations [24, 73, 55, 77, 15], posing
significant risks in real-world applications [74, 68]. In LLMs, hallucination research primarily
addresses discrepancies between model outputs and real-world facts or user inputs—i.e., factuality
hallucination and faithfulness hallucination [21]. Compared to LLMs, LVLMs incorporate visual
understanding, which naturally extends hallucinations to include visual recognition errors—textual
responses inconsistent with the referenced image—particularly in object categories [55, 33, 77],
attributes, and relationships [64, 27]. To suppress these hallucinations, recent work has achieved
promising results through improved architecture [61, 7], inference interventions [29, 22, 66, 28, 18],
and auxiliary training data or strategies [77, 26, 72, 52, 76].
Despite recent progress, most existing studies [33, 55, 34, 11] focus on isolated forms of hallucination—either textual factuality and faithfulness errors or visual recognition failures (see POPE [33] and
TruthfulQA [34] in Figure 1a). But what if neither occurs on its own? Intuitively, if an LVLM answers
both a simple vision-centric and a simple language-centric question correctly, without hallucination, it
should also succeed when the two are composed into a single query. Yet, unexpectedly, it hallucinates.
We observe that when these seemingly reliable components are combined into a single question, the
LVLM fails—hallucinating where no error existed before. For example, as shown in Figure 1(b),
the LVLM independently recognizes the goldfish in the image and understands that adding more
†

Corresponding author is Sibei Yang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

