Grounding Language with Vision: A Conditional
Mutual Information Calibrated Decoding Strategy for
Reducing Hallucinations in LVLMs

Hao Fang∗ 1 , Changle Zhou∗1 , Jiawei Kong∗1 , Kuofeng Gao1 ,
Bin Chen2 , Tao Liang1 , Guojun Ma†1 , Shu-Tao Xia† 1
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen,
{fangh25, kjw25, gkf21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, leliuzhe@163.com,
chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn, taoliangdpg@126.com,
magjhaha@126.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) are susceptible to hallucinations, where
generated responses seem semantically plausible yet exhibit little or no relevance
to the input image. Previous studies reveal that this issue primarily stems from
LVLMs’ over-reliance on language priors while disregarding the visual information during decoding. To alleviate this issue, we introduce a novel Conditional Pointwise Mutual Information (C-PMI) calibrated decoding strategy,
which adaptively strengthens the mutual dependency between generated texts
and input images to mitigate hallucinations. Unlike existing methods solely
focusing on text token sampling, we propose to jointly model the contributions of visual and textual tokens to C-PMI, formulating hallucination mitigation as a bi-level optimization problem aimed at maximizing mutual information. To solve it, we design a token purification mechanism that dynamically
regulates the decoding process by sampling text tokens remaining maximally
relevant to the given image, while simultaneously refining image tokens most
pertinent to the generated response. Extensive experiments across various benchmarks reveal that the proposed method significantly reduces hallucinations in
LVLMs while preserving decoding efficiency. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/ffhibnese/CMI_VLD_Hallucination_Mitigation.

1

Introduction

The unprecedented breakthroughs in large vision-language models (LVLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] have
expanded their applicability across various vision-language (V+L) tasks such as autonomous driving
[6, 7]. Benefiting from advanced designs of model architectures and training algorithms, LVLMs
trained on high-quality image-text pairs have exhibited outstanding capabilities in cross-modal
alignment and complex V+L understanding. Despite the remarkable success, the issue of hallucination
continues to pose challenges to LVLMs. Concretely, LVLMs may generate semantically coherent yet
factually incorrect contents that are entirely inconsistent with the input image [8, 9, 10]. E.g., describe
non-existent objects or misinterpret the attributes and relationships of visual entities within the
image. This raises serious concerns regarding the deployment of LVLMs in real-world applications,
particularly in high-risk scenarios such as medical diagnosis [11] and financial systems [12].
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

