Fast Training of Large Kernel Models
with Delayed Projections

Amirhesam Abedsoltan
UC San Diego
abedsol1@ucsd.edu

Siyuan Ma∗
Google
siyuan@siyuanm.com

Parthe Pandit
IIT Bombay
pandit@iitb.ac.in

Mikhail Belkin
UC San Diego
mbelkin@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Classical kernel machines have historically faced significant challenges in scaling
to large datasets and model sizes—a key ingredient that has driven the success
of neural networks. In this paper, we present a new methodology for building
kernel machines that can scale efficiently with both data size and model size. Our
algorithm introduces delayed projections to Preconditioned Stochastic Gradient
Descent (PSGD) allowing the training of much larger models than was previously
feasible. We validate our algorithm, EigenPro 4, across multiple datasets, demonstrating drastic training speedups without compromising the performance. Our
implementation is publicly available at: https://github.com/EigenPro/EigenPro.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods have strong theoretical foundations and broad applicability. They have also served as
the foundation for understanding many significant phenomena in modern machine learning [9, 4, 3,
28]. Despite these advantages, the scalability of kernel methods has remained a persistent challenge,
particularly when applied to large datasets. Addressing this limitation is critical for expanding the
utility of kernel-based techniques in modern machine learning applications.
A naive approach for training kernel machines is to directly solve the equivalent kernel matrix
inversion problem. In general, the computational complexity of this approach is O(n3 ), where n is
the number of training samples. Thus, computational cost grows rapidly with the size of the dataset,
making it computationally intractable for datasets with more than ∼ 105 data points.
To address this challenge, various methods employing iterative algorithms and approximations
have been proposed. Among these, Gradient Descent (GD)-based algorithms like Pegasos [21] and
EigenPro 1.0,2.0 [13, 14] have significantly reduced the computational complexity to O(n2 ). These
methods, adaptable for stochastic settings, offer more efficient implementations. Nevertheless, the
scalability of kernel machines remains constrained by the inherent linkage between the model size
and the training set.
Furthermore, the Nyström methods have emerged as a favored approach for scaling kernel machines,
with seminal works with [26] paving the way. Methods such as N YTRO [5], Falkon [20] and
ASkotch [19] leverage the Nyström Approximation (NA) in combination with other strategies to
enhance performance. N YTRO merges NA with gradient descent to improve condition number,
ASkotch combines it with block coordinate descent, whereas Falkon combines it with the Conjugate
Gradient method, facilitating the handling of large training sets. However, these strategies are limited
by model size due to memory restrictions, exhibiting quadratic scaling in relation to the size of the
∗

Work completed during author’s time at Google. Current affiliation: Lynko.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

