Delving into RL for Image Generation with CoT:
A Study on DPO vs. GRPO

Chengzhuo Tong∗4 , Ziyu Guo∗†1 , Renrui Zhang∗‡2 , Wenyu Shan∗3 , Xinyu Wei3
Zhenghao Xing1 , Hongsheng Li2 , Pheng-Ann Heng1
CUHK 1 IMIXR & 2 MMLab
∗

Equal Contribution

†

3

Peking University

Project Leader

‡

4

Shanghai AI Lab

Corresponding Author

Abstract
Recent advancements underscore the significant role of Reinforcement Learning
(RL) in enhancing the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning capabilities of large
language models (LLMs). Two prominent RL algorithms, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), are central
to these developments, showcasing different pros and cons. Autoregressive image generation, also interpretable as a sequential CoT reasoning process, presents
unique challenges distinct from LLM-based CoT reasoning. These encompass
ensuring text-image consistency, improving image aesthetic quality, and designing
sophisticated reward models, rather than relying on simpler rule-based rewards.
While recent efforts have extended RL to this domain, these explorations typically
lack an in-depth analysis of the domain-specific challenges and the characteristics
of different RL strategies. To bridge this gap, we provide the first comprehensive
investigation of the GRPO and DPO algorithms in autoregressive image generation,
evaluating their in-domain performance and out-of-domain generalization, while
scrutinizing the impact of different reward models on their respective capabilities.
Our findings reveal that GRPO and DPO exhibit distinct advantages, and crucially,
that reward models possessing stronger intrinsic generalization capabilities potentially enhance the generalization potential of the applied RL algorithms. Furthermore, we systematically explore three prevalent scaling strategies to enhance both
their in-domain and out-of-domain proficiency, deriving unique insights into efficiently scaling performance for each paradigm. We hope our study paves a new path
for inspiring future work on developing more effective RL algorithms to achieve
robust CoT reasoning in the realm of autoregressive image generation. Code is
released at https://github.com/ZiyuGuo99/Image-Generation-CoT.

1

Introduction

Recent large language models (LLMs) [33, 34, 47, 59, 64] have demonstrated remarkable achievements in diverse challenging tasks, such as mathematical problem-solving [4, 19, 32] and code
generation [8, 5, 22]. This is driven by their emergent and robust reasoning capabilities through
extended Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT) [52, 24, 18, 65, 17, 66], as exemplified by models like OpenAI’s
o1 [35], DeepSeek-R1 [16], and Kimi k1.5 [45]. These predominant advancements in reasoning
abilities are primarily facilitated by reinforcement learning (RL) [3, 61, 30] methods, applied during
post-training, which elicits a deliberate, stepwise reasoning process before reaching a final answer.
Among the prominent RL algorithms employed for fine-tuning LLMs, two representative approaches
stand out, i.e., Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [39] and Group Relative Policy Optimization
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

