Autoregressive Motion Generation with Gaussian
Mixture-Guided Latent Sampling

1

Linnan Tu1 , Lingwei Meng2 , Zongyi Li1 , Hefei Ling1∗, Shijuan Huang1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{lntu, zongyili, lhefei, shijuan_huang}@hust.edu.cn
lmeng@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing efforts in motion synthesis typically utilize either generative transformers
with discrete representations or diffusion models with continuous representations.
However, the discretization process in generative transformers can introduce motion errors, while the sampling process in diffusion models tends to be slow. In
this paper, we propose a novel text-to-motion synthesis method GMMotion that
combines a continuous motion representation with an autoregressive model, using the Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to represent the conditional probability
distribution. Unlike prior autoregressive approaches relying on residual vector
quantization, our model employs continuous motion representations derived from
the VAE’s latent space. This choice streamlines both the training and the inference
processes while mitigating discretization errors. Specifically, we utilize a causal
transformer to learn the distributions of continuous motion representations, which
are modeled with a learnable Gaussian mixture model. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our model surpasses existing state-of-the-art models in the motion
synthesis task.

1

Introduction

3D human motion synthesis, i.e., generating a vivid action sequence by control conditions, holds
promising applications in game development, embodied intelligence, and the animation. Two main
paradigms are used today: (1) One paradigm uses generative transformers with discrete motion
representation, such as GPT-like (1; 2; 3) or BERT-like (4; 5) models, to synthesize motions based
on specific conditions. Typically, these methods require a vector quantization model (6) to convert
continuous motion sequences into discrete codebook tokens. Subsequently, a generative transformer is
trained either using a teacher-forcing approach to generate discrete motion tokens autoregressively or
using a masked filling strategy to generate them non-autoregressively. Finally, a decoder synthesizes
the final motion sequence. (2) The other paradigm employs diffusion models with continuous
motion representation (7; 8; 9; 10). They first train a continuous autoencoder, primarily using VAEbased (11) models, to create a compressed and semantically rich representation of motion in latent
space. The diffusion model then utilizes various sampling strategies (12; 9; 13) and conditional
control methods (14; 15) to generate latent vectors of motion that align with the given conditions.
However, both paradigms have disadvantages.
The VQ process inevitably disrupts the continuity of the time series, which can lead to errors during
the token connection process. Some works employ residual VQ (RVQ) (4; 16), which involves
iteratively summing residuals using multiple codebooks to mitigate compression loss. However,
models using RVQ often have a structure similar to VALL-E (17), which requires separate processing
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

