X-Field: A Physically Informed Representation for 3D
X-ray Reconstruction

Feiran Wang1∗

Jiachen Tao1∗ Junyi Wu1∗ Haoxuan Wang1
Kai Wang3 Zongxin Yang4 Yan Yan1†

1

3

University of Illinois Chicago
National University of Singapore

2

(a) Visible Light

Imaging Process

Bin Duan2

University of Michigan
Harvard Medical School

4

Image

3D Representation

Source
Reﬂe
c

tion

Pixel

Scattering

3DGS

NeRF

(b) X-ray

Material 1
Source

Material 2

Penetration

Pixel
Attenuation

Material 3
X-Field

Figure 1: Comparison of Imaging Processes and Corresponding 3D Representations. (a) Visible light
interacts with surfaces mainly through scattering and reflection. 3D representations of NeRF [1] and 3DGS [2]
model this process by accumulating directional light rays. (b) Unlike previous approaches, our model represents
internal structures using homogeneous ellipsoids to capture X-ray attenuation and penetration properties.

Abstract
X-ray imaging is indispensable in medical diagnostics, yet its use is tightly regulated due to radiation exposure. Recent research borrows representations from the
3D reconstruction area to complete two tasks with reduced radiation dose: X-ray
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) and Computed Tomography (CT) reconstruction.
However, these representations fail to fully capture the penetration and attenuation
properties of X-ray imaging as they originate from visible light imaging. In this
paper, we introduce X-Field, a 3D representation informed in the physics of X-ray
imaging. First, we employ homogeneous 3D ellipsoids with distinct attenuation
coefficients to accurately model diverse materials within internal structures. Second, we introduce an efficient path-partitioning algorithm that resolves the intricate
intersection of ellipsoids to compute cumulative attenuation along an X-ray path.
We further propose a hybrid progressive initialization to refine the geometric accuracy of X-Field and incorporate material-based optimization to enhance model
fitting along material boundaries. Experiments show that X-Field achieves superior
visual fidelity on both real-world human organ and synthetic object datasets, outperforming state-of-the-art methods in X-ray NVS and CT Reconstruction. Our
code is available on the project page: https://github.com/Brack-Wang/X-Field.

1

Introduction

X-ray imaging is a cornerstone of Computed Tomography (CT) reconstruction [3, 4, 5, 6], providing
critical insights into internal structures for clinical diagnostics. X-rays undergo progressive attenuation
∗

Equal Contribution † Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

