Human-assisted Robotic Policy Refinement via
Action Preference Optimization
∗

Wenke Xia1,3,4, , Yichu Yang2 , Hongtao Wu2 , Xiao Ma2 , Tao Kong2 , Di Hu1,3,4,

†

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
2
ByteDance Seed
3
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance

Abstract
Establishing a reliable and iteratively refined robotic system is essential for deploying real-world applications. While Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models
are widely recognized as the foundation model for such robotic deployment, their
reliance on offline expert demonstrations critically limits their capacity for postdeployment refinement. To mitigate this limitation, we introduce Action Preference
Optimization (APO), a method designed to refine VLA models by human-assisted
preference alignment gathered through interaction with environments. This method
begins with a human-robot collaboration framework for reliable failure correction
and interaction trajectory collection through human intervention. However, directly
leveraging these interaction trajectories for preference optimization is non-trivial
due to the challenges of irreversible robotic actions and token distribution mismatch. To solve this, APO proposes an adaptive reweighting algorithm with binary
desirability signals derived from interaction, empowering VLA models effectively
suppress failure-prone actions while enhancing corrective action adaptation. Ultimately, APO equips VLA models with the crucial capability to learn from failure,
paving the way for their iterative refinement and reliable deployment in dynamic
environments. The experiments conducted in simulation and real-world scenarios
prove superior generalization and robustness of our human-assisted framework
across a variety of manipulation tasks. We believe this work could bring insights
for efficient and stable optimization of VLA models through human-robot collaboration. The code and dataset are released at https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/ActionPreference-Optimization.

1

Introduction

Fostering continuous improvement is crucial for the development of robust robotic manipulation
systems in real-world scenarios [10, 28, 44]. Benefiting from the capacity for generalizable reasoning
and scalable learning, Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [3, 4, 8, 18, 43, 21, 47] have been
widely recognized as the foundation model for such robotic deployment systems. However, prevailing
training paradigm for these models hinges on large-scale, offline datasets of expert demonstrations.
This severely limits their post-deployment refinement, as they lack the intrinsic ability to continually
learn from failures or adapt to novel scenarios encountered in the real world.
To enhance the continuous learning ability of robotic systems, interactive imitation learning frameworks [7, 17] have been developed to refine error-prone trajectories via iterative human-in-the-loop
∗
†

Work is done during internship at ByteDance Seed
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

