ContextAgent: Context-Aware Proactive LLM Agents
with Open-World Sensory Perceptions

Bufang Yang1† Lilin Xu2† Liekang Zeng1 Kaiwei Liu1 Siyang Jiang1 Wenrui Lu1
Hongkai Chen1 Xiaofan Jiang2 Guoliang Xing1 Zhenyu Yan1‡
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Columbia University
{bfyang,lkzeng,lk022,syjiang,wrlu,hkchen,glxing,zyyan}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk,
lx2331@columbia.edu, jiang@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have propelled intelligent
agents from reactive responses to proactive support. While promising, existing
proactive agents either rely exclusively on observations from enclosed environments (e.g., desktop UIs) with direct LLM inference or employ rule-based proactive
notifications, leading to suboptimal user intent understanding and limited functionality for proactive service. In this paper, we introduce ContextAgent, the first
context-aware proactive agent that incorporates extensive sensory contexts surrounding humans to enhance the proactivity of LLM agents. ContextAgent first
extracts multi-dimensional contexts from massive sensory perceptions on wearables
(e.g., video and audio) to understand user intentions. ContextAgent then leverages
the sensory contexts and personas from historical data to predict the necessity for
proactive services. When proactive assistance is needed, ContextAgent further
automatically calls the necessary tools to assist users unobtrusively. To evaluate this
new task, we curate ContextAgentBench, the first benchmark for evaluating contextaware proactive LLM agents, covering 1,000 samples across nine daily scenarios
and twenty tools. Experiments on ContextAgentBench show that ContextAgent outperforms baselines by achieving up to 8.5% and 6.0% higher accuracy in proactive
predictions and tool calling, respectively. We hope our research can inspire the
development of more advanced, human-centric, proactive AI assistants. The code
and dataset are publicly available at https://github.com/openaiotlab/ContextAgent.

1

Introduction

Large Language Model (LLM) agents are revolutionizing our daily life [16], assisting users with
complex tasks such as automated web navigation [12, 56, 9], software engineering [46, 51, 36], and
healthcare services [4, 43, 25]. While LLM agents are receiving growing attention and adoption,
most of them still function in a reactive paradigm: They can initiate tasks only upon explicit user
instructions and yet lack the autonomy to perceive environments and offer proactive support for users.
To further reduce reliance on instructions and alleviate human cognitive workload, proactive agents
emerge, which are capable of initiating tasks without explicit user queries [55, 24, 23, 52, 50].
For example, research on proactive agents have explored coding assistance [55, 24], conversation
participation [23, 44], re-asking strategies to reduce ambiguity in user instructions [52], and multiagent cooperation scenarios [50, 39]. However, their limited ability in open-world perceptions and
restricted functionality for proactive service hinders their potential as personal companions.
†

Equal Contribution. ‡ Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

