Ultra-high Resolution Watermarking Framework
Resistant to Extreme Cropping and Scaling

Nan Sun1 , LuYu Yuan1 , Han Fang2 , Yuxing Lu3 , ∗ Hefei Ling1 , Sijing Xie1 , Chengxin Zhao1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
National University of Singapore
3
Peking University
{sunnan, yuanly, lhefei,xiesijing,chengxinzhao }@hust.edu.cn
fanghan@nus.edu.sg, yxlu0613@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent developments in DNN-based image watermarking techniques have achieved
impressive results in protecting digital content. However, most existing methods are
constrained to low-resolution images as they need to encode the entire image, leading to prohibitive memory and computational costs when applied to high-resolution
images. Moreover, they lack robustness to distortions prevalent in large-image
transmission, such as extreme scaling and random cropping. To address these
issues, we propose a novel watermarking method based on implicit neural representations (INRs). Leveraging the properties of INRs, our method employs
resolution-independent coordinate sampling mechanism to generate watermarks
pixel-wise, achieving ultra-high resolution watermark generation with fixed and
limited memory and computational resources. This design ensures strong robustness in watermark extraction, even under extreme cropping and scaling distortions.
Additionally, we introduce a hierarchical multi-scale coordinate embedding and a
low-rank watermark injection strategy to ensure high-quality watermark generation
and robust decoding. Experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms existing schemes in terms of both robustness and computational efficiency
while preserving high image quality. Our approach achieves an accuracy greater
than 98% in watermark extraction with only 0.4% of the image area in 2K images.
These results highlight the effectiveness of our method, making it a promising
solution for large-scale and high-resolution image watermarking applications.

1

Introduction

With the rapid progress of the digital age, images have become a fundamental medium of information
exchange, reaching unprecedented scales in dissemination and application across various fields.
Concurrently, image watermarking techniques have emerged as pivotal tools for copyright protection,
data security, and integrity verification. However, with the increasing demand for processing largescale and high-resolution images, DNN-based watermarking approaches face significant challenges
in adapting to the requirements of large-scale image watermarking.
Typical deep learning-based image watermarking methods are generally designed for low-resolution
images, requiring full-image processing (Zhu et al., 2018; Tancik et al., 2020a; Fang et al., 2022).
As a result, these methods face significant limitations when applied to ultra-high resolution (UHR)
images. First, processing the entire UHR image incurs high computational costs, resulting in long
processing times and potential memory overflow, which impacts efficiency and feasibility. Second,
in the decoding phase, UHR images are more vulnerable to scaling and cropping distortions during
∗

Corresponding Author (lhefei@hust.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

