¨ Fuse2Match: Training-Free Fusion of Flow,
Diffusion, and Contrastive Models for Zero-Shot
Semantic Matching

Jing Zuo1 Jiaqi Wang1 Yonggang Qi1 # Yi-Zhe Song2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey
zuoj0723@gmail.com, {wang_jiaqi,qiyg}@bupt.edu.cn, y.song@surrey.ac.uk
# Corresponding author
1

Abstract
Recent work shows that features from Stable Diffusion (SD) and contrastively
pretrained models like DINO can be directly used for zero-shot semantic correspondence via naive feature concatenation. In this paper, we explore the stronger
potential of Stable Diffusion 3 (SD3), a rectified flow-based model with a multimodal transformer backbone (MM-DiT). We show that semantic signals in SD3
are scattered across multiple timesteps and transformer layers, and propose a
multi-level fusion scheme to extract discriminative features. Moreover, we identify that naive fusion across models suffers from inconsistent distributions, thus
leading to suboptimal performance. To address this, we propose a simple yet
effective confidence-aware feature fusion strategy that re-weights each model’s
contribution based on prediction confidence scores derived from their matching
uncertainties. Notably, this fusion approach is not only training-free but also
enables per-pixel adaptive integration of heterogeneous features. The resulting
representation, Fuse2Match, significantly outperforms strong baselines on SPair71k, PF-Pascal, and PSC6K, validating the benefit of combining SD3, SD, and
DINO through our proposed confidence-aware feature fusion. Code is available at
https://github.com/panda7777777/fuse2match

1

Introduction

Dense correspondence prediction is a fundamental computer vision task that aims to establish
pixel-level matches between two images. Conventional methods often rely on a large amount of
task-specific data and fine-tuning. In contrast, humans can naturally align semantically related
regions without supervision. This has motivated growing attention in zero-shot semantic dense
correspondence, which serves as a critical benchmark for assessing the generalizability of large-scale
foundation models.
Recent advancements in large-scale diffusion models for text-to-image generation have sparked
interest in their potential beyond generative tasks. In particular, works such as DIFT [27] and
SD+DINO [33] demonstrate that features extracted from diffusion models (i.e., Stable Diffusion [25]),
either alone or in combination with contrastive models (i.e., DINO [3]), enable strong performance in
zero-shot semantic correspondence, without any fine-tuning. However, existing research typically
adopts UNet-based Stable Diffusion and has not fully explored the latest architectures or the question
of how to effectively combine multiple pretrained models. Specifically, we ask: (i) Can the latest
flow-based diffusion models, such as SD3, bring further benefits? (ii) More importantly, can we
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

