3D Equivariant Visuomotor Policy Learning via
Spherical Projection

Boce Hu1

David Klee1 Heng Tian1 Xupeng Zhu1 Haojie Huang1
Robert Platt†,1 Robin Walters†,1
1
Northeastern University 2 Stanford University † Equal Advising

Dian Wang

,2

https://isp-3d.github.io/

Abstract
Equivariant models have recently been shown to improve the data efficiency of
diffusion policy by a significant margin. However, prior work that explored this
direction focused primarily on point cloud inputs generated by multiple cameras
fixed in the workspace. This type of point cloud input is not compatible with the
now-common setting where the primary input modality is an eye-in-hand RGB
camera like a GoPro. This paper closes this gap by incorporating into the diffusion
policy model a process that projects features from the 2D RGB camera image onto
a sphere. This enables us to reason about symmetries in SO(3) without explicitly
reconstructing a point cloud. We perform extensive experiments in both simulation
and the real world that demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms strong
baselines in terms of both performance and sample efficiency. Our work, Image-toSphere Policy (ISP), is the first SO(3)-equivariant policy learning framework for
robotic manipulation that works using only monocular RGB inputs.

1

Introduction

The eye-in-hand configuration, where the primary perception modality is a camera mounted
near the wrist of the robot, is an important setting for robotic policy learning. This setup
g
avoids the need for carefully calibrated external
camera systems, is easier to integrate onto mobile robot platforms, and provides fine-grained
visual details in the regions where the endeffector interacts with the environment. More- Figure 1: We propose the first SO(3)-equivariant
over, it is used in a growing number of large policy learning framework based on a single eyerobot datasets [27, 28, 42, 29, 2, 46].
in-hand RGB image, where the predicted action
Despite recent advances in equivariant learn- sequence transforms equivariantly under the same
ing [66, 63], there remains a lack of effective group action g ∈ SO(3) applied to the whole scene.
network architectures for leveraging equivariant structure in this setting using only RGB input. Equivariant neural networks improve data efficiency and generalization by incorporating prior knowledge of
domain symmetries directly into the model [34, 60, 41], and have recently been shown to enhance the
performance of diffusion policy [1, 70]. However, existing equivariant diffusion policy frameworks
perform best with point cloud data captured from multiple depth cameras [58]. When used with
RGB data, current equivariant policies are unable to fully leverage the SO(3) structure present in
the problem and underperform the point cloud version significantly [65]. This naturally raises the
question: can SO(3)-equivariance be achieved directly from monocular RGB images to support
Corresponding to dianwang@stanford.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

