Exploring Semantic-constrained Adversarial Example
with Instruction Uncertainty Reduction

Jin Hu1,2 Jiakai Wang2B Linna Jing1 Haolin Li3 Haodong Liu3
Haotong Qin4 Aishan Liu1 Ke Xu1,2 Xianglong Liu1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment (CCSE), Beihang University
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
4
Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zurich
hujin@buaa.edu.cn wangjk@mail.zgclab.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, semantically constrained adversarial examples (SemanticAE), which are
directly generated from natural language instructions, have become a promising
avenue for future research due to their flexible attacking forms, but have not been
thoroughly explored yet. To generate SemanticAEs, current methods fall short of
satisfactory attacking ability as the key underlying factors of semantic uncertainty
in human instructions, such as referring diversity, descriptive incompleteness, and
boundary ambiguity, have not been fully investigated. To tackle the issues, this
paper develops a multi-dimensional instruction uncertainty reduction (InsUR)
framework to generate more satisfactory SemanticAE, i.e., transferable, adaptive,
and effective. Specifically, in the dimension of the sampling method, we propose
the residual-driven attacking direction stabilization to alleviate the unstable adversarial optimization caused by the diversity of language references. By coarsely
predicting the language-guided sampling process, the optimization process will
be stabilized by the designed ResAdv-DDIM sampler, therefore releasing the
transferable and robust adversarial capability of multi-step diffusion models. In
task modeling, we propose the context-encoded attacking scenario constraint to
supplement the missing knowledge from incomplete human instructions. Guidance masking and renderer integration are proposed to regulate the constraints
of 2D/3D SemanticAE, activating stronger scenario-adapted attacks. Moreover,
in the dimension of generator evaluation, we propose the semantic-abstracted attacking evaluation enhancement by clarifying the evaluation boundary based on
the label taxonomy, facilitating the development of more effective SemanticAE
generators. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the transfer attack performance of InSUR. Besides, it is worth highlighting that we realize the
reference-free generation of semantically constrained 3D adversarial examples by
utilizing language-guided 3D generation models for the first time.

1

Introduction

Adversarial example (AE), showing that small perturbations can impact the performance of deep
learning models, is broadly focused due to its potential to promote model robustness and secure
applications in practice. A series of studies has uncovered several forms of AEs, including physicalworld AEs [1, 2, 3, 4], transfer AEs [5, 3] and naturalistic AEs [6, 7], as well as the applications in
evaluating real-world recognition [8, 9], autonomous driving [10, 11, 12] or LLM systems [13, 14].
While most adversarial example research focuses on finding AEs around existing data, generating
AEs from natural language instructions without referenced data has not yet been thoroughly explored,
i.e., to find Semantic-Constrained Adversarial Examples (SemanticAE). Specifically, given a certain
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

