Towards Reliable Identification of
Diffusion-based Image Manipulations

Alex Costanzino∗
University of Bologna
Danijela Horak
BBC R&D

Woody Bayliss
BBC R&D
Ivan Laptev
MBZUAI

Juil Sock
BBC R&D
Philip Torr
University of Oxford

Marc Gorriz Blanch
BBC R&D
Fabio Pizzati
MBZUAI

Abstract
Changing facial expressions, gestures, or background details may dramatically
alter the meaning conveyed by an image. Notably, recent advances in diffusion
models greatly improve the quality of image manipulation while also opening the
door to misuse. Identifying changes made to authentic images, thus, becomes an
important task, constantly challenged by new diffusion-based editing tools. To this
end, we propose a novel approach for ReliAble iDentification of inpainted AReas
(RADAR). RADAR builds on existing foundation models and combines features
from different image modalities. It also incorporates an auxiliary contrastive loss
that helps to isolate manipulated image patches. We demonstrate these techniques
to significantly improve both the accuracy of our method and its generalisation
to a large number of diffusion models. To support realistic evaluation, we further
introduce BBC-PAIR, a new comprehensive benchmark, with images tampered by
28 diffusion models. Our experiments show that RADAR achieves excellent results,
outperforming the state-of-the-art in detecting and localising image edits made
by both seen and unseen diffusion models. Further information about our code,
data and models, including separate licensing terms, will be publicly available at
https://alex-costanzino.github.io/radar/.

1

Introduction

With the advent of diffusion models [21, 15, 69, 52] and associated user-friendly tools [38, 47, 81, 89],
image editing has never been so easy and powerful. Along with an unprecedented creative potential,
such capabilities also imply risks of misuse. Today, even users with minimal technical expertise can
produce highly realistic image edits, raising concerns about the trustworthiness of visual media. In
particular, text-based inpainting methods [7, 6] can seamlessly insert arbitrary objects into existing
scenes. Such edits pose substantial societal threats: for instance, malicious actors could insert
compromising elements into a real picture, creating the potential for misinformation, false evidence,
or reputational harm [77, 19, 34]. Moreover, removal of certain image elements may aid propaganda
or help hide evidence [10]. These safety issues are addressed by approaches for Image Forgery
Detection and Localisation (IFDL) [32, 45, 94, 39]. The objective of such methods is to determine
whether images have been tampered by editing techniques and to localise modified regions, allowing
for the identification of synthetically generated elements.
Given the growing number of image manipulation tools, generalisation of IFDL to the large variety of
diffusion models presents a significant challenge. Existing IFDL methods focus mostly on Photoshopinspired image manipulation – such as copy-pasting visual content – and have limited capabilities
∗

This work was carried out while the author was on a research visit at the University of Oxford.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

