Rethinking Out-of-Distribution Detection and
Generalization with Collective Behavior Dynamics

Zhenbin Wang1 , Lei Zhang1,2∗, Wei Huang1 , Zhao Zhang1 , Zizhou Wang3
1
Machine Intelligence Laboratory, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
2
Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory, Chengdu, China
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
wangzhenbin@stu.scu.edu.cn, leizhang@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) problems commonly occur when models process data
with a distribution significantly deviates from the in-distribution (InD) training data.
In this paper, we hypothesize that a field or potential more essential than features
exists, and features are not the ultimate essence of the data but rather manifestations
of them during training. With this in mind, we first treat the output of the feature
extractor as charged particles and investigate their collective behavior dynamics
within a self-consistent electric field. Then, to characterize the relationship between
OOD problems and dynamical equations, we introduce the basin of attraction and
prove that its boundary can be represented as the zero level set of a differentiable
function of the potential, i.e., the spatial integral of field. We further demonstrate
that: i) InD and OOD inputs can be effectively separated based on whether they are
steady state solutions for specific field conditions, enabling robust OOD detection
and outperforming prior methods over three benchmarks. ii) the generalization
capability correlates positively with the basin of attraction. By analyzing the
dynamics of perturbations, we propose that the potential is well-characterized
by a Fourier-domain form of the Poisson equation. Evaluated on six benchmark
datasets, our method rivals the SoTA approaches for OOD generalization and can
be seamlessly integrated with them to deliver additional gains. The code is available
at https://github.com/wongzbb/CBD.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems [15, 25, 70] have achieved significant success under the i.i.d. assumption,
where training and test data are drawn from the same distribution, known as in-distribution (InD).
However, this assumption is often violated in real-world scenarios [89, 95], as test data frequently
originate from different distributions, referred to as out-of-distribution (OOD) data, which causes
distribution shift and substantial performance degradation [20, 61, 21, 87]. Prior work on addressing
OOD challenges primarily follows two directions: 1) OOD detection [19, 27, 49], which aims to
identify test inputs that deviate from the training distribution to enhance model robustness and safety
on unknown or anomalous data; 2) OOD generalization [8, 57, 1], which seeks to improve model
performance on OOD data to enhance model transferability and adaptability. Despite extensive
prior works and diverse methodologies, recent study [72, 36] in the community inspired by other
disciplines is expected to provide new perspectives and insights into OOD problems.
Recent advancements witness the success of physics-inspired deep generative models, such as the
Poisson flow model derived from electrostatics [92, 93] and the model based on the stochastic reversed
heat equation [63]. The former abstracts data as charges and generates samples by evolving them
∗

The corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

