GPO: Learning from Critical Steps to Improve LLM
Reasoning

Zelei Cheng∗
AI Foundations
Capital One
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
zelei.cheng@capitalone.com

Jiahao Yu
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
jiahao.yu@northwestern.edu

Xian Wu†
Meta AI
xianwu123@meta.com

Xinyu Xing†
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
xinyu.xing@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used in various domains, showing
impressive potential on different tasks. Recently, reasoning LLMs have been proposed to improve the reasoning or thinking capabilities of LLMs to solve complex
problems. Despite the promising results of reasoning LLMs, enhancing the multistep reasoning capabilities of LLMs still remains a significant challenge. While
existing optimization methods have advanced the LLM reasoning capabilities, they
often treat reasoning trajectories as a whole, without considering the underlying
critical steps within the trajectory. In this paper, we introduce Guided Pivotal
Optimization (GPO), a novel fine-tuning strategy that dives into the reasoning
process to enable more effective improvements. GPO first identifies the ‘critical
step’ within a reasoning trajectory - a point that the model must carefully proceed
to succeed at the problem. We locate the critical step by estimating the advantage
function. GPO then resets the policy to the critical step, samples the new rollout,
and prioritizes the learning process on those rollouts. This focus allows the model
to learn more effectively from pivotal moments within the reasoning process to
improve the reasoning performance. We demonstrate that GPO is a general strategy
that can be integrated with various optimization methods to improve reasoning
performance. Besides theoretical analysis, our experiments across challenging
reasoning benchmarks show that GPO can consistently and significantly enhance
the performance of existing optimization methods, showcasing its effectiveness and
generalizability in improving LLM reasoning by concentrating on pivotal moments
within the generation process.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of
tasks, such as code generation [1], navigating web pages [2], and question answering [3]. However,
achieving reliable multi-step reasoning remains a significant frontier in the LLM research [4, 5].
∗
†

Work done while at Northwestern University.
Correspondence to: Xian Wu <xianwu123@meta.com>, Xinyu Xing <xinyu.xing@northwestern.edu>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

