SPARTAN: A Sparse Transformer World Model
Attending to What Matters

Anson Lei
Applied AI Lab
University of Oxford, UK
anson@robots.ox.ac.uk

Bernhard Schölkopf
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
bs@tue.mpg.de

Ingmar Posner
Applied AI Lab
University of Oxford, UK
ingmar@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Capturing the interactions between entities in a structured way plays a central role
in world models that flexibly adapt to changes in the environment. Recent works
motivate the benefits of models that explicitly represent the structure of interactions
and formulate the problem as discovering local causal structures. In this work,
we demonstrate that reliably capturing these relationships in complex settings
remains challenging. To remedy this shortcoming, we postulate that sparsity is a
critical ingredient for the discovery of such local structures. To this end, we present
the SPARse TrANsformer World model (SPARTAN), a Transformer-based world
model that learns context-dependent interaction structures between entities in a
scene. By applying sparsity regularisation on the attention patterns between objectfactored tokens, SPARTAN learns sparse, context-dependent interaction graphs
that accurately predict future object states. We further extend our model to adapt
to sparse interventions with unknown targets in the dynamics of the environment.
This results in a highly interpretable world model that can efficiently adapt to
changes. Empirically, we evaluate SPARTAN against the current state-of-the-art in
object-centric world models in observation-based environments and demonstrate
that our model can learn local causal graphs that accurately reflect the underlying
interactions between objects, achieving significantly improved few-shot adaptation
to dynamics changes, as well as robustness against distractors.

1

Introduction

World Models [11] have emerged in recent years as a promising paradigm to enable a wide range of
downstream tasks such as video prediction [50, 13], physical reasoning [7], and model-based RL [12].
Recent advances have employed the transformer architecture [48] to develop world models capable of
performing accurate predictions over ever longer horizons in increasingly complex settings [30, 38].
Owing to the flexibility of attention mechanisms, the transformer architecture can be combined
with object-centric representations [28] to accurately capture interactions between objects, achieving
state-of-the-art prediction performance [53]. However, the ability to generalise and adapt to changes
in the environment in a data-efficient manner remains a significant challenge. Evidence suggests
that transformer world models can be sensitive to changes in distractors [39], further highlighting
the need for models to capture robust and generalisable interactions. As such, recent works have
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

