CPPO: Accelerating the Training of Group Relative
Policy Optimization-Based Reasoning Models

Zhihang Lin1,2 , Mingbao Lin3 , Yuan Xie2,4∗, Rongrong Ji1†
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute, China
3
Rakuten, Singapore
4
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
lzhedu@foxmail.com, linmb001@outlook.com, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
This paper introduces Completion Pruning Policy Optimization (CPPO) to accelerate the training of reasoning models based on Group Relative Policy Optimization
(GRPO). GRPO, while effective, incurs high training costs due to the need to sample multiple completions for each question. Our experiment and theoretical analysis
reveal that the number of completions impacts model accuracy yet increases training time multiplicatively, and not all completions contribute equally to policy
training—their contribution depends on their relative advantage. To address these
issues, we propose CPPO, which prunes completions with low absolute advantages,
significantly reducing the number needed for gradient calculation and updates.
Additionally, we introduce a dynamic completion allocation strategy to maximize
GPU utilization by incorporating additional questions, further enhancing training
efficiency. Experiments show that CPPO achieves up to 7.98× speedup on GSM8K
and 3.48× on Math while preserving or even enhancing the accuracy compared to
the original GRPO. We release our code at https://github.com/lzhxmu/CPPO.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a surge in the development and application of advanced reasoning models,
with models such as OpenAI-o1 [11], Deepseek-R1 [7], and Kimi-k1.5 [25] being prime examples.
These models exhibit remarkable capability in complex reasoning tasks, such as mathematics, coding,
and scientific reasoning through step-by-step inference and reflection.
Reinforcement learning has been proven to be an effective method for training reasoning models.
Deepseek-R1 [7] demonstrates that reasoning patterns can be effectively elicited through rule-based
reinforcement learning. It employs Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [21], which differs
from Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [20] by estimating the baseline directly from group scores,
eliminating the need for a critic model. However, this necessitates sampling a group of completions
for each question, rendering the training process computationally expensive. Subsequently, GRPO
computes the reward for each completion using a rule-based reward function and calculates the
relative advantage of each completion. To ensure training stability, GRPO also calculates the ratio of
the predicted probabilities of the policy model, reference model, and old policy model for a group
of completions as part of the policy objective function, further increasing the training overhead of
reinforcement learning. The substantial training overhead of GRPO limits its training efficiency and
scalability. Improving the training efficiency is an important and practical problem.
∗
†

Project Leader
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

