ObCLIP: Oblivious CLoud-Device Hybrid Image
Generation with Privacy Preservation
∗

Haoqi Wu1, , Wei Dai1 , Ming Xu2 , Li Wang1 , Qiang Yan1
1
TikTok Inc., 2 National University of Singapore

Abstract
Diffusion Models have gained significant popularity due to their remarkable capabilities in image generation, albeit at the cost of intensive computation requirement.
Meanwhile, despite their widespread deployment in inference services such as Midjourney, concerns about the potential leakage of sensitive information in uploaded
user prompts have arisen. Existing solutions either lack rigorous privacy guarantees
or fail to strike an effective balance between utility and efficiency. To bridge this
gap, we propose ObCLIP, a plug-and-play safeguard that enables oblivious clouddevice hybrid generation. By oblivious, each input prompt is transformed into a
set of semantically similar candidate prompts that differ only in sensitive attributes
(e.g., gender, ethnicity). The cloud server processes all candidate prompts without
knowing which one is the real one, thus preventing any prompt leakage. To mitigate
server cost, only a small portion of denoising steps is performed upon the large
cloud model. The intermediate latents are then sent back to the client, which selects
the targeted latent and completes the remaining denoising using a small device
model. Additionally, we analyze and incorporate several cache-based accelerations
that leverage temporal and batch redundancy, effectively reducing computation cost
with minimal utility degradation. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets
demonstrate that ObCLIP provides rigorous privacy and comparable utility to cloud
models with slightly increased server cost.

1

Introduction

Stable diffusion models [35, 34] have emerged as a de-facto standard technique in text-to-image
(T2I) generation due to their superior capability to generate high-quality images. This drives the
widespread application of T2I in inference services hosted by cloud servers. As depicted in Figure 1,
the client uploads text prompts to the cloud, which generates images and sends them back to the
client. This paradigm is widely-adopted since the generation typically requires huge computation
cost, which is unaffordable for clients, especially for devices with limited computation power.
Client

Text
Prompt

“Portrait of 18-year-old
Caucasian girl with green hair”

Cloud Server

Text Encoder

Decoder
Image
Encoder

Large
U-net

Sensitive Attributes

Figure 1: Illustration of existing server-only text-to-image generation services.
However, despite its growing popularity, there remain two essential problems: ① Prompt privacy remains a critical concern [43, 48]: In image generation services like Midjourney [30] and DALL·E [32],
∗

Email at haoqi.1997@tiktok.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

