Language-Bias-Resilient Visual Question Answering
via Adaptive Multi-Margin Collaborative Debiasing

Huanjia Zhu
Beijing Institute of Technology, Zhuhai
bvyih3@gmail.com
Yishu Liu
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
liuyishu@stu.hit.edu.cn

Shuyuan Zheng
The University of Osaka
zheng@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Sudong Cai∗
Beijing Institute of Technology, Zhuhai
caisudong.ai@gmail.com

Bingzhi Chen∗
Beijing Institute of Technology, Zhuhai
chenbingzhi@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Language bias in Visual Question Answering (VQA) arises when models exploit
spurious statistical correlations between question templates and answers, particularly in out-of-distribution scenarios, thereby neglecting essential visual cues
and compromising genuine multimodal reasoning. Despite numerous efforts to
enhance the robustness of VQA models, a principled understanding of how such
bias originates and influences model behavior remains underdeveloped. In this
paper, we address this gap through a comprehensive empirical and theoretical
analysis, revealing that modality-specific gradient imbalances, which originate
from the inherent heterogeneity of multimodal data, lead to skewed feature fusion
and biased classifier weights. To alleviate these issues, we propose a novel MultiMargin Collaborative Debiasing (MMCD) framework2 , which adaptively integrates
frequency-aware, confidence-aware, and difficulty-aware angular margins with
a dynamic, difficulty-aware contrastive learning mechanism to reshape decision
boundaries under biased training conditions. Extensive experiments across multiple
challenging VQA benchmarks confirm the consistent superiority of our proposed
MMCD over state-of-the-art baselines in combating language bias.

1

Introduction

Visual Question Answering (VQA) has emerged as a challenging task that blends computer vision and
natural language processing to provide answers to natural language questions about images. The core
difficulty of VQA models lies in their ability to reason multimodally, combining visual information
from images with language patterns in questions. Recent progress [36, 29, 42, 7, 4, 38] in deep
learning has enhanced the capabilities of VQA models. However, studies have shown that networks
still suffer from language bias [15, 6, 9, 17, 4, 29, 36], where the model learns spurious correlations
between questions and answers. This bias occurs when models overly rely on common patterns
in questions and answers, neglecting crucial visual information. These models often perform well
∗
2

Corresponding authors: Bingzhi Chen and Sudong Cai.
Code is available at https://github.com/bvyih3/2025-NIPS-MMCD

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

