Decoupled Entropy Minimization

Jing Ma2∗ , Hanlin Li2∗ , Xiang Xiang1,2∗
School of Computer Science and Tech, Huazhong University of Science and Tech, China
2
School of AI and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China

1

Abstract
Entropy Minimization (EM) is beneficial to reducing class overlap, bridging domain
gap, and restricting uncertainty for various tasks in machine learning, yet its
potential is limited. To study the internal mechanism of EM, we reformulate and
decouple the classical EM into two parts with opposite effects: cluster aggregation
driving factor (CADF) rewards dominant classes and prompts a peaked output
distribution, while gradient mitigation calibrator (GMC) penalizes high-confidence
classes based on predicted probabilities. Furthermore, we reveal the limitations
of classical EM caused by its coupled formulation: 1) reward collapse impedes
the contribution of high-certainty samples in the learning process, and 2) easyclass bias induces misalignment between output distribution and label distribution.
To address these issues, we propose Adaptive Decoupled Entropy Minimization
(AdaDEM), which normalizes the reward brought from CADF and employs a
marginal entropy calibrator (MEC) to replace GMC. AdaDEM outperforms DEM*,
an upper-bound variant of classical EM, and achieves superior performance across
various imperfectly supervised learning tasks in noisy and dynamic environments.

1

Introduction

Entropy Minimization (EM) is a common self-supervised optimization method, which minimizes the
conditional entropy of model predictions to reduce the class overlap [1]. It facilitates a low-density
separation between classes and enhances confident predictions. EM has been shown to be useful for
clustering, semi-supervised, and unsupervised learning [2; 3; 4]. Conditional entropy is also a widely
validated calibration tool for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), since it measures the prediction error
and distribution shifts to some extent [5]. EM helps to bridge the domain gap and push the model’s
decision boundary towards the low-density regions of the target distribution. Therefore, EM is widely
used in active learning, domain adaptation, and online learning as well [5; 6; 7; 8; 9].
Although Entropy Minimization is applied to a variety of tasks due to its simplicity and generality,
previous literature indicates that the potential of classical EM is limited [10; 11; 12], causing unsatisfactory performance. To investigate the internal mechanisms by which EM effectively optimizes
model parameters in an unsupervised manner, we attempt to reformulate and decouple the EM. We
divide the conditional entropy in EM into two independent parts with entirely opposite effects: a
positive-acting factor termed Cluster Aggregation Driving Factor (CADF) and a negative-acting
factor called Gradient Mitigation Calibrator (GMC). Minimizing CADF rewards dominant classes
and promotes a peaked output distribution of the model, while minimizing GMC (log-sum-exp of the
logits) penalizes the maximum logit and high-confidence classes based on predicted probabilities and
calibrates the optimization direction, serving as a regularization term. This reformulation enables
systematic analysis of these two parts and refining the classical EM, as shown in Fig. 1.
Importantly, we demonstrate that the highly coupled formulation of conditional entropy inherently
constrains the effectiveness of classical EM. First, samples with lower confidence exert a more pro∗

Equal contribution, co-first author; Correspondence to xex@hust.edu.cn (also with Peng Cheng Lab)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

