Sparse Image Synthesis via Joint Latent and RoI Flow

Ziteng Gao

Jay Zhangjie Wu

Mike Zheng Shou∗

Show Lab, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Natural images often exhibit underlying sparse structures, with information density
varying significantly across different spatial locations. However, most generative
models rely on dense grid-based pixels or latents, neglecting this inherent sparsity. In this paper, we explore modeling visual generation paradigm via sparse
non-grid latent representations. Specifically, we design a sparse autoencoder that
represents an image as a small number of latents with their positional properties
(i.e., regions of interest, RoIs) with high reconstruction quality. We then explore
training flow-matching transformers jointly on non-grid latents and RoI values. To
the best knowledge, we are the first to address spatial sparsity using RoIs in generative process. Experimental results show that our sparse flow-based transformers
have competitive performance compared with dense grid-based counterparts with
significantly reduced lower compute, and reaches a competitive 2.76 FID with just
64 latents on class-conditional ImageNet 256 × 256 generation.

1

Introduction

Deep visual generative models have advanced significantly in recent years, achieving impressive visual
quality on image [1, 2], video [3], and 3D domains [4]. Current visual generation pipelines typically
start by encoding raw data (e.g., images) into compact latent representations with autoencoders, and
then use diffusion, masking modeling, or autoregressive methods to generate such latents, as this
pipeline exemplified by latent diffusion [1]. Flagship text-to-image models, e.g., Stable Diffusion [5]
and FLUX [6], follow this line and compress spatial dimensions at typically 8× factor, significantly
lowering computational costs and modeling complexity in generative training.
Though being a core component of visual generation, autoencoders conventionally assume a gridbased space of latent structures with the uniform information density. However, natural images
often exhibit highly non-uniform information density and require adaptive computation across spatial
locations [7, 8]. For example, in a landscape image, the sky background occupies numerous pixels
while being worth fewer latent units to reconstruct and generate. In contrast, intricate foreground
objects may require more latents to capture their details. Existing visual generation pipelines fail to
address this point, as they rely on dense uniform grid-based latent structures and cannot adaptively
allocate more computation to intricate foregrounds.
This paper aims to study this point. First, we propose a sparse visual autoencoder that learns to
compress an image into a set of sparse non-grid latents along with their positional property, i.e.,
region of interests (RoIs), and then recover image pixels from them. The RoIs explicitly characterize
the spatial locations of the latents in bounding box formulation, and can be learned jointly with latents
in an end-to-end manner by the plain reconstruction loss. The resulting sparse visual autoencoder
reaches high compression rates by prioritizing latents to detailed regions while maintaining high
reconstruction fidelity. Then, we design sparse flow-based transformers to generate latents and RoIs
by modeling the joint flow of them with the velocity prediction in the denoising process [9, 10]. At
∗

The corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

