FlowCut: Rethinking Redundancy via Information
Flow for Efficient Vision-Language Models

Jintao Tong1

Wenwei Jin2‡ Pengda Qin2 Anqi Li3 Yixiong Zou1∗
Yuhong Li2∗ Yuhua Li1 Ruixuan Li1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Xiaohongshu Inc. 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

{jintaotong, yixiongz}@hust.edu.cn

2

{wenwei1217.jin, daniel.yuhong}@gmail.com

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) excel at multimodal understanding but
suffer from high computational costs due to redundant vision tokens. Existing
pruning methods typically rely on single-layer attention scores to rank and prune
redundant visual tokens to solve this inefficiency. However, as the interaction
between tokens and layers is complicated, this raises a basic question: Is such
a simple single-layer criterion sufficient to identify redundancy? To answer this
question, we rethink the emergence of redundant visual tokens from a fundamental
perspective: information flow, which models the interaction between tokens and
layers by capturing how information moves between tokens across layers. We find
(1) the CLS token acts as an information relay, which can simplify the complicated
flow analysis; (2) the redundancy emerges progressively and dynamically via
layer-wise attention concentration; and (3) relying solely on attention scores from
single layers can lead to contradictory redundancy identification. Based on this, we
propose FlowCut, an information-flow-aware pruning framework, mitigating the
insufficiency of the current criterion for identifying redundant tokens and better
aligning with the model’s inherent behaviors. Extensive experiments show that
FlowCut achieves superior results, outperforming SoTA by 1.6% on LLaVA-1.57B with 88.9% token reduction, and by 4.3% on LLaVA-NeXT-7B with 94.4%
reduction, delivering 3.2× speed-up in the prefilling stage. Our code is available at
https://github.com/TungChintao/FlowCut.

1

Introduction

Large vision-language models (LVLMs) [4, 26, 41, 53] have achieved remarkable progress, demonstrating impressive abilities in multimodal perception and reasoning by effectively bridging visual
and linguistic modalities. However, LVLMs face significant challenges in computational costs
and memory demands, primarily caused by the massive amounts of vision tokens, especially for
high-resolution images [39, 55] and multi-frame videos [36, 44], limiting their practical applications.
As visual signals inherently contain more spatial redundancy than information-dense text [12, 45, 52],
a surge of recent efforts [6, 57, 59, 62] introduce token reduction strategies to solve the inefficiency of
LVLMs by pruning visual tokens in a training-free manner. These methods typically rely on attention
scores to rank and prune tokens either at a specific layer or several LLM layers with a pre-defined
prune ratio for each layer. However, regardless of the pruning schedule, redundancy is assessed solely
based on the attention scores from the current layer. This raises a basic question: Are redundancy
defined through such a simple single-layer single-criterion score, as the core of current pruning
methods, rigorous enough to support pruning decisions?
∗

Corresponding author. ‡ Project leader.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

