Fast Rate Bounds for Multi-Task and
Meta-Learning with Different Sample Sizes

Hossein Zakerinia
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
hossein.zakerinia@ista.ac.at
Christoph H. Lampert
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
chl@ista.ac.at

Abstract
We present new fast-rate PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds for multi-task and
meta-learning in the unbalanced setting, i.e. when the tasks have training sets of
different sizes, as is typically the case in real-world scenarios. Previously, only
standard-rate bounds were known for this situation, while fast-rate bounds were
limited to the setting where all training sets are of equal size. Our new bounds
are numerically computable as well as interpretable, and we demonstrate their
flexibility in handling a number of cases where they give stronger guarantees
than previous bounds. Besides the bounds themselves, we also make conceptual
contributions: we demonstrate that the unbalanced multi-task setting has different
statistical properties than the balanced situation, specifically that proofs from
the balanced situation do not carry over to the unbalanced setting. Additionally,
we shed light on the fact that the unbalanced situation allows two meaningful
definitions of multi-task risk, depending on whether all tasks should be considered
equally important or if sample-rich tasks should receive more weight than samplepoor ones.

1

Introduction

In multi-task learning (MTL) multiple related tasks are learned jointly, with the goal of improving
generalization performance compared to learning each task separately. As a result, MTL is particularly promising in settings where tasks are individually data-scarce but collectively rich in shared
information, such as personalized Internet services, healthcare applications, or autonomous driving.
Due to its fundamental nature, aspects of MTL also influence many other recent developments
in the field of machine learning, such as distributed learning (Verbraeken et al., 2020), federated
learning (Zhao et al., 2018; Kairouz et al., 2021), multi-agent learning (Gronauer & Diepold, 2022)
or meta-learning (Hospedales et al., 2021). Besides numerous algorithmic contributions, there is
also a rich collection of results on the theoretical properties of MTL, in particular the improved
generalization guarantees it provides compared to single-task learning.
Recent works on the generalization properties of machine learning models are often stated in the
framework of PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds (McAllester, 1998). In contrast to classical
approaches, such as VC-theory (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971) or Rademacher complexity (Bartlett
& Mendelson, 2002), these tend to provide tighter results with the potential to not only provide
structural insight but even be numerically informative (i.e. non-vacuous) (Lotfi et al., 2022, 2024).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

