A High-Dimensional Statistical Method for Optimizing
Transfer Quantities in Multi-Source Transfer Learning
Qingyue Zhang1∗, Haohao Fu1∗, Guanbo Huang1∗, Yaoyuan Liang1 , Chang Chu1 ,
Tianren Peng1 , Yanru Wu1 , Qi Li1 , Yang Li1†, Shao-Lun Huang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Multi-source transfer learning provides an effective solution to data scarcity in realworld supervised learning scenarios by leveraging multiple source tasks. In this
field, existing works typically use all available samples from sources in training,
which constrains their training efficiency and may lead to suboptimal results.
To address this, we propose a theoretical framework that answers the question:
what is the optimal quantity of source samples needed from each source task to
jointly train the target model? Specifically, we introduce a generalization error
measure based on K-L divergence, and minimize it based on high-dimensional
statistical analysis to determine the optimal transfer quantity for each source task.
Additionally, we develop an architecture-agnostic and data-efficient algorithm
OTQMS to implement our theoretical results for target model training in multisource transfer learning. Experimental studies on diverse architectures and two
real-world benchmark datasets show that our proposed algorithm significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in both accuracy and data efficiency. The
code is available at https://github.com/zqy0126/OTQMS.

1

Introduction

0.9
0.85

Accuracy

Nowadays, various machine learning algorithms
0.8
have achieved remarkable success by leveraging
0.7
large-scale labeled training data. However, in
AllSources Target
0.6
many practical scenarios, the limited availability
Target-Only
of labeled data presents a significant challenge, 0.5
0
50 73 100
150
200
250
300
350
400
where transfer learning emerges as an effective
Target Training Samples Per Class
solution [33]. Transfer learning aims to leverage Figure 1: More source samples does not alknowledge from tasks with abundant data or be- ways mean better performance. Incorporating all
ing well-trained, known as the source tasks, to source samples may bring negative impact, which
improve the performance of a new learning task, is illustrated by the comparison of two strategies,
known as the target task. Given its numerous using target task samples with all source samapplications, transfer learning has gained wide ples (blue) and using target task samples only
popularity and seen success in a variety of fields, (red), evaluated on the equally divided 5-task CIsuch as computer vision [28], natural language FAR10 dataset. Theoretically, although incorporatprocessing [24], recommendation systems [7] ing more source samples reduces model variance
and anomaly detection [26]. Traditionally, trans- by expanding the training data, the discrepancy
fer learning has focused on the transfer between between the source and target tasks introduces ada single source task and a target task. However, ditional bias.
there is a growing emphasis on multi-source
transfer learning, which leverages multiple source tasks to enhance the training of the target task [23].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: Yang Li (yangli@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn), Shao-Lun Huang(twn2gold@gmail.com)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

