VFRTok: Variable Frame Rates Video Tokenizer with
Duration-Proportional Information Assumption

Tianxiong Zhong1∗, Xingye Tian2 , Boyuan Jiang2 , Xuebo Wang2†,
Xin Tao2 , Pengfei Wan2 , Zhiwei Zhang1†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Kling Team, Kuaishou Technology
inkosizhong@gmail.com, {tianxingye,jiangboyuan,wangxuebo}@kuaishou.com,
{taoxin,wanpengfei}@kuaishou.com, zwzhang@bit.edu.cn,

Abstract
Modern video generation frameworks based on Latent Diffusion Models suffer
from inefficiencies in tokenization due to the Frame-Proportional Information Assumption. Existing tokenizers provide fixed temporal compression rates, causing
the computational cost of the diffusion model to scale linearly with the frame
rate. The paper proposes the Duration-Proportional Information Assumption:
the upper bound on the information capacity of a video is proportional to the
duration rather than the number of frames. Based on this insight, the paper introduces VFRTok, a Transformer-based video tokenizer, that enables variable frame
rate encoding and decoding through asymmetric frame rate training between the
encoder and decoder. Furthermore, the paper proposes Partial Rotary Position
Embeddings (RoPE) to decouple position and content modeling, which groups
correlated patches into unified tokens. The Partial RoPE effectively improves
content-awareness, enhancing the video generation capability. Benefiting from
the compact and continuous spatio-temporal representation, VFRTok achieves
competitive reconstruction quality and state-of-the-art generation fidelity while
using only 1/8 tokens compared to existing tokenizers. The code and weights are
released at: https://github.com/KwaiVGI/VFRTok.

Other

Other

Sample
High fps Video

Ours

Ours

Sample

Other

Other

Ours

Ours

Low fps Video

Frames

Enc.

Latents

Dec.

High fps Video

Low fps Video

Cosmos
Omni
LTX

300
gFVD

Real-world

VFRTok

200
100

Frames

Figure 1: VFRTok is based on the Duration-Proportional
Information Assumption. The number of tokens for other
tokenizers grows with frame rate. VFRTok maintains a
fixed length latents tied to video duration and supports
asymmetric frame-rate encoding and decoding.

11.9× lower

0

6

Figure 2: Efficiency-quality trade-off,
where lower-left indicates better performance. VFRTok provides a more efficient latent representation.

* This work was conducted during the author’s internship at Kling Team.
†

2
4
TFLOPs

Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

