One Sample is Enough to Make Conformal Prediction
Robust
Soroush H. Zargarbashi1 Mohammad Sadegh Akhondzadeh2 Aleksandar Bojchevski2
1
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, 2 University of Cologne
[zargarbashi, akhondzadeh, bojchevski]@cs.uni-koeln.de

Abstract
For any black-box model, conformal prediction (CP) returns prediction sets guaranteed to include the true label with high adjustable probability. Robust CP (RCP)
extends the guarantee to the worst case noise up to a pre-defined magnitude. For
RCP, a well-established approach is to use randomized smoothing since it is applicable to any black-box model and provides smaller sets compared to deterministic
methods. However, smoothing-based robustness requires many model forward
passes per each input which is computationally expensive. We show that conformal
prediction attains some robustness even with a single forward pass on a randomly
perturbed input. Using any binary certificate we propose a single sample robust CP
(RCP1). Our approach returns robust sets with smaller average set size compared to
SOTA methods which use many (e.g. ∼ 100) passes per input. Our key insight is to
certify the conformal procedure itself rather than individual conformity scores. Our
approach is agnostic to the task (classification and regression). We further extend
our approach to smoothing-based robust conformal risk control.

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks return uncalibrated probability estimates [14], and other uncertainty quantification methods (like Bayesian and ensemble models, Monte-Carlo dropout) are computationally
expensive. Additionally, these methods do not usually provide formal statistical guarantees. Instead,
conformal prediction (CP) is a post-processing method returning prediction sets with a distributionfree and model-agnostic coverage guarantee, ensuring that the true answer is in the set with an
adjustable high probability. To apply CP, we need a conformity1 score function s(x, y) capturing the
agreement between x, and y (e.g. softmax). We compute a conformal threshold over a holdout set
of calibration points, and for the test points, we form the set as all labels with scores exceeding that
threshold. These sets are guaranteed to include (cover) the true label with 1 − α probability [2].
As shown in Fig. 1-left (the red dashed line), this guarantee breaks by an unnoticeably small natural or
adversarial noise to the test points – the empirical coverage drastically decreases by an imperceptible
perturbation. Note that from this point forward, we call adversarial or natural noises as “perturbations”,
not to be confused with the noise we (as the defender) introduce on purpose. Robust CP (RCP) extends
this guarantee to worst case bounded perturbations, ensuring that the perturbed input x̃ is covered
with the same or higher probability as the clean x, if x is perturbed up to a known magnitude r (e.g.
∥x̃−x∥2 ≤ r). Previous RCP approaches find the highest/lowest possible conformity score within the
perturbation ball, and replace the score with the worst-case bound[12, 16, 26, 27]. These bounds can
be computed either analytically (Lipschitz bound or verifiers) or through randomized smoothing. Here,
the trade-off is between the computational cost and the guaranteed robust radius – analytical methods
are robust to very smaller magnitudes of perturbation, while they only require a single forward pass
1
Many works define CP via a non-conformity (disagreement) score. The setups are equivalent with a change
in the score’s sign. Our robustness results are invariant to this definition.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

