Conditioning Matters: Training Diffusion Policies is
Faster Than You Think
Zibin Dong♡ , Yicheng Liu♣ , Yinchuan Li♢ , Hang Zhao∗ ♣ , Jianye Hao∗ ♡, ♢
♡
Tianjin University, ♣ Tsinghua University, ♢ Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Diffusion policies have emerged as a mainstream paradigm for building visionlanguage-action (VLA) models. Although they demonstrate strong robot control
capabilities, their training efficiency remains suboptimal. In this work, we identify
a fundamental challenge in conditional diffusion policy training: when generative
conditions are hard to distinguish, the training objective degenerates into modeling the marginal action distribution, a phenomenon we term loss collapse. To
overcome this, we propose Cocos, a simple yet general solution that modifies the
source distribution in the conditional flow matching to be condition-dependent. By
anchoring the source distribution around semantics extracted from condition inputs,
Cocos encourages stronger condition integration and prevents the loss collapse. We
provide theoretical justification and extensive empirical results across simulation
and real-world benchmarks. Our method achieves faster convergence and higher
success rates than existing approaches, matching the performance of large-scale
pre-trained VLAs using significantly fewer gradient steps and parameters. Cocos is
lightweight, easy to implement, and compatible with diverse policy architectures,
offering a general-purpose improvement to diffusion policy training.

Figure 1: Fusing generative condition into the source distribution greatly simplifies diffusion policy
training. Diffusion policy trained with our method achieves π0 performance on the LIBERO benchmarks
with only 30K gradient steps, which is 2.14x faster than the vanilla model. We also show the cosine similarity
and the norm scale change between the policy hidden states before and after injecting condition information,
demonstrating that our method fundamentally compels the policy network to utilize condition information, rather
than simply embedding conditions into the source distribution.

1

Introduction

Denoising generative models have emerged as a scalable approach for high-dimensional data generation [28, 6, 26, 17, 18, 12, 30, 16], significantly advancing Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models in
robotics (VLAs2 ) [19, 15, 1, 3, 36, 11]. Mainstream VLA models frame robot control as a conditional
generation problem: given vision-language inputs as conditions, the model generates appropriate
robot action sequences. Despite action sequences being substantially lower-dimensional than typical generative content like images or text, training VLAs remains unexpectedly challenging and
∗
2

Corresponding authors: Hang Zhao (hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn), Jianye Hao (jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn).
Unless otherwise specified, VLAs in this paper refer specifically to denoising generative VLA models.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

