Generative Perception of Shape and Material
from Differential Motion
Xinran Nicole Han
Harvard University
xinranhan@g.harvard.edu

Ko Nishino
Kyoto University
kon@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Todd Zickler
Harvard University
zickler@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Perceiving the shape and material of an object from a single image is inherently
ambiguous, especially when lighting is unknown and unconstrained. Despite this,
humans can often disentangle shape and material, and when they are uncertain, they
often move their head slightly or rotate the object to help resolve the ambiguities.
Inspired by this behavior, we introduce a novel conditional denoising-diffusion
model that generates samples of shape-and-material maps from a short video of an
object undergoing differential motions. Our parameter-efficient architecture allows
training directly in pixel-space, and it generates many disentangled attributes of
an object simultaneously. Trained on a modest number of synthetic object-motion
videos with supervision on shape and material, the model exhibits compelling emergent behavior: For static observations, it produces diverse, multimodal predictions
of plausible shape-and-material maps that capture the inherent ambiguities; and
when objects move, the distributions converge to more accurate explanations. The
model also produces high-quality shape-and-material estimates for less ambiguous,
real-world objects. By moving beyond single-view to continuous motion observations, and by using generative perception to capture visual ambiguities, our work
suggests ways to improve visual reasoning in physically-embodied systems.1

1

Introduction

A single image of an object is inherently ambiguous. The image can be mimicked by a planar surface
with paint, for example, or a curved mirror under suitable lighting. There are many possibilities, and
they arise from the intertwined roles of shape and material in image formation. We argue that vision
systems should reason about shape and material jointly, and that they should embrace and model their
ambiguities, so that additional cues like motion or touch can be triggered for disambiguation. This
will help embodied AI systems deal with very practical problems, such as distinguishing a wet floor
from a glossy one, or distinguishing a painted visual cliff from an actual cliff.
Humans naturally resolve much of the uncertainty through motion. Imagine moving a shiny textured
object under natural lighting: glossy highlights sweep across its surface, immediately revealing
its material and geometric structure. This interplay of material, surface, and motion provides far
more insight than a single static observation. Just as young children explore their environment by
manipulating objects, computational vision systems can benefit from observing differential object
motion—even across a few video frames. These observations motivate a perception framework that
(i) explicitly models shape-material ambiguity rather than collapsing to a single estimate, and (ii)
leverages object motion as a natural cue for reducing ambiguity when motion is available.
In contrast to these principles, recent learning-based approaches in computer vision typically focus
on inferring either shape or material, but not both, and they are often optimized to predict a single
1

Project page: https://xrhan.github.io/diffmotion/

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

