Zero-shot protein stability prediction by inverse
folding models: a free energy interpretation

Jes Frellsen∗ †
Technical University
of Denmark
Kresten Lindorff-Larsen
University of
Copenhagen

Maher M. Kassem∗
Novonesis‡

Tone Bengtsen
Novonesis‡

Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg
Novo Nordisk

Lars Olsen
Novonesis

Wouter Boomsma†
University of
Copenhagen

Abstract
Inverse folding models have proven to be highly effective zero-shot predictors of
protein stability. Despite this success, the link between the amino acid preferences
of an inverse folding model and the free-energy considerations underlying thermodynamic stability remains incompletely understood. A better understanding would
be of interest not only from a theoretical perspective, but also potentially provide
the basis for stronger zero-shot stability prediction. In this paper, we take steps
to clarify the free-energy foundations of inverse folding models. Our derivation
reveals the standard practice of likelihood ratios as a simplistic approximation
and suggests several paths towards better estimates of the relative stability. We
empirically assess these approaches and demonstrate that considerable gains in
zero-shot performance can be achieved with fairly simple means.

1

Introduction

Quantifying how amino acid substitutions affect protein structural stability is of fundamental importance for understanding human genetic diseases (Stein et al., 2019), and for our ability to design and
optimise industrial enzymes and protein therapeutics (Listov et al., 2024). In recent years, multiplexed
assays of variant effects (MAVE; see, e.g., Starita et al., 2017) experiments have greatly enhanced our
ability to characterize variants experimentally, but still only scratch the surface compared to the astronomically large number of possible variants (we use the term variant to refer to a protein that differs
from a reference, ‘wild-type’ protein by one or more amino acid substitutions). In silico prediction,
therefore, remains an important tool, as a low-cost and fast alternative to experimental characterisation,
but also to extrapolate meaningfully from experimental results to uncharacterized variants.
Despite the progress in high-throughput experimental characterisation, variant-effect data still falls
in the low-data regime, and supervised learning in this domain has been observed to be prone to
overfitting, exemplified by several large-scale studies on human variants (Livesey and Marsh, 2020).
As a consequence, unsupervised or weakly supervised methods are often the most attractive approach
to the problem. For protein stability prediction, inverse folding models, which provide a probability
distribution over amino acid sequences given a fixed 3D structure, have emerged as particularly useful.
In particular, variations of log-ratios based on the form
p(variant sequence | wild-type structure)
− ln
(1)
p(wild-type sequence | wild-type structure)
∗
†

Equal contribution. ‡ Work performed while employed at Novonesis.
Corresponding authors: jefr@dtu.dk & wb@di.ku.dk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

