How Does Sequence Modeling Architecture Influence
Base Capabilities of Pre-trained Language Models?
Exploring Key Architecture Design Principles
to Avoid Base Capabilities Degradation

1

Xin Lu1 , Yanyan Zhao1,∗ , Si Wei2,∗ , Shijin Wang2 , Bing Qin1 , Ting Liu1
Research Center for Social Computing and Interactive Robotics, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
iFLYTEK Co., Ltd
1
{xlu, yyzhao, qinb, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn
2
{siwei, sjwang3}@iflytek.com

Abstract
Pre-trained language models represented by the Transformer have been proven to
possess strong base capabilities, and the representative self-attention mechanism
in the Transformer has become a classic in sequence modeling architectures. Different from the work of proposing sequence modeling architecture to improve the
efficiency of attention mechanism, this work focuses on the impact of sequence
modeling architectures on base capabilities. Specifically, our concern is: How
exactly do sequence modeling architectures affect the base capabilities of pretrained language models? In this work, we first point out that the mixed domain
pre-training setting commonly adopted in existing architecture design works fails
to adequately reveal the differences in base capabilities among various architectures. To address this, we propose a limited domain pre-training setting with
out-of-distribution testing, which successfully uncovers significant differences in
base capabilities among architectures at an early stage. Next, we analyze the base
capabilities of stateful sequence modeling architectures, and find that they exhibit
significant degradation in base capabilities compared to the Transformer. Then,
through a series of architecture component analysis, we summarize a key architecture design principle: A sequence modeling architecture need possess full-sequence
arbitrary selection capability to avoid degradation in base capabilities. Finally,
we empirically validate this principle using an extremely simple Top-1 element
selection architecture and further generalize it to a more practical Top-1 chunk
selection architecture. Experimental results demonstrate our proposed sequence
modeling architecture design principle and suggest that our work can serve as a
valuable reference for future architecture improvements and novel designs.

1

Introduction

Recent research has discovered that pre-trained language models [35, 12, 6, 30], represented by
Transformer [47], possess strong base capabilities and can achieve excellent performance in language
modeling, few-shot learning, etc. Delving into the specific architecture design of Transformer, its
self-attention mechanism is widely regarded as one of the key components behind its success and has
since become a classic in sequence modeling architectures.
* Email corresponding.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

