Lost in Latent Space: An Empirical Study of
Latent Diffusion Models for Physics Emulation

François Rozet1,2,3 Ruben Ohana1,2 Michael McCabe1,4
Gilles Louppe3 François Lanusse1,2,6 Shirley Ho1,2,4,5
1

Polymathic AI 2 Flatiron Institute 3 University of Liège
4
New York University 5 Princeton University
6
Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris Cité, CEA, CNRS, AIM

Abstract
The steep computational cost of diffusion models at inference hinders their use as
fast physics emulators. In the context of image and video generation, this computational drawback has been addressed by generating in the latent space of an
autoencoder instead of the pixel space. In this work, we investigate whether a similar strategy can be effectively applied to the emulation of dynamical systems and at
what cost. We find that the accuracy of latent-space emulation is surprisingly robust
to a wide range of compression rates (up to 1000×). We also show that diffusionbased emulators are consistently more accurate than non-generative counterparts
and compensate for uncertainty in their predictions with greater diversity. Finally,
we cover practical design choices, spanning from architectures to optimizers, that
we found critical to train latent-space emulators.

1

Introduction

Numerical simulations of dynamical systems are at the core of many scientific and engineering
disciplines. Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) that describe the dynamics of physical
phenomena enables, among others, weather forecasts [1, 2], predictions of solar wind and flares [3–5],
or control of plasma in fusion reactors [6, 7]. These simulations typically operate on fine-grained
spatial and temporal grids and require significant computational resources for high-fidelity results.
To address this limitation, a promising strategy is to develop neural network-based emulators to make
predictions orders of magnitude faster than traditional numerical solvers. The typical approach [8–17]
is to consider the dynamics as a function f (xi ) = xi+1 that evolves the state xi of the system and to
train a neural network fϕ (x) to approximate that function. In the context of PDEs, this network is
sometimes called a neural solver [11, 18, 19]. After training, the autoregressive application of the
solver, or rollout, emulates the dynamics. However, recent studies [11, 18–21] reveal that, while
neural solvers demonstrate impressive accuracy for short-term prediction, errors accumulate over the
course of the rollout, leading to distribution shifts between training and inference. This phenomenon
is even more severe for stochastic or undetermined systems, where it is not possible to predict the
next state given the previous one(s) with certainty. Instead of modeling the uncertainty, neural solvers
produce a single point estimate, usually the mean, instead of a distribution.
The natural choice to alleviate these issues are generative models, in particular diffusion models,
which have shown remarkable results in recent years. Following their success, diffusion models have
been applied to emulation tasks [18, 19, 22–25] for which they were found to mitigate the rollout
instability of non-generative emulators. However, diffusion models are much more expensive than
deterministic alternatives at inference, due to their iterative sampling process, which defeats the
purpose of using an emulator. To address this computational drawback, many works in the image and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

