SpecReason: Fast and Accurate Inference-Time
Compute via Speculative Reasoning

Rui Pan§

Yinwei Dai§ Zhihao Zhang† Gabriele Oliaro†
Zhihao Jia† Ravi Netravali§
§
Princeton University † Carnegie Mellon University
{ruipan,yinweid}@princeton.edu, {zhihaoz3,goliaro}@cs.cmu.edu,
zhihao@cmu.edu, rnetravali@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in inference-time compute have significantly improved performance on complex tasks by generating long chains of thought (CoTs) using Large
Reasoning Models (LRMs). However, this improved accuracy comes at the cost of
high inference latency due to the length of generated reasoning sequences and the
autoregressive nature of decoding. Our key insight in tackling these overheads is
that LRM inference, and the reasoning that it embeds, is highly tolerant of approximations: complex tasks are typically broken down into simpler steps, each of which
brings utility based on the semantic insight it provides for downstream steps rather
than the exact tokens it generates. Accordingly, we introduce SpecReason, a system
that automatically accelerates LRM inference by using a lightweight model to (speculatively) carry out simpler intermediate reasoning steps and reserving the costly
base model only to assess (and potentially correct) the speculated outputs. Importantly, SpecReason’s focus on exploiting the semantic flexibility of thinking tokens
in preserving final-answer accuracy is complementary to prior speculation techniques, most notably speculative decoding, which demands token-level equivalence
at each step. Across a variety of cross-domain reasoning benchmarks, SpecReason
achieves 1.4 − 3.0× speedup over vanilla LRM inference while improving accuracy by 0.4 − 9.0%. Compared to speculative decoding without SpecReason, their
combination yields an additional 8.8 − 58.0% latency reduction. We open-source
SpecReason at https://github.com/ruipeterpan/specreason.

1

Introduction

Inference-time compute has unlocked a new axis for scaling AI capabilities. Recent advancements in
Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) such as OpenAI o1/o3 [Jaech et al., 2024, ope, 2025] and DeepSeek
R1 [Guo et al., 2025] have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of complex
tasks. Although these LRMs share the architectural backbones as traditional large language models
(LLMs), their inference behavior differs significantly: LRMs first “think” by generating internal
thinking tokens—tokens that decompose a task into a sequence of composable reasoning steps via a
long chain-of-thought (CoT) [Wei et al., 2022] before producing the final tokens that summarize the
reasoning process.
Despite their promise, LRMs incur substantial inference latency due to the length of the reasoning
sequences they generate. This challenge is primarily driven by the autoregressive nature of LLMs,
where decoding time scales linearly with sequence length. As a result, final output generation can
routinely take minutes, if not hours, to answer a single query; such delays far exceed those of
typical LLMs and are prohibitively slow for many interactive applications, ultimately degrading user
experience [Fu et al., 2024b].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

