Consistency Conditions for Differentiable Surrogate
Losses
Drona Khurana
University of Colorado Boulder
drona.khurana@colorado.edu
Dhamma Kimpara∗
NSF National Center for Atmospheric Research
Boulder, Colorado
dkimpara@ucar.edu

Anish Thilagar
University of Colorado Boulder
anish@colorado.edu
Rafael Frongillo
University of Colorado Boulder
raf@colorado.edu

Abstract
The statistical consistency of surrogate losses for discrete prediction tasks is often
checked via the condition of calibration. However, directly verifying calibration
can be arduous. Recent work shows that for polyhedral surrogates, a less arduous
condition, indirect elicitation (IE), is still equivalent to calibration. We give the
first results of this type for non-polyhedral surrogates, specifically the class of
convex differentiable losses. We first prove that under mild conditions, IE and
calibration are equivalent for one-dimensional losses in this class. We construct a
counter-example that shows that this equivalence fails in higher dimensions. This
motivates the introduction of strong IE, a strengthened form of IE that is equally
easy to verify. We establish that strong IE implies calibration for differentiable
surrogates and is both necessary and sufficient for strongly convex, differentiable
surrogates. Finally, we apply these results to a range of problems to demonstrate
the power of IE and strong IE for designing and analyzing consistent differentiable
surrogates.

1

Introduction

In supervised learning problems, the goal of the learner is to output a model that accurately predicts
labels on unseen feature vectors. These problems are specified by target losses, metrics intended to
reflect model error. Natural choices for target losses arise in discrete prediction tasks like classification,
ranking, and structured prediction. As minimizing discrete target losses directly is generally NP-hard,
a convex surrogate loss is typically used instead. A link function maps surrogate reports (predictions)
to target reports. Beyond ease of optimization, the surrogate and link must be statistically consistent
with respect to the target loss, meaning that minimizing the surrogate should closely approximate
minimizing the target given sufficient training data. In the finite-outcome setting, consistency turns
out to be equivalent to a simpler condition called calibration [Bartlett et al., 2006, Tewari and Bartlett,
2007, Ramaswamy and Agarwal, 2016]. In particular, calibration has been central to the design of
new consistent surrogates, serving as the key condition which must be satisfied.
While simpler than consistency, directly verifying calibration is often cumbersome. In particular, calibration requires that all sequences of reports converging to the surrogate minimizers (i.e.,
minimizers of the expected surrogate loss), eventually link to target minimizers (Figure 1). This
complexity of verifying calibration in turn impedes the design of consistent surrogates. What easily
∗

Work done while at University of Colorado Boulder.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

