Mol-LLaMA: Towards General Understanding of
Molecules in Large Molecular Language Model

Dongki Kim1 ,

Wonbin Lee1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , DeepAuto.ai2
{cleverki, smilelwb01, sungju.hwang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding molecules is key to understanding organisms and driving advances
in drug discovery, requiring interdisciplinary knowledge across chemistry and
biology. Although large molecular language models have achieved notable success
in task transfer, they often struggle to accurately analyze molecular features due to
limited knowledge and reasoning capabilities. To address this issue, we present
Mol-LLaMA, a large molecular language model that grasps the general knowledge
centered on molecules and exhibits explainability and reasoning ability. To this end,
we design key data types that encompass the fundamental molecular features, taking into account the essential abilities for molecular reasoning. Further, to improve
molecular understanding, we propose a module that integrates complementary information from different molecular encoders, leveraging the distinct advantages of
molecular representations. Our experimental results demonstrate that Mol-LLaMA
is capable of comprehending the general features of molecules and providing
informative responses, implying its potential as a general-purpose assistant for
molecular analysis. Our project page is at https://mol-llama.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Understanding molecules and their properties is fundamental to understanding chemical compounds
and living organisms, driving scientific discovery. However, it remains challenging due to the complexity of molecules and their behaviors, necessitating a comprehensive understanding of molecules.
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) [46, 16, 39, 40] have demonstrated their
potential in understanding core concepts in chemistry and biology [1, 43]. Further, LLMs have
shown that language can play various roles, which is especially crucial to dealing with substantial
complexity in chemistry, biology, and pharmacology by readily obtaining external knowledge from
users’ prompts. Nevertheless, LLMs struggle to interpret the molecular structures from the raw string
representations such as SMILES [52] due to their nature of learning the subword representations.
To integrate structural information into LLMs, recent works have studied molecular LLMs that are
instruction-tuned with the molecular modality, adopting the multi-modal instruction tuning widely
studied in other modalities, such as image [24, 26], audio [13], and video [5, 60, 36]. In the multimodal instruction tuning, there are two core components: 1) the molecular encoder to embed the
molecular structures and 2) the instruction dataset to learn the molecule-related knowledge.
Despite their success, molecular LLMs still encounter difficulties in understanding and reasoning
about the fundamental characteristics of molecules. Based on the observations from Table 1, we
identify two key challenges to develop a general-purpose assistant for molecular analysis as follows:
• Molecular LLMs should learn the general features of molecules encompassing their chemical and
biological features with a primary emphasis on the basic understanding of structures. Due to their
limited knowledge, existing molecular LLMs often misinterpret molecular structures, incorrectly
predicting key molecular features, or fail to provide meaningful explanations of molecular features.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

