ShiQ: Bringing back Bellman to LLMs
Pierre Clavier1 , Nathan Grinsztajn2 , Raphael Avalos1 ,
Yannis Flet-Berliac1 , Irem Ergun1 , Omar D. Domingues1 , Olivier Pietquin2,3 ,
Pierre H. Richemond1 , Florian Strub1 , and Matthieu Geist2,3
1

Cohere
Work done at Cohere
3
Earth Species Project
pierre.clavier@cohere.com ; matthieu@earthspecies.org
2

Abstract
The fine-tuning of pre-trained large language models (LLMs) using reinforcement
learning (RL) is generally formulated as direct policy optimization. This approach
was naturally favored as it efficiently improves a pretrained LLM, seen as an initial
policy. Another RL paradigm, Q-learning methods, has received far less attention
in the LLM community while demonstrating major success in various non-LLM RL
tasks. In particular, Q-learning effectiveness comes from its sample efficiency and
ability to learn offline, which is particularly valuable given the high computational
cost of sampling with LLM. However, naively applying a Q-learning–style update
to the model’s logits is ineffective due to the specificity of LLMs. Our core
contribution is to derive theoretically grounded loss functions from Bellman
equations to adapt Q-learning methods to LLMs. To do so, we carefully adapt
insights from the RL literature to account for LLM-specific characteristics,
ensuring that the logits become reliable Q-value estimates. We then use this loss to
build a practical algorithm, ShiQ for Shifted-Q, that supports off-policy, token-wise
learning while remaining simple to implement. Finally, we evaluate ShiQ on
both synthetic data and real-world benchmarks, e.g., UltraFeedback, BFCL-V3,
demonstrating its effectiveness in both single-turn and multi-turn LLM settings.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is commonly used for fine-tuning Large Language Models (LLMs).
A standard objective is to align the model with human preferences. To achieve this, a reward model
is first trained on preference data and then used to guide the optimization of the language model
through RL [Christiano et al., 2017, Ouyang et al., 2022]. A simpler and less costly alternative is
provided by direct alignment methods [Zhao et al., 2023, Rafailov et al., 2023, Azar et al., 2024],
which directly train a policy on preference data, without relying on a proxy reward. However, other
rewards are of interest for RL fine-tuning. For example, successful unit tests can be used as a reward
for code generation [Le et al., 2022] or a textual-entailment classifier can be used as a reward for
summarization [Roit et al., 2023]. In this work, we consider the general problem of RL fine-tuning,
without any assumptions about the target task of the reward.
RL fine-tuning is usually framed as maximizing the expected cumulative reward, regularized with
some reference model or policy obtained from a previous training phase. Given this classical
objective, it is natural to optimize it using gradient ascent, that is, policy-gradient. Moreover, in
a fine-tuning context, it is highly desirable to start from the model reference policy, which further
justifies policy-based approaches. REINFORCE [Williams and Peng, 1991] and variants, e.g., [Kool
et al., 2019], as well as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [Schulman et al., 2017], are standard
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

