Rotary Masked Autoencoders are Versatile Learners
Uros Zivanovic1 , Serafina Di Gioia2, 3 , Andre Scaffidi3 , Martín de los Rios3 , Gabriella
Contardo7, 3 , and Roberto Trotta3, 4, 5, 6
1

University of Trieste, Italy
Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Italy
3
Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati (SISSA), Italy
4
INFN – National Institute for Nuclear Physics, Italy
5
ICSC - Centro Nazionale di Ricerca in High Performance Computing, Italy
6
Imperial College London, United Kingdom
7
University of Nova Gorica, Slovenia
2

Abstract
Applying Transformers to irregular time-series typically requires specializations to
their baseline architecture, which can result in additional computational overhead
and increased method complexity. We present the Rotary Masked Autoencoder
(RoMAE), which utilizes the popular Rotary Positional Embedding (RoPE) method
for continuous positions. RoMAE is an extension to the Masked Autoencoder
(MAE) that enables interpolation and representation learning with multidimensional continuous positional information while avoiding any time-series-specific
architectural specializations. We showcase RoMAE’s performance on a variety
of modalities including irregular and multivariate time-series, images, and audio, demonstrating that RoMAE surpasses specialized time-series architectures
on difficult datasets such as the DESC ELAsTiCC Challenge while maintaining
MAE’s usual performance across other modalities. In addition, we investigate
RoMAE’s ability to reconstruct the embedded continuous positions, demonstrating
that including learned embeddings in the input sequence breaks RoPE’s relative
position property.

1

Introduction

The framework offered by foundation models has shifted the machine learning landscape by establishing new benchmarks on a variety of modalities and tasks. Specifically, Transformers [58] have
achieved state-of-the-art performance across many domains, from vision [15] to natural language
processing [61]. Given the ability of Transformers to handle sequential data such as natural language,
they naturally became appealing for time-series, which arise in a large variety of domains, including health, finance and astrophysics. Such data can often be irregularly sampled in the temporal
dimension. Being originally designed for sequences of text, the base Transformer architecture is
not able to deal with such irregularly sampled data, by default only supporting quantized positional
information as is found in natural language. This lack of support for continuous positional information
becomes a limitation when extending Transformers to other modalities, degrading performance on
tasks requiring precise temporal modelling and hindering the model’s ability to capture complex
patterns in non-uniformly sampled time-series.
Various specializations to the Transformer have been proposed to overcome this limitation. These
can be divided into two main types: modifications of the internal architecture of the Transformer
(e.g. modifying the feedforward layer in the Transformer Encoder Block [19, 46]) and novel
positional embeddings (e.g. using a neural ODE [12]). Alternatively, modern state space models
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

