AngleRoCL: Angle-Robust Concept Learning for
Physically View-Invariant T2I Adversarial Patches

Wenjun Ji1,2 Yuxiang Fu1,2 Luyang Ying1,2 Deng-Ping Fan1,2
Yuyi Wang3 Ming-Ming Cheng1,2 Ivor Tsang4 Qing Guo1,2∗
1
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian 2 VCIP, CS, Nankai University 3 CRRC Zhuzhou Institute
4
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
wenjj@mail.nankai.edu.cn tsingqguo@ieee.org

Abstract
Cutting-edge works have demonstrated that text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models
can generate adversarial patches that mislead state-of-the-art object detectors in
the physical world, revealing detectors’ vulnerabilities and risks. However, these
methods neglect the T2I patches’ attack effectiveness when observed from different
views in the physical world (i.e., angle robustness of the T2I adversarial patches).
In this paper, we study the angle robustness of T2I adversarial patches comprehensively, revealing their angle-robust issues, demonstrating that texts affect the
angle robustness of generated patches significantly, and task-specific linguistic
instructions fail to enhance the angle robustness. Motivated by the studies, we
introduce Angle-Robust Concept Learning (AngleRoCL), a simple and flexible
approach that learns a generalizable concept (i.e., text embeddings in implementation) representing the capability of generating angle-robust patches. The learned
concept can be incorporated into textual prompts and guides T2I models to generate
patches with their attack effectiveness inherently resistant to viewpoint variations.
Through extensive simulation and physical-world experiments on five SOTA detectors across multiple views, we demonstrate that AngleRoCL significantly enhances
the angle robustness of T2I adversarial patches compared to baseline methods.
Our patches maintain high attack success rates even under challenging viewing
conditions, with over 50% average relative improvement in attack effectiveness
across multiple angles. This research advances the understanding of physically
angle-robust patches and provides insights into the relationship between textual
concepts and physical properties in T2I-generated contents. We released our code
in https://github.com/tsingqguo/anglerocl.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have revealed that text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models can generate
adversarial patches capable of misleading state-of-the-art object detectors in physical environments
[48, 58]. Unlike traditional optimization-based adversarial patch generation methods [4, 23, 62]
that rely on gradient-based pixel manipulations and often struggle to transfer to physical settings
and detection models due to environmental factors like printer’s color shifting, T2I generation
approaches offer significant advantages (e.g., low-cost, model-agnostic, and transferable) in the
physical deployment [48, 58]. These patches exploit vulnerabilities in detection systems, creating
significant security concerns for critical applications such as autonomous driving and surveillance.
However, existing approaches to generating T2I adversarial patches have largely overlooked a crucial
real-world challenge: maintaining attack effectiveness when patches are viewed from different angles
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

