Bridging Arbitrary and Tree Metrics via Differentiable
Gromov Hyperbolicity

Pierre Houedry
Université Bretagne Sud
IRISA, UMR 6074, CNRS
pierre.houedry@irisa.fr

Nicolas Courty
Université Bretagne Sud
IRISA, UMR 6074, CNRS
courty@univ-ubs.fr

Florestan Martin-Baillon
Université de Rennes
IRMAR, UMR 6625, CNRS
florestan.martin-baillon@univ-rennes.fr

Laetitia Chapel
L’Institut Agro Rennes-Angers
IRISA, UMR 6074, CNRS
laetitia.chapel@irisa.fr

Titouan Vayer
INRIA, ENS de Lyon, CNRS, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1
LIP, UMR 5668
titouan.vayer@inria.fr

Abstract
Trees and the associated shortest-path tree metrics provide a powerful framework
for representing hierarchical and combinatorial structures in data. Given an arbitrary
metric space, its deviation from a tree metric can be quantified by Gromov’s δhyperbolicity. Nonetheless, designing algorithms that bridge an arbitrary metric to
its closest tree metric is still a vivid subject of interest, as most common approaches
are either heuristical and lack guarantees, or perform moderately well. In this work,
we introduce a novel differentiable optimization framework, coined D ELTA Z ERO,
that solves this problem. Our method leverages a smooth surrogate for Gromov’s
δ-hyperbolicity which enables a gradient-based optimization, with a tractable
complexity. The corresponding optimization procedure is derived from a problem
with better worst case guarantees than existing bounds, and is justified statistically.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that our method
consistently achieves state-of-the-art distortion.

1

Introduction

The notion of δ-hyperbolic metric spaces, introduced by [21], captures a large-scale analog of
negative curvature and has found significant applications in both mathematics and computer science.
A prominent example in machine learning is the success of representation learning in hyperbolic
spaces [7], which leverages their natural ability to learn on data with hierarchical structure. A key
measure of characterizing how well a hyperbolic space fits a given dataset is the Gromov hyperbolicity,
which quantifies the extent to which a metric space (X, dX ) deviates from a tree metric, with tree
structures achieving a value of zero. As such, it has often been used as a proxy for graph dataset
suitability to hyperbolic space embedding (e.g. [8, 40]), which has also been recently analyzed in [23].
Metrics that can be exactly realized as shortest-path distances in a tree play a central role in many
domains: hierarchical clustering in machine learning [28], phylogenetic tree construction in bioinformatics [14], and modeling real-world networks [1, 34], to cite a few. When data is not exactly
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

