Inference-Time Hyper-Scaling
with KV Cache Compression

Adrian Łańcucki† Konrad Staniszewski†◦
Piotr Nawrot♢∗ Edoardo M. Ponti†♢
†
◦
NVIDIA University of Warsaw ♢ University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Inference-time scaling trades efficiency for increased reasoning accuracy by generating longer or more parallel sequences. However, in Transformer LLMs, generation cost is bottlenecked by the size of the key–value (KV) cache, rather than the
number of generated tokens. Hence, we explore inference-time hyper-scaling: by
compressing the KV cache, we can generate more tokens within the same compute
budget and further improve the accuracy of scaled inference. The success of this
approach, however, hinges on the ability of compression methods to preserve
accuracy even at high compression ratios. To make hyper-scaling practical, we
introduce Dynamic Memory Sparsification (DMS), a novel method for sparsifying
KV caches that only requires 1K training steps to achieve 8× compression, while
maintaining better accuracy than training-free sparse attention. Instead of prematurely discarding cached tokens, DMS delays token eviction, implicitly merging
representations and preserving critical information. We demonstrate the effectiveness of inference-time hyper-scaling with DMS on multiple families of LLMs,
showing that it boosts accuracy for comparable inference latency and memory load.
For instance, we enhance Qwen-R1 32B by 12.0 points on AIME 24, 8.6 on GPQA,
and 9.7 on LiveCodeBench on average for an equivalent number of memory reads.

1

Introduction

Scaling inference-time compute—employed in models such as OpenAI’s o1 (OpenAI et al., 2024) or
DeepSeek’s R1 (Guo et al., 2025)—trades off increased inference time and memory for higher reasoning accuracy in large language models (LLMs).
Models reason by generating intermediate steps that
explore the problem before reaching an answer. Adjusting the depth and breadth of this exploration—
known as sequential and parallel scaling, respectively
(Muennighoff et al., 2025)—controls the inferencetime compute budget (Yao et al., 2023; Uesato et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023; Lightman et al., 2024).

R1-Qwen 2.5 1.5B
R1-Qwen 2.5 7B
R1-Qwen 2.5 32B

LiveCodeBench

AIME24

2

4

6

8

12
10
GPQA

MATH 500

Despite its success, scaling inference-time compute Figure 1: Average absolute gains of DMS
is fundamentally bottlenecked in Transformer LLMs over the original LLMs during inference-time
by the number of tokens from the key–value (or KV) scaling on reasoning tasks for the same KV
cache that are attended to during auto-regressive gen- cache memory reads, (a proxy for latency).
eration. This cache grows linearly with respect to the
length and number of reasoning chains, as the new key–value representations are appended to it.
∗

Work done as an intern at NVIDIA.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

