On the Effect of Negative Gradient in
Group Relative Deep Reinforcement Optimization

Wenlong Deng1,2 , Yi Ren1 , Muchen Li1
Danica J. Sutherland1,3 , Xiaoxiao Li1,2† , Christos Thrampoulidis1†
1

University of British Columbia, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Amii
†
Corresponding author

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become popular in enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs), with Group Relative Policy Optimization
(GRPO) emerging as a widely used algorithm in recent systems. Despite GRPO’s
widespread adoption, we identify a previously unrecognized phenomenon we term
Lazy Likelihood Displacement (LLD), wherein the likelihood of correct responses
marginally increases or even decreases during training. This behavior mirrors a
recently discovered misalignment issue in Direct Preference Optimization (DPO),
attributed to the influence of negative gradients. We provide a theoretical analysis
of GRPO’s learning dynamic, identifying the source of LLD as the naive penalization of all tokens in incorrect responses with the same strength. To address this,
we develop a method called NTHR, which downweights penalties on tokens contributing to the LLD. Unlike prior DPO-based approaches, NTHR takes advantage
of GRPO’s group-based structure, using correct responses as anchors to identify
influential tokens. Experiments on math reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that
NTHR effectively mitigates LLD, yielding consistent performance gains across
models ranging from 0.5B to 3B parameters.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has become increasingly popular for improving reasoning capabilities
of large language models (LLMs) [4, 9, 23]. In particular, Group Relative Policy Optimization
(GRPO) [22] has emerged as a widely adopted algorithm in RL training pipelines for reasoning tasks.
Models such as DeepSeek-R1 [4], DeepSeek-Math [22], Med-R1 [11], and Search-R1 [10] have
successfully employed GRPO to achieve notable performance gains in code generation, mathematical
problem solving, medical reasoning, and retrieval-augmented generation. These successes highlight
GRPO’s growing importance as a tool for aligning models to task-specific behaviors through rulebased or heuristic rewards.
Despite its empirical success, the optimization behavior of GRPO remains insufficiently studied, in
part due to its recency. In this work, we focus on the impact of negative gradients in GRPO, which
arise when the advantage function is negative—indicating that the selected action is worse than the
average action at a given state (e.g., an incorrect or suboptimal response). In such cases, the learning
algorithm decreases the probability of selecting this action. We draw a conceptual connection to
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [18], which introduces negative gradients when penalizing
dis-preferred responses. Recent studies [19, 17, 30, 20] have revealed that negative gradients can lead
to an arguably counterintuitive behavior: a simultaneous decrease in the probabilities of preferred
responses (y + ). Motivated by this insight, we examine whether similar gradient dynamics in
GRPO might cause analogous issues and investigate their impact on policy learning. This effect,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

