ADPretrain: Advancing Industrial Anomaly Detection
via Anomaly Representation Pretraining

Xincheng Yao1 , Yan Luo3,4∗ , Zefeng Qian1 , Chongyang Zhang1,2∗
School of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing Agricultural University
4
Key Laboratory of Livestock Farming Equipment, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs,
Nanjing Agricultural University
{i-Dover, zefeng_qian, sunny_zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn1
luoyan@njau.edu.cn3
1

Abstract
The current mainstream and state-of-the-art anomaly detection (AD) methods are
substantially established on pretrained feature networks yielded by ImageNet pretraining. However, regardless of supervised or self-supervised pretraining, the
pretraining process on ImageNet does not match the goal of anomaly detection
(i.e., pretraining in natural images doesn’t aim to distinguish between normal and
abnormal). Moreover, natural images and industrial image data in AD scenarios
typically have the distribution shift. The two issues can cause ImageNet-pretrained
features to be suboptimal for AD tasks. To further promote the development of
the AD field, pretrained representations specially for AD tasks are eager and very
valuable. To this end, we propose a novel AD representation learning framework
specially designed for learning robust and discriminative pretrained representations for industrial anomaly detection. Specifically, closely surrounding the goal
of anomaly detection (i.e., focus on discrepancies between normals and anomalies), we propose angle- and norm-oriented contrastive losses to maximize the
angle size and norm difference between normal and abnormal features simultaneously. To avoid the distribution shift from natural images to AD images, our
pretraining is performed on a large-scale AD dataset, RealIAD. To further alleviate the potential shift between pretraining data and downstream AD datasets,
we learn the pretrained AD representations based on the class-generalizable representation, residual features. For evaluation, based on five embedding-based AD
methods, we simply replace their original features with our pretrained representations. Extensive experiments on five AD datasets and five backbones consistently show the superiority of our pretrained features. The code is available at
https://github.com/xcyao00/ADPretrain.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the anomaly detection (AD) field has undergone rapid evolution. Researchers
have proposed various deep AD methods, including reconstruction-based [5, 51, 50, 48, 16], featuredistance-based [8, 30, 33, 13], one-class-classification-based (OCC) [36, 24, 49, 23], distillation-based
[3, 37, 9, 53], and generative-model-based AD methods [12, 20, 14, 52, 10], etc. Although different
taxonomies of methods have their distinctive insights and collaboratively address the challenging
issues in anomaly detection from various perspectives, the essence of well-performed AD methods
∗

Both Yan Luo and Chongyang Zhang are Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

