DCI: Dual-Conditional Inversion for Boosting
Diffusion-Based Image Editing

Zixiang Li1,2 , Haoyu Wang1,2 , Wei Wang1,2 , Chuangchuang Tan1,2 , Yunchao Wei1,2 , Yao Zhao1,2∗
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Visual Intelligence +X International Cooperation Joint Laboratory of MOE

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in image generation and editing
tasks. Inversion within these models aims to recover the latent noise representation for a real or generated image, enabling reconstruction, editing, and other
downstream tasks. However, to date, most inversion approaches suffer from an
intrinsic trade-off between reconstruction accuracy and editing flexibility. This
limitation arises from the difficulty of maintaining both semantic alignment and
structural consistency during the inversion process. In this work, we introduce
Dual-Conditional Inversion (DCI), a novel framework that jointly conditions on
the source prompt and reference image to guide the inversion process. Specifically,
DCI formulates the inversion process as a dual-condition fixed-point optimization
problem, minimizing both the latent noise gap and the reconstruction error under
the joint guidance. This design anchors the inversion trajectory in both semantic
and visual space, leading to more accurate and editable latent representations.
Our novel setup brings new understanding to the inversion process. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that DCI achieves state-of-the-art performance across
multiple editing tasks, significantly improving both reconstruction quality and editing precision. Furthermore, we also demonstrate that our method achieves strong
results in reconstruction tasks, implying a degree of robustness and generalizability
approaching the ultimate goal of the inversion process. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/Lzxhh/Dual-Conditional-Inversion

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have made significant progress in the field of generative artificial intelligence.
Among them, latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [41] perform the diffusion process in a compressed
latent space rather than the pixel space, enabling more efficient and high-quality image generation and
editing. This architectural design has made LDMs a powerful and flexible backbone for a wide range
of downstream tasks, such as text-to-image generation [36, 40, 43], image editing [31, 4, 48, 3], image
restoration [29, 51, 54], style transfer [52, 50, 7], etc. In the image editing tasks, the editing is achieved
by manipulating the diffusion latent representations. However, in most cases, the corresponding latent
representation for a given image is not directly available, which means that we must first perform an
inversion process to obtain their latent representations.
The earliest inversion method is DDPM [16], and it has inspired the development of numerous
related methods [47, 2, 19]. DDPMs add random noise at each timestep, which leads to the loss
of information contained in the original image, resulting in poor reconstruction and editing effects.
DDIM inversion [45, 10] reformulates the diffusion process to be deterministic as solving an implicit
equation under the assumption that consecutive points along the denoising trajectory remain close.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

