Revealing Multimodal Causality with
Large Language Models

Jin Li1 , Shoujin Wang1∗, Qi Zhang2 , Feng Liu3 , Tongliang Liu4 ,
Longbing Cao5 , Shui Yu1 , Fang Chen1
1
University of Technology Sydney 2 Tongji University
3
University of Melbourne 4 University of Sydney 5 Macquarie University
jin.li-4@student.uts.edu.au {shoujin.wang,shui.yu,fang.chen}@uts.edu.au
zhangqi_cs@tongji.edu.cn feng.liu1@unimelb.edu.au
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au longbing.cao@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Uncovering cause-and-effect mechanisms from data is fundamental to scientific
progress. While large language models (LLMs) show promise for enhancing
causal discovery (CD) from unstructured data, their application to the increasingly
prevalent multimodal setting remains a critical challenge. Even with the advent
of multimodal LLMs (MLLMs), their efficacy in multimodal CD is hindered
by two primary limitations: (1) difficulty in exploring intra- and inter-modal
interactions for comprehensive causal variable identification; and (2) insufficiency
to handle structural ambiguities with purely observational data. To address these
challenges, we propose MLLM-CD, a novel framework for multimodal causal
discovery from unstructured data. It consists of three key components: (1) a
novel contrastive factor discovery module to identify genuine multimodal factors
based on the interactions explored from contrastive sample pairs; (2) a statistical
causal structure discovery module to infer causal relationships among discovered
factors; and (3) an iterative multimodal counterfactual reasoning module to refine
the discovery outcomes iteratively by incorporating the world knowledge and
reasoning capabilities of MLLMs. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed MLLM-CD in
revealing genuine factors and causal relationships among them from multimodal
unstructured data. The implementation code and data are available at https:
//github.com/JinLi-i/MLLM-CD.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery (CD), which aims to infer the underlying causal structures from the data, is a
fundamental task across numerous real-world scenarios, including healthcare [1, 2], finance [3], and
machine perception [4–6], playing a vital role in advancing scientific inquiry and human cognition.
As data generation and collection technologies [7–9] continue to evolve, real-world scenarios are
increasingly characterized by multimodal and unstructured data, such as the combination of texts,
images, and/or audio, making CD particularly crucial yet challenging in practice. Effectively tackling
CD in such cases typically involves two key steps: (1) identifying potential causal variables (factor
discovery) and their values from the raw unstructured data, and (2) inferring the causal relationships
among these variables (structure discovery). Traditional CD methods [10–12], though successful on
structure discovery [13], heavily rely on predefined causal variables in structured data and lack the
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

