Right for the Right Reasons: Avoiding Reasoning
Shortcuts via Prototypical Neurosymbolic AI

Luca Andolfi
Imperial College London, Sapienza University of Rome
l.andolfi24@imperial.ac.uk

Eleonora Giunchiglia
Imperial College London
e.giunchiglia@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Neurosymbolic AI is growing in popularity thanks to its ability to combine neural
perception and symbolic reasoning in end-to-end trainable models. However, recent
findings reveal these are prone to shortcut reasoning, i.e., to learning unindented
concepts–or neural predicates–which exploit spurious correlations to satisfy the
symbolic constraints. In this paper, we address reasoning shortcuts at their root
cause and we introduce Prototypical Neurosymbolic architectures. These models
are able to satisfy the symbolic constraints (be right) because they have learnt the
correct basic concepts (for the right reasons) and not because of spurious correlations, even in extremely low data regimes. Leveraging the theory of prototypical
learning, we demonstrate that we can effectively avoid reasoning shortcuts by training the models to satisfy the background knowledge while taking into account the
similarity of the input with respect to the handful of labelled datapoints. We extensively validate our approach on the recently proposed rsbench benchmark suite in
a variety of settings and tasks with very scarce supervision: we show significant improvements in learning the right concepts both in synthetic tasks (MNIST-EvenOdd
and Kand-Logic) and real-world, high-stake ones (BDD-OIA). Our findings pave
the way to prototype grounding as an effective, annotation-efficient strategy for
safe and reliable neurosymbolic learning. 1

1

Introduction

Neurosymbolic AI [36, 12] (NeSy) holds the promise of being able to combine the high adaptability
of neural networks with the reasoning abilities of more traditional AI. This results in methods that
are more interpretable [11, 4, 8], able to learn from fewer labelled datapoints [2, 49, 35] and are
compliant by-design with the given constraints [1, 18]. However, recent studies [28, 29] have shown
that even state-of-the-art NeSy methods can fall prey of reasoning shortcuts, i.e., (intuitively) spurious
associations among the learnt concepts—a.k.a. the neural predicates [26]–that satisfy the given
symbolic constraints and yet violate the intended semantics.
Some attempts have already been made to address the problem, however existing mitigation strategies
carry practical trade-offs. For example, the solution proposed in [29] involves dense annotation of
a high number of datapoints which can be costly. On the other hand, unsupervised solutions like
training jointly with a reconstruction loss [29] or the Shannon entropy [27] work only in limited
settings, but fail when applied in more challenging scenarios like those in rs-bench [5].
In this paper, we address reasoning shortcuts at their root cause and we introduce Prototypical
Neurosymbolic architectures. Thanks to the prototypes, our mitigation strategy requires minimal annotations and delivers extremely positive results even in challenging scenarios like those in rs-bench.
The work is based on the simple intuition that whenever we are updating the weights of our neural
1

The code is available on our r4rr Github page

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

