BMW: Bidirectionally Memory bank reWriting for
Unsupervised Person Re-Identification

Xiaobin Liu
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
liuxb@nankai.edu.cn

Jianing Li∗
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
tensor.li@polyu.edu.hk

Wenbin Zhu
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
wenbinzhu@mail.nankai.edu.cn

Baiwei Guo
Huawei Technologies Ltd.
Shanghai, China
baiwei.guo@epfl.ch

Jing Yuan∗
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
nkyuanjing@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent works show that contrastive learning based on memory banks is an effective
framework for unsupervised person Re-IDentification (ReID). In existing methods,
memory banks are typically initialized with cluster centroids and rewritten with
positive samples via the momentum mechanism along with the model training.
However, this mechanism solely focuses on the intra-class compactness by pulling
memory banks close to positive samples, neglecting the inter-class separability
among different memory banks. Rewriting memory banks with partial constraint
limits their discrimination capacities, and hence hinders learning discriminative
features based on those memory banks. In this paper, we claim that memory banks
should be rewritten with both intra-class and inter-class constraints, and therefore
propose a unified memory bank rewriting mechanism, Bidirectionally Memory
bank reWriting (BMW), to chase enhanced discrimination capacity. Specifically,
BMW formulates the memory bank rewriting as the gradient descent update with
two objectives, i.e., reducing intra-class diversity and enhancing inter-class separability. To effectively enhance the separability of memory banks with limited
number of rewriting steps, we further design a novel objective formulation for
the inter-class constraint, which is more effective for one step update. BMW enhances both representation and discrimination capacities of memory banks, thus
leads to an effective ReID feature optimization. BMW is simple yet effective and
can serve as a new paradigm for person ReID methods based on memory banks.
Extensive experiments on standard benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
our BMW method in unsupervised ReID model training. Specially, BMW even
outperforms previous methods that use stronger backbones. Code is available at
https://github.com/liu-xb/BMW.

1

Introduction

Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims to match a query person image in a gallery set, making it
an important task in intelligent surveillance systems [1–4]. Currently, supervised person ReID
methods have been widely studied from different aspects and achieved promising performance [5–
14]. However, supervised methods requires laborious manual person ID annotation, limiting their
applications in real-world scenarios lacking annotated data. To address this issue, recent researchers
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

