Exact Expressive Power of Transformers with Padding

William Merrill∗
Allen Institute for AI
willm@allenai.org

Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for AI
ashishs@allenai.org

Abstract
Chain of thought is a natural inference-time method for increasing the computational power of transformer-based large language models (LLMs), but comes at
the cost of sequential decoding. Are there more efficient alternatives to expand a
transformer’s expressive power without adding parameters? We consider transformers with padding tokens as a form of parallelizable test-time compute. We show
that averaging-hard-attention, masked-pre-norm transformers with polynomial
padding recognize precisely the class FO-uniform TC0 of extremely parallelizable
problems. While the TC0 upper bound was known, proving a matching lower
bound had been elusive. Further, our novel analysis reveals the precise expanded
power of padded transformers when coupled with another form of inference-time
compute, namely dynamically increasing depth via looping. Our core technical
contribution is to show how padding helps bring the notions of complete problems
and reductions, which have been a cornerstone of classical complexity theory, to
the formal study of transformers. Armed with this new tool, we prove that padded
transformers with O(logd n) looping on inputs of length n recognize exactly the
class FO-uniform TCd of moderately parallelizable problems. Thus, padding and
looping together systematically expand transformers’ expressive power: with polylogarithmic looping, polynomially padded transformers recognize precisely the
class FO-uniform NC, the best that could be expected without losing parallelism
(unless NC = P). Our results thus motivate further exploration of padding and
looping as parallelizable alternatives to chain of thought for test-time compute.

1

Introduction

Due to the computational limitations of transformers (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a; Strobl et al.,
2024; Chiang, 2025), solving complex reasoning problems requires extending their computational
power at inference time, typically by allowing models to generate long chains of thought (CoT)
before their outputs (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2022). Theoretical work has shown how CoT
expands the expressive power of transformers to sequential problems outside the class TC0 of highly
parallelizable problems, but it also sacrifices parallelism (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023b; Li et al.,
2024), making inference slow. Are there alternative inference-time compute approaches that increase
expressive power while preserving parallelism?
One method for parallelizable inference-time compute with LLMs is using padding tokens rather
than CoT. Padding can be understood as restricted CoT where the tokens on the chain are restricted to
some “blank” symbol rather than tokens generated by the LLM. Since all the input tokens are known
in advance, padding is more parallelizable than CoT. There have been some attempts to make padding
practical with mixed results (Goyal et al., 2024; Pfau et al., 2024), but it is not fully understood.
Specifically, while it is known that padded transformers remain in TC0 , it has been open and elusive
whether they can solve all problems in TC0 or even the smaller class AC0 (Pfau et al., 2024).
∗

Work partially conducted as a PhD student at New York University.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

