1000+ FPS 4D Gaussian Splatting for Dynamic Scene
Rendering

Yuheng Yuan1,∗ Qiuhong Shen1,∗ Xingyi Yang2,1 Xinchao Wang1,†
National University of Singapore 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

1

{yuhengyuan,qiuhong.shen}@u.nus.edu, xingyi.yang@polyu.edu.hk, xinchao@nus.edu.sg
Project page: https://4dgs-1k.github.io/

Figure 1: Compressibility and Rendering Speed. We introduce 4DGS-1K, a novel compact
representation with high rendering speed. In contrast to 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) [1], we can
achieve rasterization at 1000+ FPS while maintaining comparable photorealistic quality with only
2% of the original storage size. The right figure is the result tested on the N3V [2] datasets, where the
radius of the dot corresponds to the storage size.

Abstract
4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) has recently gained considerable attention as a
method for reconstructing dynamic scenes. Despite achieving superior quality,
4DGS typically requires substantial storage and suffers from slow rendering speed.
In this work, we delve into these issues and identify two key sources of temporal
redundancy. (Q1) Short-Lifespan Gaussians: 4DGS uses a large portion of
Gaussians with short temporal span to represent scene dynamics, leading to an
excessive number of Gaussians. (Q2) Inactive Gaussians: When rendering, only a
small subset of Gaussians contributes to each frame. Despite this, all Gaussians
are processed during rasterization, resulting in redundant computation overhead.
To address these redundancies, we present 4DGS-1K, which runs at over 1000
FPS on modern GPUs. For Q1, we introduce the Spatial-Temporal Variation
Score, a new pruning criterion that effectively removes short-lifespan Gaussians
while encouraging 4DGS to capture scene dynamics using Gaussians with longer
temporal spans. For Q2, we store a mask for active Gaussians across consecutive
frames, significantly reducing redundant computations. Compared to vanilla 4DGS,
our method achieves a 41× reduction in storage and 9× faster rasterization on
complex dynamic scenes, while maintaining comparable visual quality.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis for dynamic scenes allows for the creation of realistic representations of 4D
environments, which is essential in fields like computer vision, virtual reality, and augmented reality.
Traditionally, this area has been led by neural radiance fields (NeRF) [2–6], which model opacity and
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

