Stop Summation: Min-Form Credit Assignment Is All
Process Reward Model Needs for Reasoning

Jie Cheng1,2 , Gang Xiong1,2 , Ruixi Qiao1,2 , Lijun Li3 , Chao Guo1 ,
Junle Wang4 , Yisheng Lv1,2,5∗, Fei-Yue Wang5,6,7,8
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Tencent
5
Faculty of Innovation Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology
6
DeSci Center of Parallel Intelligence, Obuda University
7
Research Center for Chinese Economics and Social Security,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
8
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Process reward models (PRMs) have proven effective for test-time scaling of
Large Language Models (LLMs) on challenging reasoning tasks. However, reward
hacking issues with PRMs limit their successful application in reinforcement finetuning. In this paper, we identify the main cause of PRM-induced reward hacking:
the canonical summation-form credit assignment in reinforcement learning (RL),
which defines the value as cumulative gamma-decayed future rewards, easily
induces LLMs to hack steps with high rewards. To address this, we propose PURE:
Process sUpervised Reinforcement lEarning. The key innovation of PURE is a minform credit assignment that formulates the value function as the minimum of future
rewards. This method significantly alleviates reward hacking by limiting the value
function range and distributing advantages more reasonably. Through extensive
experiments on 3 base models, we show that PRM-based approaches enabling minform credit assignment achieve comparable reasoning performance to verifiable
reward-based methods within only 30% steps. In contrast, the canonical sum-form
credit assignment collapses training even at the beginning! Additionally, when we
supplement PRM-based fine-tuning with just 10% verifiable rewards, we further
alleviate reward hacking and produce the best fine-tuned model based on Qwen2.5Math-7B in our experiments, achieving 82.5% accuracy on AMC23 and 53.3%
average accuracy across 5 benchmarks. Moreover, we summarize the observed
reward hacking cases and analyze the causes of training collapse. We release our
code and model weights at https://github.com/CJReinforce/PURE.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) of large language models (LLMs) for reasoning tasks has shown
promise in developing advanced problem-solving abilities. Recent advancements (Wang et al., 2025;
Zeng et al., 2025a), such as DeepSeek R1-Zero (Guo et al., 2025) and Kimi K1.5 (Team et al., 2025),
have demonstrated strong reasoning skills through RFT with verifiable rewards, which provide sparse
feedback for the entire response. However, as response length increases, sparse rewards potentially
lead to inefficient learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Andrychowicz et al., 2017).
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

