Low-Rank Head Avatar Personalization
with Registers

Sai Tanmay Reddy Chakkera
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University
schakkera@cs.stonybrook.edu
Md Moniruzzaman
Atmanity Inc.
mman@atmanity.io

Aggelina Chatziagapi
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University
echatziagapi@cs.stonybrook.edu

Chen-Ping Yu
Atmanity Inc.
cpyu@atmanity.io

Yi-Hsuan Tsai
Atmanity Inc.
yhtsai@atmanity.io

Dimitris Samaras
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University
samaras@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel method for low-rank personalization of a generic model for
head avatar generation. Prior work proposes generic models that achieve highquality face animation by leveraging large-scale datasets of multiple identities.
However, such generic models usually fail to synthesize unique identity-specific
details, since they learn a general domain prior. To adapt to specific subjects, we
find that it is still challenging to capture high-frequency facial details via popular
solutions like low-rank adaptation (LoRA). This motivates us to propose a specific
architecture, a Register Module, that enhances the performance of LoRA, while
requiring only a small number of parameters to adapt to an unseen identity. Our
module is applied to intermediate features of a pre-trained model, storing and
re-purposing information in a learnable 3D feature space. To demonstrate the
efficacy of our personalization method, we collect a dataset of talking videos of individuals with distinctive facial details, such as wrinkles and tattoos. Our approach
faithfully captures unseen faces, outperforming existing methods quantitatively
and qualitatively. Project page: https://starc52.github.io/publications/LoRAvatar/.

1

Introduction

Synthesizing photo-realistic human faces has long been a challenge for both computer vision and
graphics. It has broad applications from AR/VR, virtual communication, and video games, to the
movie industry and healthcare. Earlier approaches rely on 3D morphable models (3DMMs) (Garrido
et al., 2015, 2014; Thies et al., 2016), while subsequent methods turn to generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Kim et al., 2018; Pumarola et al., 2020; Prajwal et al., 2020; Vougioukas et al.,
2020). More recent works learn 3D neural representations of the human face, which rely on neural
radiance fields (NeRFs) (Pumarola et al., 2021; Park et al., 2021a; Gafni et al., 2020; Park et al.,
2021b) or 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al., 2023; Cho et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2024;
Xu et al., 2024c). While these approaches lead to high-quality results, they usually require identityspecific training and are not able to generalize. Only a few recent methods propose generic models,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

