Open-World Drone Active Tracking with
Goal-Centered Rewards
Haowei Sun1 2∗ Jinwu Hu1 3∗ Zhirui Zhang1 2 Haoyuan Tian1 2 Xinze Xie1 2
Yufeng Wang1 5 Xiaohua Xie6 Yun Lin7 Zhuliang Yu1 2† Mingkui Tan1 4†
1

South China University of Technology, 2 Institute for Super Robotics (Huangpu), 3 Pazhou Laboratory,
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory,
6
Sun Yat-sen University, 7 Harbin Engineering University

4

Abstract
Drone Visual Active Tracking aims to autonomously follow a target object by controlling the motion system based on visual observations, providing a more practical
solution for effective tracking in dynamic environments. However, accurate Drone
Visual Active Tracking using reinforcement learning remains challenging due to
the absence of a unified benchmark and the complexity of open-world environments with frequent interference. To address these issues, we pioneer a systematic
solution. First, we propose DAT, the first open-world drone active air-to-ground
tracking benchmark. It encompasses 24 city-scale scenes, featuring targets with
human-like behaviors and high-fidelity dynamics simulation. DAT also provides
a digital twin tool for unlimited scene generation. Additionally, we propose a
novel reinforcement learning method called GC-VAT, which aims to improve the
performance of drone tracking targets in complex scenarios. Specifically, we design a Goal-Centered Reward to provide precise feedback across viewpoints to the
agent, enabling it to expand perception and movement range through unrestricted
perspectives. Inspired by curriculum learning, we introduce a Curriculum-Based
Training strategy that progressively enhances the tracking performance in complex
environments. Besides, experiments on simulator and real-world images demonstrate the superior performance of GC-VAT, achieving a Tracking Success Rate
of approximately 72% on the simulator. The benchmark and code are available at
https://github.com/SHWplus/DAT_Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Visual Active Tracking (VAT) aims to autonomously follow a target object by controlling the motion
system of the tracker based on visual observations [80, 75]. It is widely used in real-world applications
such as drone target tracking and security surveillance [22, 73, 77, 54]. Unlike passive visual tracking
[3, 74, 33, 5, 9, 84, 67, 58], which involves proposing a 2D bounding box for the target on a frameby-frame with a fixed camera pose, VAT actively adjusts the camera position to maintain the target
within the field of view. Passive visual tracking often falls short in real-world scenarios due to the
highly dynamic nature of most targets. Thus, VAT offers a more practical yet challenging solution for
effective tracking in dynamic environments.
Recently, VAT methods have evolved into two main categories: pipeline VAT methods [40, 46, 15]
and reinforcement learning-based VAT methods [19, 39, 18, 80]. Pipeline VAT methods employ
a sequential framework where the visual tracking [32, 4, 62, 33] and control models are connected
in series. The tracking model estimates the target position in the input image and the control model
∗
†

Equal contribution. Email: sunhoward1105@gmail.com, fhujinwu@gmail.com
Corresponding author. Email: mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn, zlyu@scut.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

