Group-Level Data Selection for Efficient Pretraining

Zichun Yu1∗ Fei Peng2 Jie Lei2 Arnold Overwijk2 Wen-tau Yih2 Chenyan Xiong1
1
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Meta

Abstract
The efficiency and quality of language model pretraining are largely determined by
the way pretraining data are selected. In this paper, we introduce Group-MATES, an
efficient group-level data selection approach to optimize the speed-quality frontier
of language model pretraining. Specifically, Group-MATES parameterizes costly
group-level selection with a relational data influence model. To train this model,
we sample training trajectories of the language model and collect oracle data influences alongside. The relational data influence model approximates the oracle
data influence by weighting individual influence with relationships among training
data. To enable efficient selection with our relational data influence model, we
partition the dataset into small clusters using relationship weights and select data
within each cluster independently. Experiments on DCLM 400M-4x, 1B-1x, and
3B-1x show that Group-MATES achieves 3.5%-9.4% relative performance gains
over random selection across 22 downstream tasks, nearly doubling the improvements achieved by state-of-the-art individual data selection baselines. Furthermore,
Group-MATES reduces the number of tokens required to reach a certain downstream performance by up to 1.8×, substantially elevating the speed-quality frontier.
Further analyses highlight the critical role of relationship weights in the relational
data influence model and the effectiveness of our cluster-based inference. Our code
is open-sourced at https://github.com/facebookresearch/Group-MATES.

Introduction
Avg. Downstream Acc

1

0.18

Overlap

100%
Improving the speed-quality frontier is esGroup
Group-Level vs.
+37.6%
Individual Selection
sential for making large language models
80%
0.16
Random Overlap
(LLMs) more efficient, scalable, and acIndividual
60%
+15.0%
cessible across real-world applications [10,
0.14
40%
15, 20]. Pretraining data selection [3, 25]
0.12 Random
provides a practical path to achieve that
20%
0
1000 2000 3000
by identifying high-quality data [31, 44],
Data Pool Size
optimizing domain mixtures [45], and constructing adaptive training curriculum [50]. (a) Selected data overlap.
(b) Evaluation results.
Effective data selection approaches can
nearly double the FLOPs-performance Figure 1: Misalignment (a) and performance gap (b)
scaling efficiency of language models [11, between brute-force group and individual selection.
50], or enables smaller models to outperform larger counterparts [6].

Prevailing selection methods often evaluate the utility of each training data point individually [11],
implicitly assuming that the overall utility of a data group is the sum of its elements. However,
theoretical analyses [4, 34] reveal that the influence of a data group is shaped by complex interactions
among data points rather than their isolated contributions. This discrepancy is particularly pronounced
when selecting pretraining data. As shown in Figure 1a, in a typical pretraining data selection
setting [25, 50], individual data selection quickly diverges from brute-force group selection after
merely a hundred selected data points—less than a single batch in modern pretraining workflows.
∗

Part of the work done during an internship at Meta.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

