Efficient Prompt Compression with Evaluator Heads
for Long-Context Transformer Inference

Weizhi Fei1

Xueyan Niu2∗

Guoqing Xie3

Yingqing Liu3

Bo Bai2

Wei Han2

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Theory Lab, 2012 Labs, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
3
Architecture & Design, ICT Products & Solutions, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

Abstract
Although applications involving long-context inputs are crucial for the effective
utilization of large language models (LLMs), they also result in increased computational costs and reduced performance. To address this challenge, we propose an
efficient, training-free prompt compression method that retains key information
within compressed prompts. We identify specific attention heads in transformerbased LLMs, which we designate as evaluator heads, that are capable of selecting
tokens in long inputs that are most significant for inference. Building on this discovery, we develop EHPC, an Evaluator Head-based Prompt Compression method,
which enables LLMs to rapidly “skim through” input prompts by leveraging only
the first few layers with evaluator heads during the pre-filling stage, subsequently
passing only the important tokens to the model for inference. EHPC achieves stateof-the-art results on two major benchmarks: prompt compression and long-context
inference acceleration. Consequently, it effectively improves performance with the
reduced costs associated with commercial API calls. We further demonstrate that
EHPC attains competitive results compared to key-value cache-based acceleration
methods, thereby highlighting its potential to enhance the efficiency of LLMs for
long-context tasks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited exceptional capabilities in a variety of real-world
tasks and applications, with an increasing need for processing long inputs in areas such as literary
novels, legal documents, instruction manuals, and code documentation. Inference tasks that require
understanding of long contexts, such as long document summarization Zhang et al. [2024a], reasoning
Fei et al. [2024a], and autonomous agents Singh et al. [2024], Chen et al. [2024], are of particular
importance due to the high stakes in these scenarios. However, the deployment of LLMs is challenged
by the computational and memory demands inherent to transformer-based architectures, resulting in
increased latency, particularly when processing lengthy input prompts.
Prompt compression, which involves substituting the input prompts provided to a language model with
more succinct versions, has surfaced as a promising strategy for enhancing long-text understanding
and mitigating associated costs. Current mainstream methods, such as SelectContext Li et al.
[2023], LLMLingua [Jiang et al., 2023a] and LongLLMLingua [Jiang et al., 2023b], typically
rely on pre-trained LLMs, utilizing the logits or perplexity of the prompts to evict tokens deemed
insignificant. These approaches often necessitate chunking long texts for processing, leading to
numerous repeated calls of the LLM and consequently incurring considerable time complexity.
More efficient compression techniques, such as LLMLingua-2 Pan et al. [2024], generally require
∗

Correspondence to: niuxueyan3@huawei.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

