Competitive Advantage Attacks to Decentralized
Federated Learning

Yuqi Jia1 Minghong Fang2 Neil Gong1
Duke University, 2 University of Louisville
1
{yuqi.jia, neil.gong}@duke.edu, 2 minghong.fang@louisville.edu
1

Abstract
Decentralized federated learning (DFL) enables clients (e.g., hospitals and banks)
to jointly train machine learning models without a central orchestration server.
In each global training round, each client trains a local model on its own training data and then they exchange local models for aggregation. In this work, we
propose SelfishAttack, a new family of attacks to DFL. In SelfishAttack, a set
of selfish clients aim to achieve competitive advantages over the remaining nonselfish ones, i.e., the final learnt local models of the selfish clients are more accurate than those of the non-selfish ones. Towards this goal, the selfish clients
send carefully crafted local models to each remaining non-selfish one in each
global training round. We formulate finding such local models as an optimization problem and propose methods to solve it when DFL uses different aggregation rules. Theoretically, we show that our methods find the optimal solutions
to the optimization problem. Empirically, we show that SelfishAttack successfully increases the accuracy gap (i.e., competitive advantage) between the final learnt local models of selfish clients and those of non-selfish ones. Moreover, SelfishAttack achieves larger accuracy gaps than poisoning attacks when
extended to increase competitive advantages. Our code and data are available at:
https://github.com/jyqhahah/SelfishAttack.

1

Introduction

In decentralized federated learning (DFL) [8, 15, 17, 33, 9, 34, 29, 35], a group of clients (e.g.,
hospitals or banks) collaboratively train machine learning models without relying on a central server.
Each client maintains a local model (called pre-aggregation local model), trains it using private data,
exchanges a shared model with others, and aggregates shared models from all clients as a new local
model (called post-aggregation local model) through an aggregation rule, e.g., FedAvg [24]. In
non-adversarial settings, all clients converge to identical models after each round. Compared to
centralized federated learning (CFL), which requires a trusted coordinator, DFL offers enhanced
robustness by eliminating single points of failure and is better suited to scenarios, e.g., the clients
are hospitals or banks, where clients cannot agree on a central authority.
This paper reveals a new vulnerability in DFL: its decentralized nature opens the door to a unique
class of insider attacks, which we call SelfishAttack. In this attack, a subset of selfish clients collude
to compromise the training process, aiming to: 1). improve their final local models beyond what they
could achieve by training among themselves (called utility goal), and 2). outperform the remaining
non-selfish clients (called competitive-advantage goal).
Unlike conventional poisoning attacks [3, 6, 10, 31, 13], which assume external adversaries that
compromise or inject malicious clients to cause indiscriminate misclassification, SelfishAttack is an
internal, collusion-based threat. The selfish clients participate fully in the DFL process but selectively manipulate only the models shared with non-selfish participants. Their goal is not to poison
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

