Dynamic Shadow Unveils Invisible Semantics
for Video Outpainting

Ruilin Li1
Hang Yu1∗ Jiayan Qiu2
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, China
2
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Leicester, United Kingdom
{ruilinli,yuhang}@shu.edu.cn, jq46@leicester.ac.uk
1

Abstract
Conventional video outpainting methods primarily focus on maintaining coherent
textures and visual consistency across frames. However, they often fail at handling
dynamic scenes due to the complex motion of objects or camera movement, leading
to temporal incoherence and visible flickering artifacts across frames. This is
primarily because they lack instance-aware modeling to accurately separate and
track individual object motions throughout the video. In this paper, we propose a
novel video outpainting framework that explicitly takes shadow-object pairs into
consideration to enhance the temporal and spatial consistency of instances, even
when they are temporarily invisible. Specifically, we first track the shadow-object
pairs across frames and predict the instances in the scene to unveil the spatial
regions of invisible instances. Then, these prediction results are fed to guide the
instance-aware optical flow completion to unveil the temporal motion of invisible
instances. Next, these spatiotemporal guidances of instances are used to guide the
video outpainting process. Finally, a video-aware discriminator is implemented
to enhance alignment among dynamic shadows and the extended semantics in the
scene. Comprehensive experiments underscore the superiority of our approach,
outperforming existing state-of-the-art methods in widely recognized benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Shadows are an integral part of many natural scenes, providing rich but often ignored cues about
both invisible semantics. While shadows in static images can help infer approximate categories and
coarse shapes of invisible objects [44], dynamic shadows in videos offer even more, as they contain
spatiotemporal information of invisible instances like unveiling the motion and actions of objects and
even dynamic light sources in the scene.
Despite recent video outpainting methods [5, 8, 36] making significant progress in generating
contextually matching content with coherent textures and scene structure. However, this consistency
often applies to broader backgrounds rather than specific instances: objects may lack detail, exhibit
distortions, or fail to preserve identity across frames, or become temporally misaligned with dynamic
shadows, leading to inconsistencies with the motion and action of extended semantics.
Specifically, given an input video, conventional video outpainting methods often suffer from temporal
inconsistency and action misalignment when an instance is temporarily outside the visible scene. As
shown in Fig. 1(a), while the shadow moves, conventional methods tend to generate instances that
remain static. In contrast, our method aligns the generated instance with the motion of the dynamic
shadow, thereby preserving consistency across frames. Additionally, conventional approaches often
lead to action misalignment, as shown in Fig. 1(b), where the actions of the generated instance do
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

