GeoLLaVA-8K: Scaling Remote-Sensing Multimodal
Large Language Models to 8K Resolution

Fengxiang Wang1 , Mingshuo Chen2 , Yueying Li1 , Di Wang3,4 , Haotian Wang1 ,
Zonghao Guo5 , Zefan Wang5 , Boqi Shan6 , Long Lan1 , Yulin Wang5∗,
Hongzhen Wang5* , Wenjing Yang1* , Bo Du3,4 , Jing Zhang3*
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
4
Zhongguancun Academy, China 5 Tsinghua University, China 6 Beihang University, China

Abstract
Ultra-high-resolution (UHR) remote sensing (RS) imagery offers valuable data
for Earth observation but pose challenges for existing multimodal foundation
models due to two key bottlenecks: (1) limited availability of UHR training
data, and (2) token explosion caused by the large image size. To address data
scarcity, we introduce SuperRS-VQA (avg. 8,376×8,376) and HighRS-VQA
(avg. 2,000×1,912), the highest-resolution vision-language datasets in RS to date,
covering 22 real-world dialogue tasks. To mitigate token explosion, our pilot
studies reveal signiﬁcant redundancy in RS images: crucial information is concentrated in a small subset of object-centric tokens, while pruning background
tokens (e.g., ocean or forest) can even improve performance. Motivated by these
ﬁndings, we propose two strategies: Background Token Pruning and Anchored
Token Selection, to reduce the memory footprint while preserving key semantics.
Integrating these techniques, we introduce GeoLLaVA-8K, the ﬁrst RS-focused
multimodal large language model capable of handling inputs up to 8K×8K resolution, built on the LLaVA framework. Trained on SuperRS-VQA and HighRSVQA, GeoLLaVA-8K sets a new state-of-the-art on the XLRS-Bench. Datasets
and code were released at GeoLLaVA-8K.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of Earth science, the collection, process, and representation of remote
sensing (RS) data have become increasingly important. [1]. Among these data sources, satellite
imagery is able to capturing extensive spatiotemporal information about Earth’s surface [2, 3], signiﬁcantly enhancing our geographic understanding of this planet.
Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] have signiﬁcantly improved visual understanding and reasoning, simultaneously facilitating remarkable scientiﬁc progress in geoscience for handling remote sensing data [9, 10, 11]. However, despite signiﬁcant
progress of MLLMs across both general and RS domains, current models still fall short in addressing
real-world RS tasks, especially in the case of ultra-high-resolution (UHR) scenarios. For instance,
even leading models like GPT-4o [12] and Qwen-VL series [13] are limited up to 4K resolution, resulting in limited performance (Accuracy < 0.45) on the XLRS-Bench [14], a recent RS evaluation
benchmark featuring large image size (e.g., 8K-10K). This gap raises an urgent problem we aim to
investigate in this paper:
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

