On the necessity of adaptive regularisation:
Optimal anytime online learning on ℓp-balls

Emmeran Johnson
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
emmeran.johnson17@imperial.ac.uk

David Martínez-Rubio
Signal Theory and Communications Department
Carlos III University of Madrid
dmrubio@ing.uc3m.es

Ciara Pike-Burke
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
c.pike-burke@imperial.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We study online convex optimisation on ℓp -balls in Rd for p > 2. While always
sub-linear, the optimal regret exhibits a shift between the high-dimensional setting (d > T ), when the dimension d is greater than the time horizon T and the
low-dimensional setting (d ≤ T ). We show that Follow-the-Regularised-Leader
(FTRL) with time-varying regularisation which is adaptive to the dimension regime
is anytime optimal for all dimension regimes. Motivated by this, we ask whether it
is possible to obtain anytime optimality of FTRL with fixed non-adaptive regularisation. Our main result establishes that for separable regularisers, adaptivity in the
regulariser is necessary, and that any fixed regulariser will be sub-optimal in one of
the two dimension regimes. Finally, we provide lower bounds which rule out sublinear regret bounds for the linear bandit problem in sufficiently high-dimension
for all ℓp -balls with p ≥ 1.

1

Introduction

We study Online Convex Optimisation (OCO) [16, 45], a sequential game where in each round
t = 1, . . . , T , a learner selects a point xt in a convex set V ⊂ Rd and suffers a convex loss ℓt (xt ), the
full loss ℓt is then revealed to the learner before the next point xt+1 is selected. The learner competes
against the best fixed point in hindsight and aims to minimise its regret against this competitor:
PT
PT
RT = t=1 ℓt (xt ) − minu∈V t=1 ℓt (u). Optimal performance is known to depend on parameters
of the problem such as the geometry of the set V and constraints on the losses ℓt [28, 23, 25, 42].

We consider the setting where the action set V = x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥p ≤ 1 is an ℓp -ball in d-dimensional
space with p > 2 and losses are L-Lipschitz with respect to ∥·∥p (ensuring RT ≤ 2LT ). The study
of ℓp -geometries with p > 2 has been the focus of many works in optimisation [10, 28, 18, 24, 25] as
it covers sets with varying levels of curvature, offering insights for more general spaces.
In this work, we study the behaviour of the Follow-The-Regularised-Leader (FTRL) (and Online
Mirror Descent (OMD)) family of algorithms in achieving anytime optimal regret guarantees.
Anytime refers to the absence of knowledge of the time horizon T . We focus on two regimes:
the high-dimensional setting where d > T and the low-dimensional setting where d ≤ T . For
ℓp -balls with p > 2, the optimal regret exhibits a shift from the high-dimensional setting to the
low-dimensional setting (see Table 1). If T is unknown, then so is the dimension regime when
the game begins. We show that anytime optimality can be achieved with FTRL by using adaptive
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

