Classical Planning with LLM-Generated Heuristics:
Challenging the State of the Art with Python Code

Augusto B. Corrêa
University of Oxford
United Kingdom

André G. Pereira
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Brazil

Jendrik Seipp
Linköping University
Sweden

Abstract
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance in many problems. However, they fail to plan reliably. Specialized attempts
to improve their planning capabilities still produce incorrect plans and fail to generalize to larger tasks. Furthermore, LLMs designed for explicit “reasoning” fail
to compete with automated planners while increasing computational costs, which
reduces one of the advantages of using LLMs. In this paper, we show how to
use LLMs to always generate correct plans, even for out-of-distribution tasks of
increasing size. For a given planning domain, we ask an LLM to generate several
domain-dependent heuristic functions in the form of Python code, evaluate them
on a set of training tasks with a greedy best-first search, and choose the best one.
The resulting LLM-generated heuristic functions solve substantially more unseen
out-of-distribution test tasks than end-to-end LLM planning, particularly for nonreasoning LLMs. Moreover, they also solve many more tasks than state-of-the-art
domain-independent heuristics for classical planning, and are competitive with
the strongest learning algorithm for domain-dependent planning. These results
are impressive given that our implementation is based on a Python planner and
the baselines all build upon highly optimized C++ code. In some domains, the
LLM-generated heuristics expand fewer states than the baselines, showing that they
are not only efficiently computable but also more informative than the state-of-theart heuristics. Overall, our results show that sampling a set of planning heuristic
functions can significantly improve the planning capabilities of LLMs.

1

Introduction

Classical planning is a fundamental problem in Artificial Intelligence (AI), with applications ranging
from robotics to computational chemistry [25]. Given the initial state of the world, a description of
the goal, and a set of deterministic actions that can be executed in a fully-observable environment,
the task is to find a sequence of actions transforming the initial state into a state that satisfies
the goal. Nowadays, most classical planners rely on heuristic search algorithms to find plans
[6, 39, 35, 55, 45, 75, 65]. The efficiency of these planners depends on the quality of the heuristic
functions that estimate the cost of reaching the goal from a given state. Traditionally, these heuristics
have been either domain-independent, offering generality at the expense of accuracy; manually crafted
for specific domains, requiring significant human effort and expertise; or learned on a per-domain
basis, incurring costs for training a new heuristic whenever we want to use a new domain.
In this work, we propose a new way of producing heuristics: we use LLMs to automatically generate
domain-dependent heuristic functions for classical planning. Our hypothesis is that LLMs, given
sufficient context and examples, can generate heuristic functions that outperform generic domainindependent heuristics.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

