Inference-time Alignment in Continuous Space

Yige Yuan1,2∗, Teng Xiao3,4∗, Yunfan Li1,2 , Bingbing Xu1† ,
Shuchang Tao5 , Yunqi Qiu1,2 , Huawei Shen1,2 , Xueqi Cheng1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Washington, 4 Allen Institute for AI, 5 Alibaba Group
yuanyige20z@ict.ac.cn, tengxiao01@gmail.com, liyunfan24s@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Aligning large language models with human feedback at inference time has received
increasing attention due to its flexibility. Existing methods rely on generating
multiple responses from the base policy for search using a reward model, which
can be considered as searching in a discrete response space. However, these
methods struggle to explore informative candidates when the base policy is weak
or the candidate set is small, resulting in limited effectiveness. In this paper, to
address this problem, we propose Simple Energy Adaptation (SEA), a simple yet
effective algorithm for inference-time alignment. In contrast to expensive search
over the discrete space, SEA directly adapts original responses from the base policy
toward the optimal one via gradient-based sampling in continuous latent space.
Specifically, SEA formulates inference as an iterative optimization procedure on an
energy function over actions in the continuous space defined by the optimal policy,
enabling simple and effective alignment. For instance, despite its simplicity, SEA
outperforms the second-best baseline with a relative improvement of up to 77.51%
on AdvBench and 16.36% on MATH. Our code is publicly available at this link.

1

Introduction

The alignment of large language models (LLMs) plays a crucial role to ensure the model outputs
meet human expectations and reflect human values [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) [2, 6] has emerged as a widely adopted method for LLM alignment. RLHF
typically involves training a reward model based on human feedback and subsequently employing
reinforcement learning (RL), such as proximal policy optimization (PPO) [7], to generate responses
that maximize the reward for input prompt. Preference fine-tuning [8, 9, 10, 11, 12] has also been
proposed as alternatives to RLHF, replacing RL with supervised learning using preference data.
Inference-time alignment [13, 14, 15] eliminates the need for additional training phases and instead
focuses on guiding model behavior during inference, which has gained increasing attention due to its
simplicity and flexibility. This approach does not require fine-tuning the parameters of large language
models (LLMs), enabling plug-and-play adaptation for any unaligned LLM. Specifically, Best-of-N
(BoN) [16] selects the best response based on a reward model from multiple responses generated by
the base model. Other reward-guided search methods [17, 14, 18] adjust model’s output token by
token (or chunk by chunk), selecting each subsequent partial output according to reward signals.
In general, these methods essentially operate within a “search within a discrete space" paradigm,
which selects the best response from a discrete response space guided by the reward model. Figure 1
illustrates that this paradigm has significant drawbacks, as its performance is constrained by the
capability of the base model and the size of the candidate set. As shown in Figure 2(a), when the base
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

