Towards Irreversible Attack: Fooling Scene Text
Recognition via Multi-Population Coevolution Search

Jingyu Li1 , Pengwen Dai1∗, Mingqing Zhu1 , Chengwei Wang1 , Haolong Liu1 , Xiaochun Cao1
1
School of Cyber Science and Technology,
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518107, China
{lijy768, zhumq8, liuhlong7}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
wangchw23@alumni.sysu.edu.cn,
{daipw, caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent work has shown that scene text recognition (STR) models are vulnerable
to adversarial examples. Different from non-sequential vision tasks, the output
sequence of STR models contains rich information. However, existing adversarial
attacks against STR models can only lead to a few incorrect characters in the predicted text. These attack results still carry partial information about the original prediction and could be easily corrected by an external dictionary or a language model.
Therefore, we propose the Multi-Population Coevolution Search (MPCS) method
to attack each character in the image. We first decompose the global optimization
objective into sub-objectives to solve the attack pixel concentration problem existing in previous attack methods. While this distributed optimization paradigm brings
a new joint perturbation shift problem, we propose a novel coevolution energy
function to solve it. Experiments on recent STR models show the superiority of our
method. The code is available at https://github.com/Lee-Jingyu/MPCS.

1

Introduction

Scene text recognition (STR) [29, 20, 30] has garnered increasing attention in the field of computer
vision due to its wide applications, such as augmented reality [27], visual question answering [31],
automatic driving [8], etc. Despite its great success, recent studies [32, 36, 37] have shown that
STR models are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which deceive the models into making incorrect
predictions by adding imperceptible perturbations on the input images. In practice, adversarial
examples can be used to prevent private text [4, 37] in images from being recognized and exploited
by malicious optical character recognition (OCR) systems. Therefore, adversarial attacks against
STR models have become a valuable research topic.
Existing adversarial attacks in the computer vision field mainly focus on non-sequential tasks
[9, 23, 33], such as image classification, object detection, face recognition, etc. The output of these
models is usually a single label and contains limited information. In this scenario, once the model
outputs a different label, the information conveyed by the output is completely altered. In contrast, the
prediction of STR models can be seen as a series of character labels, which contain rich information.
When attacking STR models, the altered prediction may retain partial information about the original
prediction. With the retained information, the opponent could correct the mispredicted text through
an extra dictionary [22, 30, 13] or large language models (LLMs) [34, 21, 15], as shown in Figure 1.
However, existing adversarial attacks against STR models consider merely altering the model prediction as a successful attack. For example, some works focus on attacking the text image with a clean
∗

Corresponding author: Pengwen Dai <daipw@mail.sysu.edu.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

