iMIND: Insightful Multi-subject Invariant Neural
Decoding

Zixiang Yin, Jiarui Li, Zhengming Ding∗
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
{zyin, jli78, zding1}@tulane.edu

https://zachyin.com/imind

Abstract
Decoding visual signals holds an appealing potential to unravel the complexities
of cognition and perception. While recent reconstruction tasks leverage powerful
generative models to produce high-fidelity images from neural recordings, they
often pay limited attention to the underlying neural representations and rely heavily
on pretrained priors. As a result, they provide little insight into how individual
voxels encode and differentiate semantic content or how these representations
vary across subjects. To mitigate this gap, we present an insightful Multi-subject
Invariant Neural Decoding (iMIND) model, which employs a novel dual-decoding
framework–both biometric and semantic decoding–to offer neural interpretability in a data-driven manner and deepen our understanding of brain-based visual
functionalities. Our iMIND model operates through three core steps: establishing
a shared neural representation space across subjects using a ViT-based masked
autoencoder, disentangling neural features into complementary subject-specific
and object-specific components, and performing dual decoding to support both
biometric and semantic classification tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that
iMIND achieves state-of-the-art decoding performance with minimal scalability
limitations. Furthermore, iMIND empirically generates voxel-object activation
fingerprints that reveal object-specific neural patterns and enable investigation of
subject-specific variations in attention to identical stimuli. These findings provide
a foundation for more interpretable and generalizable subject-invariant neural decoding, advancing our understanding of the voxel semantic selectivity as well as
the neural vision processing dynamics.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have recently been adopted in neuroscience as powerful tools for modeling
brain activity, especially in the study of vision and cognition [6, 9, 19, 26]. A central goal in cognitive
neuroscience is to understand how the brain transforms sensory input into meaningful representations
that support recognition, memory, decision-making, and attention. Unlike behavioral annotations,
neural signals provide a direct readout of these internal processes, revealing perceptual [3], emotional
[32], and attentional dynamics [27] that cannot be fully captured by explicit labeling. Among
available neural modalities, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) [29] has been especially
influential for its ability to non-invasively measure distributed patterns of cortical activity, enabling
the study of how complex visual concepts are represented across brain regions. As such, fMRI not
only offers a promising supervisory signal for aligning neural activity with computational models,
but also serves as a critical tool for probing the neural basis of cognition and vision [16].
∗
Corresponding author. This work is partially supported by NIH 2U19 AG055373-06A1 as well as the
Harold L. and Heather E. Jurist Center of Excellence for Artificial Intelligence at Tulane University.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

