Make Information Diffusion Explainable: LLM-based
Causal Framework for Diffusion Prediction
Wenbo Shang∗ Zihan Feng∗ Yajun Yang Xin Huang†
Hong Kong Baptist University, Tianjin University
{cswbshang, xinhuang}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, {zihanfeng, yjyang}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Information diffusion prediction, which aims to forecast the future infected users
during the information spreading process on social platforms, is a challenging and
critical task for public opinion analysis. With the development of social platforms,
mass communication has become increasingly widespread. However, most existing
methods based on GNNs and sequence models mainly focus on structural and
temporal patterns in social networks, suffering from spurious diffusion connections
and insufficient information for diffusion analysis. We leverage the strong reasoning
capabilities of LLMs and develop an LLM-based causal framework for diffusion
influence derivation, named MILD. By comprehensively integrating four key
factors of social diffusion—i.e., connections, active timelines, user profiles, and
comments—MILD causally infers authentic diffusion links to construct a diffusion
influence graph, GI . To validate the quality and reliability of our constructed graph
GI , we propose a newly designed set of evaluation metrics for diffusion prediction.
In experiments, MILD provides a reliable information diffusion structure that
achieves an absolute improvement of 12% over the social network structure and
achieves state-of-the-art performance in diffusion prediction. MILD is expected to
contribute to higher-quality, more explainable, and more trustworthy public opinion
analysis. The code and data are available at: https://github.com/Shang-hub/
MILD-Official-Implementation.

1

Introduction

Information diffusion on social platforms (e.g., TikTok and Instagram) is characterized by a broad
reach and intricate, multifaceted pathways, leading to the formation of numerous diffusion cascades.
Information diffusion prediction aims to forecast the future participants of cascades, which is crucial
for tracing information flow dynamics and quantifying user influence, benefiting downstream applications such as social recommendation systems [21, 8, 15] and public opinion analysis [12, 13, 20].
Therefore, it is fundamentally important to achieve accurate information diffusion prediction, relying
on effectively modeling complex user interactions and influences.
Several learning-based approaches have emerged for predicting information diffusion. Initial efforts
focus on modeling the sequential nature of diffusion events, primarily employing Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) or Transformer architectures to capture temporal influence patterns within observed
cascades [11, 31, 32, 33, 35]. More recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have proven highly
effective for graph data, leading to hybrid frameworks that combine GNNs with sequential models to
capture both global social network structure and local diffusion dynamics [5, 23, 28, 29, 37, 41]. For
instance, methods like MS-HGAT [28] and DisenIDP [3] utilize hypergraph networks to capture user
interactions and employ self-attention to model diffusion influence. However, this “GNN+Sequence
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

