Conformal Inference under High-Dimensional
Covariate Shifts via Likelihood-Ratio Regularization

Sunay Joshi∗
University of Pennsylvania
sunayj@sas.upenn.edu

Shayan Kiyani∗
University of Pennsylvania
shayank@seas.upenn.edu

George Pappas
University of Pennsylvania
pappasg@seas.upenn.edu

Edgar Dobriban
University of Pennsylvania
dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu

Hamed Hassani
University of Pennsylvania
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of conformal prediction under covariate shift. Given
labeled data from a source domain and unlabeled data from a covariate shifted
target domain, we seek to construct prediction sets with valid marginal coverage
in the target domain. Most existing methods require estimating the unknown
likelihood ratio function, which can be prohibitive for high-dimensional data such
as images. To address this challenge, we introduce the likelihood ratio regularized
quantile regression (LR-QR) algorithm, which combines the pinball loss with a
novel choice of regularization in order to construct a threshold function without
directly estimating the unknown likelihood ratio. We show that the LR-QR method
has coverage at the desired level in the target domain, up to a small error term that
we can control. Our proofs draw on a novel analysis of coverage via stability bounds
from learning theory. Our experiments demonstrate that the LR-QR algorithm
outperforms existing methods on high-dimensional prediction tasks, including a
regression task for the Communities and Crime dataset, an image classification task
from the WILDS repository, and an LLM question-answering task on the MMLU
benchmark.

1

Introduction

Conformal prediction is a framework to construct distribution-free prediction sets for black-box
predictive models [e.g., 45, 60, 61, etc]. Given a pretrained prediction model f : X → Y mapping
features x ∈ X to labels y ∈ Y, and n1 calibration datapoints (Xi , Yi ) : i ∈ [n1 ] sampled i.i.d. from
a calibration distribution P1 , we seek to construct a prediction set C(Xtest ) ⊆ Y for test features Xtest
sampled from a marginal test distribution P2,X . We aim to cover the true label Ytest with probability
at least 1 − α for some α ∈ (0, 1): that is, P(Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )) ⩾ 1 − α. The left-hand side of this
inequality is the marginal coverage of the prediction set C, averaged over the randomness of both
the calibration datapoints and the test datapoint (Xtest , Ytest ) ∼ P2 . In the case that the calibration
and test distributions coincide (P1 = P2 ), there are numerous conformal prediction algorithms that
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to: sunayj@sas.upenn.edu, shayank@seas.upenn.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

