DY MU: Dynamic Merging and Virtual Unmerging for
Efficient Variable-Length VLMs

Zhenhailong Wang1* , Senthil Purushwalkam2* , Caiming Xiong2 ,
Silvio Savarese2 , Heng Ji1 , Ran Xu2
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Salesforce Research
{wangz3,hengji}@illinois.edu, ran.xu@salesforce.com
*
Equal contribution

Figure 1: Dynamic Merging and Virtual Unmerging (DyMU) adaptively reduces visual token lengths based
on image complexity, as shown on the left where simpler images are represented using fewer tokens. In contrast,
existing representations (like CLIP [34]) always use the same number of tokens regardless of image content.
Note that this limitation also exists in dynamic resolution encoders [18, 38], where token length depends solely
on image dimensions rather than complexity. DyMU applied to recent VLMs (right) maintains competitive
performance across different token compression levels. This training-free approach preserves key semantic
information, offering a more efficient plug-and-play alternative to VLMs with fixed-length visual tokens.

Abstract
We present DY MU, an efficient, training-free framework that dynamically reduces
the computational burden of vision-language models (VLMs) while maintaining
high task performance. Our approach comprises two key components. First, Dynamic Token Merging (DToMe) reduces the number of visual token embeddings
by merging similar tokens based on image complexity, addressing the inherent
inefficiency of fixed-length outputs in vision transformers. Second, Virtual Token
Unmerging (VTU) simulates the expected token sequence for large language models (LLMs) by efficiently reconstructing the attention dynamics of a full sequence,
thus preserving the downstream performance without additional fine-tuning. Unlike
previous approaches, our method dynamically determines token length based on
the image content—not just resolution—and operates completely training-free,
making it readily applicable to most state-of-the-art VLM architectures. Extensive
experiments on image and video understanding tasks, demonstrate that DY MU can
reduce the average visual token count by 32%-85% while achieving comparable
performance to full-length models, across diverse VLM architectures. Furthermore,
qualitative analyses show that the adaptive token reduction from DToMe aligns
well with human perception and enables users to better control computational costs
through flexible integration with additional vision tools and models.

1

Introduction

Recent large vision-language models (VLMs) follow a common approach: a visual encoder extracts
features from images or videos and projects them into the same embedding space as textual features.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

