Put CASH on Bandits: A Max K-Armed Problem for
Automated Machine Learning

Amir Rezaei Balef, Claire Vernade and Katharina Eggensperger
Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen
{amir.rezaei-balef, claire.vernade, katharina.eggensperger}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
The Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter optimization (CASH)
is a challenging resource allocation problem in the field of AutoML. We propose
MaxUCB, a max k-armed bandit method to trade off exploring different model
classes and conducting hyperparameter optimization. MaxUCB is specifically
designed for the light-tailed and bounded reward distributions arising in this setting
and, thus, provides an efficient alternative compared to classic max k-armed bandit
methods assuming heavy-tailed reward distributions. We theoretically and empirically evaluate our method on four standard AutoML benchmarks demonstrating
superior performance over prior approaches. We make our code and data available
at https://github.com/amirbalef/CASH_with_Bandits.

1

Introduction

The performance of machine learning (ML) solutions is highly sensitive to the choice of algorithms
and their hyperparameter configurations which can make finding an effective solution a challenging
task. AutoML aims to reduce this complexity and make ML more accessible by automating these
critical choices [Hutter et al., 2019, Baratchi et al., 2024].
For example, Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) methods focus on finding well-performing hyperparameter settings given a resource constraint, such as an iteration count or a time limit. However, in
practice, it is often unclear which ML model class would perform best on a given dataset [Bischl
et al., 2025]. The problem of jointly searching the model class and the appropriate hyperparameters
has been coined CASH, Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter optimization [Thornton
et al., 2013]. As a prime example, on tabular data, a ubiquitous data modality [van Breugel and
van der Schaar, 2024], the state-of-the-art ML landscape covers classic ML methods, ensembles of
gradient-boosted decision trees and modern deep learning approaches [Kadra et al., 2021, Gorishniy
et al., 2021, 2024, McElfresh et al., 2023, Kohli et al., 2024, Hollmann et al., 2023, Holzmüller et al.,
2024].
A popular approach to address the CASH problem is to use categorical and conditional hyperparameters to run HPO directly on the combined hierarchical search space of models and hyperparameters.
AutoML systems use this approach, which we call combined search, to search well-performing ML
pipelines [Thornton et al., 2013, Feurer et al., 2015, Komer et al., 2014, Kotthoff et al., 2017, Feurer
et al., 2022], but HPO remains inefficient in high-dimensional and hierarchical search spaces. A
naive solution to address the scalability limitation is to run HPO independently for the smaller search
spaces of each ML model class and then compare the found solutions. However, this solution often
exceeds available computational resources and does not scale well with an increasing number of ML
models. Figure 1 (left) illustrates the difference between searching each space individually (colored
dashed lines) and combined search (black line) on an exemplary dataset.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

