Long-Tailed Recognition via Information-Preservable
Two-Stage Learning

Fudong Lin & Xu Yuan∗
Department of Computer & Information Sciences
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19711

Abstract
The imbalance (or long-tail) is the nature of many real-world data distributions,
which often induces the undesirable bias of deep classification models toward
frequent classes, resulting in poor performance for tail classes. In this paper, we
propose a novel two-stage learning approach to mitigate such a majority-biased
tendency while preserving valuable information within datasets. Specifically, the
first stage proposes a new representation learning technique from the information
theory perspective. This approach is theoretically equivalent to minimizing intraclass distance, yielding an effective and well-separated feature space. The second
stage develops a novel sampling strategy that selects mathematically informative instances, able to rectify majority-biased decision boundaries without compromising
a model’s overall performance. As a result, our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance across various long-tailed benchmark datasets. Our code is available
at https://github.com/fudong03/BNS_IPDPP.

1

Introduction

Class imbalance naturally arises in real-world scenarios, spanning across such wide applications as
online transactions, medical diagnoses, social networks spam detection, among many others. Such
data in real scenarios usually follows a long-tailed distribution, i.e., a few head classes dominate
the entire dataset while some tail classes account for only a small portion. When encountered
with such long-tailed data, deep neural networks (DNNs) suffer from majority-biased decision
boundaries [31, 53, 24, 57, 13, 41, 16, 42], undesirably favoring frequent classes and leading to poor
performance in tail classes. Misclassifying tail classes may yield catastrophic consequences, e.g.,
failing to identify lung cancer from millions of biomedical images may result in fatalities. To this
end, building functional classifiers with unbiased decision boundaries when tackling the long-tailed
data is critical but remains open.
So far, the mainstream strategies addressing long-tailed recognition primarily fall into two categories:
one-stage learning and two-stage learning methods. One-stage learning approaches include: i) reweighting strategies [38, 10, 3, 9, 47], which prevent dominant head classes from overwhelming
the training process by reducing the weight of loss functions for majority samples; and ii) sampling
techniques [4, 21, 58, 25, 15], which create balanced training subsets either by downsampling
majority samples or by synthesizing minority samples. However, such strategies struggle to achieve
effective performance across both head and tail classes due to their limited representation learning
capabilities. On the other hand, two-stage learning methods [28, 51, 11, 62, 30, 39, 34, 35, 27]
decouple the training process into “representation learning” and “classification” stages. The former
stage focuses on learning effective and generalizable feature spaces, while the latter stage aims to
rectify majority-biased decision boundaries caused by highly skewed data distributions.
∗

Corresponding author: Dr. Xu Yuan (xyuan@udel.edu)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

