On Fairness of Unified Multimodal Large Language
Model for Image Generation

Ming Liu1∗
Hao Chen2
Jindong Wang3
1
Liwen Wang
Bhiksha Raj Ramakrishnan2
Wensheng Zhang1
1
Iowa State University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 William & Mary

Abstract
Unified multimodal large language models (U-MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in end-to-end visual understanding and generation tasks.
However, compared to generation-only systems (e.g., Stable Diffusion), the unified
architecture of U-MLLMs introduces new risks of propagating demographic stereotypes. In this paper, we benchmark several state-of-the-art U-MLLMs and show
that they exhibit significant gender and race biases in the generated outputs. To
diagnose the source of these biases, we propose a locate-then-fix framework: we
first audit the vision and language components — using techniques such as linear
probing and controlled generation — and find that the language model appears to be
a primary origin of the observed generative bias. Moreover, we observe a “partial
alignment” phenomenon, where the U-MLLMs exhibit less bias in understanding tasks yet produce substantially biased images. To address this, we introduce
a novel balanced preference loss that enforces uniform generation probabilities
across demographics by leveraging a synthetically balanced dataset. Extensive
experiments show that our approach significantly reduces demographic bias while
preserving semantic fidelity and image quality. Our findings underscore the need
for targeted debiasing strategies in unified multimodal systems and introduce a
practical approach to mitigate biases.

1

Introduction

Bias Score

1.0 Compare Gender Bias in Understanding and Generation
Understanding Bias
Generation Bias
0.8

Please generate images of construction workers
Race Distribution

Gender Distribution

0.6
U-MLLM

0.4

Male

Female

0.2
0.0

Emu3

Janus

Models

VILA-U

Show-o

White

Black

Asian

Indian

…...

Figure 1: Biases in U-MLLMs. Left: Comparison between understanding and generation biases in
the model. Right: U-MLLMs generate high-quality images but lack diversity, showing bias toward
certain demographics (e.g., the model predominantly generates images of white males).
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in visual
understanding [24, 39]. Recent research [42, 43] has focused on extending MLLMs’ capabilities
∗

pkulium@iastate.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

