DiffBreak: Is Diffusion-Based Purification Robust?
Andre Kassis, Urs Hengartner, Yaoliang Yu
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
{akassis, urs.hengartner, yaoliang.yu}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Diffusion-based purification (DBP) has become a cornerstone defense against
adversarial examples (AEs), regarded as robust due to its use of diffusion models
(DMs) that project AEs onto the natural data manifold. We refute this core claim,
theoretically proving that gradient-based attacks effectively target the DM rather
than the classifier, causing DBP’s outputs to align with adversarial distributions.
This prompts a reassessment of DBP’s robustness, accrediting it two critical factors: inaccurate gradients and improper evaluation protocols that test only a single
random purification of the AE. We show that when accounting for stochasticity and
resubmission risk, DBP collapses. To support this, we introduce DiffBreak, the first
reliable toolkit for differentiation through DBP, eliminating gradient mismatches
that previously further inflated robustness estimates. We also analyze the current
defense scheme used for DBP where classification relies on a single purification,
pinpointing its inherent invalidity. We provide a statistically grounded majorityvote (MV) alternative that aggregates predictions across multiple purified copies,
showing partial but meaningful robustness gain. We then propose a novel adaptation of an optimization method against deepfake watermarking, crafting systemic
perturbations that defeat DBP even under MV, challenging DBP’s viability.

1

Introduction

ML classifiers are vulnerable to Adversarial Examples (AEs)—imperceptible perturbations that induce
misclassification [37, 15]. Adversarial Training [28, 54] is attack-specific and costly [44], while
other defenses [16, 13, 3, 46, 49, 32, 50, 9] are vulnerable to adaptive attacks [38]. Diffusion-Based
Purification (DBP) [30, 40], which leverages diffusion models (DMs) [36, 34], has emerged as a
promising defense [6, 45, 7, 53, 31, 42]. DBP purifies inputs by solving the reverse stochastic
differential equation (SDE) associated with DMs, diffusing the input with random noise to dilute
adversarial changes and iteratively denoising it. Given DMs’ data modeling abilities [12, 39], DBP
operates under the assumption that each denoising (reverse) step’s output belongs to a corresponding
marginal natural distribution (a distribution obtained by introducing Gaussian noise into natural
inputs, with decreasing variance proportional to that step).
This is the foundation for DBP’s robustness as it ensures its outputs are from the natural distribution,
while AEs lie outside this manifold and are unlikely to be preserved. Recent works treat DBP as a static
pre-processor that standard gradient-based attacks cannot directly manipulate but rather only attempt
to evade. Thus, attackers are assumed to either fail due to randomness that masks the classifier’s
vulnerabilities [26], or be forced to rely on surrogate losses and heuristic approximations [20, 41].
We theoretically refute DBP’s robustness rooted in its ability to perform projection onto the natural
manifold. This is paradoxical as it assumes correct behavior of the score model sθ used by the
DM to mimic the gradients of the marginal distributions. Yet, sθ is an ML system with exploitable
imperfections. In §3.1, we prove that standard adaptive attacks that simply backpropagate the
classifier’s loss gradients through DBP effectively target sθ rather than the classifier, forcing it to
generate samples from an adversarial distribution. Hence, DBP’s theory no longer holds.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

