All You Need is One: Capsule Prompt Tuning
with a Single Vector
Yiyang Liu1 James C. Liang2
Xiaotian Han6 Lifu Huang7
1

Heng Fan3 Wenhao Yang4
Yiming Cui5
∗
8
9
Dongfang Liu
Qifan Wang
Cheng Han1

University of Missouri-Kansas City 2 U.S. Naval Research Laboratory 3 University of North Texas
4
Lamar University 5 ByteDance 6 Case Western Reserve University
7
University of California, Davis 8 Rochester Institute of Technology 9 Meta AI

Abstract
Prompt-based learning has emerged as a parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT)
approach to facilitate Large Language Model (LLM) adaptation to downstream
tasks by conditioning generation with task-aware guidance. Despite its successes,
current prompt-based learning methods heavily rely on laborious grid searching
for optimal prompt length and typically require considerable number of prompts,
introducing additional computational burden. Worse yet, our pioneer findings
indicate that the task-aware prompt design is inherently limited by its absence
of instance-aware information, leading to a subtle attention interplay with the
input sequence. In contrast, simply incorporating instance-aware information as
a part of the guidance can enhance the prompt-tuned model performance without
additional fine-tuning. Moreover, we find an interesting phenomenon, namely
“attention anchor,” that incorporating instance-aware tokens at the earliest position
of the sequence can successfully preserve strong attention to critical structural
information and exhibit more active attention interaction with all input tokens. In
light of our observation, we introduce Capsule Prompt-Tuning (CaPT), an efficient
and effective solution that leverages off-the-shelf, informative instance semantics
into prompt-based learning. Our approach innovatively integrates both instanceaware and task-aware information in a nearly parameter-free manner (i.e., one
single capsule prompt). Empirical results demonstrate that our method can exhibit
superior performance across various language tasks (e.g., 84.03% average accuracy
on T5-Large), serving as an “attention anchor,” while enjoying high parameter
efficiency (e.g., 0.003% of model parameters on Llama3.2-1B).

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] initiate a revolutionary transformation in both artificial
intelligence and various domains of human activity. Among their fruitful applications, a widely
adopted paradigm for adapting pre-trained LLMs to downstream tasks is known as “pretrain-thenfinetune.” As these LLMs continue to grow in size and complexity for enhanced performance,
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods [5, 6, 7, 8] have emerged as compelling alternatives
to full fine-tuning, demonstrating competitive performance with noticeably lower parameter usage.
Prompt-based Learning [5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], a well-recognized approach within PEFT, offers a simple
yet effective fine-tuning strategy in which researchers employ learnable soft prompts [5, 9, 11] to
activate model capabilities without modifying existing parameters. Prompting methods [3, 14, 15, 16]
initially relied on the manual design of discrete prompts, which often suffer from limited flexibility
and require extensive effort. Therefore, trainable soft prompts utilizing continuous embeddings have
emerged as the predominant strategy [11, 12, 13]. Nevertheless, current soft prompt-based learning h
ave two main limitations:
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

