Optimal Estimation of the Best Mean in Multi-Armed
Bandits
Takayuki Osogami
IBM Research – Tokyo
osogami@jp.ibm.com

Junya Honda
Kyoto University, RIKEN AIP
honda@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Junpei Komiyama
New York University, RIKEN AIP
junpei@komiyama.info

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating the mean reward of the best arm in a multiarmed bandit (MAB) setting. Specifically, given a target precision ε and confidence
level 1 − δ, the goal is to return an ε-accurate estimate of the largest mean reward with probability at least 1 − δ, while minimizing the number of samples.
We first establish an instance-dependent lower bound on the sample complexity,
which requires handling the infinitely many possible candidates of the estimated
best mean. This lower bound is expressed in a non-convex optimization problem, which becomes the main difficulty of this problem, preventing the direct
application of standard techniques such as Track-and-Stop to provably achieve
optimality. To overcome this difficulty, we introduce several new algorithmic
and analytical techniques and propose an algorithm that achieves the asymptotic
lower bound with matching constants in the leading term. Our method combines a
confidence ellipsoid-based stopping condition with a two-phase sampling strategy
tailored to manage non-convexity proposed algorithm is simple, nearly free of
hyperparameters, and achieves the instance-dependent, asymptotically optimal
sample complexity. Experimental results support our theoretical guarantees and
demonstrate the practical effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

AI agents and foundation models are developed to be adapted for, or applied to, a wide range of tasks,
users, and deployment contexts. Given this diversity of applications, it is essential to ensure that
these systems perform reliably even under challenging or unfavorable conditions. For example, a
foundation model should provide a minimal level of utility across various downstream tasks, and an AI
agent should consistently satisfy all required safety criteria [14]. In other words, before deployment,
we must ensure that the expected performance is acceptable even in worst-case scenarios.
This problem of evaluating expected performance in the worst-case scenario can be naturally formulated within the multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework as the task of estimating the mean of the best
arm (i.e., best-mean estimation). This paper adopts the standard MAB convention in which rewards
are to be maximized and focuses on designing an algorithm that accurately estimates the best mean.
Our primary focus in algorithm design is minimizing sample complexity, motivated by the substantial
cost of evaluating AI agents and foundation models. This concern is particularly relevant given the
growing trend toward inference-time reasoning [16, 7, 23], which often demands substantial test-time
computation. An AI agent may rely on Best-of-N sampling with millions or billions of candidates
[16, 7] or Monte Carlo tree search to select its next action [24], making each evaluation costly.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

