Optimization Inspired Few-Shot Adaptation for
Large Language Models

Boyan Gao1B

Xin Wang1

Yibo Yang1,2B

David A. Clifton1,3

1

2

University of Oxford
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
3
Oxford-Suzhou Institute of Advanced Research

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
in real-world applications. However, adapting LLMs to novel tasks via finetuning often requires substantial training data and computational resources that
are impractical in few-shot scenarios. Existing approaches, such as In-context
learning and Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), face key limitations: Incontext learning introduces additional inference computational overhead with
limited performance gains, while PEFT models are prone to overfitting on the
few demonstration examples. In this work, we reinterpret the forward pass of
LLMs as an optimization process, a sequence of preconditioned gradient descent
steps refining internal representations. Based on this connection, we propose
Optimization-Inspired Few-Shot Adaptation (OFA), integrating a parameterization
that learns preconditioners without introducing additional trainable parameters,
and an objective that improves optimization efficiency by learning preconditioners
based on a convergence bound, while simultaneously steering the optimization path
toward the flat local minimum. Our method overcomes both issues of ICL-based
and PEFT-based methods, and demonstrates superior performance over the existing
methods on a variety of few-shot adaptation tasks in experiments.

1

Introduction

The compelling performance of Large Language Model (LLM) has been demonstrated in real-world
applications such as code generation [13, 43, 45], scientific reasoning [69, 14], healthcare [57, 66, 67],
and robotics [10, 56]. This phenomenon can be attributed to the adaptation of pretrained base models
toward the target tasks. Full parameter fine-tuning as a straightforward method requires tremendous
computational resources and training data, which is usually not practical. Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) [29, 73, 46, 27] methods aim to reduce these costs by partially tuning the parameters,
while these algorithms still require a relatively large amount of high-quality training data. Especially,
when only a few data samples are given for adaptation to new tasks, they suffer from the overfitting
problem and fail to learn generalizable adapters [41, 44, 31, 20, 37].
To enable adaptation with few-shot data on new tasks, In-context learning (ICL) [54, 11] offers
an alternative approach by leveraging prompt engineering techniques. It stores a small set of
demonstration examples in a buffer and modifies the forward pass to enable LLMs to generate
answers for new queries. While ICL reduces data cost and mitigates the overfitting problem of
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT), it still faces several significant challenges. For instance, the
stored demonstration samples introduce additional computational burdens, slowing the inference
B

Corresponding authors: boyan.gao@eng.ox.ac.uk, yibo.yang93@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

