Balanced Conic Rectified Flow
Shin seong Kim
Yonsei University
tltydl2@yonsei.ac.kr

Mingi Kwon
Yonsei University
kwonmingi@yonsei.ac.kr

Jaeseok Jeong
Yonsei University
jete_jeong@yonsei.ac.kr

Youngjung Uh∗
Yonsei University
yj.uh@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Rectified flow is a generative model that learns smooth transport mappings between
two distributions through an ordinary differential equation (ODE). The model
learns a straight ODE by reflow steps which iteratively update the supervisory flow.
It allows for a relatively simple and efficient generation of high-quality images.
However, rectified flow still faces several challenges. 1) The reflow process is
slow because it requires a large number of generated pairs to model the target
distribution. 2) It is well known that the use of suboptimal fake samples in reflow
can lead to performance degradation of the learned flow model. This issue is
further exacerbated by error accumulation across reflow steps and model collapse
in denoising autoencoder models caused by self-consuming training. In this work,
we go one step further and empirically demonstrate that the reflow process causes
the learned model to drift away from the target distribution, which in turn leads to
a growing discrepancy in reconstruction error between fake and real images. We
reveal the drift problem and design a new reflow step, namely the conic reflow. It
supervises the model by the inversions of real data points through the previously
learned model and its interpolation with random initial points. Our conic reflow
leads to multiple advantages. 1) It keeps the ODE paths toward real samples,
evaluated by reconstruction. 2) We use only a small number of generated samples
instead of large generated samples, 600K and 4M, respectively. 3) The learned
model generates images with higher quality evaluated by FID, IS, and Recall. 4)
The learned flow is more straight than others, evaluated by curvature. We achieve
much lower FID in both one-step and full-step generation in CIFAR-10. The conic
reflow generalizes to various datasets such as LSUN Bedroom and ImageNet. The
project page is available at https://grainsack.github.io/BC_rectified_
flow_project_page/.

1

Introduction

Rectified flow [9, 28, 24, 25, 23] demonstrates state-of-the-art image generation with fewer sampling
steps than diffusion models [6, 43, 37, 15, 41]. k-rectified flow involves k reflow steps that make
ODE paths smooth and straight [27]. This allows the model to generate high-quality images simply
and efficiently in just one or a few steps. Intriguingly, all rectified flow models (Flux, SD3, and
AuraFlow) achieve state-of-the-art quality with 1-rectified flow and require about 30 NFEs (number
of function evaluations) [9].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

