MOBO-OSD: Batch Multi-Objective Bayesian
Optimization via Orthogonal Search Directions

Lam Ngo
School of Computing Technologies
RMIT University, Australia
tung.lam.ngo@rmit.edu.au
Jeffrey Chan
School of Computing Technologies
RMIT University, Australia
jeffrey.chan@rmit.edu.au

Huong Ha
School of Computing Technologies
RMIT University, Australia
huong.ha@rmit.edu.au
Hongyu Zhang
School of Big Data and Software Engineering
Chongqing University, China
hyzhang@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a powerful tool for optimizing expensive blackbox objective functions. While extensive research has been conducted on the
single-objective optimization problem, the multi-objective optimization problem
remains challenging. In this paper, we propose MOBO-OSD, a multi-objective
Bayesian Optimization algorithm designed to generate a diverse set of Pareto optimal solutions by solving multiple constrained optimization problems, referred to as
MOBO-OSD subproblems, along orthogonal search directions (OSDs) defined with
respect to an approximated convex hull of individual objective minima. By employing a well-distributed set of OSDs, MOBO-OSD ensures broad coverage of the
objective space, enhancing both solution diversity and hypervolume performance.
To further improve the density of the set of Pareto optimal candidate solutions
without requiring an excessive number of subproblems, we leverage a Pareto Front
Estimation technique to generate additional solutions in the neighborhood of existing solutions. Additionally, MOBO-OSD supports batch optimization, enabling
parallel function evaluations to accelerate the optimization process when resources
are available. Through extensive experiments and analysis on a variety of synthetic
and real-world benchmark functions with two to six objectives, we demonstrate that
MOBO-OSD consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms. Our code
implementation can be found at https://github.com/LamNgo1/mobo-osd.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective Bayesian Optimization (MOBO) has recently attracted much attention [5, 13, 52, 44,
1]. MOBO extends Bayesian Optimization (BO) — a powerful framework for optimizing expensive
black-box functions — to settings where multiple, often conflicting, objectives must be optimized
simultaneously. Applications of MOBO include but are not limited to machine learning [47, 29],
material design [18, 56], agriculture [27, 28], robotics [54, 34] and vehicle design [32, 2].
There are several challenges when working with MOBO problems. First, the objective functions are
often conflicting, meaning that improving one objective may deteriorate another. Hence the goal
is not to identify a single optimal solution, but rather a set of Pareto optimal solutions. Second,
maintaining the diversity among these Pareto optimal solutions is crucial to capture the wide range of
trade-off across all objectives. This becomes more challenging under the limited evaluation budget in
MOBO settings, where there is less budget to balance between exploration and exploitation while
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

