Gaussian Approximation and Concentration of
Constant Learning-Rate Stochastic Gradient Descent

Ziyang Wei
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
ziyangw@uchicago.edu

Jiaqi Li
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
jqli@uchicago.edu

Zhipeng Lou
Department of Mathematics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
zlou@ucsd.edu

Wei Biao Wu
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
wbwu@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We establish a comprehensive finite-sample and asymptotic theory for stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) with constant learning rates. First, we propose a novel
linear approximation technique to provide a quenched central limit theorem (CLT)
for SGD iterates with refined tail properties, showing that regardless of the chosen
initialization, the fluctuations of the algorithm around its target point converge to a
multivariate normal distribution. Our conditions are substantially milder than those
required in the classical CLTs for SGD, yet offering a stronger convergence result.
Furthermore, we derive the first Berry-Esseen bound – the Gaussian approximation
error – for the constant learning-rate SGD, which is sharp compared to the decaying
learning-rate schemes in the literature. Beyond the moment convergence, we also
provide the Nagaev-type inequality for the SGD tail probabilities by adopting
the autoregressive approximation techniques, which entails non-asymptotic largedeviation guarantees. These results are verified via numerical simulations, paving
the way for theoretically grounded uncertainty quantification, especially with
non-asymptotic validity.

1

Introduction

In large-scale optimization and streaming-data applications, online learning has played a crucial
role, where stochastic approximation serves as a fundamental ingredient to improve computational
efficiency and save memory. However, to facilitate trustworthy AI and reliable decision-making
based on stochastic approximation, it is important to understand its inherent variability, especially in
finite-sample settings.
This paper considers a popular recursive algorithm in online learning – Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD), also known as the Robbins-Monro algorithm [Robbins and Monro, 1951], which is widely
used due to its memory efficiency, computational simplicity, and algorithmic stability. The convergence and distributional theory of SGD and its variants have been extensively studied [Fabian,
1968; Woodroofe, 1972; Pflug, 1986; Polyak and Juditsky, 1992; Kushner and Yin, 1997; Shamir and
Zhang, 2013]. Nevertheless, the uncertainty quantification of constant learning-rate SGD remains
partially understood. Though central limit theorems (CLT) have been explored in literature [Pflug,
1986; Dieuleveut et al., 2020], refined theoretical properties such as non-asymptotic Gaussian approx39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

