How Ensembles of Distilled Policies Improve
Generalisation in Reinforcement Learning

Max Weltevrede
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands
m.r.weltevrede@tudelft.nl

Moritz A. Zanger
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands
m.a.zanger@tudelft.nl

Matthijs T. J. Spaan
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands
m.t.j.spaan@tudelft.nl

Wendelin Böhmer
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands
j.w.bohmer@tudelft.nl

Abstract
In the zero-shot policy transfer setting in reinforcement learning, the goal is to
train an agent on a fixed set of training environments so that it can generalise to
similar, but unseen, testing environments. Previous work has shown that policy
distillation after training can sometimes produce a policy that outperforms the
original in the testing environments. However, it is not yet entirely clear why that
is, or what data should be used to distil the policy. In this paper, we prove, under
certain assumptions, a generalisation bound for policy distillation after training.
The theory provides two practical insights: for improved generalisation, you should
1) train an ensemble of distilled policies, and 2) distil it on as much data from the
training environments as possible. We empirically verify that these insights hold
in more general settings, when the assumptions required for the theory no longer
hold. Finally, we demonstrate that an ensemble of policies distilled on a diverse
dataset can generalise significantly better than the original agent.

1

Introduction

A major challenge for developing reliable reinforcement learning (RL) agents is their ability to
generalise to new scenarios they did not encounter during training. The zero-shot policy transfer
setting (ZSPT, Kirk et al., 2023) tests for this ability by having an agent train on a fixed set of training
environments, referred to as training contexts, and measuring the agent’s performance on a held-out
set of similar, but different, testing contexts. Previous work has identified that policy distillation after
training, the act of transferring knowledge from the agent’s policy into a freshly initialised neural
network, can be used as a tool for generalisation. In particular, it has been shown that the distilled
policy sometimes achieves higher test performance than the original policy (Lyle et al., 2022).
However, it is not yet entirely clear how policy distillation after training can improve generalisation
performance in RL. Lyle et al. (2022) theoretically show that the temporal difference (TD) loss
negatively affects the smoothness of the learned value function, which only indirectly explains why
policy distillation after training (without TD loss) can improve generalisation. They also partially
attribute the observed generalisation benefits to the stationarity of the distillation targets, which
avoids negative effects induced by the non-stationary RL targets during training (Igl et al., 2021),
but this lacks a solid theoretical justification. Moreover, recent work has shown that not only the
stationarity of the RL training distribution, but also its overall diversity can affect generalisation to
unseen contexts (Jiang et al., 2023; Suau et al., 2024; Weltevrede et al., 2025). This additionally
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

