Enhancing Time Series Forecasting through Selective
Representation Spaces: A Patch Perspective

Xingjian Wu, Xiangfei Qiu, Hanyin Cheng, Zhengyu Li,
Jilin Hu, Chenjuan Guo, Bin Yang∗
East China Normal University
{xjwu,xfqiu,hycheng,lizhengyu}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,
{jlhu,cjguo,byang}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Time Series Forecasting has made significant progress with the help of Patching
technique, which partitions time series into multiple patches to effectively retain
contextual semantic information into a representation space beneficial for modeling
long-term dependencies. However, conventional patching partitions a time series
into adjacent patches, which causes a fixed representation space, thus resulting in
insufficiently expressful representations. In this paper, we pioneer the exploration
of constructing a selective representation space to flexibly include the most informative patches for forecasting. Specifically, we propose the Selective Representation
Space (SRS) module, which utilizes the learnable Selective Patching and Dynamic
Reassembly techniques to adaptively select and shuffle the patches from the contextual time series, aiming at fully exploiting the information of contextual time series
to enhance the forecasting performance of patch-based models. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of SRS module, we propose a simple yet effective SRSNet consisting of SRS and an MLP head, which achieves state-of-the-art performance on
real-world datasets from multiple domains. Furthermore, as a novel plug-and-play
module, SRS can also enhance the performance of existing patch-based models.
The resources are available at https://github.com/decisionintelligence/SRSNet.

1

Introduction

Time series organize data points chronologically and are either univariate or multivariate depending
on the number of variables in each data point. Among the diverse tasks in time series analysis, time
series forecasting (TSF) stands out as a critical and widely studied task. It plays a crucial role in
various fields such as economics, traffic, energy, and AIOps, providing insights for early warnings
and proactive decision-making [Qiu et al., 2024, 2025a, Chen et al., 2024, Wu et al., 2024a,b].
In recent years, significant progress has been made in TSF with the advancement of deep learning
technologies. Among these techniques, the method of dividing time series into patches [Cirstea et al.,
2022a, Zhang and Yan, 2022, Nie et al., 2023] has gradually gained attention. The significance of
dividing time series into patches lies in the fact that a single time step often lacks clear semantic
meaning, while the semantic information between adjacent time points tends to be highly similar.
Therefore, by performing patch division on the time series, local features and intrinsic patterns can
be captured more effectively. In other words, the patching technique introduces an effective way to
construct the representation space for a contextual time series, which first picks the patches adjacent,
then projects them to form the representations of the contextal time series. Working upon such
representations not only enhances the models’ ability to understand temporal dependencies but also
significantly reduces computational complexity, thereby improving overall prediction efficiency.
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

