Transferring Linear Features Across Language Models
With Model Stitching

Alan Chen
Brown University
alan_chen1@brown.edu
Alessandro Stolfo
ETH Zürich
stolfoa@ethz.ch

Jack Merullo
Goodfire
jack@goodfire.ai
Ellie Pavlick
Brown University
ellie_pavlick@brown.edu

Abstract
In this work, we demonstrate that affine mappings between residual streams of
language models is a cheap way to effectively transfer represented features between
models. We apply this technique to transfer the weights of Sparse Autoencoders
(SAEs) between models of different sizes to compare their representations. We find
that small and large models learn similar representation spaces, which motivates
training expensive components like SAEs on a smaller model and transferring to a
larger model at a FLOPs savings. In particular, using a small-to-large transferred
SAE as initialization can lead to 50% cheaper training runs when training SAEs
on larger models. Next, we show that transferred probes and steering vectors
can effectively recover ground truth performance. Finally, we dive deeper into
feature-level transferability, finding that semantic and structural features transfer
noticeably differently while specific classes of functional features have their roles
faithfully mapped. Overall, our findings illustrate similarities and differences in the
linear representation spaces of small and large models and demonstrate a method
for improving the training efficiency of SAEs.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have continually proven to be surprisingly intricate next token
predictors that become more complex yet predictably better with scale [Kaplan et al., 2020], leaving a
desire to characterize and explain the LLM’s computations [Saphra and Wiegreffe, 2024, Olah et al.,
2020]. Despite increasing efforts to study the rich internal mechanisms and representations of LLMs,
the full computations still remain opaque [Sharkey et al., 2025, Engels et al., 2024].
A popular perspective to view the internal computation of LLMs is through the lens of features, or
functions of the input that serve a downstream purpose like predicting the next token or composing to
form model circuits [Olah et al., 2020, Huben et al., 2024]. The Linear Representation Hypothesis
(LRH) posits that these features are represented as directions in a high dimensional space [Park
et al., 2024, Elhage et al., 2022]. However, the features had been empirically observed to appear
in superposition (activating with interference), making interpretation of residual stream activations
difficult. Sparse dictionary learning methods [Olshausen and Field, 1996, Faruqui et al., 2015, Serre,
2006] such as Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) have recently gained popularity for interpreting models
through this lens by disentangling dense representations into sparsely activating feature sets [Huben
et al., 2024, Bricken et al., 2023, Gao et al., 2025, Kissane et al., 2024]. A second hypothesis, Strong
Model Universality [Li et al., 2015], predicts that good models learn the same data representations.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

