Titans: Learning to Memorize at Test Time

Ali Behrouz
Google Research
USA
alibehrouz@google.com

Peilin Zhong
Google Research
USA
peilinz@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
USA
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Over more than a decade there has been an extensive research effort on how to
effectively utilize recurrent models and attention. While recurrent models aim to
compress the data into a fixed-size memory (called hidden state), attention allows
attending to the entire context window, capturing the direct dependencies of all
tokens. This more accurate modeling of dependencies, however, comes with a
quadratic cost, limiting the model to a fixed-length context. We present a neural
long-term memory module that learns to memorize historical context and helps
attention to attend to the current context while utilizing long-past information. We
show that this neural memory has the advantage of fast parallelizable training. From
a memory perspective, we argue that attention due to its limited context but accurate
dependency modeling performs as a short-term memory, while neural memory due
to its ability to memorize the data, acts as a long-term, more persistent, memory.
Based on these two modules, we introduce a new family of architectures, called
Titans, and present three variants to address how one can effectively incorporate
memory into this architecture. Our experimental results on language modeling,
common-sense reasoning, and time series tasks show that Titans are effective
compared to baselines, while they can effectively scale to larger context window in
needle-in-haystack tasks.

1

Introduction

Transformers [1], have been firmly established as state-of-the-art models in sequence modeling,
mainly due to their in-context learning and ability to learn at scale [2]. The primary building blocks
of Transformers–attention modules—function as associative memory blocks [3], where they learn
to store key-value associations and retrieve them by computing pairwise similarity between queries
(i.e., search signals) and keys (i.e., contexts). Accordingly, by design, the output of a Transformer is
exclusively conditioned on the direct dependencies of tokens in the current context window. This
accurate modeling of dependencies, however, comes with quadratic time and memory complexity
in terms of the context length. In complex real-world tasks (e.g., language modeling [4], video
understanding [5], long-term time series forecasting [6]), the context window can become extremely
large, making the applicability of Transformers challenging in these downstream tasks.
To overcome the scalability issue of Transformers, recent studies aim to design different variants
of linear Transformers [7–9], where softmax is replaced by a kernel function in the attention (see
§A.1 for details), resulting in a significant drop in memory consumption. Despite efficiency and
the ability to scale to longer context, linear Transformers do not show competitive performance
compared to Transformers as the kernel trick makes the model a linear recurrent network, in which
the data is compressed into a matrix-valued states [7]. This, however, brings a contradictory fact
about linear recurrent (or linear Transformers) models: On one hand, we use these linear models to
enhance scalability and efficiency (linear vs. quadratic complexity), whose advantages is appeared
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

