Ask a Strong LLM Judge when Your Reward Model is
Uncertain
Zhenghao Xu1∗ Qin Lu2

Qingru Zhang1∗ Liang Qiu2

Wenlin Yao2

Haoming Jiang2

Yao Liu2

1

Ilgee Hong1∗ Changlong Yu2

Lihong Li2

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

Hyokun Yun2

Tuo Zhao1

Amazon

Abstract
Reward model (RM) plays a pivotal role in reinforcement learning with human
feedback (RLHF) for aligning large language models (LLMs). However, classical
RMs trained on human preferences are vulnerable to reward hacking and generalize
poorly to out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs. By contrast, strong LLM judges
equipped with reasoning capabilities demonstrate superior generalization, even
without additional training, but incur significantly higher inference costs, limiting
their applicability in online RLHF. In this work, we propose an uncertainty-based
routing framework that efficiently complements a fast RM with a strong but costly
LLM judge. Our approach formulates advantage estimation in policy gradient
(PG) methods as pairwise preference classification, enabling principled uncertainty
quantification to guide routing. Uncertain pairs are forwarded to the LLM judge,
while confident ones are evaluated by the RM. Experiments on RM benchmarks
demonstrate that our uncertainty-based routing strategy significantly outperforms
random judge calling at the same cost, and downstream alignment results showcase
its effectiveness in improving online RLHF. Our code is available at https://
github.com/zhenghaoxu-gatech/uncertainty-router.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) is a predominant approach for large language
model (LLM) alignment and has shown great success in improving the capabilities of LLMs [7, 63,
44, 38, 3]. This approach formulates alignment as an RL problem in which the LLM, as the actor, is
tuned to maximize a reward function that reflects human preference. This RL problem is then solved
by policy gradient (PG) type of methods, including PPO [39], GRPO [43], and RLOO [1].
The reward function in RLHF is typically realized by a reward model (RM) learned from humanannotated preference data, assuming that human preference follows the Bradley-Terry (BT) model
[5]. This pointwise RM assigns a scalar reward score r(x, y) to a response y measuring the quality
of this response to the prompt x, which estimates the ground truth reward underlying the BT model
[7, 44]. A variant of this pointwise RM is the pairwise RM, or preference model (PM), which relax
the BT assumption and assigns a scalar preference score p(x, y1 , y2 ) to a pair of responses y1 and y2
given prompt x, measuring the preference strength between the two responses [36, 46, 55, 61]. Both
RMs are typically trained based on a pretrained LLM, concatenating the input as a single sequence
and directly outputting a scalar reward/preference score. They are moderately fast and have been
successfully integrated into the RLHF pipeline.
∗

Work done during internship at Amazon. Emails: {zhenghaoxu,tourzhao}@gatech.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

