Accurate KV Cache Eviction via Anchor Direction
Projection for Efficient LLM Inference

Zijie Geng1 , Jie Wang1∗, Ziqi Liu1 , Feng Ju1 , Yiming Li2 , Xing Li2 , Mingxuan Yuan2 ,
Jianye Hao2,3 , Defu Lian1 , Enhong Chen1 , Yongdong Zhang1 , Feng Wu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
Tianjin University
{zijiegeng,ziqiliu,fengju}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Key-Value (KV) cache eviction—which retains the KV pairs of the most important
tokens while discarding less important ones—is a critical technique for optimizing both memory usage and inference latency in large language models (LLMs).
However, existing approaches often rely on simple heuristics—such as attention
weights—to measure token importance, overlooking the spatial relationships between token value states in the vector space. This often leads to suboptimal token
selections and thus performance degradation. To tackle this problem, we propose a
novel method, namely AnDPro (Anchor Direction Projection), which introduces
a projection-based scoring function to more accurately measure token importance.
Specifically, AnDPro operates in the space of value vectors and leverages the
projections of these vectors onto an “Anchor Direction”—the direction of the
pre-eviction output—to measure token importance and guide more accurate token
selection. Experiments on 16 datasets from the LongBench benchmark demonstrate
that AnDPro can maintain 96.07% of the full cache accuracy using only 3.44% KV
cache budget, reducing KV cache budget size by 46.0% without compromising
quality compared to previous state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized human society by reshaping the way we process
information [1–5]. Modern LLMs are primarily built upon the Transformer architecture, with selfattention as their core mechanism [6]. However, the self-attention mechanism inherently involves
quadratic computational complexity, which grows dramatically as the sequence length increases [7].
To address this bottleneck, the Key-Value (KV) cache mechanism has been introduced to store
and reuse intermediate results—i.e., the KV pairs in the self-attention mechanism—to reduce the
computational complexity from quadratic to linear [8].As the demand for processing longer sequences
grows, however, the KV cache size expands proportionally, leading to substantial increases in both
GPU memory consumption and I/O latency [9]. Therefore, effective KV cache management is critical
for practical LLM scaling and deployment.
Recent studies have revealed that LLM self-attention exhibits inherent sparsity, with only a small
subset of tokens making a substantial contribution to the model’s output [10–12]. This insight has
sparked the development of a series of KV cache eviction strategies, which identify and retain the KV
pairs of the most important tokens while discarding less important ones [13–15]. For instance, H2O [9]
greedily eliminates KV pairs based on their cumulative attention weights during the generation phase.
SnapKV [16] employs an observation window to generate queries and uses the obtained attention
weights to measure the importance of prompt tokens during the prefilling phase. Ada-KV [17] further
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

