Generalization Guarantees for Learning Score-Based
Branch-and-Cut Policies in Integer Programming

Hongyu Cheng
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
hongyucheng@jhu.edu

Amitabh Basu
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
basu.amitabh@jhu.edu

Abstract
Mixed-integer programming (MIP) provides a powerful framework for optimization problems, with Branch-and-Cut (B&C) being the predominant algorithm in
state-of-the-art solvers. The efficiency of B&C critically depends on heuristic
policies for making sequential decisions, including node selection, cut selection,
and branching variable selection. While traditional solvers often employ heuristics
with manually tuned parameters, recent approaches increasingly leverage machine
learning, especially neural networks, to learn these policies directly from data.
A key challenge is to understand the theoretical underpinnings of these learned
policies, particularly their generalization performance from finite data. This paper
establishes rigorous sample complexity bounds for learning B&C policies where
the scoring functions guiding each decision step (node, cut, branch) have a certain
piecewise polynomial structure. This structure generalizes the linear models that
form the most commonly deployed policies in practice and investigated recently in a
foundational series of theoretical works by Balcan et al. Such piecewise polynomial
policies also cover the neural network architectures (e.g., using ReLU activations)
that have been the focal point of contemporary practical studies. Consequently, our
theoretical framework closely reflects the models utilized by practitioners investigating machine learning within B&C, offering a unifying perspective relevant to
both established theory and modern empirical research in this area. Furthermore,
our theory applies to quite general sequential decision making problems beyond
B&C.

1

Introduction

Mixed-Integer Programming (MIP) provides a powerful optimization tool for problems arising
in diverse fields such as finance [Cornuejols et al., 2018], vehicle routing [Toth and Vigo, 2014],
computational and systems biology [Gusfield, 2019], telecommunications network design [Kerivin
and Mahjoub, 2005], production planning [Pochet and Wolsey, 2006], to name a few, where decisions
involve
 both discrete choices and continuous adjustments. We focus on problems formulated as
min cT x | Ax ≤ b, x ∈ Zn+1 × Rn+2 , where A ∈ Qm×(n1 +n2 ) , b ∈ Qm , and c ∈ Rn1 +n2 . The
predominant methodology for solving such MIPs is the Branch-and-Cut (B&C) algorithm [Jünger
et al., 2009, Conforti et al., 2014] (see Algorithm 1 below for a standard outline). B&C operates
by exploring a search tree where each node represents a linear programming (LP) relaxation of
a subproblem derived from the original MIP. The process involves solving these LP relaxations,
adding valid inequalities (cutting planes) to tighten the relaxations without excluding feasible integer
solutions, and partitioning the solution space (branching) by imposing constraints on variables,
typically integer-constrained variables (j ∈ [n1 ]) that take fractional values in an LP solution. The
practical performance of the B&C algorithm is critically influenced by the sequence of strategic
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

