Mitigating Occlusions in Virtual Try-On via A
Simple-Yet-Effective Mask-Free Framework

1

Chenghu Du1 Shengwu Xiong2 Junyin Wang1 Yi Rong1∗ Shili Xiong1,3∗
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
2
Interdisciplinary Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Wuhan College
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{duch, xiongsw, wjy199708, yrong}@whut.edu.cn slxiong.illinois@gmail.com
https://du-chenghu.github.io/OccFree-VTON/

Abstract
This paper investigates the occlusion problems in virtual try-on (VTON) tasks.
According to how they affect the try-on results, the occlusion issues of existing
VTON methods can be grouped into two categories: (1) Inherent Occlusions, which
are the ghosts of the clothing from reference input images that exist in the try-on
results. (2) Acquired Occlusions, where the spatial structures of the generated
human body parts are disrupted and appear unreasonable. To this end, we analyze
the causes of these two types of occlusions, and propose a novel mask-free VTON
framework based on our analysis to deal with these occlusions effectively. In this
framework, we develop two simple-yet-powerful operations: (1) The background
pre-replacement operation prevents the model from confusing the target clothing
information with the human body or image background, thereby mitigating inherent
occlusions. (2) The covering-and-eliminating operation enhances the model’s
ability of understanding and modeling human semantic structures, leading to more
realistic human body generation and thus reducing acquired occlusions. Moreover,
our method is highly generalizable, which can be applied in in-the-wild scenarios,
and our proposed operations can also be easily integrated into different generative
network architectures (e.g., GANs and diffusion models) in a plug-and-play manner.
Extensive experiments on three VTON datasets validate the effectiveness and
generalization ability of our method. Both qualitative and quantitative results
demonstrate that our method outperforms recently proposed VTON benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Virtual Try-On (VTON) technology [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] aims to synthesize the user’s desired
clothing from a garment image onto human models or real-person images. It provides customers
with a convenient and efficient try-on experience that greatly reduces the time and effort required in
traditional offline shopping modes. Therefore, VTON has gained substantial interest in recent years,
particularly in the fields of fashion, e-commerce, and entertainment.
One of the main problems in building a VTON model lies in the unpaired nature of the training
data. While the target clothing image and the corresponding ground-truth image of a person wearing
this clothing are provided, the input reference image that contains the same person but wearing
a different clothing is typically unavailable. According to the strategies adopted to address this
issue, current VTON methods can be roughly divided into two categories: (1) Mask-based methods
[10, 11, 5, 12, 7, 8, 13] consider VTON as a self-supervised image inpainting problem. They first
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

