DEGauss: Defending Against Malicious 3D Editing
for Gaussian Splatting

Lingzhuang Meng1 , Mingwen Shao2∗, Yuanjian Qiao3 , Xiang Lv1
Shandong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Oil & Gas Industrial Software,
Qingdao Institute of Software, College of Computer Science and Technology,
China University of Petroleum (East China), China
2
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology, China
3
College of Computer Science (College of Software), Inner Mongolia University, China
lzhmeng1688@163.com, smw278@126.com, yjqiao58@163.com, lvxiang1997@126.com
1

Abstract
3D editing with Gaussian splatting is exciting in creating realistic content, but it
also poses abuse risks for generating malicious 3D content. Existing 2D defense
approaches mainly focus on adding perturbations to single image to resist malicious
image editing. However, there remain two limitations when applied directly to 3D
scenes: (1) These methods fail to reflect 3D spatial correlations, thus protecting
ineffectively under multiple viewpoints. (2) Such pixel-level perturbation is easily
eliminated during the iterations of 3D editing, leading to failure of protection. To
address the above issues, we propose a novel Defense framework against malicious
3D Editing for Gaussian splatting (DEGauss) for robustly disrupting the trajectory
of 3D editing in multi-views. Specifically, to enable the effectiveness of perturbation across various views, we devise a view-focal gradient fusion mechanism
that dynamically emphasizes the contributions of the most challenging views to
adaptively optimize 3D perturbations. Furthermore, we design a dual discrepancy
optimization strategy that both maximize the semantic deviation and the edit direction deviation of the guidance conditions to stably disrupt the editing trajectory.
Benefiting from the collaborative designs, our method achieves effective resistance
to 3D editing from various views while preserving photorealistic rendering quality.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our DEGauss not only performs excellent
defense in different scenes, but also exhibits strong generalization across various
state-of-the-art 3D editing pipelines.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in scene editing with 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17] have substantially enhanced
the controllability and expressiveness scene manipulation driven by natural language prompts, largely
powered by the integration of diffusion models with neural 3D representations [12, 39]. However,
such convenience also brings significant security risks: anyone with access to a rendered 3D model
can change identity, appearance, or contextual details without authorization [25, 22], which can lead
to serious consequences such as identity deception, misinformation, or reputational damage [31, 40].
Therefore, it is imperative to develop effective protection method for 3D digital assets and personal
portraits against unauthorized modifications, in order to prevent the spread of malicious content.
Unlike 2D editing that operates on single image [15, 38], 3D editing fundamentally involves manipulating spatially structured data [20, 35], which brings in unique properties such as multi-view
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

