Conformal Prediction in The Loop: A Feedback-Based
Uncertainty Model for Trajectory Optimization

Han Wang
School of Automation and Intelligent Sensing
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai 200240, China
h.wang@sjtu.edu.cn

Chao Ning∗
School of Automation and Intelligent Sensing
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai 200240, China
chao.ning@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Conformal Prediction (CP) is a powerful statistical machine learning tool to construct uncertainty sets with coverage guarantees, which has fueled its extensive
adoption in generating prediction regions for decision-making tasks, e.g., Trajectory Optimization (TO) in uncertain environments. However, existing methods
predominantly employ a sequential scheme, where decisions rely unidirectionally
on the prediction regions, and consequently the information from decision-making
fails to be fed back to instruct CP. In this paper, we propose a novel Feedback-Based
CP (Fb-CP) framework for shrinking-horizon TO with a joint risk constraint over
the entire mission time. Specifically, a CP-based posterior risk calculation method
is developed by fully leveraging the realized trajectories to adjust the posterior
allowable risk, which is then allocated to future times to update prediction regions.
In this way, the information in the realized trajectories is continuously fed back to
the CP, enabling attractive feedback-based adjustments of the prediction regions
and a provable online improvement in trajectory performance. Furthermore, we
theoretically prove that such adjustments consistently maintain the coverage guarantees of the prediction regions, thereby ensuring provable safety. Additionally,
we develop a decision-focused iterative risk allocation algorithm with theoretical
convergence analysis for allocating the posterior allowable risk which closely aligns
with Fb-CP. Furthermore, we extend the proposed method to handle distribution
shift. The effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method are demonstrated
through benchmark experiments.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Trajectory Optimization (TO) has recently garnered significant attention in the academic community Pan et al. [2024] and has achieved significant success in fields such as autonomous
driving Zhou et al. [2020], autonomous surface vessels Tsolakis et al. [2024], and coverage control
Davis et al. [2016]. However, collision-free TO in uncertain environments is a formidable challenge,
because the intentions of obstacles are unknown. A crucial aspect of collision avoidance involves
predicting obstacle trajectories. Existing trajectory prediction tools are unable to predict fully accurate
trajectories. Therefore, a common approach is to generate the (1 − α)-coverage prediction regions of
the obstacle trajectories. If these regions contain the true trajectories with a probability of at least
1 − α, they are considered valid. The key to probabilistic collision-free TO lies in adjusting the
prediction regions while remaining valid to improve the trajectory performance.
Conformal Prediction (CP) is an attractive framework to produce prediction regions with finite-sample
guarantees of validity Vovk et al. [2005], Shafer and Vovk [2008]. Without imposing any assumptions
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

