COALA: Numerically Stable and Efficient Framework
for Context-Aware Low-Rank Approximation

Uliana Parkina
HSE University
uliana.parkina@gmail.com

Maxim Rakhuba
HSE University

Abstract
Recent studies suggest that context-aware low-rank approximation is a useful tool
for compression and fine-tuning of modern large-scale neural networks. In this type
of approximation, a norm is weighted by a matrix of input activations, significantly
improving metrics over the unweighted case. Nevertheless, existing methods
for neural networks suffer from numerical instabilities due to their reliance on
classical formulas involving explicit Gram matrix computation and their subsequent
inversion. We demonstrate that this can degrade the approximation quality or cause
numerically singular matrices.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel inversion-free regularized framework that is based entirely on stable decompositions and overcomes the numerical pitfalls of prior art. Our method can handle possible challenging scenarios:
(1) when calibration matrices exceed GPU memory capacity, (2) when input activation matrices are nearly singular, and even (3) when insufficient data prevents
unique approximation. For the latter, we prove that our solution converges to a
desired approximation and derive explicit error bounds.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated high performance across a variety of tasks [52],
leading to significant advancements in artificial intelligence. However, the increasing size of these
models brings efficiency challenges, including inference speed and model size when resources are
constrained [55, 41, 6, 54]. To address these issues, various approaches have been proposed, such as
model compression and fine-tuning. Specifically, basic and context-aware low-rank approximation
techniques have proven to be an effective tool for compressing [46, 50, 25, 6, 27, 21] and finetuning [33, 47, 42, 43] modern large-scale neural networks.
In the context-aware approach, we consider the task of approximating a weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n given input data X ∈ Rn×k , where k is the batch size multiplied by the
context length. The goal is to find a low-rank approximation W ′ of W that maintains the performance
of the neural network while reducing its computational complexity. This objective leads to the
minimization of
L(W ′ ) = ∥W X − W ′ X∥F ,

where ∥ · ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm. We aim to minimize L(W ′ ) with respect to the matrix
W ′ ∈ Rm×n , under the constraint that the rank of W ′ does not exceed r.
Despite its seeming simplicity, the context-aware low-rank approximation poses various challenges
from the computational point of view:

Numerical instabilities. The first source of difficulty stems from numerical instability. Prior
methods [46, 25, 47, 6] frequently depend on the inversion of large or nearly singular Gram matrices
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

