Robust Contextual Pricing

Anupam Gupta
NYU and Google

Guru Guruganesh
Google

Renato Paes Leme
Google

Jon Schneider
Google

Abstract
We provide an algorithm with regret O(Cd log log T ) for contextual pricing with
C corrupted rounds, improving over the previous bound of O(d3 C log2 (T )) of
Krishnamurthy et al. (2020). The result is based on a reduction that calls the uncorrupted algorithm as a black-box, unlike the previous approach that modifies the
inner workings of the uncorrupted algorithm. As a result, it leads to a conceptually
simpler algorithm.
Finally, we provide a lower bound ruling out a O(C + d log log T ) algorithm. This
shows that robustifying contextual pricing is harder than robustifying contextual
search with ϵ-ball losses, for which it is possible to design algorithms where
corruptions add only an extra additive term C to the regret.

1

Introduction

In the contextual pricing problem, the seller is a learner who, in each round, gets a different product
described by a feature vector xt , for which it then posts a price pt . Typically, the buyer purchases
the product if its valuation (which is a function vt (xt ) of the feature vector, and a priori unknown
to the seller) is above this price. All the seller observes, after posting the price, is whether the
buyer
P purchases the product or not. The goal of the learner (i.e., seller) is to maximize their revenue
t pt 1(item t sold). As usual in pricing problems, the learner faces the exploration/exploitation
trade-off: it can “explore” by setting aggressive prices that allow it to learn about the buyer’s valuation,
but then it risks losing the sale; or it can “exploit” by setting conservative prices that guarantee a sale,
but potentially get a suboptimal revenue. In the revenue management literature, this is referred to as
the learn-and-earn problem.
Such pricing problems pose two main challenges:
(i) we only observe binary feedback (sale or no-sale), but do not directly observe the loss in
each round;
(ii) the loss function is asymmetric and discontinuous: while under-pricing an item by an amount
x will result in a sale with loss x with respect to the best possible revenue, over-pricing will
cause the buyer not to purchase the produce and incur a large constant loss.
For the single-dimensional non-contextual version of this problem, the seminal paper of Kleinberg
and Leighton (2003) identifies the best way to handle this asymmetry, obtaining the optimal regret
of Θ(log log T ). Since then, the Kleinberg and Leighton (2003) paper has been extended to the
d-dimensional contextual case by a series of papers that have obtained increasingly better bounds: the
work of Cohen et al. (2016) gave O(d2 log T ), Leme and Schneider (2018) showed O(d4 log log T ),
and finally Liu et al. (2021) gave O(d log log T ), matching the lower bound.
So far, our discussion has described the realizable and noise-free version of the problem: the buyer
has a fixed value vt , which is a constant in [0, 1] in the non-contextual case, or a linear function
vt (xt ) = ⟨v ∗ , xt ⟩ in the contextual case. Moreover, the purchasing decision is based on whether
the posted price pt is above or below this value vt . There has been considerable work extending the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

