Neural Atlas Graphs for Dynamic Scene
Decomposition and Editing

1

Jan Philipp Schneider1,2

Pratik Singh Bisht1

Ilya Chugunov2

Andreas Kolb1

Michael Moeller1,3

Felix Heide2,4

University of Siegen

2

Princeton University

3

Lamarr Institute

4

Torc Robotics

Abstract
Learning editable high-resolution scene representations for dynamic scenes is an
open problem with applications across the domains from autonomous driving to creative editing – the most successful approaches today make a trade-off between editability and supporting scene complexity: neural atlases represent dynamic scenes
as two deforming image layers, foreground and background, which are editable in
2D, but break down when multiple objects occlude and interact. In contrast, scene
graph models make use of annotated data such as masks and bounding boxes from
autonomous-driving datasets to capture complex 3D spatial relationships, but their
implicit volumetric node representations are challenging to edit view-consistently.
We propose Neural Atlas Graphs (NAGs), a hybrid high-resolution scene representation, where every graph node is a view-dependent neural atlas, facilitating both
2D appearance editing and 3D ordering and positioning of scene elements. Fit at
test-time, NAGs achieve state-of-the-art quantitative results on the Waymo Open
Dataset – by 5 dB PSNR increase compared to existing methods – and make environmental editing possible in high resolution and visual quality – creating counterfactual driving scenarios with new backgrounds and edited vehicle appearance. We
find that the method also generalizes beyond driving scenes and compares favorably
- by more than 7 dB in PSNR - to recent matting and video editing baselines on the
DAVIS video dataset with a diverse set of human and animal-centric scenes. Project
Page: https://princeton-computational-imaging.github.io/nag/

1

Introduction

There has been growing demand in graphics and vision for high-fidelity static 3D [27, 16] and
dynamic 4D [35, 38] reconstruction models, and in particular for editable representations which
decompose the scene into semantically meaningful components [43]. For autonomous driving, where
large collections of labeled video data are required to train driving behavior [13], editable scene
representations offer a direct approach to simulate counterfactual driving scenarios – removing,
re-timing, or repositioning vehicles and pedestrians to generate new trajectories, or editing the visual
elements of the scene to reflect new environmental conditions. This enables systems to expand
a limited collected real-world dataset into a richer and more diverse training set while preserving
photo-realism and semantic consistency.
In this setting, neural scene graphs [29] have emerged as a versatile hierarchical scene representation
[19, 39, 45, 22]; providing structured, object-centric models that enable repositioning and re-rendering
elements with high visual quality. These methods model the scene as set of connected nodes – e.g.,
vehicles, pedestrians, backgrounds – represented as individual radiance fields [9] or collections of
Gaussians [4]. The nodes are composited to render views of the scene, optimized during test time to
fit an input driving sequence. Beyond visual data, these neural scene graph models can also ingest
LiDAR and bounding box information, readily available in autonomous driving datasets [36, 47],
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

