R E M IND RAG: Low-Cost LLM-Guided Knowledge
Graph Traversal for Efficient RAG

Yikuan Hu1♢ Jifeng Zhu1♢ Lanrui Tang2 Chen Huang13∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
2
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
kilgrim@foxmail.com zen1984.kr@gmail.com
ray8823@connect.hku.hk huang_chen@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs), with their structured representation capabilities, offer
promising avenue for enhancing Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) systems,
leading to the development of KG-RAG systems. Nevertheless, existing methods
often struggle to achieve effective synergy between system effectiveness and cost
efficiency, leading to neither unsatisfying performance nor excessive LLM prompt
tokens and inference time. To this end, this paper proposes R E M IND RAG, which
employs an LLM-guided graph traversal featuring node exploration, node exploitation, and, most notably, memory replay, to improve both system effectiveness and
cost efficiency. Specifically, R E M IND RAG memorizes traversal experience within
KG edge embeddings, mirroring the way LLMs "memorize" world knowledge
within their parameters, but in a train-free manner. We theoretically and experimentally confirm the effectiveness of R E M IND RAG, demonstrating its superiority
over existing baselines across various benchmark datasets and LLM backbones.
Our code is available at https://github.com/kilgrims/ReMindRAG.

1

Introduction

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [23] has become a prominent method for augmenting
Large Language Models (LLMs) with external knowledge resources, enabling them to generate
more accurate outputs and thereby expanding their practical utility [17, 32]. However, conventional
RAG approaches, which primarily employ dense vector retrieval [37, 20, 1] for identifying relevant
text segments, often exhibit limitations when confronted with intricate tasks that necessitate multihop inference [49] or the capture of long-range dependencies [24]. Knowledge Graphs (KGs),
characterized by their structured representation of interconnected entities and relationships, present
a compelling alternative. Thus, research efforts are increasingly focused on developing KG-RAG
systems, which aims to improve RAG performance using graph-based text representation [10, 5, 27].
Usually, a KG-RAG system operates by initially transforming source documents into graph-based
representations2 . This often involves leveraging LLMs to extract entities and relationships, which
are then represented as nodes and edges within the graph. Information retrieval is subsequently
performed by traversing this graph to identify nodes relevant to the query. To achieve this, traditional
graph search algorithms, like PageRank [14, 9], and deep learning approaches, like GNN [53], could
be employed for traversal and answer extraction [31, 8, 26, 47], these methods often fail to capture
∗

Corresponding author. Work done during his PhD program at Sichuan University.
Both authors contributed equally to this study.
2
Unlike previous work leveraging established KGs [6, 42, 30, 22], this study explores KG-RAG systems that
generate their knowledge graph directly from the source text, like GraphRAG [9] and LightRAG [11].
♢

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

