Flow Density Control: Generative Optimization
Beyond Entropy-Regularized Fine-Tuning

Riccardo De Santi
ETH Zurich
ETH AI Center
rdesanti@ethz.ch

Marin Vlastelica
ETH Zurich
ETH AI Center
marin.vlastelica@inf.ethz.ch

Zebang Shen
ETH Zurich
zebang.shen@inf.ethz.ch

Ya-Ping Hsieh
ETH Zurich
yaping.hsieh@inf.ethz.ch

Niao He
ETH Zurich
ETH AI Center
niaohe@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
ETH AI Center
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Adapting large-scale foundational flow and diffusion generative models to optimize
task-specific objectives while preserving prior information is crucial for real-world
applications such as molecular design, protein docking, and creative image generation. Existing principled fine-tuning methods aim to maximize the expected reward
of generated samples, while retaining knowledge from the pre-trained model via
KL-divergence regularization. In this work, we tackle the significantly more general problem of optimizing general utilities beyond average rewards, including
risk-averse and novelty-seeking reward maximization, diversity measures for exploration, and experiment design objectives among others. Likewise, we consider more
general ways to preserve prior information beyond KL-divergence, such as optimal
transport distances and Rényi divergences. To this end, we introduce Flow Density
Control (FDC), a simple algorithm that reduces this complex problem to a specific
sequence of simpler fine-tuning tasks, each solvable via scalable established methods. We derive convergence guarantees for the proposed scheme under realistic
assumptions by leveraging recent understanding of mirror flows. Finally, we validate our method on illustrative settings, text-to-image, and molecular design tasks,
showing that it can steer pre-trained generative models to optimize objectives and
solve practically relevant tasks beyond the reach of current fine-tuning schemes.

1

Introduction

Large-scale generative modeling has recently seen remarkable advancements, with flow [30, 31] and diffusion models [51, 52, 23] standing out for their ability
to produce high-fidelity samples across a wide range
of applications, from chemistry [24] and biology [9]
to robotics [8]. However, approximating the data
distribution is insufficient for real-world applications
such as scientific discovery [6, 59], where one typically wishes to generate samples optimizing specific
utilities, e.g., molecular stability and diversity, while
preserving certain information from a pre-trained
model. This problem has recently been tackled via
fine-tuning in the case where the utility corresponds

Current

This work

Utility

Divergence

Figure 1: We extend the capabilities of current fine-tuning schemes from KL-regularized
expected reward maximization (left) to the
optimization of arbitrary distributional utilities F under general divergences D (right).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

