Leveraging Depth and Language for Open-Vocabulary
Domain-Generalized Semantic Segmentation

Siyu Chen1,2 †

Ting Han2,3 † * Chengzheng Fu4 ‡ Changshe Zhang5 ‡
Jinhe Su1 * Guorong Cai1 Meiliu Wu2 *

Chaolei Wang3 ‡

1

4

Jimei University, 2 University of Glasgow, 3 Sun Yat-sen University,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 5 Xidian University,

Abstract
Open-Vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS) and domain generalization in
semantic segmentation (DGSS) highlight a subtle complementarity that motivates
Open-Vocabulary Domain-Generalized Semantic Segmentation (OV-DGSS). OVDGSS aims to generate pixel-level masks for unseen categories while maintaining
robustness across unseen domains, a critical capability for real-world scenarios
such as autonomous driving in adverse conditions. We introduce Vireo, a novel
single-stage framework for OV-DGSS that unifies the strengths of OVSS
and DGSS for the first time. Vireo builds upon the frozen Visual Foundation
Models (VFMs) and incorporates scene geometry via Depth VFMs to extract
domain-invariant structural features. To bridge the gap between visual and textual
modalities under domain shift, we propose three key components: (1) GeoText
Query, which align geometric features with language cues and progressively refine
VFM encoder representations; (2) Coarse Mask Prior Embedding (CMPE) for
enhancing gradient flow for faster convergence and stronger textual influence; and
(3) the Domain-Open-Vocabulary Vector Embedding Head (DOV-VEH), which
fuses refined structural and semantic features for robust prediction. Comprehensive
evaluation on these components demonstrates the effectiveness of our designs. Our
proposed Vireo achieves the state-of-the-art performance and surpasses existing
methods by a large margin in both domain generalization and open-vocabulary
recognition, offering a unified and scalable solution for robust visual understanding
in diverse and dynamic environments. Code is available at https://github.com/SYCh/Vireo.

1

Introduction

Open-Vocabulary Domain-Generalized Semantic Segmentation (OV-DGSS) denotes the joint execution of open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS)[1, 2, 3, 4] and domain generalization in
semantic segmentation (DGSS)[5, 6, 7, 8] tasks. It involves training a model that, without access to
target-domain samples or annotations for novel categories, can generate pixel-wise segmentation for
unseen classes while sustaining high performance across previously unseen domains (such as different
cities, lighting environments, or climatic conditions). For instance, when an autonomous vehicle
receives a query like “Can I park next to that bollard?”, its perception system must comprehend the
linguistic input and accurately segment the referenced object at the pixel level—even under adverse
conditions such as dim lighting, rain-streaked lenses, or region-specific visual appearances.
OVSS and DGSS share notable similarities and can both be implemented using either multi-stage or
single-stage strategies. In multi-stage OVSS [1], candidate regions or coarse masks are generated and
then classified by a text approach, while multi-stage DGSS [9]first aligns domains through adversarial
alignment or style transfer and then trains the segmentation approach on the aligned features.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

