Stochastic Optimization in Semi-Discrete Optimal
Transport: Convergence Analysis and Minimax Rate

Ferdinand Genans1∗ Antoine Godichon-Baggioni1
François-Xavier Vialard2 Olivier Wintenberger1,3
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LPSM1
Université Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM2
Wolfgang Pauli Institute3
{ferdinand.genans-boiteux, antoine.godichon_baggioni,
olivier.wintenberger}@sorbonne-universite.fr
francois-xavier.vialard@u-pem.fr

Abstract
We investigate the semi-discrete Optimal Transport (OT) problem, where a continuous source measure µ is transported to a discrete target measure ν, with particular
attention to the OT map approximation. In this setting, Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) based solvers have demonstrated strong empirical performance in recent
machine learning applications, yet their theoretical guarantee to approximate the
OT map is an open question. In this work, we answer it positively by providing
both computational and statistical convergence guarantees of SGD. Specifically,
we show that√
SGD methods can estimate the OT map with a minimax convergence
rate of O(1/ n), where n is the number of samples drawn from µ. To establish
this result, we study the averaged projected SGD algorithm, and identify a suitable
projection set that contains a minimizer of the objective, even when the source
measure is not compactly supported. Our analysis holds under mild assumptions
on the source measure and applies to MTW cost functions,which include ∥ · ∥p for
p ∈ (1, ∞). We finally provide numerical evidence for our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) has become a central tool in machine learning for comparing and manipulating probability measures. A particularly important variant is the semi-discrete setting, where a
continuous source distribution µ is transported to a discrete target measure ν. This formulation arises
naturally in a wide range of applications, including image processing [16, 22], statistics [11, 18], and
generative modeling [4, 9, 24]. Its hybrid structure bridges the gap between fully continuous and
fully discrete formulations, allowing for expressive modeling while remaining more amenable to
scalable numerical methods.
Despite its practical appeal, solving semi-discrete OT efficiently and reliably at scale remains
challenging. Existing methods with convergence guarantees often require full knowledge of the
source density and are typically confined to low-dimensional settings. For instance, Newton-type
methods [27, 23, 21] and combinatorial [2, 1] methods have been developed and are provided with
convergence rates guarantees. However, these techniques become impractical in high-dimensional
settings, since they need full knowledge of the source measure, and employ constructions that suffer
from the curse of dimensionality such as meshes representation of the source measure.
In high dimensional and/or when the source measure can only be accessed through samples, SGD
and its variants have become a popular choice for solving semi-discrete OT, especially in applications
such as generative modeling [4, 9, 24]. These methods solve the semi-dual formulation of the OT
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

