PINN Balls: Scaling Second-Order Methods for PINNs
with Domain Decomposition and Adaptive Sampling

Andrea Bonfanti
BMW AG, Digital Campus Munich
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics
University of the Basque Country
abonfanti001@ikasle.ehu.eus
Roman List
BMW AG, Digital Campus Munich
Roberto Santana
University of the Basque Country,
Intelligent Systems Group
roberto.santana@ehu.eus

Ismael Medina
University of Göttingen,
Campus Institute Data Science

Björn Staeves
BMW AG, Digital Campus Munich

Marco Ellero
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics, CFD Group
IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science
Swansea University, Complex Fluids Research Group
mellero@bcamath.org

Abstract
Recent advances in Scientific Machine Learning have shown that second-order
methods can enhance the training of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs),
making them a suitable alternative to traditional numerical methods for Partial
Differential Equations (PDEs). However, second-order methods induce large
memory requirements, making them scale poorly with the model size. In this paper,
we define a local Mixture of Experts (MoE) combining the parameter-efficiency
of ensemble models and sparse coding to enable the use of second-order training.
Our model – PINN BALLS – also features a fully learnable domain decomposition
structure, achieved through the use of Adversarial Adaptive Sampling (AAS),
which adapts the DD to the PDE and its domain. PINN BALLS achieves better
accuracy than the state-of-the-art in scientific machine learning, while maintaining
invaluable scalability properties and drawing from a sound theoretical background.

1

Introduction

Obtaining accurate solutions to partial differential equations (PDEs) is a ubiquitous problem in
countless engineering applications, as it enables reliable simulations of real-world scenarios. While
discretization-based methods for solving PDEs offer convergence guarantees as well as a solid theoretical underpinning, their implementation and runtime can be resource intensive. Novel techniques
developed within the domain of Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) strike a highly sought-after
balance between accuracy and runtime, which has led to a rapid growth of the field in recent years
[7]. A milestone SciML architecture is the Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN), which was
theorized in the 90s [9] and gained the interest of the research community following the publication
that coined its name [28]. The salient aspect of PINNs is the inclusion of physical laws in the
loss function, computed via automatic differentiation. While their training process is not simple,
researchers proposed alternatives to fix pertinent issues of the PINN architecture, such as the complex
loss landscape generated by the PDE residuals [36], unbalanced optimization of the components of
the loss functions [17], and the spectral bias intrinsic to neural networks [29]. The combination of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

