The Hawthorne Effect in Reasoning Models:
Evaluating and Steering Test Awareness

1

Microsoft

Sahar Abdelnabi1,2,3∗ Ahmed Salem1
ELLIS Institute Tübingen & MPI for Intelligent Systems 3 Tübingen AI Center
sahar.abdelnabi@tue.ellis.eu ahmsalem@microsoft.com
2

Abstract
Reasoning-focused LLMs sometimes alter their behavior when they detect that they
are being evaluated—which can lead them to optimize for test-passing performance
or to comply more readily with harmful prompts if real-world consequences appear
absent. We present the first quantitative study of how such “test awareness” impacts
model behavior, particularly its performance on safety-related tasks1 . We introduce
a white-box probing framework that (i) linearly identifies awareness-related activations and (ii) steers models toward or away from test awareness while monitoring
downstream performance. We apply our method to different state-of-the-art openweight reasoning LLMs across both realistic and hypothetical tasks (denoting tests
or simulations). Our results demonstrate that test awareness significantly impacts
safety alignment (such as compliance with harmful requests and conforming to
stereotypes) with effects varying in both magnitude and direction across models.
By providing control over this latent effect, our work aims to provide a stress-test
mechanism and increase trust in how we perform safety evaluations.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are routinely evaluated on safety benchmarks to ensure they refuse
harmful requests. However, a critical question remains unexplored: Do these models behave differently when they detect they are being evaluated? This is analogous to the Hawthorne effect [Adair,
1984]—human behavior often changes once individuals realize they are under observation. We found
that such “test awareness” can affect model behavior in two opposing directions: models may refuse
harmful questions when they recognize a safety test, or they may comply when they perceive a task as
hypothetical with no real-world consequences. This inconsistency undermines the validity of safety
assessments as evaluation behavior diverges from deployment behavior.
To investigate this, we develop an experimental setup and a controlled steering pipeline that manipulates an LLM’s perceived test context. We construct a synthetic dataset of single-turn tasks, each
instantiated in two variants: “real” (e.g., familiar domains like @outlook.com) and “hypothetical”
(e.g., @example.com). The latter serves as an implicit trigger (without explicit prompting), signaling
to the model that it is under test or a simulation.
LLMs are now trained to reason [Guo et al., 2025] before generating a final answer, which can
reveal latent misbehavior [Baker et al., 2025]. We leverage these reasoning traces to measure two
dimensions via an LLM-based judge. Given a prompt and reasoning traces, the judge answers:
• Evaluation awareness: Does the model acknowledge or hint that it recognizes it is being evaluated?
1
We loosely use the term “aware” to refer to the mere perceived awareness based on the model’s responses.
We do not intend to anthropomorphize models by creating analogies to human awareness.
∗
: Work partially done while being at Microsoft. Code is available at: https://github.com/microsoft/
Test_Awareness_Steering.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

