NFIG: Multi-Scale Autoregressive Image Generation
via Frequency Ordering

Zhihao Huang1,2 Xi Qiu2 Yukuo Ma2,4 Yifu Zhou1,2 Junjie Chen2
Hongyuan Zhang2,3,∗ Chi Zhang2,∗ Xuelong Li2,∗
2

1
Northwest Polytechnical University
3
4
TeleAI, China Telecom
University of Hong Kong
Beihang University

huangzhihao@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, hyzhang98@gmail.com,
zhangc120@chinatelecom.cn, xuelong_li@ieee.org

Abstract
Autoregressive models have achieved significant success in image generation. However, unlike the inherent hierarchical structure of image information in the spectral
domain, standard autoregressive methods typically generate pixels sequentially in
a fixed spatial order. To better leverage this spectral hierarchy, we introduce NextFrequency Image Generation (NFIG). NFIG is a novel framework that decomposes
the image generation process into multiple frequency-guided stages. NFIG aligns
the generation process with the natural image structure. It does this by first generating low-frequency components, which efficiently capture global structure with
significantly fewer tokens, and then progressively adding higher-frequency details.
This frequency-aware paradigm offers substantial advantages: it not only improves
the quality of generated images but crucially reduces inference cost by efficiently
establishing global structure early on. Extensive experiments on the ImageNet-256
benchmark validate NFIG’s effectiveness, demonstrating superior performance
(FID: 2.81) and a notable 1.25× speedup compared to the strong baseline VAR-d20.
The source code is available at https://github.com/Pride-Huang/NFIG.

1

Introduction

2

The synthesis of images has emerged as a fundamental challenge in computer vision [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Rapid progress in this field has been propelled by deep generative models, such
as autoregressive models (AR) [13], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), and diffusion models
(SD) [14].
Despite remarkable advances in existing methods, AR models for image generation still face several
fundamental challenges. On the one hand, due to their inherently local and sequential nature, most
current AR models struggle to effectively capture long-range dependencies and global structure [15].
For example, PixelCNN [9] generates an image by predicting each pixel in a raster scanning sequence,
which neglects the global image structure and relationships with distant elements. On the other
hand, the generation process is computationally intensive and time-consuming, as AR models
always generate pixels or patches sequentially in a predetermined order, with each new element
requiring the computation of conditional probabilities based on all previously generated content [16,
17]. For instance, ViTVQ [18] requires more than 6 seconds to generate a 256 × 256 image over
∗
2

Corresponding authors
Completed during internship at TeleAI.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

