On the VC dimension of deep group convolutional
neural networks
Anna Sepliarskaia
Booking.com
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Twente
Drienerlolaan 5
7522 NB Enschede, Netherlands
a.sepliarskaia@utwente.nl

Sophie Langer
Faculty of Mathematics
Ruhr University Bochum
Universitätsstraße 150
44801 Bochum, Germany
s.langer@rub.de

Johannes Schmidt-Hieber
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Twente
Drienerlolaan 5
7522 NB Enschede, Netherlands
a.j.schmidt-hieber@utwente.nl

Abstract
Equivariant neural networks outperform traditional deep neural networks on a
number of tasks. The theoretical understanding of their generalization properties
remains, however, limited. In this paper, we analyze the generalization capabilities
of Group Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs) with ReLU activation function
through the lens of Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension theory. By deriving
upper and lower bounds, we investigate how the network architecture affects the
VC dimension.

1

Introduction

A central challenge in machine learning is selecting a model that generalizes well, meaning models
that maintain high performance on both training and unseen data. In neural networks, a common
strategy to enhance generalization is to explicitly incorporate task-specific symmetries into the
network architecture, as is done in Group Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs). Therefore,
understanding the theoretical aspects of generalization is particularly important for GCNNs—this is
the problem we address in this paper.
GCNNs were first introduced by [10] to improve statistical efficiency and enhance geometric reasoning. Since then equivariant network structures have evolved to support equivariance on Euclidean
groups [6, 5, 33], compact groups [18] and Riemannian manifolds [34]. More recent architectures
have even been generalized beyond other types of symmetry groups [35, 11, 27]. GCNNs have
demonstrated promise in a variety of domains, including fluid dynamics [32, 31], electrodynamics
[35], medical image segmentation [6], partial differential equation (PDE) solvers [8], and video
tracking [29]. A notable example of the success of equivariant neural networks is the AlphaFold algorithm, which achieves high accuracy in protein structure prediction through a novel roto-translation
equivariant attention architecture of the neural network [15, 14].
While GCNNs have demonstrated strong empirical performance—often outperforming Deep (Feedforward) Neural Networks (DNNs)—rigorous theoretical guarantees remain limited. This gap is
not due to a lack of interest; indeed, several works have attempted to address the theoretical understanding of GCNN’s generalization. Most of these studies approach the problem by comparing the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

