Path-Enhanced Contrastive Learning for
Recommendation
Haoran Sun†
Beijing Jiaotong University
haoran.sun@bjtu.edu.cn

Fei Xiong†∗
Beijing Jiaotong University
xiongf@bjtu.edu.cn

Yuanzhe Hu†
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences
yuanzhe@iscas.ac.cn

Liang Wang
Northwestern Polytechnical University
liangwang0123@gmail.com

Abstract
Collaborative filtering (CF) methods are now facing the challenge of data sparsity
in recommender systems. In order to reduce the effect of data sparsity, researchers
proposed contrastive learning methods to extract self-supervised signals from raw
data. Contrastive learning methods address this problem by graph augmentation
and maximizing the consistency of node representations between different augmented graphs. However, these methods tends to unintentionally distance the target
node from its path nodes on the interaction path, thus limiting its effectiveness.
In this regard, we propose a solution that uses paths as samples in the contrastive
loss function. In order to obtain the path samples, we design a path sampling
method. In addition to the contrast of the relationship between the target node
and the nodes within the path (intra-path contrast), we also designed a method
of contrasting the relationship between the paths (inter-path contrast) to better
pull the target node and its path nodes closer to each other. We use Simplifying
and Powering Graph Convolution Network (LightGCN) as the basis and combine
with a new path-enhanced graph approach proposed for graph augmentation. It
effectively improves the performance of recommendation models. Our proposed
Path Enhanced Contrastive Loss (PECL) model replaces the common contrastive
loss function with our novel loss function, showing significant performance improvement. Experiments on three real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our model.

1

Introduction

In the era of information explosion, recommender systems play a crucial role in identifying users’
preferences and delivering personalized experiences effectively[18]. Among the various techniques,
CF[9, 21] has become a cornerstone approach to generate recommendations utilizing implicit feedback
such as clicks, purchases, and comments. The core idea of CF methods is that users with similar
behaviors are likely to share similar preferences. CF methods are broadly classified into memorybased[15, 4, 20] and model-based approaches[17, 10, 12]. Recent research trends focus on modelbased CF techniques due to their superior performance and scalability. However, CF methods are
often challenged by the data sparsity problem. To address this, researchers proposed various models
to enhance the representations of users and items by using additional information[10, 25, 2, 13, 27, 5].
For instance, models like SVD++ incorporate implicit feedback from user-item interactions to refine
∗
†

Corresponding author
These authors contributed equally to this research.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

