Incentivizing Dual Process Thinking for Efficient
Large Language Model Reasoning

Xiaoxue Cheng1,2,3∗, Junyi Li4∗ , Zhenduo Zhang5 , Xinyu Tang1 ,
Wayne Xin Zhao1,2,3†, Xinyu Kong5 , Zhiqiang Zhang5
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance
3
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE
4
Department of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong 5 Ant Group
chengxiaoxue@ruc.edu.cn, junyili@cityu.edu.hk, batmanfly@gmail.com

Abstract
Large reasoning models (LRMs) have demonstrated strong performance on complex reasoning tasks, but often suffer from overthinking, generating redundant
content regardless of task difficulty. Inspired by the dual process theory in cognitive science, we propose Adaptive Cognition Policy Optimization (ACPO), a
reinforcement learning framework that enables LRMs to achieve efficient reasoning through adaptive cognitive allocation and dynamic system switch. ACPO
incorporates two key components: (1) introducing system-aware reasoning tokens
to explicitly represent the thinking modes thereby making the model’s cognitive
process transparent, and (2) integrating online difficulty estimation and token
length budget to guide adaptive system switch and reasoning during reinforcement
learning. To this end, we propose a two-stage training strategy. The first stage
begins with supervised fine-tuning to cold start the model, enabling it to generate
reasoning paths with explicit thinking modes. In the second stage, we apply ACPO
to further enhance adaptive system switch for difficulty-aware reasoning. Experimental results demonstrate that ACPO effectively reduces redundant reasoning
while adaptively adjusting cognitive allocation based on task complexity, achieving
efficient hybrid reasoning.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large reasoning models (LRMs) [1] have demonstrated remarkable success on
complex tasks such as mathematical reasoning [2, 3, 4, 5], largely attributed to reinforcement learning
that encourages the generation of detailed, step-by-step reasoning processes. LRMs improve answer
accuracy through self-reflection and self-verification during long reasoning paths. As the reasoning
length increases, the performance of model tends to improve accordingly [2, 6, 7]. Although the long
chain-of-thought (CoT) [8] reasoning in LRMs is effective for solving complex problems [2, 9], it
often leads to overthinking [10, 11], producing redundant reasoning paths. Most existing LRMs rely
on fixed reasoning strategies, lacking the ability to dynamically switch between different thinking
modes based on task complexity. This rigidity results in inefficient inference, particularly for simple
problems that could be resolved more effectively with concise and direct reasoning.
Several recent efforts have explored long CoT compression for efficient reasoning [12, 13]. One
line of work fine-tunes LRMs using supervision from shorter chain-of-thought exemplars [14, 15],
encouraging the model to arrive at correct answers with fewer intermediate steps. Another line
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

