Layer-wise Update Aggregation with Recycling for
Communication-Efficient Federated Learning

Jisoo Kim1 , Sungmin Kang2 , Sunwoo Lee1∗
1
Inha University
Incheon, Republic of Korea
2
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
starprin3@inha.edu, kangsung@usc.edu, sunwool@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Expensive communication cost is a common performance bottleneck in Federated
Learning (FL), which makes it less appealing in real-world applications. Many
communication-efficient FL methods focus on discarding a part of model updates
mostly based on gradient magnitude. In this study, we find that recycling previous
updates, rather than simply dropping them, more effectively reduces the communication cost while maintaining FL performance. We propose FedLUAR, a Layer-wise
Update Aggregation with Recycling scheme for communication-efficient FL. We
first define a useful metric that quantifies the extent to which the aggregated gradients influence the model parameter values in each layer. FedLUAR selects a
few layers based on the metric and recycles their previous updates on the server
side. Our extensive empirical study demonstrates that the update recycling scheme
significantly reduces the communication cost while maintaining model accuracy.
For example, our method achieves nearly the same AG News accuracy as FedAvg,
while reducing the communication cost to just 17%.

1

Introduction

While Federated Learning has become a distributed learning method of choice recently, there
still exists a huge gap between practical efficacy and theoretical performance. Especially, the
communication cost of model aggregation is one of the most challenging issues in realistic FL
environments. It is well known that larger models exhibit stronger learning capabilities. The larger
the model, the higher the communication cost. Thus, addressing the communication cost issue is
crucial for realizing scalable and practical FL applications.
Many communication-efficient FL methods focus on partially ‘dropping’ model parameters and
thus their updates. Quantization-based FL methods reduce communication costs by lowering the
numerical precision of transmitted model parameters, representing each parameter with a lower
bit-width. Pruning-based FL methods directly remove a portion of model parameters to avoid the
associated gradient computations and communication overhead. Model reparameterization-based
FL methods adjust the model architecture using matrix decomposition techniques, reducing the total
number of parameters.While all these approaches reduce the communication cost, they commonly
compromise learning capability by either reducing the number of parameters or degrading the data
representation quality.
In this paper, we propose FedLUAR, a Layer-wise Update Aggregation with Recycling method
for communication-efficient and accurate FL. Instead of dropping the updates for a part of model
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

