Efficient Fairness-Performance Pareto Front
Computation
Mark Kozdoba *1 , Binyamin Perets *1 , and Shie Mannor1,2
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
2
NVIDIA

Abstract
There is a well known intrinsic trade-off between the fairness of a representation
and the performance of classifiers derived from the representation. In this paper
we propose a new method to compute the optimal Pareto front of this trade off.
In contrast to the existing methods, this approach does not require the training of
complex fair representation models.
Our approach is derived through three main steps: We analyze fair representations
theoretically, and derive several structural properties of optimal representations.
We then show that these properties enable a reduction of the computation of the
Pareto Front to a compact discrete problem. Finally, we show that these compact
approximating problems can be efficiently solved via off-the shelf concave-convex
programming methods.
In addition to representations, we show that the new methods may also be used to
directly compute the Pareto front of fair classification problems. Moreover, the
proposed methods may be used with any concave performance measure. This is
in contrast to the existing reduction approaches, developed recently in fair classification, which rely explicitly on the structure of the non-differentiable accuracy
measure, and are thus unlikely to be extendable.
The approach was evaluated on several real world benchmark datasets and compares
favorably to a number of recent state of the art fair representation and classification
methods.

1

Introduction

Fair representations are a central topic in the field of Fair Machine Learning, Mehrabi et al. (2021),
Pessach and Shmueli (2022),Chouldechova and Roth (2018). Since their introduction in Zemel et al.
(2013), Fair representations have been extensively studied, giving rise to a variety of approaches
based on a wide range of modern machine learning methods, such GANs, variational auto encoders,
numerous variants of Optimal Transport methods, and direct variational formulations. See the papers
Feldman et al. (2015), Madras et al. (2018), Gordaliza et al. (2019); Zehlike et al. (2020), Song et al.
(2019), Du et al. (2020), Zhao and Gordon (2022), Jovanović et al. (2023), Dehdashtian et al. (2024),
for a sample of existing methods.
For a given representation learning problem and a target classification problem, since the fairness
constraints reduce the space of feasible classifiers, the best possible classification performance will
usually be lower as the fairness constraint becomes stronger. This phenomenon is known as the
Fairness-Performance trade-off. Assume that we have fixed a way to measure fairness. Then for
a given representation learning method, one is often interested in the fairness-performance curve
(γ, E(γ)). Here, γ is the fairness level, and E(γ) is the classification performance of the method at
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

