VGGT-SLAM: Dense RGB SLAM
Optimized on the SL(4) Manifold

Dominic Maggio∗ Hyungtae Lim∗ Luca Carlone
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{drmaggio, shapelim, lcarlone}@mit.edu

Abstract
We present VGGT-SLAM, a dense RGB SLAM system constructed by incrementally and globally aligning submaps created from the feed-forward scene
reconstruction approach VGGT using only uncalibrated monocular cameras. While
related works align submaps using similarity transforms (i.e., translation, rotation,
and scale), we show that such approaches are inadequate in the case of uncalibrated cameras. In particular, we revisit the idea of reconstruction ambiguity,
where given a set of uncalibrated cameras with no assumption on the camera
motion or scene structure, the scene can only be reconstructed up to a 15-degreesof-freedom projective transformation of the true geometry. This inspires us to
recover a consistent scene reconstruction across submaps by optimizing over
the SL(4) manifold, thus estimating 15-degrees-of-freedom homography transforms between sequential submaps while accounting for potential loop closure
constraints. As verified by extensive experiments, we demonstrate that VGGTSLAM achieves improved map quality using long video sequences that are infeasible for VGGT due to its high GPU requirements. Our code is available at
https://github.com/MIT-SPARK/VGGT-SLAM.

1

Introduction

One of the most fundamental tasks in computer vision is that of simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) where given multiple monocular (or stereo) images, the task is to generate a 3D
reconstruction of the scene and estimate the 6-degrees-of-freedom (DOF) pose of the cameras. Most
approaches for this have traditionally leveraged classical multi-view geometry constraints [47, 25, 80,
81], data association [38, 37], and backend optimization such as bundle adjustment [52, 53, 57, 1,
58, 59]. Recently, a new paradigm of using simpler, feed-forward networks, which produce point
clouds from uncalibrated input images, has gained increasing popularity. In this thrust, the seminal
work DUSt3R [73] takes in a pair of images and estimates dense point clouds of both images in
the reference frame of the first camera, thus creating a dense scene reconstruction and allowing the
camera poses estimated easily with a 3-point RANSAC solver [48, 40].
To extend feed-forward reconstruction to multiple images, VGGT (Visual Geometry Grounded
Transformer) [71] takes in an arbitrary number of images, and in addition to estimating dense point
clouds of each camera frame, also estimates depth maps, feature tracks, and camera poses and
intrinsics. However, VGGT is limited in the number of images that can be processed by GPU
memory. For example, in the case of an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 with 24 GB, this is limited to
approximately 60 images, making larger reconstructions requiring hundreds or thousands of images
infeasible.
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

