Maximizing the Value of Predictions in Control:
Accuracy Is Not Enough

Yiheng Lin
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
yihengl@caltech.edu
Zaiwei Chen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
chen5252@purdue.edu

Christopher Yeh
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
cyeh@caltech.edu
Adam Wierman
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the value of stochastic predictions in online optimal control with random
disturbances. Prior work provides performance guarantees based on prediction
error but ignores the stochastic dependence between predictions and disturbances.
We introduce a general framework modeling their joint distribution and define
“prediction power” as the control cost improvement from the optimal use of predictions compared to ignoring the predictions. In the time-varying Linear Quadratic
Regulator (LQR) setting, we derive a closed-form expression for prediction power
and discuss its mismatch with prediction accuracy and connection with online
policy optimization. To extend beyond LQR, we study general dynamics and costs.
We establish a lower bound on prediction power under two sufficient conditions
that generalize the properties of the LQR setting, characterizing the fundamental
benefit of incorporating stochastic predictions. We apply this lower bound to nonquadratic costs and show that even weakly dependent predictions yield significant
performance gains.

1

Introduction

Understanding the benefits of predictions in control has received significant attention recently [1, 2,
3, 4, 5]. In this work, we study a class of discrete-time online optimal control problems in general
time-varying systems, where random disturbances Wt affect state transitions. The agent leverages a
prediction vector containing information about future disturbances to minimize the expected total
cost over a finite horizon T . To study the impact of using predictions, a fundamental question is how
to model disturbances and their relationship to predictions. Prior works adopt different modeling
approaches [1, 5, 6], each with distinct strengths and limitations.
A common paradigm assumes perfect predictions over a finite horizon k, yielding an elegant characterization of “prediction power” that improves with larger k. Under this model, predictions exactly
reveal future disturbances Wt , . . . , Wt+k−1 . [1] shows how prediction power grows with k in the
LQR setting, and subsequent work extends this result to time-varying systems [3]. As a result, the
marginal benefit of one additional prediction decays exponentially with k, offering insight into how
to select k. However, longer-horizon predictions are more costly and less accurate, and real-world
predictions are rarely perfect [7], making this idealized setting challenging in practice.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

