STAR: Spatial-Temporal Tracklet Matching for
Multi-Object Tracking

Xuewei Bai1

Yongcai Wang1∗ Deying Li1† Haodi Ping2‡ Chunxu Li1,3
School of Information, Renmin University of China
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
3
China Waterborne Transport Research Institute
{bai_xuewei,ycw,deyingli}@ruc.edu.cn
haodi.ping@bjut.edu.cn
lichunxu@wti.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Existing tracking-by-detection Multi-Object Tracking methods mainly rely on
associating objects with tracklets using motion and appearance features. However,
variations in viewpoint and occlusions can result in discrepancies between the features of current objects and those of historical tracklets. To tackle these challenges,
this paper proposes a novel Spatial-Temporal Tracklet Graph Matching paradigm
(STAR). The core idea of STAR is to achieve long-term, reliable object association
through the association of Tracklet Clips (TCs). TCs are segments of confidently
associated multi-object trajectories, which are linked through graph matching.
Specifically, STAR initializes TCs using a Confident Initial Tracklet Generator
(CITG) and constructs a TC graph via Tracklet Clip Graph Construction (TCGC).
In TCGC, each object in a TC is treated as a vertex, with the appearance and local
topology features encoded on the vertex. The vertices and edges of the TC graph are
then updated through message propagation to capture higher-order features. Finally,
a Tracklet Clip Graph Matching (TCGM) method is proposed to efficiently and
accurately associate the TCs through graph matching. STAR is model-agnostic, allowing for seamless integration with existing methods to enhance their performance.
Extensive experiments on diverse datasets, including MOTChallenge, DanceTrack,
and VisDrone2021-MOT, demonstrate the robustness and versatility of STAR,
significantly improving tracking performance under challenging conditions. The
code is available at https://github.com/baixuewei430-dotcom/STAR.

1

Introduction

Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a longstanding task in computer vision [1, 2, 3, 4], generally divided
into two paradigms: tracking-by-detection (TBD) and joint detection-and-tracking (JDT). Currently,
TBD [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] generally outperforms JDT in terms of accuracy. The core task in TBD involves
effectively extracting object features and designing accurate association strategies to assign stable
IDs to the same object. However, existing methods still encounter challenges in feature extraction
and data association in difficult scenarios, such as crowded environments or frequent occlusions.
∗

Dr. Wang is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant No.61972404,
Public Computing Cloud, Renmin University of China, and the Blockchain Lab. School of Information, Renmin
University of China.
†
Dr. Li is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant No.12071478.
‡
Dr. Ping is supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4244076.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

