Optimal Neural Compressors for the
Rate-Distortion-Perception Tradeoff

†

Eric Lei†∗, Hamed Hassani‡ , Shirin Saeedi Bidokhti‡
JPMorganChase Global Technology Applied Research, ‡ University of Pennsylvania
eric.lei@jpmchase.com, {hassani, saeedi}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Recent efforts in neural compression have focused on the rate-distortion-perception
(RDP) tradeoff, where the perception constraint ensures the source and reconstruction distributions are close in terms of a statistical divergence. Theoretical work on
RDP describes properties of RDP-optimal compressors without providing constructive and low complexity solutions. While classical rate-distortion theory shows that
optimal compressors should efficiently pack space, RDP theory additionally shows
that infinite randomness shared between the encoder and decoder may be necessary
for RDP optimality. In this paper, we propose neural compressors that are low
complexity and benefit from high packing efficiency through lattice coding and
shared randomness through shared dithering over the lattice cells. For two important settings, namely infinite shared and zero shared randomness, we analyze the
RDP tradeoff achieved by our proposed neural compressors and show optimality in
both cases. Experimentally, we investigate the roles that these two components of
our design, lattice coding and randomness, play in the performance of neural compressors on synthetic and real-world data. We observe that performance improves
with more shared randomness and better lattice packing.

1

Introduction

Neural compressors learned from large-scale datasets have achieved state-of-the-art performance in
terms of the rate-distortion tradeoff (Ballé et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2023), especially when trained
to produce reconstructions that align well with human perception (Mentzer et al., 2020; Tschannen
et al., 2018; Agustsson et al., 2019; Muckley et al., 2023). To achieve this, an additional perception
loss term is used, typically defined as a statistical divergence δ between the reconstruction and source
distributions. As such, recent focus has shifted to the rate-distortion-perception (RDP) framework,
where compressors explore a triple tradeoff between rate, distortion and perception δ (Blau and
Michaeli, 2019). The RDP function of a source X ∼ PX , defined as
R(D, P ) = min

PX̂|X

s.t.

I(X; X̂)
EPX PX̂|X [∆(X, X̂)] ≤ D,

δ(PX , PX̂ ) ≤ P,

(1)

where ∆ is a distortion function, has emerged to describe this fundamental tradeoff (Matsumoto,
2018; Blau and Michaeli, 2019; Li et al., 2011). Several RDP coding theorems have recently been
proven (Theis and Wagner, 2021; Wagner, 2022; Chen et al., 2022), providing an operational meaning
to (1) as a fundamental limit of lossy compression for the RDP tradeoff1 .
In this paper, we investigate how neural compressors may achieve RDP optimality, and what components are necessary for good RDP performance. The RDP coding theorems, while non-constructive,
∗
1

Prepared prior to employment at JPMorganChase.
Specifically, (1) is achievable by a sequence of source codes, and no source code can do better than (1).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

