Towards Robust Uncertainty Calibration for
Composed Image Retrieval

Yifan Wang1 , Wuliang Huang2 , Yufan Wen1 , Shunning Liu1 , Chun Yuan1∗
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yifan-wa22@mails, wenyf24@mails, lsn24@mails, yuanc@sz}.tsinghua.edu.cn
huangwuliang19b@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The interactive task of composed image retrieval aims to retrieve the most relevant
images with the bi-modal query, consisting of a reference image and a modification
sentence. Despite significant efforts to bridge the heterogeneous gap within the
bi-modal query and leverage contrastive learning to reduce the disparity between
positive and negative triplets, prior methods often fail to ensure reliable matching
due to aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. Specifically, the aleatoric uncertainty
stems from underlying semantic correlations within candidate instances and annotation noise, and the epistemic uncertainty is usually caused by overconfidence in
dominant semantic categories. In this paper, we propose Robust UNcertainty Calibration (RUNC) to quantify the uncertainty and calibrate the imbalanced semantic
distribution. To mitigate semantic ambiguity in similarity distribution between
fusion queries and targets, RUNC maximizes the matching evidence by utilizing a
high-order conjugate prior distribution to fit the semantic covariances in candidate
samples. With the estimated uncertainty coefficient of each candidate, the target
distribution is calibrated to encourage balanced semantic alignment. Additionally,
we minimize the ambiguity in the fusion evidence when forming the unified query
by incorporating orthogonal constraints on explicit textual embeddings and implicit queries, to reduce the representation redundancy. Extensive experiments and
ablation analysis on benchmark datasets FashionIQ and CIRR verify the robustness
of RUNC in predicting reliable retrieval results from a large image gallery.

1

Introduction

The task of composed image retrieval (CIR) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] is emerging as a multi-modal interaction
form to accommodate the flexible search requirements. Distinguished from traditional single-modal
image retrieval or cross-modal retrieval, the queries of CIR support two modalities, i.e., reference
images and modification texts that illustrate alternations on the reference images. To identify the most
correlated images among the massive candidate images, the core objective is to establish semantic
connections between target images and bi-modal queries through similarity measurement and bridge
the heterogeneous modality gap across different modalities within queries. Exploring multi-modal
data integration and natural interaction requirements on this task could provide underlying support
for tasks such as visual question answering (VQA) [6, 7, 8], visual reasoning [9, 10, 11], etc. as the
basis of multi-modal understanding [12].
One widely recognized challenge for composed image retrieval is the comprehension of the semantic
conflict in the bi-modal query. Despite the modality gap in the query composition, the modifications
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

