UFM: A Simple Path towards Unified Dense
Correspondence with Flow
uniflowmatch.github.io
Yuchen Zhang
Nikhil Keetha
Chenwei Lyu
Bhuvan Jhamb
Yutian Chen
Yuheng Qiu
Jay Karhade
Shreyas Jha
Yaoyu Hu
Deva Ramanan
Sebastian Scherer
Wenshan Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
Performance v.s. Inference Time on OF and WB Tasks
EPE on Wide Baseline Data

FlowFormer

UniMatch

SEA-RAFT

Average End-Point-Error (pixels)

EPE on Optical Flow Data

t
Fas
5x urate e
lin
Acc
3x Base
e
Wid

13% Better
Optical Flow

UFM (ours)

RoMa

Inference Time (ms @ A6000)

Figure 1: UFM (Unified Flow & Matching) unifies dense pixel correspondence tasks such as optical
flow and wide-baseline matching. We visualize sets of 2 × 2 grids, where the top 2 images are the
input, and the bottom 2 are images warped with forward & backward flow. UFM is able to match
across a wide range of baselines, including extreme ones with little co-visible overlap.

Abstract
Dense image correspondence is central to many applications, such as visual odometry, 3D reconstruction, object association, and re-identification. Historically, dense
correspondence has been tackled separately for wide-baseline scenarios and optical
flow estimation, despite the common goal of matching content between two images.
In this paper, we develop a Unified Flow & Matching model (UFM), which is
trained on unified data for pixels that are co-visible in both source and target images.
UFM uses a simple, generic transformer architecture that directly regresses the
(u, v) flow. It is easier to train and more accurate for large flows compared to the
typical coarse-to-fine cost volumes in prior work. UFM is 28% more accurate
than state-of-the-art flow methods (Unimatch), while also having 62% less error
and 6.7x faster than dense wide-baseline matchers (RoMa). UFM is the first to
demonstrate that unified training can outperform specialized approaches across
both domains. This result enables fast, general-purpose correspondence and opens
new directions for multi-modal, long-range, and real-time correspondence tasks.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

