Uni-RL: Unifying Online and Offline RL via
Implicit Value Regularization

Haoran Xu∗1 Liyuan Mao∗2 Hui Jin∗3
Weinan Zhang2 Xianyuan Zhan4 Amy Zhang1
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Tsinghua University

Abstract
The practical implementations of reinforcement learning (RL) often face diverse
settings, such as online, offline, and offline-to-online learning. Instead of developing separate algorithms for each setting, we propose Uni-RL, a unified model-free
RL framework that addresses all these scenarios within a single formulation. UniRL builds on the Implicit Value Regularization (IVR) framework (Xu et al., 2023)
and generalizes its dataset behavior constraint to the constraint w.r.t. a reference
policy, yielding a unified value learning objective for general settings. The reference policy is chosen to be the target policy in the online setting and the behavior
policy in the offline setting. Using an iteratively refined behavior policy solves the
over-conservative issue of directly applying IVR in the online setting, it provides
an implicit trust-region style update through the value function while being offpolicy. Uni-RL also introduces a unified policy extraction objective that estimates
in-sample policy gradient using only actions from the reference policy. This not
only supports various policy classes, but also theoretically guarantees less value
estimation error and larger performance improvement over the reference policy. We
evaluate Uni-RL on a range of standard RL benchmarks across online, offline, and
offline-to-online settings. In online RL, Uni-RL achieves higher sample efficiency
than both off-policy methods without trust-region updates and on-policy methods
with trust-region updates. In offline RL, Uni-RL retains the benefits of in-sample
learning while outperforming IVR through better policy extraction. In offlineto-online RL, Uni-RL beats both constraint-based methods and unconstrained
approaches by effectively balancing stability and adaptability.
Code: https://github.com/ryanxhr/Uni-RL

0.0

0.0

Offline-to-online RL
D4RL Antmaze, Kitchen and Adroit.

1.0
0.8

AWAC

IQL

0.2

Cal-QL

0.4

RLPD

0.6

UNIVR

Expert-Normalized

0.2

IQL

0.4

IVR

0.6

Diffusion-QL

PPO

TD3

0.3

SAC

0.6

MPO

0.9

0.8

IDQL

1.2

1.0

Expert-Normalized

1.5

UNIVR

SAC-Normalized

1.8

Offline RL
D4RL MuJoCo and Antmaze

UNIVR

Online RL
Gym, PyBullet, DMControl

0.0

Figure 1: Summary of results. Aggregate mean performance across six common RL benchmarks and 23
environments with diverse characteristics (e.g., observation and action spaces, task types, and offline data
compositions). Error bars indicate the 95% stratified bootstrap confidence interval. UNIVR achieves competitive
performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines across online, offline, and offline-to-online settings.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to haoran.xu@utexas.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

