Purifying Approximate Differential Privacy with
Randomized Post-processing

Yingyu Lin∗, Erchi Wang∗, Yi-An Ma, Yu-Xiang Wang
University of California, San Diego
{yil208, erw011, yianma, yuxiangw}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We propose a framework to convert (ε, δ)-approximate Differential Privacy (DP)
mechanisms into (ε′ , 0)-pure DP mechanisms under certain conditions, a process
we call “purification.” This algorithmic technique leverages randomized postprocessing with calibrated noise to eliminate the δ parameter while achieving nearoptimal privacy-utility tradeoff for pure DP. It enables a new design strategy for
pure DP algorithms: first run an approximate DP algorithm with certain conditions,
and then purify. This approach allows one to leverage techniques such as strong
composition and propose-test-release that require δ > 0 in designing pure-DP
methods with δ = 0. We apply this framework in various settings, including
Differentially Private Empirical Risk Minimization (DP-ERM), stability-based
release, and query release tasks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work with a statistically and computationally efficient reduction from approximate
DP to pure DP. Finally, we illustrate the use of this reduction for proving lower
bounds under approximate DP constraints with explicit dependence in δ, avoiding
the sophisticated fingerprinting code construction.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP), in its original form [DMNS06, Definition 1], has only one privacy parameter
ε. Over the two decades of research in DP, many have advocated that DP is too stringent to be practical
and have proposed several relaxations. Among them, the most popular is arguably the approximate
DP [DKM+ 06], which introduces a second parameter δ.
Definition 1 (Differential privacy [DMNS06, DR+ 14]) A mechanism M satisfies (ε, δ)differential privacy if, for all neighboring datasets D ≃ D′ (datasets differing in at most one entry)
and for any measurable set S ⊆ Range(M), it holds that:
P[M(D) ∈ S] ≤ eε P[M(D′ ) ∈ S] + δ.
When δ = 0, the definition is now fondly referred to as ε-pure DP. Choosing δ > 0 significantly
weakens the protection, as it could leave any event with probability smaller than δ completely
unprotected.
Two common reasons why DP researchers adopt this relaxation are: 1. Utility gain: approximate DP
is perceived to be more practical, as it allows for larger utility; 2. Flexible algorithm design: Many
algorithmic tools (such as advanced composition and Propose-Test-Release) support approximate DP
but not pure DP, which enables more flexible (and often more efficient) algorithm design when δ > 0
is permitted. For these two reasons, it is widely believed that the relaxation is a necessary evil.
We argue that the claim of “worse utility for pure-DP” is oftentimes a myth. In some applications
of DP, a pure-DP mechanism has both stronger utility and stronger privacy. For example, in lowdimensional private histogram release, the Laplace mechanism enjoys smaller variance in almost all
∗

Equal Contribution. Alphabetical order.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

