The Computational Complexity of Counting Linear
Regions in ReLU Neural Networks

Moritz Stargalla
University of Technology Nuremberg
moritz.stargalla@utn.de

Christoph Hertrich
University of Technology Nuremberg
christoph.hertrich@utn.de

Daniel Reichman
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
daniel.reichman@gmail.com

Abstract
An established measure of the expressive power of a given ReLU neural network is
the number of linear regions into which it partitions the input space. There exist
many different, non-equivalent definitions of what a linear region actually is. We
systematically assess which papers use which definitions and discuss how they
relate to each other. We then analyze the computational complexity of counting the
number of such regions for the various definitions. Generally, this turns out to be an
intractable problem. We prove NP- and #P-hardness results already for networks
with one hidden layer and strong hardness of approximation results for two or more
hidden layers. Finally, on the algorithmic side, we demonstrate that counting linear
regions can at least be achieved in polynomial space for some common definitions.

1

Introduction

Neural networks with rectified linear unit (ReLU) activations are among the most common and
fundamental models in modern machine learning. The functions represented by ReLU networks are
continuous and piecewise linear (CPWL), meaning that the input space can be partitioned into finitely
many pieces on each of which the function is affine. Such pieces are called linear regions. This leads
to the following intuition: the more linear regions a neural network can produce, the more complex
problems it is capable of solving. Consequently, starting with Pascanu et al. [2014] and Montúfar
et al. [2014], the number of linear regions became a standard measure of the expressive power of
a ReLU network. Substantial effort has been put into understanding this quantity, e.g., by deriving
upper and lower bounds depending on the network architecture or by developing algorithms to count
it. More information can be found in the surveys Huchette et al. [2023], Balestriero et al. [2025].
Despite the significant interest in understanding the number of linear regions, surprisingly little is
known about the most natural associated computational complexity question: Given a neural network,
what are the time and space requirements needed to determine how many regions it has? The main
objective of our paper is to make progress on this question by proving complexity-theoretical results
on the problem of counting linear regions.
However, before one can even talk about counting linear regions, one has to properly define them.
What sounds like a simple exercise is actually a non-trivial task. In the literature, there exists a variety
of non-equivalent definitions of what counts as a linear region of a ReLU network. For example,
some authors define it via possible sets of active neurons, others define it solely based on the function
represented by the neural network. Some authors require regions to be full-dimensional, or connected,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

