PointMapPolicy: Structured Point Cloud Processing
for Multi-Modal Imitation Learning

Xiaogang Jia1∗ Qian Wang1 Anrui Wang1 Han A. Wang2† Balázs Gyenes1
Emiliyan Gospodinov1 Xinkai Jiang1 Ge Li1 Hongyi Zhou1 Weiran Liao1
Xi Huang1 Maximilian Beck3 Moritz Reuss1 Rudolf Lioutikov1 Gerhard Neumann1
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

2

Reality Labs, Meta

3

Johannes Kepler University Linz

Abstract
Robotic manipulation systems benefit from complementary sensing modalities,
where each provides unique environmental information. Point clouds capture
detailed geometric structure, while RGB images provide rich semantic context.
Current point cloud methods struggle to capture fine-grained detail, especially for
complex tasks, which RGB methods lack geometric awareness, which hinders their
precision and generalization. We introduce PointMapPolicy, a novel approach that
conditions diffusion policies on structured grids of points without downsampling.
The resulting data type makes it easier to extract shape and spatial relationships
from observations, and can be transformed between reference frames. Yet due to
their structure in a regular grid, we enable the use of established computer vision
techniques directly to 3D data. Using xLSTM as a backbone, our model efficiently
fuses the point maps with RGB data for enhanced multi-modal perception. Through
extensive experiments on the RoboCasa, CALVIN benchmarks and real robot
evaluations, we demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
across diverse manipulation tasks. The overview and demos are available on our
project page.

1

Introduction

The advent of diffusion-based Imitation Learning (IL) has allowed robots to carry out complex,
long-horizon tasks from raw image observations [1, 2]. RGB images are a common observation
modality for diffusion policies due to their ubiquitousness and rich semantic information. However,
policies conditioned on only RGB images lack 3D geometric information about the scene. This
3D information is crucial for learning generalizable policies that can act precisely in complex 3D
scenes, especially when using multiple camera views [3–6]. An alternative modality is point clouds,
unstructured sets of 3D points that preserve geometric shape, distances, and spatial relationships. In
addition, points captured from multiple camera views can be transformed into a common reference
frame and concatenated, yielding a natural and powerful way to fuse multiple cameras. Although
numerous works use point clouds as an input modality [7–9], their irregular structure limits the
network architectures that can be used with them. In contrast, RGB images are on a regular grid and
can be processed using convolutional operators, but are susceptible to changes in perspective and
lighting.
Current 3D processing approaches face fundamental limitations that create a critical gap between
3D geometric information and existing 2D vision architectures. Downsampling-based methods [7],
∗
†

Correspondence to jia266163@gmail.com
This work is not related to Han A. Wang’s position at Meta.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

