DuSA: Fast and Accurate Dual-Stage Sparse Attention
Mechanism Accelerating Both Training and Inference

Chong Wu∗
Dept of Electrical Eng
City University of Hong Kong
chongwu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
imroxaswc@gmail.com

Jiawang Cao∗
Opus AI Research
gavin.cao@opus.pro

Zhuoheng Ran
Dept of Electrical Eng
City University of Hong Kong
zhuoheran2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
Wenbo Zhu
Opus AI Research
vito.zhu@opus.pro

Renjie Xu∗
Dept of Electrical Eng
City University of Hong Kong
harryxu950510@gmail.com

Maolin Che†
School of Mathematics and Statistics
Guizhou University
chncml@outlook.com
Hong Yan
Dept of Electrical Eng
City University of Hong Kong
h.yan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper proposes the Dual-Stage Sparse Attention (DuSA) mechanism for attention acceleration of transformers. In the first stage, DuSA performs intrablock
sparse attention to aggregate local inductive biases. In the second stage, DuSA
performs interblock sparse attention to obtain long-range dependencies. Both
stages have low computational complexity and can be further accelerated by memory acceleration attention mechanisms directly, which makes DuSA faster than
some extremely fast attention mechanisms. The dual-stage sparse attention design
provides a lower error in approximating vanilla scaled-dot product attention than
the basic single-stage sparse attention mechanisms and further advances the basic sparse attention mechanisms to match or even outperform vanilla scaled-dot
product attention. Even in some plug and play situations, DuSA can still maintain
low performance loss. DuSA can be used in both training and inference acceleration. DuSA achieves leading performance in different benchmarks: long range
arena, image classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, text to video
generation, and long context understanding, and accelerates models of different
sizes.

1

Introduction

The vanilla scaled-dot product attention (VSA) mechanism [1] is a core technique in transformers
due to its ability to capture and model long-range dependencies [2]. However, the softmax operation
after the scaled-dot product becomes the main bottleneck that makes the computational complexity
of VSA the square of the sequence length and significantly limits efficiency of VSA [3].
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

