FAN: Fourier Analysis Networks

Yihong Dong1∗ , Ge Li1∗ , Yongding Tao1 , Xue Jiang1 , Kechi Zhang1 , Jia Li ♂1 ,
Jinliang Deng2 , Jing Su3 , Jun Zhang3 , Jingjing Xu3
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 ByteDance
dongyh@stu.pku.edu.cn, lige@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable successes of general-purpose neural networks, such as
MLPs and Transformers, we find that they exhibit notable shortcomings in modeling and reasoning about periodic phenomena, achieving only marginal performance
within the training domain and failing to generalize effectively to out-of-domain
(OOD) scenarios. Periodicity is ubiquitous throughout nature and science. Therefore, neural networks should be equipped with the essential ability to model and
handle periodicity. In this work, we propose FAN, a novel neural network that
effectively addresses periodicity modeling challenges while offering broad applicability similar to MLP with fewer parameters and FLOPs. Periodicity is naturally
integrated into FAN’s structure and computational processes by introducing the
Fourier Principle. Unlike existing Fourier-based networks, which possess particular
periodicity modeling abilities but face challenges in scaling to deeper networks and
are typically designed for specific tasks, our approach overcomes this challenge to
enable scaling to large-scale models and maintains the capability to be applied to
more types of tasks. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the superiority of FAN in periodicity modeling tasks and the effectiveness and generalizability
of FAN across a range of real-world tasks. Moreover, we reveal that compared to
existing Fourier-based networks, FAN accommodates both periodicity modeling
and general-purpose modeling well.

1

Introduction

The flourishing of modern machine learning and artificial intelligence is inextricably linked to the
revolutionary advancements in the foundational architecture of general-purpose neural networks.
For instance, multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [Rosenblatt, 1958, Haykin, 1998] plays a pivotal role in
laying the groundwork for current deep learning models, with its expressive power guaranteed by the
universal approximation theorem [Hornik et al., 1989]. Recent claims about the impressive performance of large models on various tasks are typically supported by Transformer architecture [Vaswani
et al., 2017, Touvron et al., 2023, OpenAI, 2023]. In this context, the community’s enthusiasm for
research on neural networks has never diminished. Some emerged neural networks demonstrate
notable capabilities in specific fields [Gu and Dao, 2023, Liu et al., 2024], sparking widespread
discussion within the community.
Beneath the surface of apparent prosperity, we uncover a critical issue that remains in existing
general-purpose neural networks: they struggle to model the periodicity from data, especially in OOD
∗

Equal Contribution
This work was supported by a cooperation project between Peking University and ByteDance Company.
During this time, Yihong was also an intern at ByteDance.
‡
The code is available at https://github.com/YihongDong/FAN
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

