Simultaneous Statistical Inference for Off-Policy
Evaluation in Reinforcement Learning

Tianpai Luo∗ Xinyuan Fan∗ Weichi Wu†
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, China
{ltp21, fxy22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wuweichi@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This work presents the first theoretically justified simultaneous inference framework
for off-policy evaluation (OPE). In contrast to existing methods that focus on point
estimates or pointwise confidence intervals (CIs), the new framework quantifies
global uncertainty across an infinite or continuous initial state space, offering
valid inference over the entire state space. Our method leverages sieve-based
Q-function estimation and (high-dimensional) Gaussian approximation techniques
over convex regions, which further motivates a new multiplier bootstrap algorithm
for constructing asymptotically correct simultaneous confidence regions (SCRs).
The widths of the SCRs exceed those of the pointwise CIs by only a logarithmic
factor, indicating that our procedure is nearly optimal in terms of efficiency. The
effectiveness of the proposed approach is demonstrated through simulations and
analysis of the OhioT1DM dataset.

1

Introduction

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is a fundamental topic in reinforcement learning (RL), aiming to
assess the performance of a target policy using data collected under a different behavior policy,
before adopting the target policy in practice. For this purpose, much effort has been made on the
statistical inference of the value of the target policy, including obtaining an accurate estimate and valid
confidence intervals for quantifying the uncertainty. See Uehara et al. (2022) for a comprehensive
review.
In many real-world applications, such as healthcare (Murphy et al. 2001, Matsouaka et al. 2014, Shi,
Lu & Song 2020), ridesharing (Xu et al. (2018)), and autonomous driving (Sallab et al. (2017)), it is
often necessary to evaluate a policy across a range of initial states. For instance, in the OhioT1DM
dataset (Marling & Bunescu (2020)), each patient begins in a different state of continuous glucose
monitoring (CGM) blood glucose levels and self-reported life events. The evaluation of a potentially
effective off-policy must be conducted without direct deployment, and it requires quantification of
uncertainties across multiple initial states. However, constructing pointwise confidence intervals (CIs)
for each state with Bonferroni correction inflates the overall significance level, which is well-known
as the multiple testing problem. The inflation becomes especially pronounced when the state space is
infinite, for example, R. To address this, we consider the following question:
Is it possible to simultaneously quantify the uncertainty of off-policy value estimators over the entire
state space?
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

