STACI: Spatio-Temporal Aleatoric Conformal
Inference
Brandon R. Feng
North Carolina State University

David Keetae Park
Brookhaven National Laboratory

Xihaier Luo
Brookhaven National Laboratory

Arantxa Urdangarin
University of the Basque Country

Shinjae Yoo
Brookhaven National Laboratory

Brian J. Reich∗
North Carolina State University

Abstract
Fitting Gaussian Processes (GPs) provides interpretable aleatoric uncertainty quantification for estimation of spatio-temporal fields. Spatio-temporal deep learning
models, while scalable, typically assume a simplistic independent covariance
matrix for the response, failing to capture the underlying correlation structure.
However, spatio-temporal GPs suffer from issues of scalability and various forms
of approximation bias resulting from restrictive assumptions of the covariance
kernel function. We propose STACI, a novel framework consisting of a variational
Bayesian neural network approximation of non-stationary spatio-temporal GP
along with a novel spatio-temporal conformal inference algorithm. STACI is highly
scalable, taking advantage of GPU training capabilities for neural network models,
and provides statistically valid prediction intervals for uncertainty quantification.
STACI outperforms competing GPs and deep methods in accurately approximating
spatio-temporal processes and we show it easily scales to datasets with millions of
observations.

1

Introduction

Accurate estimation of spatio-temporal (ST) fields is a complex task that has relevance in a wide
variety of domains [1; 2]. These domains range from, but are not limited to medical imaging[3; 4],
remote sensing [5; 6], climate modeling [7; 8] and video quality [9]. Analysis of ST data is difficult as
there are often obstructions in the field causing missing data, the surface is rarely smooth across both
space and time, and the volume of data requires efficient estimators to be used. These issues have
resulted in the need of flexible models providing both accurate prediction of surfaces and uncertainty
quantification (UQ) providing interpretability of results.
Gaussian Process (GP) regression is heavily used in spatio-temporal statistics [10; 11; 12]. GPs
provide both a flexible predictive surface and precise UQ. Unfortunately, it is not scalable, with the
computational cost of likelihood evaluation being cubic in number of locations. Sparse GPs [13; 14]
trained from a subset of inducing points, spectral GPs [15] that project the GP into a low-rank spectral
domain, and nearest neighbor methods [16; 17] that assume a local dependent structure are three
popular classes of approximate GPs that reduce this cost. In much of the approximate STGP literature,
the covariance kernel is assumed to have some known stationary and separable form to maintain
∗

Corresponding author, bjreich@ncsu.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

