Dimension-free Score Matching and Time
Bootstrapping for Diffusion Models

Syamantak Kumar∗
University of Texas at Austin
syamantak@utexas.edu

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Google DeepMind
dheerajnagaraj@google.com

Purnamrita Sarkar
University of Texas at Austin
purna.sarkar@utexas.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models generate samples by estimating the score function of the target
distribution at various noise levels. The model is trained using samples drawn
from the target distribution, progressively adding noise. Previous sample complexity bounds have a polynomial dependence on the dimension d, apart from
log (|H|), where H is the hypothesis class. In this work, we establish the first
(nearly) dimension-free sample complexity bounds, modulo any dependence due
to log(|H|), for learning these score functions, achieving a double exponential
improvement in dimension over prior results. A key aspect of our analysis is to
use a single function approximator to jointly estimate scores across noise levels,
a critical feature in practice which enables generalization across timesteps. We
introduce a novel martingale-based error decomposition and sharp variance bounds,
enabling efficient learning from dependent data generated by Markov processes,
which may be of independent interest. Building on these insights, we propose
Bootstrapped Score Matching (BSM), a variance reduction technique that utilizes
previously learned scores to improve accuracy at higher noise levels. These results
provide crucial insights into the efficiency and effectiveness of diffusion models
for generative modeling.

1

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models [43, 17] are generative models that have transformed image and
video generation [38, 40, 37, 36], enabling foundation models to produce photorealistic and stylized
images from text prompts. Their adaptability extends diverse domains such as audio [24, 10], text
[13, 15, 29, 49], molecule [18, 19], and layout generation [21, 28]. They generate additional samples
given m i.i.d. samples from a target distribution (π) using a trained neural network that learns the score
function π at different noise levels. In contrast, the classical Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods which seek to sample from a distribution given access to underlying density function. While
MCMC methods can be slow for multi-modal distributions, diffusion models can sample efficiently
with minimal assumptions, provided the score functions are learned accurately [6, 1].
Given m i.i.d. samples from the target distribution, the first step (called the forward process) obtains
noised samples from a noising Markov process converging to the Gaussian distribution at various
noise levels. The second step estimates score functions of the distribution at each noise level using
Denoising Score Matching (DSM) [51]. This approach relies on learning from dependent data from
∗

Work partly done during internship at Google DeepMind

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

