Breaking the Batch Barrier (B3) of Contrastive
Learning via Smart Batch Mining

Raghuveer Thirukovalluru†
Ping Nie §

Semih Yavuz‡

Duke University†

Rui Meng‡∗

Ye Liu‡

Yingbo Zhou‡

Salesforce AI Research‡

Karthikeyan K†

Wenhu Chen¶
Independent§

Mingyi Su¶

Bhuwan Dhingra†

University of Waterloo¶

rt195@duke.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) is a prevalent technique for training embedding models,
which pulls semantically similar examples (positives) closer in the representation
space while pushing dissimilar ones (negatives) further apart. A key source of
negatives are “in-batch” examples, i.e., positives from other examples in the batch.
Effectiveness of such models is hence strongly influenced by the size and quality
of training batches. In this work, we propose Breaking the Batch Barrier (B3), a
novel batch construction strategy designed to curate high-quality batches for CL.
Our approach begins by using a pretrained teacher embedding model to rank all
examples in the dataset, from which a sparse similarity graph is constructed. A
community detection algorithm is then applied to this graph to identify clusters of
examples that serve as strong negatives for one another. The clusters are then used
to construct batches that are rich in in-batch negatives. Empirical results on the
MMEB multimodal embedding benchmark (36 tasks) demonstrate that our method
sets a new state of the art, outperforming previous best methods by +1.3 and +2.9
points at the 7B and 2B model scales, respectively. Notably, models trained with B3
surpass existing state-of-the-art results even with a batch size as small as 64, which
is 4–16× smaller than that required by other methods. Moreover, experiments show
that B3 generalizes well across domains and tasks, maintaining strong performance
even when trained with considerably weaker teachers.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Learning (CL) has emerged as the dominant approach for training embedding models
[5, 2, 8]. It typically operates on data in the form of (query, positive) pairs [29], where the objective
is to minimize the distance between the query’s representation and that of its positive counterpart.
To foster more discriminative representations, CL also incorporates negative examples – instances
which, for a given query, are not its designated positive – by increasing their representational distance
from the query. In practice, other examples within the same batch serve as readily available in-batch
negatives [9]. Furthermore, to significantly enhance the learning signal, “hard negatives” are often
explicitly mined and integrated into the training process [5, 11]. These hard negatives are particularly
challenging examples that share superficial features with the query or its positive, making them easily
confusable with the true positive, yet are semantically distinct.
∗

Now at Google;

Code and Models: https://github.com/raghavlite/B3

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

