Dimensionality Mismatch Between Brains and
Artificial Neural Networks
Santiago Galella
FIAS & Institute of Computer Science
Goethe University Frankfurt
galella@fias.uni-frankfurt.de

Maren Wehrheim∗
Mila & Department of Biology
York University
maren.wehrheim@mila.quebec

Matthias Kaschube*
FIAS & Institute of Computer Science
Goethe University Frankfurt
kaschube@fias.uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract
Biological and artificial vision systems both rely on hierarchical architectures, yet
it remains unclear how their representational geometry evolves across processing
stages, and what functional consequences may arise from potential differences. In
this work, we systematically quantify and compare the linear and nonlinear dimensionality of human brain activity (fMRI) and artificial neural networks (ANNs)
during natural image viewing. In the human ventral visual stream, both dimensionality measures increase along the visual hierarchy, supporting the emergence of
semantic and abstract representations. For linear dimensionality, most ANNs show
a similar increase, but only for pooled features, emphasizing the importance of
appropriate feature readouts in brain–model comparisons. In contrast, nonlinear
dimensionality shows a collapse in the later layers of ANNs, pointing at a mismatch
in representational geometry between the human and artificial visual systems. This
mismatch may have functional consequences: while high-dimensional brain representations support flexible generalization to abstract features, ANNs appear to lose
this capacity in later layers, where their representations become overly compressed.
Overall, our findings propose dimensionality alignment as a benchmark for building
more flexible and biologically grounded vision models.

1

Introduction

The geometry of functional representations has been linked to core computational properties of both
biological and artificial systems, including accuracy, flexibility, and generalization [e.g., 1, 12, 21, 25,
43, 61, 67]. One key geometric property is representational dimensionality, which quantifies how
neural activity is embedded in low- or high-dimensional subspaces in response to different stimuli or
tasks [2, 11]. Various metrics have been proposed to quantify the representational dimensionality
[e.g., 13, 11, 67, 58]. Linear measures such as the effective dimensionality describe how variance is
spread globally, while nonlinear estimates (intrinsic dimensionality) capture the number of degrees
of freedom needed to locally approximate the data manifold. Understanding how these geometric
properties evolve along the visual hierarchy is critical for identifying functional distinctions across
processing stages and for aligning representational principles between brains and models.
In machine learning, the manifold hypothesis posits that high-dimensional inputs lie on lowdimensional manifolds embedded in ambient space [6]. ANNs leverage this by compressing task∗

Joint supervision

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

