Is Grokking a Computational Glass Relaxation?

Xiaotian Zhang1 Yue Shang1,2 Entao Yang3,∗ Ge Zhang1,∗
Department of Physics, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
3
Innovation Campus Delaware, Air Liquide, Newark, DE, USA
1

Abstract
Understanding neural network’s (NN) generalizability remains a central question
in deep learning research. The special phenomenon of grokking, where NNs
abruptly generalize long after the training performance reaches a near-perfect
level, offers a unique window to investigate the underlying mechanisms of NNs’
generalizability. Here we propose an interpretation for grokking by framing it
as a computational glass relaxation: viewing NNs as a physical system where
parameters are the degrees of freedom and train loss is the system energy, we find
memorization process resembles a rapid cooling of liquid into non-equilibrium
glassy state at low temperature and the later generalization is like a slow relaxation
towards a more stable configuration. This mapping enables us to sample NNs’
Boltzmann entropy (density of states) landscape as a function of training loss and
test accuracy. Our experiments in transformers on arithmetic tasks suggests that
there is NO entropy barrier in the memorization-to-generalization transition of
grokking, challenging previous theory that defines grokking as a first-order phase
transition [1]. We identify a high-entropy advantage under grokking, an extension
of prior work linking entropy to generalizability but much more significant [2].
Inspired by grokking’s far-from-equilibrium nature, we develop a toy optimizer,
WanD, based on Wang-Landau Molecular Dynamics, which can eliminate grokking
without any constraints and find high-norm generalizing solutions. This provides
strictly-defined counterexamples to theory attributing grokking solely to weight
norm evolution towards the Goldilocks zone [3] and also suggests new potential
ways for optimizer design.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning generally relies on heavily overparameterized neural networks (NNs), which
presents surprisingly strong generalization capabilities across diverse tasks [4, 5, 6, 7]. Therefore,
understanding the mechanism behind this generalizability is crucial for further advancement in the
field. While model generalization performance typically improves with the training performance
simultaneously, the grokking phenomenon exhibits dramatically different dynamics, providing an
intriguing case for the investigation of generalization. Grokking was first reported in modular
arithmetic tasks where researchers used a transformer model [8]. The model can rapidly reach
nearly 100% training accuracy but the test accuracy remains very low, suggesting that the model
only memorizes the training dataset without actually understanding them. However, after extensive
further training, the model exhibits a sudden transition to a state of high generalization where the test
accuracy is (almost) at perfect level. This significantly delayed generalization distinguishes grokking
from typical learning processes and raises fundamental challenges towards the existing generalization
theory [8, 9, 10].
∗

Corresponding authors: entao.yang@airliquide.com, gzhang37@cityu.edu.hk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

