Datasets, Documents, and Repetitions:
The Practicalities of Unequal Data Quality

Alex Fang1,2 Hadi Pouransari1 Matt Jordan3
Alexander Toshev1 Vaishaal Shankar4 Ludwig Schmidt2 Tom Gunter1
1
Apple 2 Stanford 3 work done while at UT Austin 4 work done while at Apple

Abstract
Data filtering has become a powerful tool for improving model performance while
reducing computational cost. However, as large language model compute budgets
continue to grow, the limited data volume provided by heavily filtered and deduplicated datasets will become a practical constraint. In efforts to better understand how
to proceed, we study model performance at various compute budgets and across
multiple pre-training datasets created through data filtering and deduplication. We
find that, given appropriate modifications to the training recipe, repeating existing
aggressively filtered datasets for up to ten epochs can outperform training on the ten
times larger superset for a single epoch across multiple compute budget orders of
magnitude. While this finding relies on repeating the dataset for many epochs, we
also investigate repeats within these datasets at the document level. We find that not
all documents within a dataset are equal, and we can create better datasets relative
to a token budget by explicitly manipulating the counts of individual documents.
We conclude by arguing that even as large language models scale, data filtering
remains an important direction of research.

1

Introduction

Scaling data and compute has been the winning recipe for producing state of the art machine learning
models. As costs increase with diminishing returns, recent work often points to high-quality data as a
key factor for high model performance [30, 6]. One method of obtaining high quality data is through
data filtering. However, as frontier level large language models (LLMs) scale in compute through
increases in both parameter count and token count, there are concerns that we will run out of training
data. Data filtering reduces the dataset size, creating a tension between data quality and data quantity.
It is currently unclear whether the performance gains from data filtering can be sustained at scale
through repetitions as an attempt to compensate for the reduction in dataset size.
Recent work has studied data filtering as a means of efficiently training strong models with limited
compute [8, 15]. However, it is unclear if the findings are practical for training larger models.
Unfortunately, existing frontier level LLMs lack transparency when it comes to their data filtering
pipelines [30, 6, 1, 16]. This gap in knowledge adds to concerns about the practicality of data filtering
on a scale.
Understanding the interaction between data filtering and scaling would be made easier if we better
understood what it means to be a better dataset. Currently, the quality of a dataset is determined by
using standardized benchmarks to evaluate the performance of a model trained on it. However, there
are other traits we desire in the data beyond the performance of the raw downstream model, such as
repeatability and performance over replacement. Developing a better understanding of these traits
would allow for a more principled construction of better datasets.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

