On the Coexistence and Ensembling of Watermarks

Aleksandar PetrovA,O Shruti AgarwalA Philip TorrO Adel BibiO John CollomosseA,S
A

Adobe Research,

O

University of Oxford,

S

University of Surrey

Abstract
Watermarking, the practice of embedding imperceptible information into media
such as images, videos, audio, and text, is essential for intellectual property protection, content provenance and attribution. The growing complexity of digital
ecosystems necessitates watermarks for different uses to be embedded in the same
media. However, to detect and decode all watermarks, they need to coexist well
with one another. We perform the first study of coexistence of deep image watermarking methods and, contrary to intuition, we find that various open-source
watermarks can coexist with only minor impacts on image quality and decoding
robustness. The coexistence of watermarks also opens the avenue for ensembling
watermarking methods. We show how ensembling can increase the overall message
capacity and enable new trade-offs between capacity, accuracy, robustness and
image quality, without needing to retrain the base models.

1

Introduction

Watermarking, the encoding of information into media such as images (Zhu et al., 2018), video
(Doerr and Dugelay, 2003; Luo et al., 2023), audio (Hua et al., 2016) or text (Liu et al., 2024) in
imperceptible ways, has long been a cornerstone tool for intellectual property protection. While
watermarking is not a new technology, it is experiencing a resurgence in interest as a result of the
recent growth of AI-generated content and the increased societal expectations and scrutiny (Longpre
et al., 2024). Watermarking has been proposed as a tool for restoring stripped content provenance
metadata (Collomosse and Parsons, 2024), and for content attribution, where it can be used to trace
what training data influenced a newly generated sample (Asnani et al., 2024). In spite of concerns
about stripping and spoofing watermarks (Zhao et al., 2023), standards such as C2PA (C2PA, 2025)
implement solutions with visual similarity search, manifest databases, and robust fingerprinting.
Watermarking adoption is increasing, especially if legally required as recently proposed (Ricketts,
2023; Wicks, 2024), making it necessary to consider complex ecosystems of watermark providers.
However, in a world with many watermarking algorithms, a user, or more likely, their web browser,
would not know which detector to use. As such, a sign-posting super watermark added alongside
the original watermark can indicate how the original watermark has been encoded and what detector
should be used to decode it. Furthermore, different actors need to encode different watermarks in
the same media, e.g. the author might want to add content provenance watermark, the distributor
could apply an intellectual property tracking watermark, and a generative model developer might
need a content attribution watermark. Hence, we will likely see more and more cases of multiple
watermarks in the same media.
Embedding multiple watermarks in one image requires their coexistence without mutual interference,
enabling independent and accurate decoding of every watermark. Yet, the coexistence of multiple deep
learning-based watermarks has not been studied, possibly with the assumption that they overwrite
each other. That is why we conducted a comprehensive analysis demonstrating they can indeed
effectively coexist within the same image. While coexistence incurs minor reductions in image
quality and decoding robustness, it persists even when controlling for these factors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

