Protocols for Verifying Smooth Strategies in Bandits
and Games
Miranda Christ
Columbia University
mchrist@cs.columbia.edu

Daniel Reichman
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
daniel.reichman@gmail.com

Jonathan Shafer
MIT
shaferjo@mit.edu

Abstract
We study protocols for verifying approximate optimality of strategies in multiarmed bandits and normal-form games. As the number of actions available to each
player is often large, we seek protocols where the number of queries to the utility
oracle is sublinear in the number of actions. We prove that such verification is
possible for sufficiently smooth strategies that do not put too much probability
mass on any specific action and provide protocols for verifying that a smooth
policy for a multi-armed bandit is close to optimal. Our verification protocols
require provably fewer arm queries than learning. Furthermore, we show how to
use cryptographic tools to reduce the communication cost of our protocols. We
complement our protocol by proving a nearly tight lower bound on the query
complexity of verification in our settings. As an application, we use our bandit
verification protocol to build a protocol for verifying approximate optimality of a
strong smooth Nash equilibrium, with sublinear query complexity.

1

Introduction

An overabundance of available actions makes decision-making challenging in numerous settings,
from consumer choice to logistical operations and public policy. To gain information about the
(often stochastic) reward an action entails, an agent can simply perform that action and experience
the outcome. However, in many situations it is infeasible for an agent with limited resources to try
even a small fraction of the set of available actions. One method to mitigate such choice overload
is to rely on an external source providing information about the utility of actions. For example,
one may consult recommendations from other customers when deciding whether to purchase a
product, or solicit advice from consulting firms when formulating a business strategy or public
policy. This information however, may be unreliable, and it is not clear how to efficiently verify its
accuracy. Namely, can one outsource information collection to an untrusted external party, and verify
correctness by independently assessing the utility of just a few actions?
Verifying utility estimates arises in machine learning (ML) applications as well. For example, an
end user may delegate ML training to a better-resourced but untrusted external party [Goldwasser
et al., 2021, 2015]. In reinforcement learning, a training algorithm might return a set of estimates
for the rewards of possible actions. Once again, a challenge for the user is to verify the fidelity of
these estimates, which could be inaccurate for numerous reasons. For example, the external party
could be malicious, careless and susceptible to errors, or the training algorithm may be faulty. To
address this challenge, a line of research develops learning methods that are robust to adversarial
data corruption [Charikar et al., 2017, Canetti and Karchmer, 2021]. The specific case of corrupted
rewards (utilities) in multi-armed bandits has received attention as well [Jun et al., 2018, Zhang et al.,
2022].
Similar verification issues emerge in multiagent settings studied in game theory, where each agent’s
utility may depend on the other agents’ actions. An object of central interest in such settings is the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

