AutoSciDACT: Automated Scientific Discovery
through Contrastive Embedding and Hypothesis
Testing

Samuel Bright-Thonney1,2 Christina Reissel1 Gaia Grosso1,2 Nathaniel Woodward1,3
Katya Govorkova1 Andrzej Novak1 Sang Eon Park1 Eric Moreno1 Philip Harris1,2
1
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
The NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
3
Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison

Abstract
Novelty detection in large scientific datasets faces two key challenges: the noisy
and high-dimensional nature of experimental data, and the necessity of making
statistically robust statements about any observed outliers. While there is a wealth
of literature on anomaly detection via dimensionality reduction, most methods do
not produce outputs compatible with quantifiable claims of scientific discovery. In
this work we directly address these challenges, presenting the first step towards a
unified pipeline for novelty detection adapted for the rigorous statistical demands
of science. We introduce AutoSciDACT (Automated Scientific Discovery with
Anomalous Contrastive Testing), a general-purpose pipeline for detecting novelty in
scientific data. AutoSciDACT begins by creating expressive low-dimensional data
representations using a contrastive pre-training, leveraging the abundance of highquality simulated data in many scientific domains alongside expertise that can guide
principled data augmentation strategies. These compact embeddings then enable
an extremely sensitive machine learning-based two-sample test using the New
Physics Learning Machine (NPLM) framework, which identifies and statistically
quantifies deviations in observed data relative to a reference distribution (null
hypothesis). We perform experiments across a range of astronomical, physical,
biological, image, and synthetic datasets, demonstrating strong sensitivity to small
injections of anomalous data across all domains.

1

Introduction

Scientific discovery is often characterized by serendipity: an unexpected observation turns out
to have a profound impact on a field, leading to rapid progress or discovery. Today’s data-rich
scientific landscape is potentially brimming with curious or unexplained observations, but the scale
and complexity of available data increasingly obscures genuine novelties behind statistical noise
or incidental fluctuations. As scientific datasets continue to grow, so too grows the challenge of
uncovering meaningful unexplained phenomena.
The scientific method traditionally provides a structured framework for discovery, encompassing
observation, inquiry, research, hypothesis formulation, experimentation, and conclusion (top row of
Fig. 1). Effective implementation of this method relies on human intuition and domain expertise to
identify relevant observables and devise meaningful experiments. However, given the magnitude of
modern datasets, the process would significantly benefit from automated tools to efficiently identify
the most promising regions for discovery.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

