FALQON: Accelerating LoRA Fine-tuning with
Low-Bit Floating-Point Arithmetic

Kanghyun Choi

Hyeyoon Lee

SunJong Park

Dain Kwon

Jinho Lee

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
{kanghyun.choi, hylee817, ryan0507, dain.kwon, leejinho}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Low-bit floating-point (FP) formats, such as FP8, provide significant acceleration
and memory savings in model training thanks to native hardware support on modern
GPUs and NPUs. However, we analyze that FP8 quantization offers speedup
primarily for large-dimensional matrix multiplications, while inherent quantization
overheads diminish speedup when applied to low-rank adaptation (LoRA), which
uses small-dimensional matrices for efficient fine-tuning of large language models
(LLMs). To address this limitation, we propose FALQON, a novel framework that
eliminates the quantization overhead from separate LoRA computational paths
by directly merging LoRA adapters into an FP8-quantized backbone during finetuning. Furthermore, we reformulate the forward and backward computations for
merged adapters to significantly reduce quantization overhead, and introduce a
row-wise proxy update mechanism that efficiently integrates substantial updates
into the quantized backbone. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that FALQON
achieves approximately a 3× training speedup over existing quantized LoRA
methods with a similar level of accuracy, providing a practical solution for efficient
large-scale model fine-tuning. Moreover, FALQON’s end-to-end FP8 workflow
removes the need for post-training quantization, facilitating efficient deployment.
Code is available at https://github.com/iamkanghyunchoi/falqon.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable progress
across a wide range of natural language understanding and generation tasks. Despite these achievements, the massive parameter counts in LLMs require prohibitively large computational and memory
resources, posing significant challenges for both training and deployment. In many real-world settings,
even those with a reasonable amount of computational resources, training or fine-tuning such massive
models becomes especially challenging [6, 13, 40].
One promising way to reduce the computational burden of LLM fine-tuning is through low-precision
floating-point (FP) [29, 33, 34], such as FP8, which can theoretically double the throughput of FP16
matrix multiplication thanks to the hardware support of modern GPUs and NPUs. However, it is
known that FP8 quantization primarily accelerates large-dimensional matrix multiplication, while
small-dimensional computations suffer from unexpected slowdown. This is due to quantization
overhead, which requires a reduction operation followed by element-wise scaling of a given tensor.
Therefore, FP8 quantization becomes effective when computational gains surpass the overhead, which
empirically occurs when each dimension of the matrices exceeds approximately 4K elements [43].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

