Exploring the Noise Robustness of Online
Conformal Prediction

1

Huajun Xi1 , Kangdao Liu1,2 , Hao Zeng1 , Wenguang Sun3 , Hongxin Wei1∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
3
Center for Data Science, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Conformal prediction is an emerging technique for uncertainty quantification that
constructs prediction sets guaranteed to contain the true label with a predefined
probability. Recent work develops online conformal prediction methods that
adaptively construct prediction sets to accommodate distribution shifts. However,
existing algorithms typically assume perfect label accuracy which rarely holds in
practice. In this work, we investigate the robustness of online conformal prediction
under uniform label noise with a known noise rate. We show that label noise
causes a persistent gap between the actual mis-coverage rate and the desired rate α,
leading to either overestimated or underestimated coverage guarantees. To address
this issue, we propose a novel loss function robust pinball loss, which provides
an unbiased estimate of clean pinball loss without requiring ground-truth labels.
Theoretically, we demonstrate that robust pinball loss enables online conformal
prediction to eliminate the coverage gap under uniform label noise, achieving a
convergence rate of O(T −1/2 ) for both empirical and expected coverage errors
(i.e., absolute deviation of the empirical and expected mis-coverage rate from the
target level α). This loss offers a general solution to the uniform label noise, and
is complementary to existing online conformal prediction methods. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that robust pinball loss enhances the noise robustness
of various online conformal prediction methods by achieving a precise coverage
guarantee and improved efficiency.

1

Introduction

Machine learning techniques are revolutionizing decision-making in high-stakes domains, such as
autonomous driving [1] and medical diagnostics [2]. It is crucial to ensure the reliability of model
predictions in these contexts, as wrong predictions can result in serious consequences. While various
techniques have been developed for uncertainty estimation, including confidence calibration [3]
and Bayesian neural networks [4], they typically lack rigorous theoretical guarantees. Conformal
prediction addresses this limitation by establishing a systematic framework to construct prediction
sets with provable coverage guarantee [5, 6, 7, 8]. Notably, this framework requires no parametric
assumptions about the data distribution and can be applied to any black-box predictor, which makes
it a powerful technique for uncertainty quantification.
Recent research extends conformal prediction to online setting where the data arrives in a sequential
order [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. These methods provably achieve the desired coverage property under
arbitrary distributional changes. However, previous studies typically assume perfect label accuracy,
an assumption that seldom holds true in practice due to the common occurrence of noisy labels in
online learning [15, 16, 17]. Recent work [18] proves that online conformal prediction can achieve a
∗

Correspondence to: Hongxin Wei <weihx@sustech.edu.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

