MindForge: Empowering Embodied Agents with
Theory of Mind for Lifelong Cultural Learning

Mircea Lică*
Delft University of Technology
mlica@tudelft.nl

Ojas Shirekar*
Delft University of Technology
o.k.shirekar@tudelft.nl

Baptiste Colle
Delft University of Technology
collebaptiste@gmail.com

Chirag Raman
Delft University of Technology
c.a.raman@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Embodied agents powered by large language models (LLMs), such as Voyager,
promise open-ended competence in worlds such as Minecraft. However, when
powered by open-weight LLMs they still falter on elementary tasks after domainspecific fine-tuning. We propose M IND F ORGE, a generative-agent framework for
cultural lifelong learning through explicit perspective taking. We introduce three
key innovations: (1) a structured theory of mind representation linking percepts,
beliefs, desires, and actions; (2) natural inter-agent communication; and (3) a
multi-component memory system. Following the cultural learning framework, we
test M IND F ORGE in both instructive and collaborative settings within Minecraft.
In an instructive setting with GPT-4, M IND F ORGE agents powered by open-weight
LLMs significantly outperform their Voyager counterparts in basic tasks yielding
3× more tech-tree milestones and collecting 2.3× more unique items than the
Voyager baseline. Furthermore, in fully collaborative settings, we find that the
performance of two underachieving agents improves with more communication
rounds, echoing the Condorcet Jury Theorem. M IND F ORGE agents demonstrate
sophisticated behaviors, including expert-novice knowledge transfer, collaborative
problem solving, and adaptation to out-of-distribution tasks through accumulated
cultural experiences.

1

Introduction

The development of generally capable agents marks a significant shift in advancing artificial intelligence, transitioning from assimilating data to generating novel knowledge through embodied
interactions with open-ended environments [1–4]. Classical approaches leveraging reinforcement
learning [5, 6] and imitation learning [7] often struggle with generalization and exploration, as agents
tend to converge on repetitive behaviors in static environments [8]. To address these limitations,
researchers have sought to emulate human-like lifelong learning capabilities, developing systems
that can continuously acquire, update, and transfer knowledge over extended periods [9, 10].The
advent of large language models (LLMs) has accelerated this pursuit, enabling the development of
agents such as Voyager [11] that can apply internet-scale knowledge to continuously explore, plan,
and acquire new skills in partially observable, open-ended environments such as Minecraft.
Despite their promise, we argue that state-of-the-art lifelong learning agents like Voyager face a
crucial limitation: they learn in isolation, neglecting a fundamental aspect of human intelligence—the
*

Equal Contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

