SPMDM: Enhancing Masked Diffusion Models
through Simplifying Sampling Path

1

Yichen Zhu 1,3,* Weiyu Chen 2,* James Kwok 2 Zhou Zhao 1,3,†
Zhejiang University 2 HKUST 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{yc_zhu, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn
{wchenbx, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Autoregressive models (ARMs) show strong capabilities in many domains but
face challenges with planning and complex reasoning due to their sequential
generation. Masked diffusion models (MDMs) address these issues by enabling
controllable, any-order, and parallel generation but encounter training difficulties
as token prediction complexity varies with unmasked token positions. This work
identifies two key characteristics of efficient MDM sampling paths: prioritizing
tokens near unmasked ones and generating subsequence earlier in reasoning. We
propose the Simple Path Masked Diffusion Model (SPMDM), which partitions
sequences into fixed-length, non-overlapping subsequences and applies varying
noise scales to learn token-level and cross-subsequence dependencies. Experiments
on synthetic data and tasks like Countdown and Sudoku show SPMDM captures
structural rules effectively, significantly outperforming existing MDMs and ARMs,
with competitive results on broader reasoning benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive models (ARMs) have ushered in a new era of artificial intelligence, demonstrating
remarkable performance in applications such as high-quality text generation [33, 3, 43, 7], code
generation [35], and chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning for mathematical problem solving [45].
Despite the remarkable achievements and widespread real-world applications of autoregressive
models, the left-to-right generation paradigm continues to suffer from several inherent limitations [21,
40, 8, 20, 46]. Notable challenges include difficulties in future planning, complex reasoning and selfcorrection [22, 6, 47]. These constraints have spurred researchers to explore alternative architectures
for next-generation LLMs.
A compelling direction in current research focuses on the development of masked diffusion models
(MDMs) [5, 26, 25, 30, 36]. Researchers have drawn inspiration from the remarkable success of
diffusion models in image generation [19, 42, 34, 14] and have increasingly focused on exploring
MDMs for discrete sequence generation. In contrast to AR models, which generate tokens sequentially, a unifying insight across these models is the potential of diffusion language models (DLMs)
for controllable [29, 44], any-order, and parallel text generation [28, 16, 27]. Notably, DLMs exhibit
promising capabilities in complex reasoning and global planning [48, 51], thereby addressing key
limitations inherent in the AR approach.
However, training MDMs is inherently more challenging than training ARMs [23]. While ARMs
aim to predict the next token given an unmasked prefix, MDMs are tasked with predicting a token
conditioned on a set of unmasked tokens located at arbitrary positions. In other words, unlike ARMs,
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

