The emergence of sparse attention:
impact of data distribution and benefits of repetition

Nicolas Zucchet∗
ETH Zürich

Francesco D’Angelo
EPFL

Andrew Lampinen†
Google DeepMind

Stephanie Chan†
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Emergence is a fascinating property of large language models and neural networks
more broadly: as models scale and train for longer, they sometimes develop new
abilities in sudden ways. Despite initial studies, we still lack a comprehensive
understanding of how and when these abilities emerge. To address this gap, we
study the emergence over training of sparse attention, a critical and frequently
observed attention pattern in Transformers. By combining theoretical analysis of a
toy model with empirical observations on small Transformers trained on a linear
regression variant, we uncover the mechanics driving sparse attention emergence
and reveal that emergence timing follows power laws based on task structure,
architecture, and optimizer choice. We additionally find that repetition can greatly
speed up emergence. Finally, we confirm these results on a well-studied in-context
associative recall task. Our findings provide a simple, theoretically grounded
framework for understanding how data distributions and model design influence
the learning dynamics behind one form of emergence.
Scaling has been central to the recent success of large language models [1–5], with scaling laws [6, 7]
describing how increased model size, data, and training consistently improve average performance.
However, beneath this macroscopic predictability, model performance on specific tasks often reveals
capabilities that appear suddenly beyond critical scaling thresholds – a phenomenon known as
emergence [8–11]. While recent studies have begun to characterize how emergence can appear after
a critical training time [12–18], a comprehensive scientific understanding remains elusive.
This work explores sparse attention as a lens to understand emergence during training. The formation
of sparse attention – where Transformers’ attention layers focus on a small subset of critical tokens –
coincides with sudden performance improvements in many emergent behaviors, including in-context
learning abilities [12, 15] and factual recall [18]. We investigate why the development of sparse
attention can lead to abrupt performance improvements and reveal how characteristics of the training
data influence the speed of emergence. We make two key contributions:
– We design a variant of linear regression that specifically requires Transformers to learn to focus
on a few tokens within the context (Section 2). This analytically tractable task allows us to
mathematically characterize, in a toy model, the mechanics behind the emergence of sparse
attention and precisely quantify how shorter sequences and repetition accelerate emergence.
– We apply our sparse attention framework to explain the emergence of in-context learning in an
associative recall task (Section 3). Our theoretical predictions successfully account for how data
influences the emergence speed of the induction head that solves this task.
Overall, our results suggest that sparse attention may provide a unifying perspective for understanding
seemingly diverse emergence phenomena in large language models. They additionally highlight the
potential practical benefits of repetition for accelerating the formation of specific neural circuits.
∗

Correspondance to nzucchet@ethz.ch. † Advisory capacity only.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

