Keep It on a Leash: Controllable Pseudo-label
Generation Towards Realistic Long-Tailed
Semi-Supervised Learning

1

Yaxin Hou1 , Bo Han1 , Yuheng Jia1,2,3∗, Hui Liu3 , Junhui Hou4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Computing Information Sciences, Saint Francis University, Hong Kong, China
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
yaxin@seu.edu.cn, hanbo@seu.edu.cn, yhjia@seu.edu.cn,
h2liu@sfu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Current long-tailed semi-supervised learning methods assume that labeled data
exhibit a long-tailed distribution, and unlabeled data adhere to a typical predefined
distribution (i.e., long-tailed, uniform, or inverse long-tailed). However, the distribution of the unlabeled data is generally unknown and may follow an arbitrary
distribution. To tackle this challenge, we propose a Controllable Pseudo-label
Generation (CPG) framework, expanding the labeled dataset with the progressively
identified reliable pseudo-labels from the unlabeled dataset and training the model
on the updated labeled dataset with a known distribution, making it unaffected by
the unlabeled data distribution. Specifically, CPG operates through a controllable
self-reinforcing optimization cycle: (i) at each training step, our dynamic controllable filtering mechanism selectively incorporates reliable pseudo-labels from the
unlabeled dataset into the labeled dataset, ensuring that the updated labeled dataset
follows a known distribution; (ii) we then construct a Bayes-optimal classifier
using logit adjustment based on the updated labeled data distribution; (iii) this
improved classifier subsequently helps identify more reliable pseudo-labels in the
next training step. We further theoretically prove that this optimization cycle can
significantly reduce the generalization error under some conditions. Additionally,
we propose a class-aware adaptive augmentation module to further improve the
representation of minority classes, and an auxiliary branch to maximize data utilization by leveraging all labeled and unlabeled samples. Comprehensive evaluations
on various commonly used benchmark datasets show that CPG achieves consistent
improvements, surpassing state-of-the-art methods by up to 15.97% in accuracy.
The code is available at https://github.com/yaxinhou/CPG.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, semi-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a mainstream paradigm for
enhancing the performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) in label-scarce domains like medical
diagnosis [1, 2, 3] by leveraging abundant unlabeled data. The dominant SSL framework utilizes unlabeled samples by generating pseudo-labels from high-confidence model predictions [4, 5, 6]. However,
conventional SSL methods [7, 8, 9] rely on the unrealistic assumption of balanced and aligned distri∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

