SkyLadder: Better and Faster Pretraining via
Context Window Scheduling

Tongyao Zhu1,2 Qian Liu2∗ Haonan Wang1 Shiqi Chen3
Xiangming Gu1 Tianyu Pang2 Min-Yen Kan1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Sea AI Lab 3 City University of Hong Kong
tongyao.zhu@u.nus.edu; liuqian.sea@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in LLM pretraining have featured ever-expanding context
windows to process longer sequences. However, our controlled study reveals that
models pretrained with shorter context windows consistently outperform their
long-context counterparts under a fixed token budget. This finding motivates
us to explore an optimal context window scheduling strategy to better balance
long-context capability with pretraining efficiency. To this end, we propose SkyLadder, a simple yet effective approach that implements a short-to-long context
window transition. SkyLadder preserves strong standard benchmark performance,
while matching or exceeding baseline results on long-context tasks. Through extensive experiments, we pretrain 1B-parameter models (up to 32K context) and
3B-parameter models (8K context) on 100B tokens, demonstrating that SkyLadder
yields consistent gains of up to 3.7% on common benchmarks, while achieving up
to 22% faster training speeds compared to baselines2 .

1

Introduction

The evolution of language models has been marked by a consistent expansion in context window sizes
(Figure 1 left). While early models like GPT [39] and BERT [8] were limited to context windows of
512 tokens, subsequent models have pushed significantly beyond these bounds. GPT-2 [40] doubled
this capacity to 1024 tokens, and with Large Language Models (LLMs) exceeding 1B parameters,
this trend has continued: Llama [51] has a 2048-token window, followed by Llama-2 [52] (4096
tokens), and Llama-3 [13] (8192 tokens). The need for models to handle longer sequences during
inference has fueled the rush to expand the context window. As models pretrained with longer context
windows reduce document truncation and preserve coherence [9], there is a widespread belief that
such models should perform comparably to, or even surpass, their shorter-context counterparts.
We question the common belief that larger context windows do actually improve performance. Close
inspection of previous work reveals that there has yet to be a fair experimental setup for comparing
models across different context windows while adhering to a fixed token budget. Using tightly
controlled experiments, we test how changing only the context window size during pretraining
impacts their performance. As shown in Figure 1 (right), our results indicate that models pretrained
using shorter contexts always outperform long-context models, when assessed by their average
performance across popular benchmarks. In addition, we verify that the performance gap is not
eliminated by using advanced document packing strategies [13, 9, 44].
To ensure the model can ultimately process long sequences, the model still needs to be exposed to
long sequences. However, given the finding that shorter context windows enhance performance on
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Project code is at https://github.com/sail-sg/SkyLadder

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

