Energy Matching: Unifying Flow Matching and
Energy-Based Models for Generative Modeling

Michal Balcerak
University of Zurich
michal.balcerak@uzh.ch
Suprosanna Shit
University of Zurich

Tamaz Amiranashvili
University of Zurich
Technical University of Munich
Lea Bogensperger
University of Zurich

Petros Koumoutsakos
Harvard University

Antonio Terpin
ETH Zurich

Sebastian Kaltenbach
Harvard University
Bjoern Menze
University of Zurich

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art generative models map noise to data distributions by matching flows or scores. A key limitation of these models is their inability to readily
integrate available partial observations and additional priors. In contrast, energybased models (EBMs) address this by incorporating corresponding scalar energy
terms. Here, we propose Energy Matching, a framework that endows flow-based
approaches with the flexibility of EBMs. Far from the data manifold, samples move
from noise to data along irrotational, optimal transport paths. As they approach
the data manifold, an entropic energy term guides the system into a Boltzmann
equilibrium distribution, explicitly capturing the underlying likelihood structure of
the data. We parameterize these dynamics with a single time-independent scalar
field, which serves as both a powerful generator and a flexible prior for effective
regularization of inverse problems. The present method substantially outperforms
existing EBMs on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet generation in terms of fidelity, while
retaining simulation-free training of transport-based approaches away from the
data manifold. Furthermore, we leverage the flexibility of the method to introduce
an interaction energy that supports the exploration of diverse modes, which we
demonstrate in a controlled protein generation setting. This approach learns a scalar
potential energy, without time conditioning, auxiliary generators, or additional networks, marking a significant departure from recent EBM methods. We believe this
simplified yet rigorous formulation significantly advances EBMs capabilities and
paves the way for their wider adoption in generative modeling in diverse domains.

1

Introduction

Generative models learn to map from a simple, easy-to-sample distribution, such as a Gaussian, to
a desired data distribution. They do so by approximating the optimal transport (OT) map—such as
in flow matching [Lipman et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2023, Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden, 2023]—or
through iterative noising and denoising schemes, such as in diffusion models [Ho et al., 2020, Song
et al., 2021]. In addition to being highly effective in sample generation, diffusion- and flow-based
models have also been used as priors to regularize poorly posed inverse problems [Chung et al., 2023,
Mardani et al., 2024, Ben-Hamu et al., 2024]. However, these models do not explicitly capture the
unconditional data score and instead model the score of smoothed manifolds at different noise levels.
The measurement likelihood, on the other hand, is not tractable on these noised manifolds. As a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

