Trust Region Reward Optimization and
Proximal Inverse Reward Optimization Algorithm ∗
Yang Chen1† ‡ Menglin Zou2 † Jiaqi Zhang3 Yitan Zhang2 Junyi Yang2
Gaël Gendron2 Libo Zhang2 Jiamou Liu2 Michael J. Witbrock2
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 University of Auckland 3 Chongqing University
chenyang4@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) learns a reward function to explain expert
demonstrations. Modern IRL methods often use the adversarial (minimax) formulation that alternates between reward and policy optimization, which often lead
to unstable training. Recent non-adversarial IRL approaches improve stability by
jointly learning reward and policy via energy-based formulations but lack formal
guarantees. This work bridges this gap. We first present a unified view showing
canonical non-adversarial methods explicitly or implicitly maximize the likelihood
of expert behavior, which is equivalent to minimizing the expected return gap.
This insight leads to our main contribution: Trust Region Reward Optimization
(TRRO), a framework that guarantees monotonic improvement in this likelihood
via a Minorization-Maximization process. We instantiate TRRO into Proximal
Inverse Reward Optimization (PIRO), a practical and stable IRL algorithm. Theoretically, TRRO provides the IRL counterpart to the stability guarantees of Trust
Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) in forward RL. Empirically, PIRO matches or
surpasses state-of-the-art baselines in reward recovery, policy imitation with high
sample efficiency on MuJoCo and Gym-Robotics benchmarks and a real-world
animal behavior modeling task. 1

1

Introduction

Learning optimal policies from fixed reward functions is reinforcement learning (RL); learning
rewards from fixed expert policies is inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [28]. Modern IRL methods
[12, 40, 33] often take a minimax game formulation and a bi-level optimization procedure, where
a reward function (min player) is adversarially optimized to differentiate between a best-response
policy (max player, an RL subroutine) and the expert policy via their expected return gap (a.k.a. the
imitation gap [39]). Due to the advantages of interpretability, robustness to dynamics shifts [1], and
out-of-distribution generalization [6], these methods have been effectively applied in autonomous
driving [21], robotics [7], and reward modeling in language models [38]. However, despite its
theoretical grounding and practical appeal, adversarial training introduces optimization instability due
to brittle approximations and high sensitivity to hyperparameters, hindering reliable reward recovery.
∗
Title used at submission and review: PIRO: Toward Stable Reward Learning for Inverse RL via Monotonic
Policy Divergence Reduction.
†
Main contributors. Yang Chen developed the theorems, completed the proofs, wrote the paper, and
implemented the initial version of the algorithm. Menglin Zou led the experimental evaluation. Jiaqi Zhang and
Junyi Yang validated the algorithm using toy models. Yitan Zhang conducted the experiments on robotics and
animal behavior modeling tasks. The remaining authors contributed through critical discussions and feedback.
‡
Corresponding author.
1
The implementation is available at https://github.com/PolynomialTime/PIRO.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

