Momentum-SAM: Sharpness Aware Minimization
without Computational Overhead

Marlon Becker

Frederick Altrock Benjamin Risse
University of Muenster
{marlonbecker,f.altrock,b.risse}@uni-muenster.de

Abstract
The recently proposed optimization algorithm for deep neural networks Sharpness
Aware Minimization (SAM) suggests perturbing parameters before gradient calculation by a gradient ascent step to guide the optimization into parameter space
regions of flat loss. While significant generalization improvements and thus reduction of overfitting could be demonstrated, the computational costs are doubled due
to the additionally needed gradient calculation, making SAM unfeasible in case of
limited computationally capacities. Motivated by Nesterov Accelerated Gradient
(NAG) we propose Momentum-SAM (MSAM), which perturbs parameters in the
direction of the accumulated momentum vector to achieve low sharpness without
significant computational overhead or memory demands over SGD or Adam. We
evaluate MSAM in detail and reveal insights on separable mechanisms of NAG,
SAM and MSAM regarding training optimization and generalization. Code is
available at https://github.com/MarlonBecker/MSAM.

1

Introduction

While artificial neural networks (ANNs) are typically trained by Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM),
i.e., the minimization of a predefined loss function on a finite set of training data, the actual purpose
is to generalize over this dataset and fit the model to the underlying data distribution. Due to
heavy overparameterization of state-of-the-art ANN models (Nakkiran et al., 2021), the risk of
assimilating the training data increases. As a consequence, a fundamental challenge in designing
network architectures and training procedures is to ensure the objective of ERM to be an adequate
proxy for learning the underlying data distribution.
One strategy to tackle this problem is to exploit the properties of the loss landscape of the parameter
space on the training data. A strong link between the sharpness in this loss landscape and the
models generalization capability has been proposed by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1994) and
further analyzed in the work of Keskar et al. (2017). Following these works, Foret et al. (2021)
proposed an algorithm to explicitly reduce the sharpness of loss minima and thereby improve the
generalization performance, named Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM). Built on top of gradient
based optimizers such as SGD or Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015), SAM searches for a loss maximum
in a limited parameter vicinity for each optimization step and calculates the loss gradient at this
ascended parameter position. To construct a computationally feasible training algorithm, SAM
approximates the loss landscape linearly so that the maximization is reduced to a single gradient
ascent step. Moreover, this step is performed on a single data batch rather than the full training set.
Unfortunately, the ascent step requires an additional forward and backward pass of the network and
therefore doubles the computational time, limiting the applications of SAM severely. Even though the
linear approximation of the loss landscape poses a vast simplification and Foret et al. (2021) showed
that searching for the maximum with multiple iterations of projected gradient ascent steps indeed
yields higher maxima, these maxima, however, do not improve the generalization, suggesting that
finding the actual maximum in the local vicinity is not pivotal. Instead, it appears to be sufficient
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

