FairDD: Fair Dataset Distillation
Qihang Zhou∗, Shenhao Fang∗ , Shibo He† , Wenchao Meng, Jiming Chen
Zhejiang University
{zqhang, 22460454, s18he, wmengzju, cjm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Condensing large datasets into smaller synthetic counterparts has demonstrated
its promise for image classification. However, previous research has overlooked a
crucial concern in image recognition: ensuring that models trained on condensed
datasets are unbiased towards protected attributes (PA), such as gender and race.
Our investigation reveals that dataset distillation fails to alleviate the unfairness
towards minority groups within original datasets. Moreover, this bias typically
worsens in the condensed datasets due to their smaller size. To bridge the research
gap, we propose a novel fair dataset distillation (FDD) framework, namely FairDD,
which can be seamlessly applied to diverse matching-based DD approaches (DDs),
requiring no modifications to their original architectures. The key innovation of
FairDD lies in synchronously matching synthetic datasets to PA-wise groups of
original datasets, rather than indiscriminate alignment to the whole distributions in
vanilla DDs, dominated by majority groups. This synchronized matching allows
synthetic datasets to avoid collapsing into majority groups and bootstrap their
balanced generation to all PA groups. Consequently, FairDD could effectively
regularize vanilla DDs to favor biased generation toward minority groups while
maintaining the accuracy of target attributes. Theoretical analyses and extensive
experimental evaluations demonstrate that FairDD significantly improves fairness
compared to vanilla DDs, with a promising trade-off between fairness and accuracy.
Its consistent superiority across diverse DDs, spanning Distribution and Gradient
Matching, establishes it as a versatile FDD approach. Code is available at https:
//github.com/zqhang/FairDD.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has witnessed remarkable success in computer vision, particularly with recent breakthroughs in vision models [45, 28, 47, 33, 72]. Their vision backbones, such as ResNet [20] and
ViT [16], are data-hungry models that require extensive amounts of data for optimization. Dataset
Distillation (DD) [60, 67, 69, 6, 58, 32, 12, 38, 18, 22, 7, 8, 71] provides a promising solution to
alleviate this data requirement by condensing the original large dataset into more informative and
smaller counterparts [42, 10]. Despite its appeal, existing researches focus on ensuring that models
trained on condensed datasets perform comparable accuracy to those trained on the original dataset
in terms of target attributes (TA) [13, 40, 56]. However, they have overlooked enabling the fairness
of trained models with respect to protected attributes (PA).
Unfairness typically arises from imbalanced sample distributions among PA in the empirical training
datasets. When the original datasets suffer from the PA imbalance, the corresponding datasets
condensed by vanilla DDs inherit and amplify this bias in Fig. 1(e). Since vanilla DDs tend to cover
TA distribution for image classification, and as a result, it naturally leads to more synthetic samples
located in majority groups compared to minority groups w.r.t. PA, as shown in Figs. 1(a), 1(b), 1(c),
and 1(d). In this case, these condensed datasets retain the imbalance between protected attributes,
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

