Modeling the Economic Impacts of
AI Openness Regulation

Tori Qiu
Carnegie Mellon University
toriq@andrew.cmu.edu

Benjamin Laufer
Cornell Tech
bdl56@cornell.edu

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University
kleinberg@cornell.edu

Hoda Heidari
Carnegie Mellon University
hheidari@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Regulatory frameworks, such as the EU AI Act, encourage openness of generalpurpose AI models by offering legal exemptions for “open-source” models. Despite
this legislative attention on openness, the definition of open-source foundation
models remains ambiguous. This paper models strategic interactions among the
creator of a general-purpose model (the generalist) and the entity that fine-tunes the
general-purpose model to a specialized domain or task (the specialist), in response
to regulatory requirements on model openness. We present a stylized model of
the regulator’s choice of an open-source definition to evaluate which AI openness
standards will establish appropriate economic incentives for developers. Our results
characterize market equilibria — specifically, upstream model release decisions and
downstream fine-tuning efforts — under various openness regulations and present
a range of effective regulatory penalties and open-source thresholds. Overall, we
find the model’s baseline performance determines when increasing the regulatory
penalty vs. the open-source threshold will significantly alter the generalist’s release
strategy. Our model provides a theoretical foundation for AI governance decisions
around openness and enables evaluation and refinement of practical open-source
policies.

1

Introduction

Foundation models with publicly available weights, such as Llama and Deepseek [42, 13], have the
potential to distribute economic benefits and broaden access to AI development. However, developers
of these general-purpose models have faced criticism for marketing their products as “open-source”
while departing from established open-source principles and concealing essential design decisions
[29]. Traditionally, open-source software (OSS) describes publicly available source code with few
restrictions on use, modification, and redistribution [24]. Foundation models complicate the standard
open-source definition, as they exhibit different degrees of openness, ranging from models with
hosted API access to open-weight models to fully open models with public weights, code, data, and
no use restrictions [38, 20]. Open-source definitions that transfer principles of OSS to foundation
models prohibit any use restrictions or monetization of the model [41] and may require disclosure
of all components, including training data [24]. Industry embraces a more lenient definition, where
open-weights models released under a non-proprietary license qualify as open-source, even when
commercial use restrictions exist (e.g., Llama and Mistral Large [3, 33]).
Regulatory frameworks for foundation models have proposed various definitions of “open-source”
that reflect this uncertainty. While the EU AI Act exempts open-source models from disclosure
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

