Multidimensional Bayesian Utility Maximization:
Tight Approximations to Welfare

Kira Goldner ∗

Taylor Lundy †

Abstract
We initiate the study of multidimensional Bayesian utility maximization, focusing
on the unit-demand setting where values are i.i.d. across both items and buyers.
The seminal result of Hartline and Roughgarden ’08 studies simple, informationrobust mechanisms that maximize utility for n i.i.d. agents and m identical items
via an approximation to social welfare as an upper bound, and they prove the gap
between optimal utility and social welfare is Θ(1 + log n/m) in this setting. We
extend these results to the multidimensional setting. To do so, we develop simple, prior-independent, approximately-optimal mechanisms, targeting the simplest
benchmark of optimal welfare. We give a (1 − 1/e)-approximation when there are
more items than buyers, and a Θ(log n/m)-approximation when there are more
buyers than items, and we prove that this bound is tight in both n and m by reducing the i.i.d. unit-demand setting to the identical items setting. Finally, we include
an extensive discussion section on why Bayesian utility maximization is a promising research direction. In particular, we characterize complexities in this setting
that defy our intuition from the welfare and revenue literature, and motivate why
coming up with a better benchmark than welfare is a hard problem itself.

1

Introduction

Utility maximization—also sometimes called consumer surplus, residual surplus, money burning, or
a setting with ordeals—is best motivated by a social service provider who wishes to allocate goods
whose demand far exceeds their supply (or budget), such as medications and vaccines. In such
cases, it would be inequitable to gate-keep these goods by charging a price. Instead, acquiring these
items is often made laborious by requiring consumers to wait in long lines, fill out forms, travel
physical distances, or even try other medications first. These ordeals act like payments by ensuring
that only those who have high value for the good are actually able to obtain it. As with social welfare
maximization, the social service provider has the option to use (non-monetary) payments as a tool in
order to allocate items to those with higher need; in contrast, in this setting, doing so comes at a cost
to the objective function, as neither consumer nor seller benefit from these ordeals. Crucially, this
yields a trade-off in the objective function between allocation and payment—is it more important
to give the goods to the right people, potentially using expensive payments that decrease utility
to do so, or to minimize payments, allowing the allocation to be more random? Despite sitting
between social welfare maximization and payment minimization, intuition from both regimes can
fail, requiring clever solutions somewhere in between.
∗
Boston University; goldner@bu.edu. Supported by NSF Award CNS-2228610, NSF CAREER Award
CCF-2441071, and a Shibulal Family Career Development Professorship.
†
University of British Columbia; tlundy@cs.ubc.ca. Supported by an NSERC Discovery Grant, and a
CIFAR Canada AI Research Chair (Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute).
A preliminary version of this work appeared on arXiv under the title “Simple Mechanisms for Utility Maximization: Approximating Welfare in the I.I.D. Unit-Demand Setting.”

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

1

