Rethinking Circuit Completeness in Language Models:
AND, OR, and ADDER Gates

Hang Chen
School of Computer Science and Technology
Xi’an Jiaotong University
albert2123@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Jiaying Zhu
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
jyzhu24@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Xinyu Yang∗
School of Computer Science and Technology
Xi’an Jiaotong University
yxyphd@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Wenya Wang†
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
wangwy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Circuit discovery has gradually become one of the prominent methods for mechanistic interpretability, and research on circuit completeness has also garnered
increasing attention. Methods of circuit discovery that do not guarantee completeness not only result in circuits that are not fixed across different runs but also
cause key mechanisms to be omitted. The nature of incompleteness arises from the
presence of OR gates within the circuit, which are often only partially detected
in standard circuit discovery methods. To this end, we systematically introduce
three types of logic gates: AND, OR, and ADDER gates, and decompose the
circuit into combinations of these logical gates. Through the concept of these
gates, we derive the minimum requirements necessary to achieve faithfulness and
completeness. Furthermore, we propose a framework that combines noising-based
and denoising-based interventions, which can be easily integrated into existing circuit discovery methods without significantly increasing computational complexity.
This framework is capable of fully identifying the logic gates and distinguishing
them within the circuit. In addition to the extensive experimental validation of
the framework’s ability to restore the faithfulness, completeness, and sparsity of
circuits, using this framework, we uncover fundamental properties of the three
logic gates, such as their proportions and contributions to the output, and explore
how they behave among the functionalities of language models.

1

Introduction

As an intervention-based approach to mechanistic interpretability, circuit discovery allows for the
extraction of subgraphs from the computational graph of a language model that play a significant
role in task performance, referred to as circuits [1, 2, 3, 4]. Several key studies have supported its
development [5, 6], such as those focusing on ensuring that circuits faithfully reflect the model’s
outputs [2, 7], enabling efficient circuit extraction [8], and addressing scalability challenges for
models with extremely large parameters and corpora [9, 10, 11].
As the concept of circuits evolves, recent attention has increasingly focused on the completeness
of circuits in addition to faithfulness. For example, completeness has been redefined such that
∗
†

Corresponding author
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

