The Computational Advantage of Depth in
Learning High-Dimensional Hierarchical Targets
Yatin Dandi1,2 , Luca Pesce1 , Lenka Zdeborová2 , and Florent Krzakala1
1

Information, Learning and Physics Laboratory. Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.
2
Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory. Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Abstract
Understanding the advantages of deep neural networks trained by gradient descent (GD) compared to shallow models remains an open theoretical challenge.
In this paper, we introduce a class of target functions (single and multi-index
Gaussian hierarchical targets) that incorporate a hierarchy of latent subspace
dimensionalities. This framework enables us to analytically study the learning
dynamics and generalization performance of deep networks compared to shallow ones in the high-dimensional limit. Specifically, our main theorem shows
that feature learning with GD successively reduces the effective dimensionality,
transforming a high-dimensional problem into a sequence of lower-dimensional
ones. This enables learning the target function with drastically less samples than
with shallow networks. While the results are proven in a controlled training
setting, we also discuss more common training procedures and argue that they
learn through the same mechanisms.
Understanding the computational benefits of deep neural networks over their shallow counterparts
is a central question in modern machine learning theory [76, 87]. While shallow models can
approximate any complex functions [27], deep networks almost universally exhibit remarkable
advantages in practice [49, 4]. There has been much progress in approximation theory on the
advantage of depth (see e.g. [62, 79, 61, 68] and reference therein), however, the dynamics of
learning with gradient descent is a more complex question. A fundamental open problem is thus:
Can one quantify the computational advantage of deep models trained with gradient-based methods
with respect to shallow models in some analyzable setting?
One line of work on GD-based methods in deep networks leading to interesting results is in the
setting of deep linear network —see e.g. [73, 46, 12, 51, 40]. While deep linear networks offer
valuable insights into nonlinear learning dynamics, their simplicity renders them insufficient to
capture the complexity of hierarchical feature learning.
Another popular line of research is to study the dynamics of gradient-based methods learning multiindex functions with shallow models [19, 17, 39, 22, 1, 81]. Multi-index functions provide a rich class
of targets, but their efficient learnability by shallow two-layer networks [11, 52] undermines their
utility as benchmarks for understanding the computational advantages of depth. This motivates
the following consideration:
What is the natural model of targets to consider for understanding the emergent computational
advantage of depth when training with gradient-based methods?
The present paper addresses both these questions. To answer the latter, we introduce a class of target
functions designed to probe the hierarchical structure and computational potential of deep networks.
These Multi-Index Gaussian-Hierachical Target (MIGHT) functions encapsulate a hierarchy of latent
subspaces with varying dimensionalities. We then proceed to answer the former interrogative
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

