Gains: Fine-grained Federated Domain
Adaptation in Open Set
∗

∗

†

Zhengyi Zhong1,3, , Wenzheng Jiang1, , Weidong Bao1 , Ji Wang1, , Qi Wang2 ,
Guanbo Wang3 , Yongheng Deng3 , Ju Ren3
1
Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense Technology
2
College of Science, National University of Defense Technology
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Conventional federated learning (FL) assumes a closed world with a fixed total
number of clients. In contrast, new clients continuously join the FL process in
real-world scenarios, introducing new knowledge. This raises two critical demands:
detecting new knowledge, i.e., knowledge discovery, and integrating it into the
global model, i.e., knowledge adaptation. Existing research focuses on coarsegrained knowledge discovery, and often sacrifices source domain performance and
adaptation efficiency. To this end, we propose a fine-grained federated domain
adaptation approach in open set (Gains). Gains splits the model into an encoder
and a classifier, empirically revealing features extracted by the encoder are sensitive
to domain shifts while classifier parameters are sensitive to class increments. Based
on this, we develop fine-grained knowledge discovery and contribution-driven
aggregation techniques to identify and incorporate new knowledge. Additionally,
an anti-forgetting mechanism is designed to preserve source domain performance,
ensuring balanced adaptation. Experimental results on multi-domain datasets across
three typical data-shift scenarios demonstrate that Gains significantly outperforms
other baselines in performance for both source-domain and target-domain clients.
Code is available at: https://github.com/Zhong-Zhengyi/Gains.

1

Introduction

As a typical distributed intelligent model training paradigm, federated learning (FL) [33, 11, 36, 67]
has garnered significant attention from researchers in recent years [15, 32, 39, 35, 45, 12, 66, 59, 19,
48]. Conventional FL is often studied in a setup with a fixed number of clients [33, 30], which limits
its applicability in a more realistic scenario when new clients, i.e., target domain, are allowed to join
the learning process. To scale FL effectively in such scenarios, we have to deal with heterogeneous
or evolving client data distributions, e.g., IoT networks, cross-device applications. This prompts
researchers to prioritize the study of two critical techniques in the field: (i) assessing whether the new
client contributes previously unseen knowledge [37], referred to as knowledge discovery; (ii) devising
strategies to integrate it into the global model for improving generalization under the updated domain
setting [18, 7], which we call knowledge adaptation.
Existing challenges: Though the practical demands and corresponding techniques are well specified,
bottlenecks still remain in achieving the deployment purpose (Fig. 1). Regarding knowledge discovery,
it is rarely investigated in FL, and existing strategies hardly process complicated scenarios. Take
the latest work, FOSDA [37], as an example; it facilitates the discovery of new classes, i.e., class
1∗
2†

Equal Contribution (zhongzhengyi20@nudt.edu.cn, jiangwenzheng@nudt.edu.cn)
Corresponding Author (wangji@nudt.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

