An Optimized Franz-Parisi Criterion
and its Equivalence with SQ Lower Bounds

Siyu Chen
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
siyu.chen.sc3226@yale.edu

Theodor Misiakiewicz
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
theodor.misiakiewicz@yale.edu

Ilias Zadik
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
ilias.zadik@yale.edu

Peiyuan Zhang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
peiyuan.zhang@yale.edu

Abstract
Bandeira et al. (2022) introduced the Franz-Parisi (FP) criterion for characterizing
the computational hard phases in statistical detection problems. The FP criterion,
based on an annealed version of the celebrated Franz-Parisi potential from statistical physics, was shown to be equivalent to low-degree polynomial (LDP) lower
bounds for Gaussian additive models, thereby connecting two distinct approaches
to understanding the computational hardness in statistical inference. In this paper,
we propose a refined FP criterion that aims to better capture the geometric “overlap"
structure of statistical models. Our main result establishes that this optimized FP
criterion is equivalent to Statistical Query (SQ) lower bounds—another foundational framework in computational complexity of statistical inference. Crucially,
this equivalence holds under a mild, verifiable assumption satisfied by a broad class
of statistical models, including Gaussian additive models, planted sparse models, as
well as non-Gaussian component analysis (NGCA), single-index (SI) models, and
convex truncation detection settings. For instance, in the case of convex truncation
tasks, the assumption is equivalent with the Gaussian correlation inequality (Royen,
2014) from convex geometry. In addition to the above, our equivalence not only
unifies and simplifies the derivation of several known SQ lower bounds—such as
for the NGCA model (Diakonikolas et al., 2017) and the SI model (Damian et al.,
2024)—but also yields new SQ lower bounds of independent interest, including for
the computational gaps in mixed sparse linear regression (Arpino et al., 2023) and
convex truncation (De et al., 2023).

1

Introduction

Over the past decades, a central focus in statistical inference has been to understand the transition
from computationally easy to hard regimes—that is, to characterize when a statistical task can be
solved by polynomial-time algorithms. A key insight from this line of work is the emergence of
computational-statistical tradeoffs: in many models, there exist broad parameter regimes where
information-theoretic recovery is possible, yet no known polynomial-time algorithm succeeds.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

