The Omni-Expert: A Computationally Efficient
Approach to Achieve a Mixture of Experts in a Single
Expert Model

Sohini Saha1
1

Mezisashe S. Ojuba2

Leslie M. Collins1

Boyla O. Mainsah 1∗

Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; 2 Howard University, Washington, DC, USA

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models have become popular in machine learning,
boosting performance by partitioning tasks across multiple experts. However, the
need for several experts often results in high computational costs, limiting their
application on resource-constrained devices with stringent real-time requirements,
such as cochlear implants (CIs). We introduce the Omni-Expert (OE) - a simple
and efficient solution that leverages feature transformations to achieve the ’divideand-conquer’ functionality of a full MoE ensemble in a single expert model. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the OE using phoneme-specific time-frequency
masking for speech dereverberation in a CI. Empirical results show that the OE
delivers statistically significant improvements in objective intelligibility measures
of CI vocoded speech at different levels of reverberation across various speech
datasets at a much reduced computational cost relative to a counterpart MoE.

1

Introduction

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models [1, 2] have emerged as powerful and flexible architectures for
machine learning (ML) tasks that require specialized fine-tuning of complex tasks, such as language
modeling and computer vision. However, MoE models pose computational challenges, in terms of
power consumption, processing capability, latency and memory capacity, as the number of experts
increases. Hardware considerations are highly relevant for deployment in resource-constrained edge
devices, especially for applications with real-time inference constraints, such as auditory prostheses.
Thus, there is a need for lightweight adaptations of MoE models or alternative strategies that preserve
performance while meeting resource limitations.
In this work, we focus on the cochlear implant (CI), a medical device that restores hearing to
individuals with profound hearing loss by converting sound to electrical pulses that directly stimulate
an impaired cochlea. Most CI users generally have good speech understanding in quiet conditions;
however, CI users struggle to understand speech in challenging acoustic environments with noise and
reverberation [3]. Some modern hearing aids now incorporate deep neural networks (DNNs) either
for acoustic scene selection to (de)activate specific features, to control channel-specific gains for
noise reduction and for separating noise and speech, enabled by more powerful on-chip processors,
e.g., [4–6]. DNNs have been investigated mostly for speech denoising in CIs [7–11]; however, to our
knowledge, no DNNs have been deployed in current commercially available CI sound processors.
Unlike hearing aids that primarily function to amplify sound, CIs have a higher functional burden
of acoustic-to-electric signal conversion, wireless signal transmission and electrical stimulation. In
addition, real-time CI sound processing must be causal with time delays that are within tolerable
limits of audiovisual asynchrony for CI users; preferably <10 ms [12].
∗

Corresponding author: boyla.mainsah@duke.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

