Beyond the Seen: Bounded Distribution Estimation for
Open-Vocabulary Learning

Xiaomeng Fan1∗ Yuchuan Mao1∗ Zhi Gao1†
Yuwei Wu1,2
Jin Chen1 Yunde Jia2,1†
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University

https://github.com/Beyond-the-Seen-NeurIPS

Abstract
Open-vocabulary learning requires modeling the data distribution in open environments, which consists of both seen-class and unseen-class data. Existing methods
estimate the distribution in open environments using seen-class data, where the
absence of unseen classes makes the estimation error inherently unidentifiable.
Intuitively, learning beyond the seen classes is crucial for distribution estimation
to bound the estimation error. We theoretically demonstrate that the distribution
can be effectively estimated by generating unseen-class data, through which the
estimation error is upper-bounded. Building on this theoretical insight, we propose a novel open-vocabulary learning method, which generates unseen-class data
for estimating the distribution in open environments. The method consists of a
class-domain-wise data generation pipeline and a distribution alignment algorithm.
The data generation pipeline generates unseen-class data under the guidance of a
hierarchical semantic tree and domain information inferred from the seen-class
data, facilitating accurate distribution estimation. With the generated data, the
distribution alignment algorithm estimates and maximizes the posterior probability
to enhance generalization in open-vocabulary learning. Extensive experiments on
11 datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms baseline approaches by up to
14%, highlighting its effectiveness and superiority.

1

Introduction

Open-vocabulary learning, an increasingly prominent task in computer vision, aims to recognize
objects for both seen and unseen classes in open environments [65, 49, 80]. Effectively modeling
the data distribution in open environments requires capturing both seen-class and unseen-class
distributions. However, existing methods estimate open-environment distributions only based on
seen-class data [48, 78, 77, 24, 25], and the absence of unseen classes makes it challenging to obtain
accurate distribution estimation in open environments.
In this paper, we study how to learn beyond the seen classes in open environments. We derive
distribution estimation theorems that prove the distribution can be estimated by generating unseenclass data, with an upper bound on the estimation error. Furthermore, these theorems reveal that
narrowing the distribution gap between seen-class and generated unseen-class data tightens this upper
bound, leading to more precise estimation. Motivated by these theoretical insights, it is desirable
to generate unseen-class data that closely aligns with the seen-class data distribution, enabling a
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

