Multiclass Loss Geometry Matters for Generalization
of Gradient Descent in Separable Classification

Matan Schliserman
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
Tel Aviv University
schliserman@mail.tau.ac.il

Tomer Koren
Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study the generalization performance of unregularized gradient methods for separable linear classification. While previous work mostly deal with the binary case,
we focus on the multiclass setting with 𝑘 classes and establish novel population risk
bounds for Gradient Descent for loss functions that decay to zero. In this setting,
we show risk bounds that reveal that convergence rates are crucially influenced by
the geometry of the loss template, as formalized by Wang and Scott [24], rather
than of the loss function itself. Particularly, we establish risk upper bounds that
holds for any decay rate of the loss whose template is smooth with respect to
the 𝑝-norm. In the case of exponentially decaying losses, our results indicates a
contrast between the 𝑝 = ∞ case, where the risk exhibits a logarithmic dependence
on 𝑘, and 𝑝 = 2 where the risk scales linearly with 𝑘. To establish this separation
formally, we also prove a lower bound in the latter scenario, demonstrating that
the polynomial dependence on 𝑘 is unavoidable. Central to our analysis is a novel
bound on the Rademacher complexity of low-noise vector-valued linear predictors
with a loss template smooth w.r.t. general 𝑝-norms.

1

Introduction

The generalization properties of gradient-based learning methods, particularly in overparameterized
regimes, is a central topic of study in contemporary machine learning. A key question is how
unregularized gradient methods achieve good generalization despite their potential to overfit. Early
work by Soudry et al. [21] demonstrated that gradient descent (GD) applied to linearly separable
data with the logistic loss asymptotically converges to the max-margin solution. This result suggests
that gradient descent, when properly tuned, can avoid overfitting without explicit regularization.
Extensions of this result to other optimization algorithms and loss functions have further deepened
our understanding of this phenomenon in various scenarios [3, 4, 12, 13, 5].
A particularly interesting regime for these investigations is multi-class classification. In this setting,
Soudry et al. [21] achieved convergence to max-margin with the cross-entropy loss, and Lyu and
Li [8], Lyu et al. [9] extended the results to homogeneous models and two-layer networks. More
recently, Ravi et al. [15] generalized the implicit bias analysis to a broader class of exponentially
tailed loss functions using the PERM framework [24], thereby bridging the binary and multi-class
settings in this context.
Beyond these asymptotic results, recent work has focused on the generalization performance of
gradient-based methods in finite-time regimes. In the binary classification setting, several recent
works examined gradient-based methods applied to smooth loss functions that decay to zero at
infinity [20, 17, 19, 23]. These results show that strong generalization without explicit regularization,
even in finite time, can be achieved by gradient methods also beyond the regime of exponentially
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

