Score-informed Neural Operator for
Enhancing Ordering-based Causal Discovery

Jiyeon Kang1,2∗ , Songseong Kim1,2∗, Chanhui Lee1,3 , Doyeong Hwang1,2 ,
Joanie Hayoun Chung2 , Yunkyung Ko2 , Sumin Lee2 , Sungwoong Kim3† , Sungbin Lim1,2†
1
LG AI Research
2
Department of Statistics, Korea University
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University

Abstract
Ordering-based approaches to causal discovery identify topological orders of causal
graphs, providing scalable alternatives to combinatorial search methods. Under the
Additive Noise Model (ANM) assumption, recent causal ordering methods based
on score matching require an accurate estimation of the Hessian diagonal of the
log-densities. In this paper, we aim to improve the approximation of the Hessian
diagonal of the log-densities, thereby enhancing the performance of orderingbased causal discovery algorithms. Existing approaches that rely on Stein gradient
estimators are computationally expensive and memory-intensive, while diffusionmodel-based methods remain unstable due to the second-order derivatives of score
models. To alleviate these problems, we propose Score-informed Neural Operator
(SciNO), a probabilistic generative model in smooth function spaces designed to
stably approximate the Hessian diagonal and to preserve structural information
during the score modeling. Empirical results show that SciNO reduces order divergence by 42.7% on synthetic graphs and by 31.5% on real-world datasets on
average compared to DiffAN, while maintaining memory efficiency and scalability.
Furthermore, we propose a probabilistic control algorithm for causal reasoning
with autoregressive models that integrates SciNO’s probability estimates with autoregressive model priors, enabling reliable data-driven causal ordering informed
by semantic information. Consequently, the proposed method enhances causal
reasoning abilities of LLMs without additional fine-tuning or prompt engineering.

1

Introduction

Ordering-based causal discovery aims to identify a topological ordering of nodes in a causal graph,
typically represented as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), such that the order reflects the underlying
cause-effect relationships. The combinatorial search over DAG structures is known to be NP-hard,
with complexity increasing sharply as the number of variables grows [6]. In contrast, ordering-based
approaches first infer a topological order of the causal graph, and then determine the direction of
edges based on this order, which substantially reduces the number of candidate graph structures.
By leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs), predicting causal orderings rather than full graph
structures, improves consistency and reduces structural errors [42]. Moreover, such causal order
suffices to identify valid backdoor adjustment sets, without full graph discovery [42, Proposition 3.2].
Recently, causal ordering methods based on score matching have been proposed [33, 35, 45] under
the ANM (Additive Noise Model) assumption. All of these approaches determine the causal order by
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Authors. {swkim01, sungbin}@korea.ac.kr.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

