Towards Unsupervised Open-Set Graph Domain
Adaptation via Dual Reprogramming

Zhen Zhang1,2
Nanjing University
2
National University of Singapore
zhen_zhang@nju.edu.cn
1

Bingsheng He
National University of Singapore
Singapore
dcsheb@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation has become a promising paradigm for
transferring knowledge from a fully labeled source graph to an unlabeled target
graph. Existing graph domain adaptation models primarily focus on the closed-set
setting, where the source and target domains share the same label spaces. However, this assumption might not be practical in the real-world scenarios, as the
target domain might include classes that are not present in the source domain. In
this paper, we investigate the problem of unsupervised open-set graph domain
adaptation, where the goal is to not only correctly classify target nodes into the
known classes, but also recognize previously unseen node types into the unknown
class. Towards this end, we propose a novel framework called GraphRTA, which
conducts reprogramming on both the graph and model sides. Speciﬁcally, we reprogram the graph by modifying target graph structure and node features, which
facilitates better separation of known and unknown classes. Meanwhile, we also
perform model reprogramming by pruning domain-speciﬁc parameters to reduce
bias towards the source graph while preserving parameters that capture transferable patterns across graphs. Additionally, we extend the classiﬁer with an extra
dimension for the unknown class, thus eliminating the need of manually speciﬁed
threshold in open-set recognition. Comprehensive experiments on several public
datasets demonstrate that our proposed model can achieve satisﬁed performance
compared with recent state-of-the-art baselines. Our source codes and datasets are
publicly available at https://github.com/cszhangzhen/GraphRTA.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in a wide range of graphbased tasks, such as node classiﬁcation [25, 14, 48], social recommendation [54, 6, 57], molecular
generation [59, 34, 44] and point cloud processing [22, 43, 45], etc. Despite their great success,
these GNN models often suffer from severe performance degradation when confronted with distribution shifts in graphs, such as changes in the underlying structures, node features, and label distributions [52, 30, 28]. Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation has become a promising strategy
for addressing the domain shift problem by transferring knowledge across domains without relying
on labels in the target domain. The majority of existing models are developed under the closed-set
setting [62, 51, 66], which assumes that the source and target domains share the same set of classes.
However, such a strict assumption is unrealistic in real-world applications, since the target domain
might introduce new classes that are absent from the source domain [64, 53], leading to signiﬁcant
challenges in identifying unseen samples. For instance, fraud detection models trained on previously known fraudulent behaviors from the source domain might struggle in the emerging target domain, as fraud schemes are continually evolving with fraudsters frequently developing new tactics.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

