A Set of Generalized Components to Achieve Effective
Poison-only Clean-label Backdoor Attacks with
Collaborative Sample Selection and Triggers

Zhixiao Wu
Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen
wzxnh24428@gmail.com
Hao Sun
Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen
hitsz.sh@gmail.com

Yao Lu∗
Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen
luyao2021@hit.edu.cn
Qi Zhou
Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen
mickyseveneleven@gmail.com

Jie Wen
Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen
jiewen_pr@126.com
Guangming Lu
Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen
luguangm@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Poison-only Clean-label Backdoor Attacks (PCBAs) aim to covertly inject attackerdesired behavior into DNNs by merely poisoning the dataset without changing the
labels. To effectively implant a backdoor, multiple triggers are proposed for various
attack requirements of Attack Success Rate (ASR) and stealthiness. Additionally,
sample selection enhances clean-label backdoor attacks’ ASR by meticulously
selecting “hard” samples instead of random samples to poison. Current methods,
however, 1) usually handle the sample selection and triggers in isolation, leading
to limited performance on both ASR and stealthiness when converted to PCBAs.
Therefore, we seek to explore the bi-directional collaborative relations between the
sample selection and triggers to address the above dilemma. 2) Since the strong
specificity within triggers, the simple combination of sample selection and triggers
fails to flexibly and generally mitigate the drawback of various backdoor attacks.
Therefore, we seek to propose a set of components based on the commonalities of
attacks. Specifically, Component A ascertains two critical selection factors, and
then makes them an appropriate combination based on the trigger scale to select
more reasonable “hard” samples for improving ASR. Component B is proposed to
select samples with similarities to relevant trigger implanted samples to promote
stealthiness. Component C reassigns trigger poisoning intensity on RGB colors
through distinct sensitivity of the human visual system to RGB for higher ASR,
with stealthiness ensured by sample selection including Component B. Furthermore,
all components can be strategically integrated into diverse PCBAs, enabling
tailored solutions that balance ASR and stealthiness enhancement for specific
attack requirements. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
components in stealthiness, ASR, and generalization. Our code can be seen at
https://github.com/HITSZ-wzx/GeneralComponents.git.

1

Introduction & Related Works

Since the interpretation of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is still under-explored, effectively defending the backdoor attacks (Doan et al. [2021], Lv et al. [2023], Zeng et al. [2023a]) is a huge challenge.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

