Complete Structure Guided Point Cloud Completion
via Cluster- and Instance-Level Contrastive Learning

Yang Chen1 , Yirun Zhou1 , Weizhong Zhang2,3 , Cheng Jin1,3∗
1
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{chen_yang23,yrzhou22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {weizhongzhang,jc}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud completion, aiming to reconstruct missing part from incomplete point
clouds, is a pivotal task in 3D computer vision. Traditional supervised approaches
often necessitate complete point clouds for training supervision, which are not
readily accessible in real-world applications. Recent studies have attempted to
mitigate this dependency by employing self-supervise mechanisms. However, these
approaches frequently yield suboptimal results due to the absence of complete
structure in the point cloud data during training. To address these issues, in this
paper, we propose an effective framework to complete the point cloud under the
guidance of self learned complete structure. A key contribution of our work
is the development of a novel self-supervised complete structure reconstruction
module, which can learn the complete structure explicitly from incomplete point
clouds and thus eliminate the reliance on training data from complete point clouds.
Additionally, we introduce a contrastive learning approach at both the clusterand instance-level to extract shape features guided by the complete structure and
to capture style features, respectively. This dual-level learning design ensures
that the generated point clouds are both shape-completed and detail-preserving.
Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that
our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art self-supervised methods.

1

Introduction

The advancement and widespread adoption of 3D sensors, particularly LiDAR, have led to the
emergence of point clouds as a dominant representation of 3D shapes across various domains [6, 10]
primarily owning to their ease of acquisition and comprehensive geometric features. However, in
real-world scenarios, raw point clouds often suffer from incompleteness caused by factors such
as self-occlusion and lighting conditions, which can hinder the performance of downstream tasks,
including object detection [22] and segmentation [4]. Consequently, point cloud completion has been
proposed as an effective solution to infer complete point clouds from incomplete inputs.
Supervised learning is the paradigm adopted by most existing methods [38, 41, 27]. These approaches
typically utilize paired complete and incomplete point cloud data to train neural networks, learning
a one-to-one mapping from incomplete point clouds to their corresponding complete counterparts.
Impressive results have been reported in recent studies. However, since high-quality complete point
clouds are often difficult to obtain through real-world scanning, paired data for training is frequently
sourced from virtual datasets, such as ShapeNet [2]. As a result, supervised methods contend with
the domain gap when applied to real-world data.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

