CAD-Coder: Text-to-CAD Generation with
Chain-of-Thought and Geometric Reward

Yandong Guan
School of Software
Beihang University
Beijing, China
yd_guan@buaa.edu.cn
Jing Zhang
School of Software
Beihang University
Beijing, China
zhang_jing@buaa.edu.cn

Xilin Wang
School of Software
Beihang University
Beijing, China
wang_xilin@buaa.edu.cn

Ximing Xing
School of Software
Beihang University
Beijing, China
ximingxing@buaa.edu.cn

Dong Xu
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
dongxu@cs.hku.hk

Qian Yu∗
School of Software
Beihang University
Beijing, China
qianyu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we introduce CAD-Coder, a novel framework that reformulates
text-to-CAD as the generation of CadQuery scripts—a Python-based, parametric
CAD language. This representation enables direct geometric validation, a richer
modeling vocabulary, and seamless integration with existing LLMs. To further
enhance code validity and geometric fidelity, we propose a two-stage learning
pipeline: (1) supervised fine-tuning on paired text–CadQuery data, and (2) reinforcement learning with Group Reward Policy Optimization (GRPO), guided by
a CAD-specific reward comprising both a geometric reward (Chamfer Distance)
and a format reward. We also introduce a chain-of-thought (CoT) planning process
to improve model reasoning, and construct a large-scale, high-quality dataset of
110K text–CadQuery–3D model triplets and 1.5K CoT samples via an automated
pipeline. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CAD-Coder enables LLMs to
generate diverse, valid, and complex CAD models directly from natural language,
advancing the state of the art of text-to-CAD generation and geometric reasoning.

1

Introduction

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) systems are fundamental tools in engineering and manufacturing,
enabling the creation of precise 3D models. However, traditional CAD workflows often demand
significant expertise and are time-consuming [21, 6], which limits broader accessibility and hampers
rapid iteration. Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs)[28], particularly their proficiency in natural language understanding and code generation[3, 1], present a promising opportunity
to streamline CAD processes [5, 26] based on natural language descriptions. The ability to generate
or modify CAD models via textual instructions [2, 13, 16] could lower the entry barrier for novices
and enhance the efficiency of experienced users.
However, generating CAD from textual descriptions remains a nontrivial challenge. To leverage
progress in natural language processing, researchers have proposed representing CAD models using
pre-defined command sequences and formulating text-to-CAD as a machine translation problem—i.e.,
autoregressively predicting CAD command tokens conditioned on input text [32, 13].
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

