Quantifying Elicitation of Latent Capabilities in
Language Models

Elizabeth Donoway1,2∗
John Schulman4

Hailey Joren1

Julian Michael5

Henry Sleight3

Arushi Somani1

Michael R DeWeese2

Ethan Perez1

Fabien Roger1

†1

Jan Leike1

Anthropic, 2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 Constellation, 4 Thinking Machines, 5 Scale AI

Abstract
Large language models often possess latent capabilities that lie dormant unless
explicitly elicited, or surfaced, through fine-tuning or prompt engineering. Predicting, assessing, and understanding these latent capabilities pose significant
challenges in the development of effective, safe AI systems. In this work, we
recast elicitation as an information-constrained fine-tuning problem and empirically characterize upper bounds on the minimal number of parameters needed
to achieve specific task performances. We find that training as few as 10–100
randomly chosen parameters—several orders of magnitude fewer than state-ofthe-art parameter-efficient methods—can recover up to 50% of the performance
gap between pretrained-only and full fine-tuned models, and 1,000s to 10,000s
of parameters can recover 95% of this performance gap. We show that a logistic
curve fits the relationship between the number of trained parameters and model
performance gap recovery. This scaling generalizes across task formats and domains, as well as model sizes and families, extending to reasoning models and
remaining robust to increases in inference compute. To help explain this behavior,
we consider a simplified picture of elicitation via fine-tuning where each trainable
parameter serves as an encoding mechanism for accessing task-specific knowledge.
We observe a relationship between the number of trained parameters and how efficiently relevant model capabilities can be accessed and elicited, offering a potential
route to distinguish elicitation from teaching.

1

Introduction

Many recent efforts in advancing the capability frontier of large language models (LLMs) focus on
post-training methods, such as fine-tuning, reinforcement learning with human feedback, or prompt
engineering. In many cases, these methods easily achieve significant performance gains through
small adjustments to a model, suggesting pre-existing capabilities that need only be unlocked rather
than taught. As a result, evaluations intended to benchmark maximal performance can underestimate
a model’s true capabilities [1], leading to an “elicitation gap” between its actual ceiling performance
and the capabilities it ordinarily demonstrates. This poses challenges in accurately predicting the
∗
†

Correspondence to donoway@berkeley.edu
Code repository: https://github.com/edonoway/quantifying-elicitation-neurips25

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

