Understanding LLM Behaviors via Compression: Data
Generation, Knowledge Acquisition and Scaling Laws

Zhixuan Pan1,∗ Shaowen Wang1,∗ Pengfei Liao2 Jian Li1,†
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
panzx24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangsw23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
liaopf22@buaa.edu.cn, lapordge@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across
numerous tasks, yet principled explanations for their underlying mechanisms and
several phenomena, such as scaling laws, hallucinations, and related behaviors,
remain elusive. In this work, we revisit the classical relationship between compression and prediction, grounded in Kolmogorov complexity and Shannon information
theory, to provide deeper insights into LLM behaviors. By leveraging the Kolmogorov Structure Function and interpreting LLM compression as a two-part
coding process, we offer a detailed view of how LLMs acquire and store information across increasing model and data scales – from pervasive syntactic patterns
to progressively rarer knowledge elements. Motivated by this theoretical perspective and natural assumptions inspired by Heap’s and Zipf’s laws, we introduce
a simplified yet representative hierarchical data-generation framework called the
Syntax-Knowledge model. Under the Bayesian setting, we show that prediction
and compression within this model naturally lead to diverse learning and scaling
behaviors of LLMs. In particular, our theoretical analysis offers intuitive and principled explanations for both data and model scaling laws, the dynamics of knowledge
acquisition during training and fine-tuning, factual knowledge hallucinations in
LLMs. The experimental results validate our theoretical predictions.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as one of the most influential breakthroughs in
modern artificial intelligence, achieving impressive performance across a multitude of tasks, ranging
from fluent text generation, translations, and summarization to answering factual queries, and even
performing complex reasoning. Despite these remarkable achievements, a theoretical understanding
of what enables LLMs to generalize so effectively remains limited. Traditional learning theory
frameworks have not yet fully explained why certain scaling laws hold, why in-context learning
emerges, or when and why hallucinations arise in the output of these models.
One promising lens for gaining deeper insight into LLM behavior is the intrinsic connection between
prediction and compression. Kolmogorov complexity and Shannon information theory have long established that optimal prediction of a data sequence is intimately tied to the most efficient compression
of that sequence (see e.g., [13, 47, 59, 34]). From this perspective, a predictive model, particularly
a large language model (LLM), can be viewed as a practical approximation of the Kolmogorov
compressor (see e.g., [69, 16, 48]) of training data. See Appendix C and Appendix B for more details.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

