LaRes: Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning with
LLM-based Adaptive Reward Search

Pengyi Li
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
lipengyi@tju.edu.cn

Hongyao Tang
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
tanghongyao@tju.edu.cn

Jinbin Qiao
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
jinbin@tju.edu.cn

Yan Zheng†
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
yanzheng@tju.edu.cn

Jianye Hao†
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
The integration of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) with reinforcement learning
(RL) has shown superior performance compared to standalone methods. However, previous research focuses on exploration in policy parameter space, while
overlooking the reward function search. To bridge this gap, we propose LaRes,
a novel hybrid framework that achieves efficient policy learning through reward
function search. LaRes leverages large language models (LLMs) to generate the
reward function population, guiding RL in policy learning. The reward functions
are evaluated by the policy performance and improved through LLMs. To improve
sample efficiency, LaRes employs a shared experience buffer that collects experiences from all policies, with each experience containing rewards from all reward
functions. Upon reward function updates, the rewards of experiences are relabeled,
enabling efficient use of historical data. Furthermore, we introduce a Thompson
sampling-based selection mechanism that enables more efficient elite interaction.
To prevent policy collapse when improving reward functions, we propose the reward scaling and parameter constraint mechanisms to efficiently coordinate reward
search with policy learning. Across both initialized and non-initialized settings,
LaRes consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance, outperforming strong
baselines in both sample efficiency and final performance. The code is available at
https://github.com/yeshenpy/LaRes.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [1] is a class of learning methods that excels at handling sequential
decision-making problems [2]. Through trial and error and gradient-based optimization, RL approximates value functions and provides policy gradients for policy learning [3]. It has been applied in
various fields, including robotic control [4], game AI [5], and recommender systems [6]. In contrast,
†

Corresponding authors: Yan Zheng and Jianye Hao

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

