Self-supervised Blending Structural Context of Visual
Molecules for Robust Drug Interaction Prediction
Tengfei Ma∗ Kun Chen∗ Yongsheng Zang Yujie Chen Xuanbai Ren Bosheng Song
Hongxin Xiang Yiping Liu Xiangxiang Zeng†
State Key Laboratory of Chemo and Biosensing, College of Computer Science and
Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China
The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Fusion Computing of Supercomputing
and Artificial Intelligence, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.
tfma@hnu.edu.cn, xzeng@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Identifying drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is critical for ensuring drug safety and
advancing drug development, a topic that has garnered significant research interest.
While existing methods have made considerable progress, approaches relying
solely on known DDIs face a key challenge when applied to drugs with limited data
(e.g., novel and few-shot drugs): insufficient exploration of the space of unlabeled
pairwise drugs. To address these issues, we innovatively introduce S2 VM, a Selfsupervised Visual pretraining framework for pair-wise Molecules, to fully fuse
structural representations and explore the space of drug pairs for DDI prediction.
S2 VM incorporates the explicit structure and correlations of visual molecules, such
as the positional relationships and connectivity between functional substructures.
Specifically, we blend the visual fragments of drug pairs into a unified input for
joint encoding and then recover molecule-specific visual information for each
drug individually. This approach integrates fine-grained structural representations
from unlabeled drug pair data. By using visual fragments as anchors, S2 VM
effectively captures the spatial information of local molecular components within
visual molecules, resulting in more comprehensive embeddings of drug pairs.
Experimental results show that S2 VM achieves state-of-the-art performance on
widely used benchmarks, with Macro-F1 score improvements of 4.21% and 3.31%,
respectively. Further extensive results and theoretical analysis demonstrate the
effectiveness of S2 VM for both few-shot and novel drugs. The code and data are
available at https://github.com/xiaomingaaa/S2VM.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial therapy, which involves the simultaneous use of multiple drugs, is a promising strategy
for treating patients with complex diseases [1, 2]. However, this approach poses challenges due
to potential drug-drug interactions (DDIs) that can alter the intended therapeutic outcomes. When
patients take multiple drugs at the same time, these interactions can result in unexpected side effects
or diminished clinical efficacy [3, 4]. Therefore, accurately predicting DDIs is essential to avoid
potential adverse effects, making it a critical task in the common therapeutic field [5]. Despite
ongoing efforts, predicting these interactions remains a significant challenge.
Numerous computational prediction methods have been developed to address these challenges to
predict unknown drug-drug interaction (DDI) events [6, 4, 7]. Many of these methods use handcrafted
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

