COOPERA: Continual Open-Ended
Human-Robot Assistance

†

Ruta Desai

Chenyang Ma1 Kai Lu1
Xavier Puig† Andrew Markham1† Niki Trigoni1†
1
University of Oxford

Abstract
To understand and collaborate with humans, robots must account for individual
human traits, habits, and activities over time. However, most robotic assistants lack
these abilities, as they primarily focus on predefined tasks in structured environments and lack a human model to learn from. This work introduces COOPERA,
a novel framework for COntinual, OPen-Ended human-Robot Assistance, where
simulated humans, driven by psychological traits and long-term intentions, interact with robots in complex environments. By integrating continuous human
feedback, our framework, for the first time, enables the study of long-term, openended human-robot collaboration (HRC) in different collaborative tasks across
various time-scales. Within COOPERA, we introduce a benchmark and an approach to personalize the robot’s collaborative actions by learning human traits and
context-dependent intents. Experiments validate the extent to which our simulated
humans reflect realistic human behaviors and demonstrate the value of inferring
and personalizing to human intents for open-ended and long-term HRC.

1

Introduction

A long-standing goal in robotics is to develop agents that can effectively assist humans in their daily
lives by adapting to their preferences and habits. In order to do this, a robot agent must be able to
not only learn to interact in environments with humans in a given moment, but also reason about the
human across long periods of time, adapting its behavior to provide better assistance. For example,
such an agent should be able to fetch a cup of coffee while also understanding that someone may
prefer it cooler in the morning but stronger in the afternoon, heating up water accordingly.
Over recent years, several works have made significant advances in developing agents that can assist
humans in household tasks [52, 50, 75, 65, 47], using simulation environments to study human-robot
collaboration (HRC) in a safe and scalable manner. However, most of these works focus on episodic
settings, where a robot is evaluated over a set of short collaboration scenarios with tasks specified in
advance. These settings are very different from real-world scenarios, where humans have preferences
and long-term goals that guide their behaviors, needing different types of assistance at different times.
To advance robot agents that can assist and adapt to humans, we propose COOPERA, a novel
framework for COntinual, OPen-Ended human-Robot Assistance in complex household environments
(Fig. 1). At its core, COOPERA features a human model with preferences that supports long-term
interactions, a feedback mechanism, and benchmarks and metrics to evaluate if robots can assist
humans in long-term tasks and reason about their preferences effectively.
To model realistic humans, we simulate humans using an LLM with detailed human traits and
habits, retrieved environment information, and intention history, enabling behaviors that exhibit three
characteristics. 1) Dynamic intention-driven: Humans act based on intentions that vary over time
†

Equal advising.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

