R EASONING C OMPILER: LLM-Guided
Optimizations for Efficient Model Serving

Annabelle Sujun Tang
University of California
San Diego
sujun@ucsd.edu

Christopher Priebe∗
University of California
San Diego
cpriebe@ucsd.edu

Lianhui Qin
University of California
San Diego
lianhui@ucsd.edu

Rohan Mahapatra∗
University of California
San Diego
rohan@ucsd.edu

Hadi Esmaeilzadeh
University of California
San Diego
hadi@ucsd.edu

Abstract
While model serving has unlocked unprecedented capabilities, the high cost of
serving large-scale models continues to be a significant barrier to widespread accessibility and rapid innovation. Compiler optimizations have long driven substantial performance improvements, but existing compilers struggle with neural
workloads due to the exponentially large and highly interdependent space of possible transformations. Although existing stochastic search techniques can be effective, they are often sample-inefficient and fail to leverage the structural context
underlying compilation decisions. We set out to investigate the research question
of whether reasoning with large language models (LLMs), without any retraining, can leverage the context-aware decision space of compiler optimizations to
significantly improve sample efficiency. To that end, we introduce a novel compilation framework (dubbed R EASONING C OMPILER) that formulates optimization
as a sequential, context-aware decision process guided by a large language model
and structured Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS). The LLM acts as a proposal
mechanism, suggesting hardware-informed transformations that reflect the current program state and accumulated performance feedback. MCTS incorporates
the LLM-generated proposals to balance exploration and exploitation, facilitating
a structured, context-sensitive traversal of the expansive compiler optimization
space. By achieving substantial speedups with markedly fewer samples than leading neural compilers, our approach demonstrates the potential of LLM-guided
reasoning to transform the landscape of compiler optimization.1

1

Introduction

The rise of model serving for LLMs, diffusion models, and other neural models has enabled a new
class of intelligent systems, driving transformative applications in healthcare, education, and scientific discovery. These models incur significant computational demands during inference, which
proportionally translate into substantial monetary costs. Driving down the cost of model serving is
critical, not merely to broaden access and democratize inference, but to catalyze faster cycles of innovation in model design and deployment. Achieving this goal demands reducing inference runtime
on computational infrastructure, resources that are not only expensive but also increasingly limited
in availability. Compiler optimizations are a critical enabler, not only for cost-efficient inferencing
across diverse applications but also for empowering rapid research iteration.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/he-actlab/REASONING_COMPILER
Equal contribution
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
*

