Scaling Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning
with Batch and Weight Normalization

1

Daniel Palenicek1,2 Florian Vogt3 Joe Watson4 Jan Peters1,2,5,6
Technical University of Darmstadt 2 hessian.AI 3 University of Freiburg 4 University of Oxford
5
German Research Center for AI (DFKI) 6 Robotics Institute Germany (RIG)
daniel.palenicek@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has achieved significant milestones, but sample efficiency
remains a bottleneck for real-world applications. Recently, CrossQ has demonstrated state-of-the-art sample efficiency with a low update-to-data (UTD) ratio of 1.
In this work, we explore CrossQ’s scaling behavior with higher UTD ratios. We
identify challenges in the training dynamics, which are emphasized by higher UTD
ratios. To address these, we integrate weight normalization into the CrossQ framework, a solution that stabilizes training, has been shown to prevent potential loss of
plasticity and keeps the effective learning rate constant. Our proposed approach
reliably scales with increasing UTD ratios, achieving competitive performance
across 25 challenging continuous control tasks on the DeepMind Control Suite
and MyoSuite benchmarks, notably the complex dog and humanoid environments.
This work eliminates the need for drastic interventions, such as network resets, and
offers a simple yet robust pathway for improving sample efficiency and scalability
in model-free reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown great successes in recent years, achieving breakthroughs in
diverse areas. Despite these advancements, a fundamental challenge that remains in RL is enhancing
the sample efficiency of algorithms. Indeed, in real-world applications, such as robotics, collecting
large amounts of data can be time-consuming, costly, and sometimes impractical due to physical
constraints or safety concerns. Thus, addressing this is crucial to make RL methods more accessible
and scalable.
Different approaches have been explored to address the problem of low sample efficiency in RL.
Model-based RL, on the one hand, attempts to increase sample efficiency by learning dynamic models
that reduce the need for collecting real data, a process often expensive and time-consuming [39,
22, 12, 17]. Model-free RL approaches, on the other hand, have explored increasing the number
of gradient updates on the available data, referred to as the update-to-data (UTD) ratio [33, 10],
modifying network architectures [4], or both [9, 18, 20, 32]. A central tension in these research
directions is balancing the sample efficiency of the agent against the computational complexity,
i.e., wall-clock time, of the underlying algorithm. Algorithmic adjustments such as model-based
rollouts, computing auxiliary exploration rewards and higher UTDs can all significantly increase the
wall-clock time of the algorithm. Likewise, architectural changes such as larger models [32] and more
ensemble members [9] also increase the wallclock time of the method. Ideally, we desire architectural
and algorithmic changes that balance sample efficiency and simplicity, such as CrossQ [4], which
showed that careful use of batch normalization unlocks significantly greater sampler efficiency of
deep actor-critic methods without significantly impacting the wallclock time.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

