GyroSwin: 5D Surrogates for Gyrokinetic
Plasma Turbulence Simulations
Fabian Paischer ∗ 1,3
Lorenzo Zanisi2

Gianluca Galletti ∗ 1

Naomi Carey2

William Hornsby2

Stanislas Pamela2

Paul Setinek1

Johannes Brandstetter1,3

1

2

ELLIS Unit, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz
United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, Culham campus
3
EMMI AI, Linz
{paischer,galletti,brandstetter}@ml.jku.at
ml-jku/neural-gyrokinetics,

ml-jku/gyroswin

Abstract
Nuclear fusion plays a pivotal role in the quest for reliable and sustainable energy
production. A major roadblock to viable fusion power is understanding plasma
turbulence, which significantly impairs plasma confinement, and is vital for nextgeneration reactor design. Plasma turbulence is governed by the nonlinear gyrokinetic equation, which evolves a 5D distribution function over time. Due to its
high computational cost, reduced-order models are often employed in practice to
approximate turbulent transport of energy. However, they omit nonlinear effects
unique to the full 5D dynamics. To tackle this, we introduce GyroSwin, the first
scalable 5D neural surrogate that can model 5D nonlinear gyrokinetic simulations,
thereby capturing the physical phenomena neglected by reduced models, while
providing accurate estimates of turbulent heat transport. GyroSwin (i) extends hierarchical Vision Transformers to 5D, (ii) introduces cross-attention and integration modules for latent 3D↔5D interactions between electrostatic potential fields
and the distribution function, and (iii) performs channelwise mode separation inspired by nonlinear physics. We demonstrate that GyroSwin outperforms widely
used reduced numerics on heat flux prediction, captures the turbulent energy cascade, and reduces the cost of fully resolved nonlinear gyrokinetics by three orders
of magnitude while remaining physically verifiable. GyroSwin shows promising
scaling laws, tested up to one billion parameters, paving the way for scalable neural surrogates for gyrokinetic simulations of plasma turbulence.

1

Introduction

Nuclear fusion promises sustainable energy by fusing hydrogen isotopes within an ionized plasma.
Because the plasma reaches temperatures of hundreds of millions of degrees, it must be confined
by a magnetic field. During confinement, turbulence can arise from micro-instabilities, leading to
energy and particle transport toward the reactor walls. This causes plasma to leak from its magnetic
cage, resulting in heat and density loss, and therefore impaired energy production. The design and
control of plasma scenarios strictly require knowledge of turbulent transport, which can be obtained
via nonlinear gyrokinetic simulations that evolve a 5D Partial Differential Equation (PDE) over time.
The computational cost of nonlinear gyrokinetic simulations is prohibitive. Therefore, QuasiLinear
approaches (QL), such as QuaLiKiz (Bourdelle et al., 2015; Citrin et al., 2017) and TGLF (Staebler
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

