Look-Ahead Reasoning on Learning Platforms

Haiqing Zhu
Australian National University
haiqing.zhu@anu.edu.au

Tijana Zrnic
Stanford University
tijana.zrnic@stanford.edu

Celestine Mendler-Dünner
ELLIS Institute Tübingen
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center
celestine@tue.ellis.eu

Abstract
On many learning platforms, the optimization criteria guiding model training
reflect the priorities of the designer rather than those of the individuals they affect.
Consequently, users may act strategically to obtain more favorable outcomes.
While past work has studied strategic user behavior on learning platforms, the
focus has largely been on individual strategic responses to a deployed model,
without considering the behavior of other users. In contrast, look-ahead reasoning
takes into account that user actions are coupled, and—at scale—impact future
predictions. Within this framework, we first formalize level-k thinking, a concept
from behavioral economics, where users aim to outsmart their peers by looking
one step ahead. We show that, while convergence to an equilibrium is accelerated,
the equilibrium remains the same, providing no benefit of higher-level reasoning
for individuals in the long run. Then, we focus on collective reasoning, where users
take coordinated actions by optimizing through their joint impact on the model. By
contrasting collective with selfish behavior, we characterize the benefits and limits
of coordination; a new notion of alignment between the learner’s and the users’
utilities emerges as a key concept. Look-ahead reasoning can be seen as a generalization of algorithmic collective action; we thus offer the first results characterizing
the utility trade-offs of coordination when contesting algorithmic systems.

1

Introduction

Digital platforms deploy learning algorithms that collect and analyze data about individuals to power
services, personalize experiences, and allocate resources. As people come to understand how these
systems make decisions, they often adapt strategically to improve their outcomes. Prior research has
largely modeled such strategic behavior as unilateral: each agent responds to the platform’s decision
rule by optimizing their own outcome while treating that rule as fixed. For example, a job applicant
might rephrase their resume to include keywords that align with an automated screening system’s
preferences. This perspective neglects the fact that many others may be doing the same—thereby
collectively shifting the data distribution from which the platform learns in the future.
In reality, there is ample empirical evidence that users frequently reason about one another’s
behavior. They may act in solidarity [Tassinari and Maccarrone, 2020], anticipate other people’s
adaptations to gain an advantage [Kneeland, 2015], or coordinate to amplify their collective influence [Chen, 2018], in the latter case oftentimes facilitated by labor organizations [e.g., Rideshare
Drivers United]. On learning platforms in particular, such reasoning involves not only anticipating
the behavior of other platform participants but also how those behavioral changes will impact the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

