Riemannian Flow Matching for Brain Connectivity
Matrices via Pullback Geometry

Antoine Collas∗ , Ce Ju, Nicolas Salvy, Bertrand Thirion
Inria, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay
Palaiseau, France
∗
antoine.collas@inria.fr

Abstract
Generating realistic brain connectivity matrices is key to analyzing population
heterogeneity in brain organization, understanding disease, and augmenting data
in challenging classification problems. Functional connectivity matrices lie in
constrained spaces—such as the set of symmetric positive definite or correlation
matrices—that can be modeled as Riemannian manifolds. However, using Riemannian tools typically requires redefining core operations (geodesics, norms,
integration), making generative modeling computationally inefficient. In this work,
we propose D IFFEO CFM, an approach that enables conditional flow matching
(CFM) on matrix manifolds by exploiting pullback metrics induced by global
diffeomorphisms on Euclidean spaces. We show that Riemannian CFM with such
metrics is equivalent to applying standard CFM after data transformation. This
equivalence allows efficient vector field learning, and fast sampling with standard
ODE solvers. We instantiate D IFFEO CFM with two different settings: the matrix
logarithm for covariance matrices and the normalized Cholesky decomposition
for correlation matrices. We evaluate D IFFEO CFM on three large-scale fMRI
datasets with more than 4600 scans from 2800 subjects (ADNI, ABIDE, OASIS-3)
and two EEG motor imagery datasets with over 30000 trials from 26 subjects
(BNCI2014-002 and BNCI2015-001). It enables fast training and achieves stateof-the-art performance, all while preserving manifold constraints.
Code: https://github.com/antoinecollas/DiffeoCFM

1

Introduction

Brain imaging connectivity and Riemannian geometry Modern neuroimaging analyses map
brain functional signals toward connectivity matrices—covariance or correlation estimates between
regions of interest or sensor channels [37]. These structured representations are used in many
applications, such as motor imagery classification [4, 51, 41, 44], brain age prediction [16, 22, 54, 55],
or disease diagnosis [15]. They are central to the analysis of signals from many neuroimaging
modalities, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG),
and magnetoencephalography (MEG). Brain connectivity matrices are symmetric positive definite
(SPD) or lie in the open elliptope of full-rank correlation matrices, and thus belong to smooth matrix
manifolds—S++
and its submanifold Corrd —defined respectively by
d


S++
= Σ ∈ Rd×d Σ⊤ = Σ, Σ ≻ 0 and Corrd = Σ ∈ S++
diag(Σ) = 1 .
(1)
d
d
Several Riemannian metrics have been proposed to analyse these data such as the affine-invariant
metric [65, 7], the log-Euclidean metric [3], or the Euclidean-Cholesky metric [68]. They enable
the definition of Riemannian operations such as geodesics, exponential maps, and parallel transport,
which extend standard Euclidean operations to the manifold. Building on these manifolds, a wide
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

