Corporate Needs You to Find the Difference:
Revisiting Submodular and Supermodular Ratio
Optimization Problems

Elfarouk Harb
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
eyfmharb@gmail.com

Yousef Yassin
Carleton University
yousef.yassin@carleton.ca

Chandra Chekuri
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
chekuri@illinois.edu

Abstract
We consider the following question: given a submodular/supermodular set function f : 2V → R, how should one minimize/maximize its average value f (S)/|S|
over non-empty subsets S ⊆ V ? This problem generalizes several well-known
objectives, including Densest Subgraph (DSG), Densest Supermodular Set (DSS),
and Submodular Function Minimization (SFM). Motivated by recent applications
[42, 34], we formalize two new broad problems: the Unrestricted Sparsest Submodular Set (USSS) and Unrestricted Densest Supermodular Set (UDSS), both of
which allow negative and non-monotone functions.
Using classical results, we show that DSS, SFM, USSS, UDSS, and Minimum
Norm Point (MNP) are all equivalent under strongly polynomial-time reductions.
This equivalence enables algorithmic cross-over: methods designed for one problem can be repurposed to solve others efficiently. In particular, we use the perspective of the minimum norm point in the base polyhedron of a sub/supermodular
function, which, via Fujishige’s results, yields the dense decomposition as a
byproduct. Through this perspective, we show that a recent converging heuristic
for DSS, S UPER G REEDY ++ [17, 32], and Wolfe’s minimum norm point algorithm
are both universal solvers for all of these problems.
On the theoretical front, we explain the observation made in recent work [42,
34] that S UPER G REEDY ++ appears to work well even in settings beyond DSS.
Surprisingly, we also show that this simple algorithm can be used for Submodular
Function Minimization, including acting as a practical minimum s-t cut algorithm.
On the empirical front, we explore the utility of several algorithms for recent problems. We conduct over 400 experiments across seven problem types and largescale synthetic and real-world datasets (up to ≈ 100 million edges). Our results reveal that methods historically considered inefficient, such as convex-programming
methods, flow-based solvers, and Fujishige-Wolfe’s algorithm, outperform stateof-the-art task-specific baselines by orders of magnitude on concrete problems
like HNSN [42]. These findings challenge prevailing assumptions and demonstrate that with the proper framing, general optimization algorithms can be both
scalable and state-of-the-art for supermodular and submodular ratio problems.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

