Fast Computation and Optimization for
Opinion-Based Quantities of Friedkin-Johnsen Model

Haoxin Sun, Yubo Sun, Xiaotian Zhou, Zhongzhi Zhang∗
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Fudan University
{23110240089,25110890019}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {20210240043,zhangzz}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of fast computation and optimization of
opinion-based quantities in the Friedkin–Johnsen (FJ) model. We first introduce
the concept of partial rooted forests, based on which we present an efficient algorithm for computing relevant quantities using this method. Furthermore, we study
two optimization problems in the FJ model: the Opinion Minimization Problem
and the Polarization and Disagreement Minimization Problem. For both problems,
we propose fast algorithms based on partial rooted forest samplings. Our methods
reduce the time complexity from linear to sublinear. Extensive experiments on
real-world networks demonstrate that our algorithms are both accurate and efficient, outperforming state-of-the-art methods and scaling effectively to large-scale
networks.

1

Introduction

Online social networks and social media have become integral to our daily lives, fundamentally
altering how individuals communicate, exchange, and form opinions [33, 21, 48, 50, 59, 44]. Recent
studies suggest that, unlike traditional forms of communication, online interactions in the digital
era have profoundly impacted human behavior, facilitating the widespread, critical, and complex
propagation of information [40]. To better understand the mechanisms driving opinion formation
and dissemination, various mathematical frameworks for opinion dynamics have been developed [27,
41, 17, 6]. Among these models, the Friedkin-Johnsen (FJ) model [19] stands out as one of the
most widely used, with applications spanning multiple fields [8, 20]. For instance, a modified FJ
model was recently used to study the Paris Agreement negotiations, revealing key factors behind the
achieved consensus [8].
The fundamental concept in opinion dynamics is the opinion itself, which serves as the basis for many
opinion-based quantities that have garnered significant attention. Among these quantities are the
overall opinion, which reflects public sentiment on specific issues, and various social phenomena such
as polarization, disagreement, and conflict. Given the importance of these opinion-based quantities, a
key challenge is how to effectively compute and optimize them. A Laplacian solver-based approach
for computing these quantities was proposed in [52, 54], followed by a sampling-based algorithm
to accelerate the computation process [39]. For the optimization of opinion-based quantities, a
range of methods has been introduced, including matrix inversion [24], vector projection [56, 59],
eigencentralities [5], convex optimization [38], and sampling techniques [44]. Although many
effective methods have been proposed for computing and optimizing opinion-based quantities in
the FJ model, they are often limited to specific problems or suffer from high time complexity.
Consequently, a unified framework to efficiently address both computation and optimization of
opinion-based quantities in the FJ model is imperative.
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

