Identifying Macro Causal Effects in C-DMGs over
DMGs
Simon Ferreira
Sorbonne Université, INSERM,
Institut Pierre Louis d’Epidémiologie
et de Santé Publique,
F75012, Paris, France
simon.ferreira@sorbonne-universite.fr

Charles K. Assaad
Sorbonne Université, INSERM,
Institut Pierre Louis d’Epidémiologie
et de Santé Publique,
F75012, Paris, France
charles.assaad@inserm.fr

Abstract
The do-calculus is a sound and complete tool for identifying causal effects in
acyclic directed mixed graphs (ADMGs) induced by structural causal models
(SCMs). However, in many real-world applications, especially in high-dimensional
settings, constructing a fully specified ADMG is often infeasible. This limitation
has led to growing interest in partially specified causal representations, particularly through cluster-directed mixed graphs (C-DMGs), which group variables
into clusters and offer a more abstract yet practical view of causal dependencies.
While these representations can include cycles, recent work has shown that the
do-calculus remains sound and complete for identifying macro-level causal effects
in C-DMGs over ADMGs under the assumption that all clusters sizes are greater
than 1. Nevertheless, real-world systems often exhibit cyclic causal dynamics
at the structural level. To account for this, input-output structural causal models
(ioSCMs) have been introduced as a generalization of SCMs that allow for cycles.
ioSCMs induce another type of graph structure known as a directed mixed graph
(DMG). Analogous to the ADMG setting, one can define C-DMGs over DMGs
as high-level representations of causal relations among clusters of variables. In
this paper, we prove that, unlike in the ADMG setting, the do-calculus is unconditionally sound and complete for identifying macro causal effects in C-DMGs over
DMGs. Furthermore, we show that the graphical criteria for non-identifiability
of macro causal effects previously established C-DMGs over ADMGs naturally
extends to a subset of C-DMGs over DMGs.

1

Introduction

Understanding and identifying causal effects is a central goal in many scientific disciplines. In recent
years, structural causal models (SCMs) have emerged as a foundational framework for reasoning
about causality. These models encode causal assumptions through structural equations and are
typically represented by acyclic directed mixed graphs (ADMGs), which capture both causal and
confounding relationships. Within this framework, the do-calculus [Pearl, 1995]—based on the notion
of d-separation [Pearl, 1988]—provides a complete and sound set of inference rules for identifying
causal effects from observational data, assuming the causal structure is fully specified. However,
SCMs do not fully capture systems with cyclic causal dependencies at the structural level, which are
common in public health, biology, economics, and engineering systems. For example, there can be
a cyclic relation between poor mental health (e.g., depression or anxiety) and substance use (e.g.,
alcohol, drugs). The worsening of mental health and increase in substance use can occur in tight
time-frames (daily or even hourly), especially in high-risk populations. Over time, they may reach
a cyclic equilibrium where both reinforce each other without a clear causal ordering. To address
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

