GIST: Greedy Independent Set Thresholding for
Max-Min Diversification with Submodular Utility

Matthew Fahrbach∗
Google
fahrbach@google.com
Sara Ahmadian
Google
sahmadian@google.com

Srikumar Ramalingam∗
Google
rsrikumar@google.com

Morteza Zadimoghaddam∗
Google
zadim@google.com

Gui Citovsky
Google
gcitovsky@google.com

Giulia DeSalvo
Google
giuliad@google.com

Abstract
This work studies a novel subset selection problem called max-min diversification
with monotone submodular utility (MDMS), which has a wide range of applications
in machine learning, e.g., data sampling and feature selection. Given a set of points
in a metric space, the goal of MDMS is to maximize f (S) = g(S) + λ · div(S)
subject to a cardinality constraint |S| ≤ k, where g(S) is a monotone submodular
function and div(S) = minu,v∈S:u̸=v dist(u, v) is the max-min diversity objective.
We propose the GIST algorithm, which gives a 1/2-approximation guarantee for
MDMS by approximating a series of maximum independent set problems with a
bicriteria greedy algorithm. We also prove that it is NP-hard to approximate within
a factor of 0.5584. Finally, we show in our empirical study that GIST outperforms
state-of-the-art benchmarks for a single-shot data sampling task on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Subset selection is a ubiquitous and challenging problem at the intersection of machine learning and
combinatorial optimization, finding applications in areas such as feature selection, recommendation
systems, and data summarization, including the critical task of designing pretraining sets for large
language models [59, 3]. Data sampling in particular is an increasingly important problem given
the unprecedented and continuous streams of data collection. For example, one self-driving vehicle
generates ~80 terabytes of data daily from LiDAR and imaging devices [34], and academic datasets
have scaled dramatically from 1.2M images in ImageNet [54] to 5B in Laion [56].
Subset selection often involves balancing competing objectives: we rely on the utility (or weight)
of individual items to prioritize them, while simultaneously trying to avoid selecting duplicate or
near-duplicate items to ensure diversity. When selecting a small subset, this process should guarantee
that the chosen set is a good representation of the original dataset—often called coverage. The
intricate trade-offs between utility, diversity, and coverage are often expressed through an objective
function. It is often a significant challenge to design efficient algorithms with strong approximation
guarantees for constrained subset selection problems, even when leveraging tools and techniques
from combinatorial optimization such as submodular maximization, k-center clustering, and convex
hull approximations.
This paper studies a novel subset selection problem called max-min diversification with monotone
submodular utility (MDMS). Given n points V in a metric space, a nonnegative monotone submodular
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

