HOComp: Interaction-Aware Human-Object
Composition

Dong Liang
Tongji University / CityUHK / HKUST(GZ)
sse_liangdong@tongji.edu.cn
Yuhao Liu†
CityUHK
yuhaoliu7456@gmail.com

Jinyuan Jia†
Tongji University / HKUST(GZ)
jinyuanjia@hkust-gz.edu.cn
Rynson W.H. Lau†
CityUHK
Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
While existing image-guided composition methods may help insert a foreground
object onto a user-specified region of a background image, achieving natural
blending inside the region with the rest of the image unchanged, we observe that
these existing methods often struggle in synthesizing seamless interaction-aware
compositions when the task involves human-object interactions. In this paper, we
first propose HOComp, a novel approach for compositing a foreground object
onto a human-centric background image, while ensuring harmonious interactions
between the foreground object and the background person and their consistent
appearances. Our approach includes two key designs: (1) MLLMs-driven Regionbased Pose Guidance (MRPG), which utilizes MLLMs to identify the interaction
region as well as the interaction type (e.g., holding and lefting) to provide coarseto-fine constraints to the generated pose for the interaction while incorporating
human pose landmarks to track action variations and enforcing fine-grained pose
constraints; and (2) Detail-Consistent Appearance Preservation (DCAP), which
unifies a shape-aware attention modulation mechanism, a multi-view appearance
loss, and a background consistency loss to ensure consistent shapes/textures of the
foreground and faithful reproduction of the background human. We then propose
the first dataset, named Interaction-aware Human-Object Composition (IHOC),
for the task. Experimental results on our dataset show that HOComp effectively
generates harmonious human-object interactions with consistent appearances, and
outperforms relevant methods qualitatively and quantitatively. Project page: https:
//dliang293.github.io/HOComp-project/.

1

Introduction

Considering a scenario in which a designer aims to create a perfume advertisement by compositing
the image of a product onto an existing photograph with a human person, as shown in row 1 of Fig. 1,
two critical objectives need to be satisfied in order to produce a visually convincing output. First, the
interaction between the person and the perfume bottle should appear natural, such that the bottle
may seem to be appropriately related to (e.g., held by) the person. Second, visual consistency must
be maintained, preserving the original identities of both the person (including facial features and
makeup) and the perfume bottle (e.g., the logo, color, and shape).
†

Joint corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

