Set-LLM: A Permutation-Invariant LLM
Beni Egressy1
1

Jan Stühmer1,2

Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies
2
IAR, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

Abstract
While large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive capabilities across
numerous applications, their robustness remains a critical concern. This paper
is motivated by a specific vulnerability: the order sensitivity of LLMs. This vulnerability manifests itself as the order bias observed when LLMs decide between
possible options (for example, a preference for the first option) and the tendency
of LLMs to provide different answers when options are reordered. The use cases
for this scenario extend beyond the classical case of multiple-choice question answering to the use of LLMs for multidocument tasks and as automated evaluators
in AI pipelines. We introduce Set-LLM, a novel architectural adaptation for pretrained LLMs that enables the processing of mixed set-text inputs with permutation
invariance guarantees. The adaptations involve a new attention mask and new
positional encodings specifically designed for sets. We provide a theoretical proof
of invariance and demonstrate through experiments that Set-LLM can be trained
effectively, achieving comparable or improved performance and maintaining the
runtime of the original model, while altogether eliminating order sensitivity.

1

Introduction

The remarkable achievements of Large Language Models (LLMs) in recent years [1, 11, 16] have
propelled their adoption across a wide range of applications, including safety-critical and sensitive
domains such as medicine and finance [25, 54]. As such, the eye-catching drops in performance from
adversarial attacks can be all the more alarming [13, 38]. One such attack, shown in Figure 1, is as
trivial as permuting the choices in multiple-choice questions, which Zong et al. [57] demonstrate can
degrade an LLM’s performance from “good” to worse than random.
This sensitivity to input order becomes even more critical given the increasing reliance on LLMs to
compare and evaluate the output of other LLMs [8, 18, 45, 53]. Indeed, LLM-as-a-judge is widely
used as an evaluation metric [2, 53], and is also used to annotate LLM-generated output to create
new data sets and to decide between possible reasoning paths when solving complex problems
[2, 10, 12, 26]. This inherent order sensitivity directly undermines the reliability of these pipelines.
We propose Set-LLM1 , a permutation-invariant LLM architecture that eliminates this problem entirely.
Set-LLM guarantees consistent responses by building permutation invariance directly into the model
architecture. Moreover, it achieves these guarantees while retaining or improving performance on
set-input tasks.
Set-LLM is based on the well-known observation that the attention mechanism underpinning all of
the recent LLM architectures is permutation invariant by construction. In fact, to force them to take
into account the order of the input tokens, almost all models use some form of positional encoding
[37, 39, 43]. However, Kazemnejad et al. [17] prove that even without positional encodings, the
causal attention mask used in decoder-only LLMs is sufficient to completely reconstruct the input
order. We therefore remove positional encoding and causal masks as the first steps towards Set-LLM.
1

All code is available under open licenses at https://github.com/hits-mli/set-llm.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

