Infinite-Width Limit of a Single Attention Layer:
Analysis via Tensor Programs
Mana Sakai1,3

Ryo Karakida2,3

Masaaki Imaizumi1,3

1 The University of Tokyo
2 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
3 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project

mana.sakai.77@gmail.com, karakida.ryo@aist.go.jp,
imaizumi@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In modern theoretical analyses of neural networks, the infinite-width limit is often
invoked to justify Gaussian approximations of neuron preactivations (e.g., via neural
network Gaussian processes or Tensor Programs). However, these Gaussian-based
asymptotic theories have so far been unable to capture the behavior of attention
layers, except under special regimes such as infinitely many heads or tailored scaling
schemes. In this paper, leveraging the Tensor Programs framework, we rigorously
identify the infinite-width limit distribution of variables within a√single attention
layer under realistic architectural dimensionality and standard 1/ 𝑛-scaling with
𝑛 dimensionality. We derive the exact form of this limit law without resorting
to infinite-head approximations or tailored scalings, demonstrating that it departs
fundamentally from Gaussianity. This limiting distribution exhibits non-Gaussianity
from a hierarchical structure, being Gaussian conditional on the random similarity
scores. Numerical experiments validate our theoretical predictions, confirming the
effectiveness of our theory at finite width and accurate description of finite-head
attentions. Beyond characterizing a standalone attention layer, our findings lay the
groundwork for developing a unified theory of deep Transformer architectures in
the infinite-width regime.

1

Introduction

A useful approach to understanding the complex probabilistic behavior of neural networks is through
the study of parameter distributions in the infinite-width limit. Notable examples include the
neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) [LBN+ 18, HBSDN20], which approximates the limit of
stochastic parameter distributions with Gaussian processes; the neural tangent kernel (NTK) [JGH18],
which represents the model near the initial value with kernel functions; mean field theory, which
describes the update of parameter distributions [MMN18]; and the Tensor Program, developed by
[Yan19a, Yan20a, YL21, Yan20b, YH21, YL23, YHB+ 21, YYZH24], which is a general probabilistic
analytical framework that unifies the representation of the infinite-width limit for a wide range of
neural architectures and multiple layers. These methods provide probabilistic models that closely
approximate the complex phenomena of neural networks.
One challenge in the studies is to properly represent the attention mechanisms used in Transformers [VSP+ 17], which frequently appear in recent large-scale architectures [DCLT19, AAA+ 23,
ZZL+ 23]. Unlike ordinary multi-layer perceptrons, an attention layer has interactions between query
and key variables by multiplication, which makes the infinite-width limit distribution considerably
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

