Embeddings as Probabilistic Equivalence
in Logic Programs

Jaron Maene
KU Leuven
Leuven, Belgium
jaron.maene@kuleuven.be

Efthymia Tsamoura
Huawei Labs∗
Cambridge, United Kingdom
efthymia.tsamoura@huawei.com

Abstract
The integration of logic programs with embedding models resulted in a class of
neurosymbolic frameworks that jointly learn symbolic rules and representations
for the symbols in the logic (constant or predicate). The key idea that enabled
this integration was the differentiable relaxation of unification, the algorithm for
variable instantiation during inference in logic programs. Unlike unification, its
relaxed counterpart exploits the similarity between symbols in the embedding
space to decide when two symbols are semantically equivalent. We show that this
similarity between symbols violates the transitive law of equivalence, leading to
undesirable side effects in learning and inference. To alleviate those side effects,
we are the first to revamp the well-known possible world semantics of probabilistic
logic programs into new semantics called equivalence semantics. In our semantics,
a probabilistic logic program induces a probability distribution over all possible
equivalence relations between symbols, instead of a probability distribution over
all possible subsets of probabilistic facts. We propose a factorization of the equivalence distribution using latent random variables and characterize its expressivity.
Additionally, we propose both exact and approximate techniques for reasoning
in our semantics. Experiments on well-known benchmarks show that the equivalence semantics leads to neurosymbolic models with up to 42% higher results than
state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic logic programs offer a principled way to reason in the presence of uncertain knowledge
[De Raedt and Kimmig, 2015]. In neurosymbolic AI, this uncertain knowledge is provided by
neural models [Marra et al., 2024, Feldstein et al., 2024]. Probability can hence be the “glue”
between symbolic background knowledge and neural networks, leading to end-to-end differentiable
architectures [Rocktäschel and Riedel, 2017, Manhaeve et al., 2021].
The most straightforward way to reason symbolically over the outputs of neural networks is by treating
them as probabilistic facts [Manhaeve et al., 2021]. A second alternative is to map the constants
and predicates of the logic program into a representation space, achieving a tighter integration. The
question hence arises, how can we apply a symbolic rule over elements in an embedding space?
The answer is via adopting the simple, yet powerful notion of soft unification [Rocktäschel and
Riedel, 2017], which relaxes the unification algorithm in logic programming [Sessa, 2002]. Instead
of requiring two constants and predicates to be syntactically the same, they need to be “semantically
equivalent” to some extent. We demonstrate the notion of unification and its soft counterpart below.
Example 1. Consider the rule isIn(X, Y ) ← isIn(X, Z) ∧ isIn(Z, Y ) and the following three facts:
locatedIn(eiffel_tower, paris), isIn(paris, france), isIn(france, europe). In the context of logic pro∗

Work started before Efthymia Tsamoura joined Huawei Labs.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

