Unveiling Extraneous Sampling Bias with
Data Missing-Not-At-Random

Chunyuan Zheng1 Haocheng Yang2 Haoxuan Li1,∗ Mengyue Yang3,∗
Peking University 2 National University of Singapore 3 University of Bristol
cyzheng@stu.pku.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Selection bias poses a widely recognized challenge for unbiased evaluation and
learning in many industrial scenarios. For example, in recommender systems, it
arises from the users’ selective interactions with items. Recently, doubly robust
and its variants have been widely studied to achieve debiased learning of prediction
models, however, all of them consider a simple exact matching scenario, i.e., the
units (such as user-item pairs in a recommender system) are the same between
the training and test sets. In practice, there may be limited or even no overlap
in units between the training and test. In this paper, we consider a more practical scenario: the joint distribution of the feature and rating is the same in the
training and test sets. Theoretical analysis shows that the previous DR estimator
is biased even if the imputed errors and learned propensities are correct in this
scenario. In addition, we propose a novel super-population doubly robust estimator (SuperDR), which can achieve a more accurate estimation and desirable
generalization error bound compared to the existing DR estimators, and extend
the joint learning algorithm for training the prediction and imputation models. We
conduct extensive experiments on three real-world datasets, including a large-scale
industrial dataset, to show the effectiveness of our method. The code is available at
https://github.com/ChunyuanZheng/neurips-25-SuperDR.

1

Introduction

Selection bias means the distribution of collected data differs from that in the target population.
It is ubiquitous and occurs when data are missing-not-at-random (MNAR). For example, in the
recommender system (RS), due to the subjective preferences of users and the data collection process
itself, selection bias always exists in the collected data [1, 2]. Thus, selection bias poses a widelyrecognized challenge [3, 4, 5, 6]. Ignoring selection bias makes machine learning methods difficult to
achieve unbiased predictions and reducing its reliability [7, 8].
Many methods have been proposed to address selection bias. The error imputation-based (EIB)
method [9, 10] utilizes an imputation model to impute the missing relevance. The inverse propensity
score (IPS) method uses inverse propensity to reweight the observed events to achieve unbiasedness [11, 12, 13]. The doubly robust (DR) method combines the error imputation model and the
propensity model [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19], which is unbiased if either the imputed errors or the learned
propensities are accurate, and is also proved to have lower variance compared to IPS [20].
Although previous DR-based methods have demonstrated promising performance in debiasing tasks,
all of them consider the exact matching scenario, i.e., the units are the same between training and test
set. In RS, it means the users and items are the same between training and test set, as illustrated in the
left part in Figure 1. However, there may be limited or even no overlap in units between training and
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

