DMWM: Dual-Mind World Model with Long-Term
Imagination

Lingyi Wang1∗ Rashed Shelim1 Walid Saad1 Naren Ramakrishnan2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, USA
Emails: {lingyiwang, rasheds, walids, naren}@vt.edu

1

Abstract
Imagination in world models is crucial for enabling agents to learn long-horizon
policies in a sample-efficient manner. Existing recurrent state-space model (RSSM)based world models depend on single-step statistical inference to capture the environment dynamics, and, hence, they cannot effectively perform long-term imagination tasks due to the accumulation of prediction errors. Inspired by the dual-process
theory of human cognition, we propose a novel dual-mind world model (DMWM)
framework that integrates logical reasoning to enable imagination with logical
consistency. DMWM is composed of two components: an RSSM-based System 1
(RSSM-S1) component that handles state transitions in an intuitive manner and a
logic-integrated neural network-based System 2 (LINN-S2) component that guides
the imagination process through hierarchical deep logical reasoning. The intersystem feedback mechanism is designed to ensure that the imagination process
follows the logical rules of the real environment. The proposed framework is
evaluated on benchmark tasks that require long-term planning from the DMControl
suite and the robotic platforms. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed framework yields significant improvements in terms of logical coherence,
trial efficiency, data efficiency and long-term imagination over the state-of-the-art
world models. The code is available at https://github.com/news-vt/DMWM.

1

Introduction

Imagination is a core capability of world models that allows agents to predict and plan effectively
within internal virtual environments by using real-world knowledge [1, 2, 3, 4]. By predicting
future scenarios in latent spaces, agents can evaluate potential outcomes without frequent real-world
interactions thereby significantly improving data efficiency and minimizing trial-and-error costs. For
complex tasks requiring long-term planning, imagination capabilities allow world models to evaluate
the long-term consequences of diverse strategies and identify the optimal action plans. Consequently,
the effectiveness of model-based decision-making approaches, such as model-based reinforcement
learning (RL) [5, 6, 7, 8] and model predictive control (MPC) [9, 10, 11], can heavily depend on the
quality of their imagination abilities.
One of the most widely used frameworks for world models is the so-called recurrent state-space model
(RSSM) [2, 9, 12] and its variants [13, 14, 15, 16] that combine deterministic recurrent structures with
stochastic latent variables to model environmental dynamics in a compact latent space. By doing so,
RSSM models can capture the sequential dependencies and uncertainty of their target environment.
However, RSSM cannot provide reliable, long-term predictions over extended imagination horizons
due to the accumulation of prediction errors and the limitations of statistical inference [17, 18, 19].
In particular, although existing RSSM-based solutions can generate accurate short-term predictions
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

