Breaking the Frozen Subspace: Importance Sampling
for Low-Rank Optimization in LLM Pretraining

Haochen Zhang1 , Junze Yin1 , Guanchu Wang2 , Zirui Liu3 , Lin F. Yang4 , Tianyi Zhang1 ,
Anshumali Shrivastava1 , Vladimir Braverman1,5
1

Rice University, 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 3 University of Minnesota Twin Cities,
4
University of California, Los Angeles, 5 Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Low-rank optimization has emerged as a promising approach to enabling memoryefficient training of large language models (LLMs). Existing low-rank optimization
methods typically project gradients onto a low-rank subspace, reducing the memory
cost of storing optimizer states. A key challenge in these methods is selecting
suitable subspaces to ensure an effective optimization trajectory. Most existing
approaches select the dominant subspace to preserve gradient information, as this
intuitively provides the best approximation. However, we find that in practice, the
dominant subspace stops changing during pretraining, thereby constraining weight
updates to similar subspaces. In this paper, we propose importance sampling for
low-rank optimization in LLM pretraining with a provable convergence guarantee,
which the dominant subspace approach does not have. Empirically, we demonstrate
that our method significantly outperforms previous methods in LLM pretraining
tasks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), pretrained on next-token prediction tasks, achieve human-level text
generation capabilities and exhibit zero-shot transferability to various downstream tasks [5]. They are
also fine-tuned or aligned with human preferences to be expert in downstream tasks [66, 53]. Over the
past few years, there has been rapid progress in LLM development, characterized by consistent growth
in the number of trainable parameters and the scale of datasets [3, 31, 13, 1]. The parameter count in
language models has increased from 100 million [56] to over a hundred billion [10]. However, despite
their enhanced expressiveness, such large models demand extensive GPU memory for pretraining
[52]. Thus, a critical question arises:
How can we improve the memory efficiency of LLM pretraining?
In LLM pretraining, Adam is commonly used as the optimizer due to its superior optimization
performance. However, a key limitation of Adam is its memory requirement, as it necessitates storing
two optimizer states, each consuming as much memory as the model itself. This poses a significant
challenge, given the substantial memory demands of the model’s parameters. To address this issue,
researchers have explored low-rank optimization, where gradients are projected onto a low-rank
subspace to reduce the memory consumption of optimizer states. These states are then projected
back to their original size when updating the weights. For example, GaLore [79] and Q-GaLore
[77] project gradients onto subspaces defined by the leading singular vectors corresponding to the
largest singular values, a technique referred to as the dominant subspace. FLora [23] and GoLore
[24], on the other hand, utilize unbiased random low-rank projections for gradients, employing the
Johnson–Lindenstrauss transform. Grass [51] introduces sparse low-rank projections, which further
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

