Diffusion Feature Field for Text-based
3D Editing with Gaussian Splatting

Eunseo Koh
Jiwoo Chung

Sangeek Hyun
Kangmin Seo

MinKyu Lee
Jae-Pil Heo†

Sungkyunkwan University
{colorrain, hsi1032, bluelati98, wldn0202, skmskku, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in text-based image editing have motivated the extension of
these techniques into the 3D domain. However, existing methods typically apply
2D diffusion models independently to multiple viewpoints, resulting in significant
artifacts, most notably the Janus problem, due to inconsistencies across edited views.
To address this, we propose a novel approach termed DFFSplat, which integrates
a 3D-consistent diffusion feature field into the editing pipeline. By rendering
and injecting these 3D-consistent structural features into intermediate layers of
a 2D diffusion model, our method effectively enforces geometric alignment and
semantic coherence across views. However, averaging 3D features during the
feature field learning process can lead to the loss of fine texture details. To overcome
this, we introduce a dual-encoder architecture to disentangle view-independent
structural information from view-dependent appearance details. By encoding only
the disentangled structure into the 3D field and injecting it during 2D editing
phase, our method produces semantically and multi-view coherent edited images
while maintaining high quality editing. Additionally, we employ a time-invariance
objective to ensure consistency across diffusion timesteps, enhancing the stability of
learned representations. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in terms of CLIP similarity, and better preserves
structural and semantic consistency compared to existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in text-based image generation models [28, 29, 27, 22] have enabled their widespread
application, particularly in text-based image editing tasks [35, 10, 1, 14]. Driven by increasing
demand for intuitive and efficient editing of 3D content, recent efforts have focused on extending
these text-based editing techniques from the 2D domain into 3D representations. Consequently,
numerous text-based 3D editing [9, 13, 30, 43, 4, 37, 3] approaches have been proposed, significantly
broadening their applicability across diverse fields, including film production, game development.
The primary objective of text-based 3D editing is to modify a given source 3D representation
according to user-provided textual instructions. To edit a source 3D representation based on the given
textual instruction, existing approaches typically follow a two-step process. First, 2D editing methods
are applied to multi-view images rendered from the source 3D representation. Subsequently, the 3D
representation is optimized to align with these edited 2D reference views.
†

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

