L-MTP: Leap Multi-Token Prediction Beyond
Adjacent Context for Large Language Models

Xiaohao Liu1
Xiaobo Xia1∗ Weixiang Zhao2
Manyi Zhang3
3
4
5
Xianzhi Yu
Xiu Su
Shuo Yang
See-Kiong Ng1
Tat-Seng Chua1
1
2
National University of Singapore
Harbin Institute of Technology
3
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Central South University
5
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{XIAOHAO . LIU @ U . NUS . EDU , XIAOBOXIA . UNI @ GMAIL . COM}

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved notable progress. Despite their
success, next-token prediction (NTP), the dominant method for LLM training and
inference, is constrained in both contextual coverage and inference efficiency due
to its inherently sequential process. To overcome these challenges, we propose
leap multi-token prediction (L-MTP), an innovative token prediction method that
extends the capabilities of multi-token prediction (MTP) by introducing a leapbased mechanism. Unlike conventional MTP, which generates multiple tokens at
adjacent positions, L-MTP strategically skips over intermediate tokens, predicting non-sequential ones in a single forward pass. This structured leap not only
enhances the model’s ability to capture long-range dependencies but also enables
a decoding strategy specially optimized for non-sequential leap token generation,
effectively accelerating inference. We theoretically demonstrate the benefit of LMTP in improving inference efficiency. Experiments across diverse benchmarks
validate its merit in boosting both LLM performance and inference speed. The
source code is available at https://github.com/Xiaohao-Liu/L-MTP.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated rapid and remarkable progress, driven by data,
computing, and architectural innovation advances [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. They exhibit
strong capabilities in world knowledge acquisition [12, 13] and enable breakthroughs across a wide
range of research domains, such as chemistry [14, 15], biology [16, 17], medicine [18, 19], and
personalization [20, 21, 22, 23]. As model scales and training data continue to increase, LLMs are
attaining ever more powerful generalization and reasoning abilities [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30].
Next-token prediction (NTP) remains the mainstream strategy for both training and inference in
LLMs [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37]. It generates tokens in an autoregressive manner, where each token
is predicted based only on the preceding context (see Figure 1(a)). However, despite its conceptual
simplicity, NTP results in inefficient generation, and limits the model to a focused yet short contextual horizon, and overlooks “hard” decisions [38, 39]. Intriguingly, LLMs are verified with inherent
pre-planning capabilities, which indicates the potential of extending NTP to predict multiple tokens
at once [39]. This gives rise to the multi-token prediction (MTP) paradigm [39] (see Figure 1(b)).
Specifically, by incorporating additional language model heads, MTP enables the parallel prediction
of a sequence of adjacent tokens and brings two key benefits. First, it provides a broader training
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

