Curious Causality-Seeking Agents in
Open-ended Worlds

Zhiyu Zhao1 , Haoxuan Li2 , Haifeng Zhang3,4 , Jun Wang5 , Francesco Faccio6,7 ,
Jürgen Schmidhuber6,7 Mengyue Yang1∗
1
University of Bristol 2 Peking University
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
University College London
6
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
7
The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA-USI/SUPSI

Abstract
When building a world model, a common assumption is that the environment
has a single, unchanging underlying causal rule, like applying Newton’s laws to
every situation. However, in truly open-ended environments, the apparent causal
mechanism may drift over time because the agent continually encounters novel
contexts and operates within a limited observational window. This brings about
a problem that, when building a world model, even subtle shifts in policy or
environment states can alter the very observed causal mechanisms. In this work, we
introduce the Meta-Causal Graph as world models for open-ended environments,
a minimal unified representation that efficiently encodes the transformation rules
governing how causal structures shift across different latent world states. A single
Meta-Causal Graph is composed of multiple causal subgraphs, each triggered
by meta state, which is in the latent state space. Building on this representation,
we introduce a Causality-Seeking Agent whose objectives are to (1) identify
the meta states that trigger each subgraph, (2) discover the corresponding causal
relationships by agent curiosity-driven intervention policy, and (3) iteratively refine
the Meta-Causal Graph through ongoing curiosity-driven exploration and agent
experiences. Experiments on both synthetic tasks and a challenging robot arm
manipulation task demonstrate that our method robustly captures shifts in causal
dynamics and generalizes effectively to previously unseen contexts.

1

Introduction

World models [21, 62, 70] have emerged as a critical component in reinforcement learning, enabling
agents to simulate and plan in complex environments. These models aim to capture the underlying dynamics of the environment, allowing agents to predict future states and evaluate potential
actions [23, 21, 62, 55]. However, simply learning which variables correlate can mislead an agent
when the world’s dynamics change. Recently, causality has been adopted to improve world models
for interactive and complex environments, since causal rules—describing how one factor brings about
another—capture the underlying data-generation process and yield more robust and generalizable
decision-making [36, 59]. While many existing approaches incorporate notions of causality, they
typically fail to capture the open-world causal relationships.
To identify the underlying world rules, traditional causal models rely predominantly on observational
data [46], implicitly assuming a fixed causal structure. In open-ended environments, although the
∗

Corresponding author: mengyue.yang@bristol.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

