Offline RL by Reward-Weighted Fine-Tuning for
Conversation Optimization

Subhojyoti Mukherjee, Viet Dac Lai, Raghavendra Addanki, Ryan Rossi
Adobe Research
subhomuk@adobe.com
Seunghyun Yoon, Trung Bui, Anup Rao, Jayakumar Subramanian, Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is a variant of RL where the policy is learned
from a previously collected dataset of trajectories and rewards. In our work, we
propose a practical approach to offline RL with large language models (LLMs).
We recast the problem as reward-weighted fine-tuning, which can be solved using
similar techniques to supervised fine-tuning (SFT). To showcase the value of our
approach, we apply it to learning short-horizon question-answering policies of a
fixed length, where the agent reasons about potential answers or asks clarifying
questions. Our work stands in a stark contrast to state-of-the-art methods in this
domain, based on SFT and direct preference optimization, which have additional
hyper-parameters and do not directly optimize for rewards. We compare to them
empirically, and report major gains in both optimized rewards and language quality.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [62] is a machine learning framework for learning to act sequentially in
an unknown environment with the goal of maximizing a long-term reward. Because of its generality
and broad applicability, RL has been studied extensively and many RL algorithms have been proposed,
including temporal-difference learning [61], Q-learning [70], policy gradients [72], and actor-critic
methods [63]. All of these algorithms learn from online interactions with the environment, which
is often not possible due to engineering and safety constraints. This motivates the need for offline
reinforcement learning [34, 81]. The key idea in offline RL is to collect a dataset of interactions with
the environment and learn a policy from it, akin to learning a classifier in supervised learning [35].
Offline RL is especially suitable for problems where offline interactions are abundant or can be easily
simulated. For instance, question answering (QA) is an area at the intersection of natural language
processing (NLP) and information retrieval concerned with building systems for answering natural
language questions. Since many QA datasets exist [71, 43, 14, 22] and QA can be simulated using
pre-trained large language models (LLMs) [51, 7, 6], several recent works on QA focused on learning
better QA policies using offline RL.
The main contribution of our work are two novel algorithms for offline RL with LLMs: Refit and
Swift. The key idea in Refit is to optimize a lower bound on the online RL objective, which is the
sum of the log-probabilities of logged actions weighted by trajectory rewards. This new objective has
two main benefits. First, it does not involve ratios of token-level propensity scores, unlike in PPO
[57] and GRPO [58]. This leads to a stable and practical algorithm. Second, the optimization of the
objective can be viewed as weighted fine-tuning and solved by a minor modification of supervised
fine-tuning (SFT), a standard post-training technique for LLMs. Motivated by GRPO [58], we also
propose Swift, which is a variant of Refit where we standardize trajectory rewards using multiple
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

