Segment Anything Model Meets Semi-supervised
Medical Image Segmentation: A Novel Perspective

Haifeng Zhao1,2 , Haiyang Li1,2 , Lei-Lei Ma1,2∗, Dengdi Sun2,3∗
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, China
2
Key Lab Intelligent Comp & Signal Proc, Minist Educ, Anhui University, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, China
1

Abstract
The scarcity of annotated medical imaging data has driven significant progress in
semi-supervised learning to alleviate reliance on expensive expert labeling. While
foundational vision models such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM) exhibit
robust generalization in generic segmentation tasks, their direct application to
medical images often results in suboptimal performance. To address this challenge,
in this work, we propose a novel fully SAM-based semi-supervised medical image
segmentation framework and develop the corresponding knowledge distillationbased learning strategy. Specifically, we first employ an efficient SAM variant as
the backbone network of the semi-supervised framework and update the default
prompt embedding of SAM to unleash its full potential. Then, we utilize an
original SAM, which is rich in prior knowledge, as the teacher to optimize our
efficient student SAM backbone through hierarchical knowledge distillation and
a dynamic loss weighting strategy. Extensive experiments on various medical
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art semi-supervised
segmentation approaches. Especially, our model requires less than 10% of the
parameter size of the original SAM, enabling substantially lower deployment and
storage overhead in real-world clinical settings.

1

Introduction

Medical image segmentation aims to delineate precise anatomical structures from imaging data and
serves as a fundamental basis for clinical applications [1, 2]. Recently, as an important foundational
vision model for general image segmentation, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [3] has been
applied to medical images, resulting in various medical SAM variants. Through fine-tuning on medical
datasets [4, 5, 6] and generating high-quality prompts [7, 8, 9, 10], these variants have achieved
considerable segmentation results. Despite significant progress in medical image segmentation, the
cumbersome and costly manual annotation process still hinders its development. To address this
challenge, semi-supervised learning has gained traction as a robust approach that enhances model
performance and generalization by leveraging both limited labeled data and abundant unlabeled
data. However, there are still some key issues regarding how to effectively integrate the powerful
capabilities of foundational models into semi-supervised medical image segmentation (SSMIS).
First, existing SSMIS frameworks have yet to fully leverage the capabilities of SAM. Lately,
researchers have conducted numerous explorations into the application of SAM in SSMIS. For
instance, SemiSAM [11] leverages coarse masks from the segmentation model to derive prompt
points, which are then fed into SAM to generate more accurate pseudo-labels for model optimization.
SFR [12] introduces an improved approach by pre-training SAM on labeled data, allowing it to
∗

Correspondence to: Lei-Lei Ma (xiaoleilei1990@gmail.com) and Dengdi Sun (sundengdi@163.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

