Greedy Algorithm for Structured Bandits: A Sharp
Characterization of Asymptotic Success / Failure

Aleksandrs Slivkins
Microsoft Research, New York City
slivkins@microsoft.com

Yunzong Xu
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
xyz@illinois.edu

Shiliang Zuo
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
szuo3@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study the greedy (exploitation-only) algorithm in bandit problems with a known
reward structure. We allow arbitrary finite reward structures, while prior work
focused on a few specific ones. We fully characterize when the greedy algorithm
asymptotically succeeds or fails, in the sense of sublinear vs. linear regret as a
function of time. Our characterization identifies a partial identifiability property of
the problem instance as the necessary and sufficient condition for the asymptotic
success. Notably, once this property holds, the problem becomes easy—any
algorithm will succeed (in the same sense as above), provided it satisfies a mild
non-degeneracy condition. Our characterization extends to contextual bandits and
interactive decision-making with arbitrary feedback. Examples demonstrating
broad applicability and extensions to infinite reward structures are provided.

1

Introduction

Online learning algorithms often face uncertainty about the counterfactual outcomes of their actions.
To navigate this uncertainty, they balance two competing objectives: exploration, making potentially
suboptimal decisions to acquire information, and exploitation, leveraging known information to
maximize rewards. This trade-off is central to the study of multi-armed bandits [Slivkins, 2019,
Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020], a foundational framework in sequential decision-making.
While exploration is central to bandit research, it presents significant challenges in practice, esp.
when an algorithm interacts with human users. First, exploration can be wasteful and risky for the
current user, imposing a burden that may be considered unfair since its benefits primarily accrue to
future users. Second, exploration adds complexity to algorithm design,and its adoption in large-scale
applications requires substantial buy-in and engineering support compared to a system that only
exploits [Agarwal et al., 2016, 2017]. Third, exploration may be incompatible with users’ incentives
when actions are controlled by the users. E.g., an online platform cannot force users to try and review
new products; instead, users gravitate toward well-reviewed or familiar options [Kremer et al., 2014].1
A natural alternative is the greedy algorithm (Greedy), which exploits known information at every
step without any intentional exploration. This approach sidesteps the aforementioned challenges and
often better aligns with user incentives. In particular, it models the natural dynamics in an online
1. Enforcing exploration in such settings is very challenging (Kremer et al. [2014] and follow-up work, see
Slivkins [2023] for an overview). While exploration can be made incentive-compatible, doing so involves
considerable performance and/or monetary costs and additional complexity. More importantly, it hinges upon
substantial (even if standard) assumptions from economic theory.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

