Revisiting Multi-Agent World Modeling from a
Diffusion-Inspired Perspective

Yang Zhang1∗ , Xinran Li2 , Jianing Ye3 , Shuang Qiu4 , Delin Qu5 ,
Xiu Li1 , Chongjie Zhang3 , Chenjia Bai6,7†
1

3

Tsinghua University, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Washington University in St. Louis, 4 City University of Hong Kong, 5 Fudan University,
6
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom,
7
Shenzhen Research Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University
z-yang21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, baicj@chinatelecom.cn

Abstract
World models have recently attracted growing interest in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) due to their ability to improve sample efficiency for policy
learning. However, accurately modeling environments in MARL is challenging
due to the exponentially large joint action space and highly uncertain dynamics
inherent in multi-agent systems. To address this, we reduce modeling complexity by shifting from jointly modeling the entire state-action transition dynamics
to focusing on the state space alone at each timestep through sequential agent
modeling. Specifically, our approach enables the model to progressively resolve
uncertainty while capturing the structured dependencies among agents, providing
a more accurate representation of how agents influence the state. Interestingly,
this sequential revelation of agents’ actions in a multi-agent system aligns with
the reverse process in diffusion models—a class of powerful generative models
known for their expressiveness and training stability compared to autoregressive or
latent variable models. Leveraging this insight, we develop a flexible and robust
world model for MARL using diffusion models. Our method, Diffusion-Inspired
Multi-Agent world model (DIMA), achieves state-of-the-art performance across
multiple multi-agent control benchmarks, significantly outperforming prior world
models in terms of final return and sample efficiency, including MAMuJoCo and
Bi-DexHands. DIMA establishes a new paradigm for constructing multi-agent
world models, advancing the frontier of MARL research. Codes are open-sourced
at https://github.com/breez3young/DIMA.

1

Introduction

Learning accurate world models to capture environmental dynamics is crucial for effective decisionmaking. In the realm of model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL), such models play a pivotal
role by enabling policy training through learning in imagination [1, 2, 3, 4], facilitating planning with
look-ahead search [5, 6], or combining both approaches [7, 8]. While MBRL has achieved significant
success in single-agent settings, extending these methodologies to multi-agent scenarios presents
unique challenges, necessitating new approaches for multi-agent world modeling.
In multi-agent settings, where multiple agents simultaneously interact within a shared environment,
two primary challenges emerge. First, the joint action space grows exponentially with the number of
∗
†

Work done during the internship at TeleAI.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

