Complexity Scaling Laws for Neural Models
using Combinatorial Optimization

Lowell Weissman†
Virginia Tech

Michael Krumdick
Kensho Technologies

A. Lynn Abbott†
Virginia Tech

Abstract
Recent work on neural scaling laws demonstrates that model performance scales
predictably with compute budget, model size, and dataset size. In this work, we
develop scaling laws based on problem complexity. We analyze two fundamental
complexity measures: solution space size and representation space size. Using the
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) as a case study, we show that combinatorial
optimization promotes smooth cost trends, and therefore meaningful scaling laws
can be obtained even in the absence of an interpretable loss. We then show that
suboptimality grows predictably for fixed-size models when scaling the number of
TSP nodes or spatial dimensions, independent of whether the model was trained
with reinforcement learning or supervised fine-tuning on a static dataset. We
conclude with an analogy to problem complexity scaling in local search, showing
that a much simpler gradient descent of the cost landscape produces similar trends.1

1

Introduction

Neural network performance usually improves with more parameters, more training, and more data.
While small increases in budget improve performance unpredictably, model performance becomes
highly predictable at scale, often with surprisingly simple trends [1, 2]. Such trends have been called
neural scaling laws [3, 4], where performance smoothly improves when scaling model size, dataset
size, or compute budget. This principle is summarized elegantly [3] by analogy to the ideal gas law,
which describes the macroscopic behavior of a gas independent of its microscopic dynamics.
Neural scaling laws emerge over a wide variety of problems and problem scales [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. This
observation implies the existence of a general underlying order, one that persists across the diverse
natures of various tasks. Neural scaling laws capture slices of this behavior, fixing variables of the
problem so that their influence is absorbed within the constants of a specific trend.
In this paper, we hypothesize that model performance is similarly predictable when scaling fundamental measures of problem complexity. We directly isolate this relationship and scale problem
complexity for parameter-constrained, fixed-size models while approximating the regime in which
compute and data are unconstrained. We take an initial step toward predicting the limit of performance
as a function of the deep learning algorithm, the capacity of the model, and the properties of the task.
If we study measures of complexity that are task-specific, it will be difficult to draw meaningful
conclusions that are general in nature, even if smooth scaling laws emerge. For example, Jones [10]
extends compute scaling laws to also be a function of Hex board size. Measures like game-tree
complexity and state-space complexity are well-studied for Hex [11] but have complicated relationships with board size [12] and are primarily applicable to sequential games. We approach this
issue by distilling two fundamental measures of problem complexity inherent in any deep learning
†

Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. Correspondence to: <lowell6@vt.edu>
Project code, along with our new dataset of 128 million optimal TSP solutions, is provided at:
https://github.com/lowellw6/complexity-scaling-laws
1

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

