No-Regret Learning Under Adversarial Resource
Constraints: A Spending Plan Is All You Need!

Francesco Emanuele Stradi∗
Politecnico di Milano
francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it
Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it
Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Christian Kroer
Columbia University
ck2945@columbia.edu

Abstract
We study online decision making problems under resource constraints, where both
reward and cost functions are drawn from distributions that may change adversarially over time. We focus on two canonical settings: (i) online resource allocation
where rewards and costs are observed before action selection, and (ii) online learning with resource constraints where they are observed after action selection, under
full feedback or bandit feedback. It is well known that achieving sublinear regret
in these settings is impossible when reward and cost distributions may change
arbitrarily over time. To address this challenge, we analyze a framework in which
the learner is guided by a spending plan—a sequence prescribing expected resource usage across rounds. We design general (primal-)dual methods that achieve
sublinear regret with respect to baselines that follow the spending plan. Crucially,
the performance of our algorithms improves when the spending plan ensures a
well-balanced distribution of the budget across rounds. We additionally provide a
robust variant of our methods to handle worst-case scenarios where the spending
plan is highly imbalanced. To conclude, we study the regret of our algorithms when
competing against benchmarks that deviate from the prescribed spending plan.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study online decision making problems with resource constraints. In this class of
problems, a decision maker has m resources and a decision set X . Across a sequence of T timesteps,
the decision maker must repeatedly choose decisions xt ∈ X , where each decision leads to some
resource depletion specified by a cost function ct (xt ) ∈ [0, 1]m and a reward ft (xt ) ∈ [0, 1]. We
study two canonical settings. (i) Online resource allocation (ORA). In this setting, the decision maker
observes the reward and cost functions ft , ct before choosing xt . This setting captures problems
such as budget management in second-price auctions [12] and network revenue management [57].
(ii) Online learning with resource constraints (OLRC), where the decision maker chooses xt first,
and then receives some feedback on rewards and costs. Under full feedback, they observe the entire
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

