Vid-SME: Membership Inference Attacks against
Large Video Understanding Models

Qi Li Runpeng Yu Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore
{liqi, r.yu}@u.nus.edu xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) demonstrate remarkable capabilities
in handling complex multimodal tasks and are increasingly adopted in video understanding applications. However, their rapid advancement raises serious data privacy
concerns, particularly given the potential inclusion of sensitive video content, such
as personal recordings and surveillance footage, in their training datasets. Determining improperly used videos during training remains a critical and unresolved
challenge. Despite considerable progress on membership inference attacks (MIAs)
for text and image data in MLLMs, existing methods fail to generalize effectively
to the video domain. These methods suffer from poor scalability as more frames
are sampled and generally achieve negligible true positive rates at low false positive
rates (TPR@Low FPR), mainly due to their failure to capture the inherent temporal
variations of video frames and to account for model behavior differences as the
number of frames varies. To address these challenges, we introduce Vid-SME
(Video Sharma–Mittal Entropy), the first membership inference method tailored for
video data used in video understanding LLMs (VULLMs). Vid-SME leverages the
confidence of model output and integrates adaptive parameterization to compute
Sharma–Mittal entropy (SME) for video inputs. By leveraging the SME difference
between natural and temporally-reversed video frames, Vid-SME derives robust
membership scores to determine whether a given video is part of the model’s
training set. Experiments on various self-trained and open-sourced VULLMs
demonstrate the strong effectiveness of Vid-SME. Code is available here.

1

Introduction

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [1, 11, 26, 55] have received widespread attention from
the AI community. By combining large language models (LLMs) with vision encoders, MLLMs gain
the ability to perform a wide range of vision-language tasks [17, 64, 19, 21]. Recently, there has been
growing interest in extending MLLMs to video understanding [63, 28, 30, 45], driven by their strong
capabilities in processing visual information. However, the rapid development of video understanding
LLMs (VULLMs) also raises critical concerns regarding data privacy leakage, as videos used for
model training may contain sensitive content, such as personal recordings and surveillance footage,
which could be memorized and unintentionally exposed by the models [5, 48, 61]. This highlights
the severity of the problem, since early studies demonstrate that models’ memorization of data can be
maliciously exploited to conduct membership inference attacks (MIAs) [44, 4], where adversaries
aim to determine whether a specific data sample was used during training. However, despite the
booming development of VULLMs, efforts to address this issue significantly lags behind.
Recent studies have explored MIAs on LLMs and MLLMs [59, 43, 24, 50]. However, we observe
that directly applying these methods to VULLMs results in extremely poor performance, and the
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

