Recursive Inference Scaling:
A Winning Path to Scalable Inference in Language and
Multimodal Systems

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin
Google Deepmind
Zürich, Switzerland
ibomohsin@google.com

Xiaohua Zhai
Google Deepmind
Zürich, Switzerland
xzhai@google.com

Abstract
Inspired by recent findings on the fractal geometry of language, we introduce
Recursive INference Scaling (RINS) as a complementary, plug-in recipe for scaling
inference time in language and multimodal systems. RINS is a particular form
of recursive depth that significantly outperforms +55 other variants, including the
recent “repeat-all-over” (RAO) strategy in Mobile LLM (Liu et al., 2024) and
latent recurrent thinking (Geiping et al., 2025). Unlike prior works, we carry out
our comparisons on a compute-matched regime, and demonstrate that for a fixed
model size and training compute budget, RINS substantially improves language
modeling performance. It also generalizes beyond pure language tasks, delivering
gains in multimodal systems, including a +2% improvement in 0-shot ImageNet
accuracy for SigLIP-B/16. Additionally, by deriving data scaling laws, we show that
RINS improves both the asymptotic performance limits and the scaling exponents.
More importantly, with light-weight (linear) adapters (comprising < 1% of model
parameters) and stochastic dropout, RINS offers a no-regret strategy, meaning that
RINS-enabled pretraining improves performance in language modeling even when
recursive depth is not applied at inference time. This corresponds to improving
performance on a training compute-, parameter-, and inference-matched regime,
suggesting its potential as a viable component of LLM pretraining!

1

Introduction

There has been a proliferation of research in recent years pointing to the pivotal role of scale, and how
its benefits could be predicted empirically (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020; Alabdulmohsin
et al., 2022; Bansal et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2022). Generally, the performance of deep neural networks
f (x) (such as its error rate or log-perplexity) often follows a power law f (x) ∼ βx−c + ε as one
varies a dimension x, such as the data size or model parameters. These “scaling laws,” as they are
known today, have been used, among others, to determine the training data size needed for a specified
level of accuracy (Cho et al., 2015; Beleites et al., 2013; Figueroa et al., 2012) and to optimize the
model architecture (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Alabdulmohsin et al., 2024b), with
some theoretical justification (Bahri et al., 2021; Hutter, 2021; Sharma and Kaplan, 2022).
Besides this conventional approach of scaling training compute, the impact of increased inference
compute on model performance has emerged as another key scaling dimension. For example, chainof-thought (CoT) prompting show that eliciting longer inference paths through additional token
generation could improve the reasoning capabilities of LLMs (Wei et al., 2024), similar to the
success of critiquing before evaluating (Ankner et al., 2024). Also, AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022) and
Codex (Chen et al., 2021) generate multiple samples during inference to enhance code generation.
Remarkably, Brown et al. (2024) shows that the benefit of sampling multiple solutions in tasks such
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

