ESCA: Contextualizing Embodied Agents via
Scene-Graph Generation

Jiani Huang
University of Pennsylvania
jianih@seas.upenn.edu

Amish Sethi ∗
University of Pennsylvania
asethi04@seas.upenn.edu

Matthew Kuo ∗
University of Pennsylvania
mkuo@seas.upenn.edu

Mayank Keoliya
University of Pennsylvania
mkeoliya@seas.upenn.edu

Neelay Velingker
University of Pennsylvania
neelay@seas.upenn.edu

JungHo Jung
University of Pennsylvania
j76jung@seas.upenn.edu

Ser-Nam Lim
University of Central Florida
sernam@ucf.edu

Ziyang Li
Johns Hopkins University
ziyang@cs.jhu.edu

Mayur Naik
University of Pennsylvania
mhnaik@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) are making rapid progress toward
general-purpose embodied agents. However, existing MLLMs do not reliably
capture fine-grained links between low-level visual features and high-level textual
semantics, leading to weak grounding and inaccurate perception. To overcome this
challenge, we propose ESCA, a framework that contextualizes embodied agents
by grounding their perception in spatial-temporal scene graphs. At its core is
SGClip, a novel, open-domain, promptable foundation model for generating scene
graphs that is based on CLIP. SGClip is trained on 87K+ open-domain videos
using a neurosymbolic pipeline that aligns automatically generated captions with
scene graphs produced by the model itself, eliminating the need for human-labeled
annotations. We demonstrate that SGClip excels in both prompt-based inference
and task-specific fine-tuning, achieving state-of-the-art results on scene graph
generation and action localization benchmarks. ESCA with SGClip improves perception for embodied agents based on both open-source and commercial MLLMs,
achieving state of-the-art performance across two embodied environments. Notably,
ESCA significantly reduces agent perception errors and enables open-source models to surpass proprietary baselines. We release the source code for SGCLIP model
training at https://github.com/video-fm/LASER and for the embodied agent
at https://github.com/video-fm/ESCA.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large-scale pretraining have enabled foundation models to assist with a wide
range of tasks, from language and vision understanding [2, 15, 52, 83] to mathematical problem
solving [96, 18] and code generation [21, 61, 55]. However, it remains an open challenge to realize
embodied agents that are capable of doing household chores, training alongside humans in physical
activities, or providing care for the aging [39, 13]. A critical first step toward this goal is equipping
agents with fine-grained perception to ground abstract goals in physical interactions.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

