From Forecasting to Planning: Policy World Model for
Collaborative State-Action Prediction
Zhida Zhao ∗ Talas Fu ∗ Yifan Wang Lijun Wang † Huchuan Lu
Dalian University of Technology
{770153907, oyontalas}@mail.dlut.edu.cn
{wyfan, ljwang, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite remarkable progress in driving world models, their potential for autonomous systems remains largely untapped: the world models are mostly learned
for world simulation and decoupled from trajectory planning. While recent efforts
aim to unify world modeling and planning in a single framework, the synergistic
facilitation mechanism of world modeling for planning still requires further exploration. In this work, we introduce a new driving paradigm named Policy World
Model (PWM), which not only integrates world modeling and trajectory planning
within a unified architecture, but is also able to benefit planning using the learned
world knowledge through the proposed action-free future state forecasting scheme.
Through collaborative state-action prediction, PWM can mimic the human-like
anticipatory perception, yielding more reliable planning performance. To facilitate
the efficiency of video forecasting, we further introduce a parallel token generation
mechanism, equipped with a context-guided tokenizer and an adaptive dynamic focal loss. Despite utilizing only front camera input, our method matches or exceeds
state-of-the-art approaches that rely on multi-view and multi-modal inputs. Code
will be released at https://github.com/6550Zhao/Policy-World-Model.

1

Introduction

Driving world models have recently garnered growing research interest, due to their capacity to
simulate future environmental states, enabling autonomous systems to anticipate complex traffic
dynamics and enhance decision-making safety [1, 2]. This trend is particularly evident in video-based
paradigms, driven by the accessibility of large-scale video datasets and the breakthroughs of the
video generation technique [3–5]. Despite remarkable progress having been achieved, existing world
model based autonomous driving methods [6–10] mostly operate in a decoupled manner (Figure 1
(a)), i.e., the world models aim to predict the next state and the associated reward but cannot directly
perform trajectory planning. A separate policy model is still required for perceiving and planning. As
a result, the full potential of the world model in autonomous driving is largely restricted [11].
Several concurrent works have made the initial attempt towards integrating both world modeling
and planning in a unified autoregressive model [12, 11], where interleaved image and action token
sequences are generated through the next-token prediction manner. Although the two tasks are
jointly learned in these works, they are still independently conducted (Figure 1 (b)), where world
modeling prioritizes high-fidelity next frame prediction with photo-realistic details conditioned on
input actions, and trajectory planning is performed through an end-to-end mapping from the visual
observation to output actions without explicitly leveraging the learned world model. As such, the
world modeling and trajectory planning are only unified in terms of model architecture and prediction
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

