From Dormant to Deleted: Tamper-Resistant
Unlearning Through Weight-Space Regularization

Shoaib Ahmed Siddiqui ∗
University of Cambridge

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite
Google DeepMind
Mila

Michael C. Mozer
Google DeepMind

David Krueger
Mila

Eleni Triantafillou
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Recent unlearning methods for LLMs are vulnerable to relearning attacks: knowledge believed-to-be-unlearned re-emerges by fine-tuning on a small set of (even
seemingly-unrelated) examples. We study this phenomenon in a controlled setting for example-level unlearning in vision classifiers. We make the surprising
discovery that forget-set accuracy can recover from around 50% post-unlearning
to nearly 100% with fine-tuning on just the retain set—i.e., zero examples of the
forget set. We observe this effect across a wide variety of unlearning methods,
whereas for a model retrained from scratch excluding the forget set (gold standard),
the accuracy remains at 50%. We observe that resistance to relearning attacks
can be predicted by weight-space properties, specifically, L2 -distance and linear
mode connectivity between the original and the unlearned model. Leveraging this
insight, we propose a new class of methods that achieve state-of-the-art resistance
to relearning attacks2 .

Introduction

Machine unlearning is the problem of removing
the influence of specific training datapoints, the
forget set, from a pretrained model. This was initially motivated from the perspective of privacy,
the right-to-be-forgotten [3, 33], data protection
policies [32], and recently applied to a range of
problems, including removing harmful knowledge [28, 46, 8].

Retrain from scratch
SCRUB

Forget set accuracy

1

1.00

NegGrad+
Circuit Breakers

Unlearned
Relearned

0.50

Exact unlearning refers to completely eliminating the influence of the forget set. This objective
0.00
can be achieved by retraining the model without
0.88 0.90 0.92 0.94
those datapoints (i.e., retrain from scratch) [2].
Test set accuracy
However, such a method is computationally prohibitive as it requires retraining the model for Figure 1: Fine-tuning an unlearned model on
every unlearning request [2]. This issue moti- just the retain set recovers performance on the
vated the development of approximate unlearn- forget set! Results on CIFAR-10 using a forget set
of atypical examples from class ‘airplane’.
∗
2

Correspondence to msas3@cam.ac.uk.
Code to reproduce our experiments: https://github.com/shoaibahmed/vision_relearning

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

