FedGPS: Statistical Rectification Against Data
Heterogeneity in Federated Learning

Zhiqin Yang1 Yonggang Zhang3 Chenxin Li1
Yiu-ming Cheung2 Bo Han2 Yixuan Yuan1∗
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Hong Kong Baptist University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) confronts a significant challenge known as data heterogeneity, which impairs model performance and convergence. Existing methods
have made notable progress in addressing this issue. However, improving performance in certain heterogeneity scenarios remains an overlooked question: How
robust are these methods to deploy under diverse heterogeneity scenarios? To
answer this, we conduct comprehensive evaluations across varied heterogeneity
scenarios, showing that most existing methods exhibit limited robustness. Meanwhile, insights from these experiments highlight that sharing statistical information
can mitigate heterogeneity by enabling clients to update with a global perspective. Motivated by this, we propose FedGPS (Federated Goal-Path Synergy), a
novel framework that seamlessly integrates statistical distribution and gradient
information from others. Specifically, FedGPS statically modifies each client’s
learning objective to implicitly model the global data distribution using surrogate information, while dynamically adjusting local update directions with gradient information from other clients at each round. Extensive experiments show
that FedGPS outperforms state-of-the-art methods across diverse heterogeneity
scenarios, validating its effectiveness and robustness. The code is available at:
https://github.com/CUHK-AIM-Group/FedGPS.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) facilitates collaborative model training across distributed data sources,
garnering substantial interest in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4]. Its primary goal is to keep data localized
to protect sensitive information while harnessing contributions from other participants to enhance
individual models [5, 6] or construct a superior global model [7]. However, this decentralized
paradigm encounters data heterogeneity [8, 9] (also known as statistical heterogeneity), due to the
variations in client devices, geographic locations, and annotation processes [10, 11]. This departure
from the assumption of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data presents a substantial
challenge, complicating the training of distributed networks across diverse data distributions to
achieve robust generalization on the overall data distribution [8, 12].
To enhance performance in FL, numerous studies have advanced efforts to mitigate the impact of
data heterogeneity [13, 14, 15, 16]. FedAvg [7] introduces the paradigm of local training followed
by aggregation. Moreover, several studies have refined the learning objective of local training by
incorporating constraints to mitigate client drift [11, 12, 17, 18]. Client sampling [19, 20] and global
aggregation weight adjustments [21, 22] have also been tailored to adapt to heterogeneity scenarios.
Additionally, information-sharing strategies [23, 14, 15] have emerged as a promising approach
∗

Corresponding author: Yixuan Yuan (yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

