Deep Edge Filter: Return of the Human-Crafted
Layer in Deep Learning

Dongkwan Lee∗

Junhoo Lee∗
Seoul National University
{biancco,mrjunoo,nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

Nojun Kwak†

Abstract
We introduce the Deep Edge Filter, a novel approach that applies high-pass filtering to deep neural network features to improve model generalizability. Our method
is motivated by our hypothesis that neural networks encode task-relevant semantic
information in high-frequency components while storing domain-specific biases
in low-frequency components of deep features. By subtracting low-pass filtered
outputs from original features, our approach isolates generalizable representations
while preserving architectural integrity. Experimental results across diverse domains such as Vision, Text, 3D, and Audio demonstrate consistent performance
improvements regardless of model architecture and data modality. Analysis reveals that our method induces feature sparsification and effectively isolates highfrequency components, providing empirical validation of our core hypothesis. The
code is available at https://github.com/dongkwani/DeepEdgeFilter.

1

Introduction

Edge filters have long been a widely used classical technique in image processing to effectively
capture relevant information, providing strong priors that are robust to various types of noise while
effectively extracting semantic information. However, modern deep learning remains vulnerable to
perturbation and domain shift [25, 23]. This is because the superficial low-level texture dependencies acquired by deep learning models during training further exacerbate their vulnerability to perturbations [8]. This vulnerability is evident in the fields of adversarial attack [10, 7] and domain
adaptation [18, 42]. For example, even small adversarial perturbations, difficult for the human eye
to detect, can cause significant confusion in models, or the performance of models can be greatly
degraded simply because of a change from day to night.
Why have we lost knowledge of edge detection? Indeed, numerous past attempts have sought to
integrate edge detection techniques into the deep learning domain [32, 48]. The core idea was to apply edge detection, or methodologies inspired by it, to input images. These processed images would
then be fed into deep learning models, aiming to leverage the inherent robustness of edge detection
against perturbations. However, such approaches failed to gain significant traction. This lack of success can be attributed to two primary factors. Firstly, while applying Edge Filters to images offers the
benefit of robustness against perturbations, it conversely leads to the removal of fine-grained image
details. This diminishes the informational content fed into deep learning models, limiting the ability
to fully leverage the strengths of deep learning models, which excel at processing information-rich
inputs. Secondly, classical edge detection was limited to the image domain. This inherent limitation
makes it difficult to employ universally within the current deep learning landscape, which increasingly focuses on handling diverse data modalities, not only visual data but also a wide array of
modalities including natural language, 3D scenes, and audio.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

