Learning 3D Anisotropic Noise Distributions Improves
Molecular Force Field Modeling
Xixian Liu1→, Rui Jiao2→, Zhiyuan Liu3† , Yurou Liu4 , Yang Liu2 ,
Ziheng Lu5 , Wenbing Huang4† , Yang Zhang3 , Yixin Cao6
1
Fudan University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 National University of Singapore
4
Renmin University of China, 5 Microsoft Research
6
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
xixian.liu@mila.quebec, jiaor21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhiyuan@nus.edu.sg, hwenbing@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Coordinate denoising has emerged as a promising method for 3D molecular pretraining due to its theoretical connection to learning a molecular force field. However, existing denoising methods rely on oversimplified molecular dynamics that
assume atomic motions to be isotropic and homoscedastic. To address these limitations, we propose a novel denoising framework AniDS: Anisotropic Variational
Autoencoder for 3D Molecular Denoising. AniDS introduces a structure-aware
anisotropic noise generator that can produce atom-specific, full covariance matrices
for Gaussian noise distributions to better reflect directional and structural variability in molecular systems. These covariances are derived from pairwise atomic
interactions as anisotropic corrections to an isotropic base. Our design ensures
that the resulting covariance matrices are symmetric, positive semi-definite, and
SO(3)-equivariant, while providing greater capacity to model complex molecular
dynamics. Extensive experiments show that AniDS outperforms prior isotropic
and homoscedastic denoising models and other leading methods on the MD17
and OC22 benchmarks, achieving average relative improvements of 8.9% and
6.2% in force prediction accuracy. Our case study on a crystal and molecule
structure shows that AniDS adaptively suppresses noise along the bonding direction, consistent with physicochemical principles. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ZeroKnighting/AniDS.

1

Introduction

Accurately and efficiently predicting atomic properties of molecules and materials is fundamental
to a wide range of downstream applications, including drug discovery [1, 2], material design [3],
catalyst design [4, 5], and molecular dynamics simulations [6, 7]. Ab initio methods such as Density
Functional Theory (DFT) [8] are widely regarded as the standard for atomic property prediction, but
their high computational cost significantly limits scalability to large systems or datasets. To overcome
this challenge, machine learning potentials [9] have been developed to accelerate atomic simulations
by orders of magnitude, with recent advances of graph neural networks (GNNs) [10, 11] further
improving prediction accuracy. Among these methods, coordinate denoising [12, 13] has emerged as
a promising training objective, due to its theoretical grounding in learning molecular force fields.
Classical coordinate denoising [12] involves recovering the original atomic coordinates X from
the perturbed version X + ω, where the noise ω → N (0, ω 2 I) is drawn from an isotropic Gaussian.
This objective corresponds to learning the molecular force fields when the data distribution p(X̃)
→

Equal contribution.

† Correspondence.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

