Overcoming Long-Context Limitations of State-Space
Models via Context-Dependent Sparse Attention

1

Zhihao Zhan1,2,† , Jianan Zhao1,2,† , Zhaocheng Zhu1,2 , Jian Tang1,3,4,*
Mila - Québec AI Institute, 2 University of Montréal 3 HEC Montréal, 4 CIFAR AI Chair
†
Equal contribution * Correspondence: tangjian@mila.quebec

Abstract
Efficient long-context modeling remains a critical challenge for natural language
processing (NLP), as the time complexity of the predominant Transformer architecture scales quadratically with the sequence length. While state-space models
(SSMs) offer alternative sub-quadratic solutions, they struggle to capture longrange dependencies effectively. In this work, we focus on analyzing and improving
the long-context modeling capabilities of SSMs. We show that the widely used
synthetic task, associative recall, which requires a model to recall a value associated with a single key without context, insufficiently represents the complexities
of real-world long-context modeling. To address this limitation, we extend the
associative recall to a novel synthetic task, joint recall, which requires a model to
recall the value associated with a key given in a specified context. Theoretically, we
prove that SSMs do not have the expressiveness to solve multi-query joint recall in
sub-quadratic time complexity. To resolve this issue, we propose a solution based
on integrating SSMs with Context-Dependent Sparse Attention (CDSA), which has
the expressiveness to solve multi-query joint recall with sub-quadratic computation.
To bridge the gap between theoretical analysis and real-world applications, we
propose locality-sensitive Hashing Attention with sparse Key Selection (HAX),
which instantiates the theoretical solution and is further tailored to natural language
domains. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world long-context
benchmarks show that HAX consistently outperforms SSM baselines and SSMs
integrated with context-independent sparse attention (CISA). Our code is available
at: https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/HAX.

1

Introduction

Long-context modeling is a central challenge in natural language processing (NLP), which underpins a
variety of applications, such as document summarization, question answering, and machine translation
[30]. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have broadened the landscape of long-context
modeling, enabling new capabilities such as autonomous agents, retrieval-augmented generation,
dialogue systems, and long-context reasoning [22]. This growing demand has spurred intensive
research into algorithms that can efficiently and effectively capture long-range dependencies [37].
Currently, the Transformer architecture [38] is the dominant paradigm in sequence modeling. However, its applicability to long sequences is fundamentally constrained by the required computation that
grows quadratically with the sequence length. This motivates the research direction for the invention
of efficient architectures.
Recently, state-space models (SSMs) [10, 16, 31] have emerged as a potential alternative solution,
offering sub-quadratic time complexity as well as comparable performance to Transformers on
short-context NLP tasks [14, 4]. However, empirical evidence suggests that SSMs are less effective
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

