PINNs with Learnable Quadrature

Sourav Pal
UW-Madison
spal9@wisc.edu

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli
NVIDIA Corporation
kaazizzad@gmail.com

Vikas Singh
UW-Madison
vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
The growing body of work on Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) seeks
to use machine learning strategies to improve methods for solution discovery of
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). While classical solvers may remain the
preferred tool of choice in the short-term, PINNs can be viewed as complementary.
The expectation is that in some specific use cases, they can be effective, standalone.
A key step in training PINNs is selecting domain points for loss evaluation, where
Monte Carlo sampling remains the dominant but often suboptimal in low dimension settings, common in physics. We leverage recent advances in asymptotic
expansions of quadrature nodes and weights (for weight functions belonging to
the modified Gauss-Jacobi family) together with suitable adjustments for parameterization towards a data-driven framework for learnable quadrature rules. A direct
benefit is a performance improvement of PINNs, relative to existing alternatives,
on a wide range of problems studied in the literature. Beyond finding a standard
solution for an instance of a single PDE, our construction enables learning rules to
predict solutions for a given family of PDEs via hyper-networks, a useful capability
for PINNs.

1

Introduction

Differential equations are widely used across science, providing a framework for modeling/analyzing
diverse physical dynamics. Most real-world settings lead to differential equations where analytical
solutions are not possible, but research over decades has led to a mature set of numerical methods
[Ames, 2014, Trefethen and Bau, 2022]. Specifically, a growing body of work has identified novel
architectures, by marrying differential equation solvers with deep learning and these formulations
offer new capabilities. For example, one now has access to completely data-driven approaches [Li
et al., 2020b,a, Kovachki et al., 2021] which use observational data to estimate the operator for
a PDE. We also have a new class of differential equation solvers that exploit neural networks to
encode physical laws (PINNs) [Raissi et al., 2019, Kharazmi et al., 2019] without any observational
data. PINNs give solutions which are mesh-independent, easier to implement due to automatic
differentiation, and handle non-linearity well. As such, while classical solvers may remain the default
choice in general, developments in PINN suggest that they can be an alternative in certain scenarios.
Roughly speaking, the aforementioned line of work [Karniadakis et al., 2021], discussed in more
detail later in §7 can be broadly classified under three main threads: (a) Solving PDEs using neural
networks (PINNs) [Raissi et al., 2019]; (b) PDE discovery (e.g., symbolic regression) [Holt et al.,
2023, d’Ascoli et al., 2023] and (c) operator learning (e.g., Fourier Neural Operator) [Azizzadenesheli
et al., 2024]. This classification is loosely based on the amount of data or physics used to solve/inform
the forward/inverse problem, [Boullé and Townsend, 2023]. Our work falls under the first category,
where we wish to solve a single (or multiple instances) of a PDE with PINNs. Here, we seek to
identify how a learning mechanism can deliver efficiency gains solely based on the shared structure
and knowledge of physics, without the use of any labeled data.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

