Ultrametric Cluster Hierarchies: I Want ‘em All!
Andrew Draganov∗ 1,2 Pascal Weber∗ 3,4,5
Rasmus Jørgensen1
Anna Beer3
Claudia Plant3,5 Ira Assent1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
2
IAS-8: Data Analytics and Machine Learning, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany
3
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
4
UniVie Doctoral School Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
5
Data Science @ Uni Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
draganovandrew@gmail.com pascal.weber@univie.ac.at

Abstract
Hierarchical clustering is a powerful tool for exploratory data analysis, organizing
data into a tree of clusterings from which a partition can be chosen. This paper
generalizes these ideas by proving that, for any reasonable hierarchy, one can
optimally solve any center-based clustering objective over it (such as k-means).
Moreover, these solutions can be found exceedingly quickly and are themselves
necessarily hierarchical. Thus, given a cluster tree, we show that one can quickly
access a plethora of new, equally meaningful hierarchies. Just as in standard
hierarchical clustering, one can then choose any desired partition from these new
hierarchies. We conclude by verifying the utility of our proposed techniques across
datasets, hierarchies, and partitioning schemes.†

1

Introduction

Hierarchical clustering is a fundamental technique for exploratory data analysis [42, 77]. The key
idea is that having a tree of clusterings over a given dataset allows users to choose any partition
from this hierarchy that best suits the users’ needs. These notions go beyond standard agglomerative
clustering algorithms to also include density-based clustering techniques like DBSCAN [24] and
HDBSCAN [12]. Even non-hierarchical clustering algorithms like k-means can be solved efficiently
by leveraging hierarchical representations [17, 18, 55].
The central underlying concept of hierarchical clustering methods is that they can be modeled using
ultrametrics: distances which satisfy the strong triangle inequality d(x, z) ≤ max(d(x, y), d(y, z))
for all x, y, z. Put simply, a set of points can only satisfy this inequality if they are arranged in nested,
hierarchical structures [4]. Originally described for phylogenetic and agglomerative clustering tasks
[57, 65], the depth of this equivalence between hierarchical clustering and ultrametrics has inspired
multiple subfields of unsupervised learning theory [3, 19, 22].
Our results. We prove an elegant, previously unknown property of ultrametrics: all standard
center-based clustering tasks (i.e., k-means, k-median, k-center) can be solved optimally in any
ultrametric. The key insight is that, in this setting, these center-based clustering tasks can be reduced
to sorting. Consequently, our algorithm is remarkably efficient: given an ultrametric on n points,
finding the full set of optimal solutions (i.e., for all k ∈ [n]) requires only Sort(n) time – the time to
sort n values. Our results therefore improve on recent work in both runtime and generality [6, 18, 44].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
∗

First authors with equal contribution in alphabetical order.
https://github.com/pasiweber/SHiP-framework/ – Implementation and experiments
https://pypi.org/project/SHiP-framework/ – Python interface package

†

