SafeVLA: Towards Safety Alignment of VisionLanguage-Action Model via Constrained Learning

Borong Zhang1,2,4,∗ , Yuhao Zhang1,∗ , Jiaming Ji1,3,∗ , Yingshan Lei1,2 ,
Josef Dai1,2 , Yuanpei Chen1,2 , Yaodong Yang1,2,†

Abstract
Vision-language-action models (VLAs) show potential as generalist robot policies.
However, these models pose extreme safety challenges during real-world deployment, including the risk of harm to the environment, the robot itself, and humans.
How can safety constraints be explicitly integrated into VLAs? We address this
by exploring an integrated safety approach (ISA), systematically modeling safety
requirements, then actively eliciting diverse unsafe behaviors, effectively constraining VLA policies via safe reinforcement learning, and rigorously assuring
their safety through targeted evaluations. Leveraging the constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) paradigm, ISA optimizes VLAs from a min-max perspective
against elicited safety risks. Thus, policies aligned through this comprehensive
approach achieve the following key features: (I) effective safety-performance
trade-offs, reducing the cumulative cost of safety violations by 83.58% compared
to the state-of-the-art method, while also maintaining task success rate (+3.85%).
(II) strong safety assurance, with the ability to mitigate long-tail risks and handle
extreme failure scenarios. (III) robust generalization of learned safety behaviors
to various out-of-distribution perturbations. The effectiveness is evaluated on
long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks. Our data, models and newly proposed
benchmark environment are available at https://pku-safevla.github.io.

1

Introduction

Embodied AI aims to develop a generalist policy that can perform perception, interaction, reasoning,
and adaptation in the physical world [1]. Building on the emergence of large language models (LLMs)
and vision-language models (VLMs), vision-language-action models (VLAs) [2, 3, 4, 5] advance
this field by enabling robots to follow vision-language instructions and perform tasks in real-world
environments. As these models continue to evolve, they have the potential to become generalist
robot policies [6, 7], capable of executing previously unseen instructions and effectively generalizing
behaviors across a diverse range of robot embodiments, scenes, skills, and objects [3]. Ensuring the
alignment of these models with human values and safety has become more critical than ever [8, 9],
due to their increasing complexity and power [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. While significant progress has been
made in task performance, the explicit integration of safety mechanisms remains an open challenge.
How can safety constraints be explicitly integrated into VLAs without loss of performance?
The safety risks of LLMs and VLMs have been extensively studied, with existing methods such as
data augmentation [15], content moderation [16, 17], reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) [18, 19], Safe-RLHF [20], language feedback [21, 22], and lightweight alignment [23, 24].
However, these safety mechanisms cannot be directly applied to VLAs, as there is a substantial
gap between the abstract safety concerns at the model intention level [25, 26] and the unique safety
∗
Equal Contribution. 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. 2 PKU-PsiBot Joint Lab. 3 State
Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. 4 Zhongguancun Academy. Author email:
<borongzh@gmail.com, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

