Retrospective In-Context Learning for Temporal
Credit Assignment with Large Language Models

Wen-Tse Chen1

Jiayu Chen2 Fahim Tajwar1 Hao Zhu3 Xintong Duan1
Ruslan Salakhutdinov1 Jeff Schneider1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Stanford University

Abstract
Learning from self-sampled data and sparse environmental feedback remains a
fundamental challenge in training self-evolving agents. Temporal credit assignment
mitigates this issue by transforming sparse feedback into dense supervision signals.
However, previous approaches typically depend on learning task-specific value
functions for credit assignment, which suffer from poor sample efficiency and
limited generalization. In this work, we propose to leverage pretrained knowledge
from large language models (LLMs) to transform sparse rewards into dense training signals (i.e., the advantage function) through retrospective in-context learning
(RICL). We further propose an online learning framework, RICOL, which iteratively refines the policy based on the credit assignment results from RICL. We
empirically demonstrate that RICL can accurately estimate the advantage function
with limited samples and effectively identify critical states in the environment for
temporal credit assignment. Extended evaluation on four BabyAI scenarios show
that RICOL achieves comparable convergent performance with traditional online
RL algorithms with significantly higher sample efficiency. Our findings highlight
the potential of leveraging LLMs for temporal credit assignment, paving the way
for more sample-efficient and generalizable RL paradigms.

1

Introduction

Online learning with LLMs, guided by self-generated data and environmental feedback, offers a
promising research direction for advancing beyond the constraints of demonstration [Dong et al.,
2024]. However, this task is inherently difficult because valuable environmental feedback is often
sparse [Andrychowicz et al., 2017, Sukhbaatar et al., 2017]. This challenge is particularly evident
in multi-turn settings, where agents must execute a sequence of correct actions to receive a reward
signal. Sparse environmental feedback increases both the sample complexity and the instability of
the learning process [Chaudhari et al., 2024, Cao et al., 2024]. In this work, we explore effective
temporal credit assignment methods to convert sparse feedback into dense training signals based on a
creative use of LLMs, enabling the identification of critical states and actions in the environment and
facilitating more efficient online learning (of LLM agents).
In particular, we adopt LLMs as policies and update them using a novel Retrospective In-Context
Learning (RICL) algorithm. RICL is designed specifically for multi-turn setting. At each turn
(i.e., environment time step), RICL first analyze environmental feedback (i.e., reward signals) by
leveraging the pretrained knowledge of an LLM reflector, then incorporate this analysis into the
prompt to perform an in-context update of the LLM policy. Further, we introduce a novel paradigm
to estimate the advantage function of an LLM policy by utilizing the log-probabilities of both the
original policy and its in-context updated version. This process is theoretically grounded, and our
experiments demonstrate that it can accurately estimate the advantage function with high sample
efficiency. In this way, we transform sparse reward signals into advantage functions, which are
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

