Reasoning Is Not a Race: When Stopping Early Beats
Going Deeper

Mohan Zhang1∗ Jiaxuan Gao1∗ Shusheng Xu2 Yi Wu1†
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Ant Group
zhangmohan70@gmail.com, jxwuyi@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the use of Process Reward Models (PRMs) for guiding Long Chain-ofThought (CoT) reasoning in large language models. Although PRMs deliver finegrained feedback in standard tasks, PRM-guided beam search does not consistently
outperform PRM-free approaches in long CoT reasoning. We trace this shortfall to
a “step quality degradation”—the expected step quality shows concave behavior,
yielding unimodal or monotonically declining trends. To counteract this, we
propose Z-Score Guided Early Stopping (ZGES), which halts search at the detected
quality peak using local PRM-reward z-scores. Across multiple math benchmarks
and model scales, ZGES outperforms both standard PRM-guided beam search
and the PRM-free methods. Ablation studies further highlight the advantages and
robustness of ZGES’s adaptive stopping mechanism.

1

Introduction

Process Reward Models (PRMs) play a crucial role in test-time search of reasoning tasks [1] for large
language models (LLMs). Compared to the Outcome Reward Models (ORMs) [2] that focus solely
on the correctness of the final answer, PRMs offer finer-grained supervision by providing stepwise
rewards throughout the reasoning process. By offering feedback at each step, PRMs help guide the
model’s reasoning path toward the correct solution path. Recent works have trained PRMs through
automatically annotated labels to guide LLMs in beam search or to re-rank multiple candidate outputs
from the LLMs [3–6], resulting in improved performance compared to naive sampling.
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [7] prompting has emerged as a powerful method to enhance the reasoning
ability of LLMs by decomposing complex problems into intermediate steps. Building on this
technique, the emergence of Long CoT LLMs capable of sustaining long-horizon reasoning chains,
such as OpenAI o1 [8] and DeepSeek R1 [9], has sparked growing interest in long-CoT reasoning.
These models demonstrate significant advances in mathematical reasoning, code synthesis, and
cross-domain inference [10–12]. Compared to short CoT, Long CoT entails more comprehensive
reasoning processes, greater depth in analyzing intermediate steps, and a wider exploration of logical
relationships [12]. However, how to effectively apply PRMs to Long CoT reasoning tasks remains
unclear. Specifically, we ask:
Q1: How well does PRM guide Long CoT models during test-time search?
Q2: How to enhance PRMs’ effectiveness in test-time search under Long CoT settings?
In this work, to answer Q1, we evaluate the performance of Long CoT models with varying parameter
sizes on math benchmarks including AMC2023, AIME2024, and AIME2025, using two prevalent
classes of Process Reward Models: Hard PRM and Soft PRM (see Section 2). The hard PRM treats a
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

