Sample-Efficient Multi-Round Generative Data
Augmentation for Long-Tail Instance Segmentation

Byunghyun Kim, Minyoung Bae, Jae-Gil Lee∗
KAIST
{rooknpown, mybae, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Data synthesis has become increasingly crucial for long-tail instance segmentation
tasks to mitigate class imbalance and high annotation costs. Previous methods have
primarily prioritized the selection of data from a pre-generated image object pool,
which frequently leads to the inefficient utilization of generated data. To address this
inefficiency, we propose a collaborative approach that incorporates feedback from
an instance segmentation model to guide the augmentation process. Specifically,
the diffusion model uses feedback to generate objects that exhibit high uncertainty.
The number and size of synthesized objects for each class are dynamically adjusted
based on the model state to improve learning in underrepresented classes. This
augmentation process is further strengthened by running multiple rounds, allowing
feedback to be refined throughout training. In summary, multi-round collaborative
augmentation (MRCA) enhances sample efficiency by providing optimal synthetic
data at the right moment. Our framework requires only 6% of the data generation
needed by state-of-the-art methods while outperforming them.

1

Introduction

The advent of diffusion models has made generating high-quality images significantly easier with
lower cost [9, 23, 30, 31]. These advancements naturally opened new possibilities for generating
training data in data-hungry vision tasks like object detection [16, 17] and instance segmentation [4,
21, 27]1 . Diffusion models can synthesize images conditioned on textual descriptions, enabling
the creation of diverse and detailed datasets with labels [6, 22]. Especially for long-tail instance
segmentation, where class imbalance and high annotation costs pose significant challenges, diffusionbased image synthesis has become a crucial solution.
Copy-paste-based methods, originally intended for augmenting training data using real image objects [8, 15], now have been extended to utilize high-quality synthetic image objects generated by
diffusion models. That is, these recent methods first generate a large pool of image objects and then
augment the training data by pasting them to real images [11, 37, 41]. The advantage arises from
generating objects in a training-free manner, at a comparably lower cost than layout-based methods
that train the diffusion model with the training data as shown in Figure 1a [5, 40]. However, some
studies have shown that continuously training with synthetic data can eventually degrade model
performance [12, 13]. Such finding has naturally led to research on active and curriculum learning
strategies that can incrementally select most informative synthetic objects from a pre-generated object
pool as shown in Figure 1b [26, 41]. Nevertheless, preemptively constructing the object pool before
training may be suboptimal, as it can result in a significant number of unused objects and may not
include object characteristics that could address the model’s deficiencies encountered during training.
∗

Corresponding author
While we designate instance segmentation as our target task, object detection is equally relevant.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
1

