Multi-Task Vehicle Routing Solver via Mixture of
Specialized Experts under State-Decomposable MDP

Yuxin Pan1∗ Zhiguang Cao2 Chengyang Gu3 Liu Liu4†
Peilin Zhao4,6 Yize Chen5† Fangzhen Lin1†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Singapore Management University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Tencent AI Lab
5
University of Alberta
6
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yuxin.pan@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Existing neural methods for multi-task vehicle routing problems (VRPs) typically
learn unified solvers to handle multiple constraints simultaneously. However, they
often underutilize the compositional structure of VRP variants, each derivable from
a common set of basis VRP variants. This critical oversight causes unified solvers
to miss out the potential benefits of basis solvers, each specialized for a basis VRP
variant. To overcome this limitation, we propose a framework that enables unified
solvers to perceive the shared-component nature across VRP variants by proactively
reusing basis solvers, while mitigating the exponential growth of trained neural
solvers. Specifically, we introduce a State-Decomposable MDP (SDMDP) that
reformulates VRPs by expressing the state space as the Cartesian product of basis
state spaces associated with basis VRP variants. More crucially, this formulation
inherently yields the optimal basis policy for each basis VRP variant. Furthermore,
a Latent Space-based SDMDP extension is developed by incorporating both the
optimal basis policies and a learnable mixture function to enable the policy reuse
in the latent space. Under mild assumptions, this extension provably recovers the
optimal unified policy of SDMDP through the mixture function that computes
the state embedding as a mapping from the basis state embeddings generated by
optimal basis policies. For practical implementation, we introduce the Mixtureof-Specialized-Experts Solver (MoSES), which realizes basis policies through
specialized Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) experts, and implements the mixture
function via an adaptive gating mechanism. Extensive experiments conducted
across VRP variants showcase the superiority of MoSES over prior methods. The
source code is available at https://github.com/panyxy/moses_vrp.

1

Introduction

Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) are a canonical class of combinatorial optimization problems
(COPs) with broad applications spanning transportation [19], logistics [6], and manufacturing [80].
While exact methods are computationally prohibitive [36], and heuristic methods rely on substantial
domain-specific knowledge [23, 66], recent studies craft learning-based neural solvers for empirically
sound performance with lower makespan and marginal domain expertise [67, 54, 34, 35]. Prevailing
∗
†

This work is done when Yuxin Pan works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding Authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

