Causal Discovery over Clusters of Variables
in Markovian Systems

Tara V Anand
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Columbia University
tara.v.anand@columbia.edu

Adèle H Ribeiro
Institute of Medical Informatics
University of Münster
adele.ribeiro@uni-muenster.de

Jin Tian
Mohamed bin Zayed University
of Artificial Intelligence
jin.tian@mbzuai.ac.ae
George Hripcsak
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Columbia University
gh13@cumc.columbia.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Causal discovery methods are powerful tools for uncovering the structure of relationships among variables, yet they face significant challenges in scalability
and interpretability, especially in high-dimensional settings. In many domains,
researchers are not only interested in causal links between individual variables, but
also in relationships among sets or clusters of variables. Learning causal structure
at the cluster level can both reveal higher-order relationships of interest and improve scalability. In this work, we introduce an approach for causal discovery over
clusters in Markov causal systems. We propose a new graphical model that encodes
knowledge of relationships between user-defined clusters while fully representing
independencies and dependencies over clusters, faithful to a given distribution.
We then define and characterize a graphical equivalence class of these models
that share cluster-level independence information. Lastly, we present a sound and
complete algorithm for causal discovery to represent learnable causal relationships
between clusters of variables.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery, where observational data are used to uncover causal relationships between variables,
is a task of interest in many domains [13, 19]. The goal in causal discovery is to use data to learn as
much information as possible about the underlying causal diagram, a graph that illustrates assumptions
about the presence and direction of causal and confounding relationships between variables in a
system. One approach to causal discovery has been through constraint-based methods, where
independence information, combined with logic regarding graphical properties, are used to determine
structural properties of the graph, and constraints on possible causal diagrams that could correspond
with the dataset [22, 13, 18]. Among constraint-based algorithms, PC is a foundational algorithm for
Markovian systems, where causal sufficiency, or the absence of latent confounding, is assumed [19]
and there are several extensions of this algorithm [15, 17]. FCI is the comparable algorithm for nonMarkovian settings where unobserved confounding is permitted [26, 20] and of which there are also
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

