GeoRanker: Distance-Aware Ranking for Worldwide
Image Geolocalization

Pengyue Jia1,2 , Seongheon Park2 , Song Gao3 , Xiangyu Zhao1∗ , Sharon Li2
1
Department of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong,
2
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
3
Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin-Madison
jia.pengyue@my.cityu.edu.hk,sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Worldwide image geolocalization—the task of predicting GPS coordinates from
images taken anywhere on Earth—poses a fundamental challenge due to the vast
diversity in visual content across regions. While recent approaches adopt a twostage pipeline of retrieving candidates and selecting the best match, they typically
rely on simplistic similarity heuristics and point-wise supervision, failing to model
spatial relationships among candidates. In this paper, we propose GeoRanker, a
distance-aware ranking framework that leverages large vision-language models
to jointly encode query–candidate interactions and predict geographic proximity.
In addition, we introduce a multi-order distance loss that ranks both absolute and
relative distances, enabling the model to reason over structured spatial relationships.
To support this, we curate GeoRanking, the first dataset explicitly designed for
geographic ranking tasks with multimodal candidate information. GeoRanker
achieves state-of-the-art results on two well-established benchmarks (IM2GPS3K
and YFCC4K), significantly outperforming current best methods. We also release
our code, checkpoint, and dataset online2 for ease of reproduction.

1

Introduction
Accuracy at 1km

Worldwide geolocalization [1, 2] refers to the task of predicting the
0.4
+96.2%
+68.1% 0.327
GPS coordinates of images captured anywhere on Earth. Unlike
0.280
+39.9%
0.3
approaches constrained to specific cities or regions [3, 4, 5, 6, 7],
0.233
global geolocalization poses significantly greater challenges due
0.2 0.167
to the immense diversity in visual content, ranging from natural
0.1
landscapes and climatic variations to architectural differences and
cultural markers [8, 9, 10]. Despite these complexities, accurate
0.0
G3 Top5 Top10 Top20
global geolocalization holds broad practical relevance, with a wide
range of applications including criminal investigations [11], naviga- Figure 1: Accuracy at 1km ertion systems [12], and environmental monitoring [13].
ror threshold for G3 (Current
Recent state-of-the-art approaches [8, 9, 10, 14] typically follow a SOTA) vs. the best candidate
two-stage pipeline: (1) retrieving and generating a set of candidates within top-k retrieved results.
based on a global database, and (2) selecting the top match as the predicted geolocation. As shown in
Figure 1, although the current SOTA model (G3 [14], which ranks candidates via GPS location-image
embedding similarity) achieves 16.7% accuracy at the 1km error threshold on IM2GPS3K, better
candidates often exist among the top-k retrieved results. This suggests that one can retrieve reasonably
high-quality candidates, yet the final prediction accuracy hinges on the second stage—the model’s
∗
2

Corresponding author
https://github.com/Applied-Machine-Learning-Lab/GeoRanker

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

