Non-Asymptotic Analysis Of Data Augmentation For
Precision Matrix Estimation
Lucas Morisset∗
Qube Research and Technologies
& École Polytechnique

Adrien Hardy
Qube Research and Technologies

Alain Durmus
École Polytechnique

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of inverse covariance (also known as precision matrix) estimation in high-dimensional settings. Specifically, we focus on two classes
of estimators: linear shrinkage estimators with a target proportional to the identity
matrix, and estimators derived from data augmentation (DA). Here, DA refers
to the common practice of enriching a dataset with artificial samples—typically
generated via a generative model or through random transformations of the original
data—prior to model fitting. For both classes of estimators, we derive estimators
and provide concentration bounds for their quadratic error. This allows for both
method comparison and hyperparameter tuning, such as selecting the optimal
proportion of artificial samples. On the technical side, our analysis relies on tools
from random matrix theory. We introduce a novel deterministic equivalent for
generalized resolvent matrices, accommodating dependent samples with specific
structure. We support our theoretical results with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

In this work, we consider the problem of estimating the inverse covariance matrix, also known as the
precision matrix, of a random vector from i.i.d. zero-mean samples [X1 , · · · , Xn ] ∈ Rd×n with true
covariance ΣX = E X1 X1> . Here, n denotes the number of samples, and d is the dimensionality
of the data. This problem has important applications in statistics and signal processing (see, e.g.,
[FLL16, Car88]).
We are particularly interested in the high-dimensional regimes, where the data dimension d and
the number of samples n are of the same order. In this setting, the sample covariance matrix
CX = n−1 XX > may be non-invertible or poorly-conditionned. As a result, using its inverse
as an estimator can lead to numerical instability and high estimation error. To address this issue,
shrinkage estimators for the covariance matrix have been proposed as a regularization method
[BGP16, LW04, SS05, LSW03], which involve adding a target matrix to CX . The simplest and
most common choice for the target is a multiple of the identity matrix, which effectively shifts
the eigenvalues above a threshold λ > 0, improving stability. In addition to linear shrinkage and
even more importantly, this paper also explores the use of data augmentation (DA) as an alternative
strategy.
Data augmentation (DA) involves increasing the size of a dataset by incorporating additional artificial
samples. The underlying intuition is that, in many cases, it is possible to artificially replicate the
∗

Correspondence to: lucas.morisset@polytechnique.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

