Irrational Complex Rotations Empower Low-bit
Optimizers

Zhen Tian
ByteDance
Beijing
chenyuwuxinn@gmail.com

Wayne Xin Zhao∗
GSAI, Renmin University of China
Beijing
batmanfly@gmail.com

Ji-Rong Wen
GSAI, Renmin University of China
Beijing
jrwen@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel optimizer state compression algorithm, namely
π-Quant, which leverages the properties of irrational numbers (e.g., π) for memoryefficient training. The core idea is based on our mathematical findings, which show
that a pair of parameters can be represented by a single rotation angle using
the complex rotation scheme. Building on this insight, we map the parameters
into a complex space and perform quantization using the corresponding rotation
angles. To efficiently integrate it into optimization process, we develop an efficient
system of geometric equations that computes the precise rotation angles with linear
complexity. We evaluate π-Quant on a wide range of tasks. Our experiments
show that it can reduce the bit-width of parameters to 3.32-bit, achieving a 41.8%
decrease in GPU memory usage, all while maintaining full accuracy. The code is
provided at https://github.com/RUCAIBox/Pi-Quant.

1

Introduction

The rapid growth of large-scale AI models (e.g., large language models [1]) has led to significant improvements in various tasks. However, larger models often require substantially more computational
power and memory resources to train. Typically, most models are trained with momentum-based
optimizers such as Adam [2], which require the storage of one or two optimizer momentum for each
individual parameter. As the parameter scale increases, the optimizer states consume the majority
of memory, with first-order and second-order momentum tensors in the Adam accounting for 66%
of parameter usage [3]. Therefore, finding a solution to develop a memory-efficient optimizer is a
critical challenge.
Considering the above issues, a number of studies [4, 3] propose using lower-precision representations
for the optimizer states, as shown in Table 1. They primarily analyze the frequently occurring values
of the optimizer states, and then use binary search to quantize all state elements to these values. While
previous attempts have demonstrated the promise of this approach, two major challenges remain.
First, most deep learning frameworks (e.g., Pytorch [5], TensorFlow [6]) do not support such search
quantization operations, these methods require additional compilation of GPU-supported operators.
As a result, these methods are not directly compatible with devices other than GPUs (e.g., CPU or
TPU). Second, these methods are specifically designed for certain bit-width quantization, making it
∗

Wayne Xin Zhao (batmanfly@gmail.com) is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

