Towards 3D Objectness Learning in an Open World

1

Taichi Liu1 , Zhenyu Wang2 , Ruofeng Liu3 , Guang Wang4 , Desheng Zhang1
Rutgers University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Michigan State University 4 Florida State University
taichi.liu@rutgers.edu, wangzy20@tsinghua.edu.cn
liuruofe@msu.edu, guang.wang@fsu.edu, desheng@cs.rutgers.edu
op3det.github.io

Abstract
Recent advancements in 3D object detection and novel category detection have
made significant progress, yet research on learning generalized 3D objectness
remains insufficient. In this paper, we delve into learning open-world 3D objectness,
which focuses on detecting all objects in a 3D scene, including novel objects unseen
during training. Traditional closed-set 3D detectors struggle to generalize to openworld scenarios, while directly incorporating 3D open-vocabulary models for openworld ability struggles with vocabulary expansion and semantic overlap. To achieve
generalized 3D object discovery, we propose OP3Det, a class-agnostic OpenWorld Prompt-free 3D Detector to detect any objects within 3D scenes without
relying on hand-crafted text prompts. We introduce the strong generalization
and zero-shot capabilities of 2D foundation models, utilizing both 2D semantic
priors and 3D geometric priors for class-agnostic proposals to broaden 3D object
discovery. Then, by integrating complementary information from point cloud
and RGB image in the cross-modal mixture of experts, OP3Det dynamically
routes uni-modal and multi-modal features to learn generalized 3D objectness.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the extraordinary performance of OP3Det,
which significantly surpasses existing open-world 3D detectors by up to 16.0% in
AR and achieves a 13.5% improvement compared to closed-world 3D detectors.

1

Introduction

In 3D perception systems, especially in real-world environments such as autonomous driving and
robotics, object categories of interest may change dynamically. This has led to increasing attention on
challenging tasks like out-of-distribution 3D detection [1, 2], open-world 3D detection [3, 4] and openvocabulary 3D detection [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], improving generalization beyond closed-set assumptions.
A core challenge across these tasks is the ability to localize all objects, which lies in understanding
how objects are structured in 3D scenes to distinguish them from the background. While extensive
efforts have been made to identify unknown or novel objects in the 2D domain [11, 12, 13] - known
as class-agnostic object detection (OD) [14], such exploration in the 3D domain remains limited. To
bridge this gap, we introduce learning 3D objectness in a class-agnostic paradigm, enabling models to
detect and discover objects beyond known categories. Therefore, our goal is to achieve class-agnostic
3D object detection, where objects are identified and localized based on their intrinsic properties
rather than pre-defined semantic labels, thus supporting open-world perception.
In a class-agnostic manner, ensuring a high recall rate is essential, as it ensures that the majority of
objects in the scene are detected regardless of their semantic categories. This serves as a foundation
for accurate category assignment and significantly contributes to object detection for categories
of interest [7, 15]. Although current point-cloud-based 3D detectors [16, 17, 18, 19, 20] have
achieved significant success in 3D benchmark datasets [21, 22, 23, 24], simply shifting from classspecific to class-agnostic classification is ineffective. This is primarily because 3D point cloud
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

