Towards Syn-to-Real IQA: A Novel Perspective on
Reshaping Synthetic Data Distributions

Jinjian Wu∗ Yongxu Liu Leida Li Weisheng Dong
Xidian University
abli@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {jinjian.wu, wsdong}@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
{yongxu.liu, ldli}@xidian.edu.cn
Aobo Li

Abstract
Blind Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) has advanced significantly through deep
learning, but the scarcity of large-scale labeled datasets remains a challenge. While
synthetic data offers a promising solution, models trained on existing synthetic
datasets often show limited generalization ability. In this work, we make a key
observation that representations learned from synthetic datasets often exhibit a
discrete and clustered pattern that hinders regression performance: features of
high-quality images cluster around reference images, while those of low-quality
images cluster based on distortion types. Our analysis reveals that this issue
stems from the distribution of synthetic data rather than model architecture. Consequently, we introduce a novel framework SynDR-IQA, which reshapes synthetic data distribution to enhance BIQA generalization. Based on theoretical
derivations of sample diversity and redundancy’s impact on generalization error, SynDR-IQA employs two strategies: distribution-aware diverse content upsampling, which enhances visual diversity while preserving content distribution,
and density-aware redundant cluster downsampling, which balances samples by
reducing the density of densely clustered areas. Extensive experiments across
three cross-dataset settings (synthetic-to-authentic, synthetic-to-algorithmic, and
synthetic-to-synthetic) demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The code is
available at https://github.com/Li-aobo/SynDR-IQA.

1

Introduction

Blind Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) aims to automatically and accurately evaluate image quality
without relying on reference images [1, 2]. It plays a crucial role in enhancing user experience in
multimedia applications, improving the robustness of downstream image processing algorithms, and
guiding the optimization of image enhancement methods. However, the BIQA task is challenging
due to its complexity and high association with human perception.
In recent years, mainstream BIQA methods have greatly surpassed traditional methods due to the
powerful representational capabilities of deep learning models. However, the success of deep learning
largely relies on large-scale annotated datasets. The high cost of acquiring subjective quality labels
limits the growth of existing datasets. The availability of reference images and the controllability
of quality degradation in synthetic distortions suggest that low-cost data augmentation through
artificially synthesized data appears to be a feasible solution. In practice, training directly on existing
synthetic distortion datasets results in suboptimal quality representations with limited generalization
capabilities.
We observe a key phenomenon: models trained on synthetic data tend to produce a discrete and
clustered feature distribution. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, high-quality image features form
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

