O PEN CUA: Open Foundations for
Computer-Use Agents

Xinyuan Wang*x Bowen Wang*x Dunjie Lu*x Junlin Yang*x Tianbao Xie*x Junli Wang*x
Jiaqi Dengx Xiaole Guox Yiheng Xux Chen Henry Wuc Zhennan Shenx Zhuokai Lix Ryan Lix Xiaochuan Lix
Junda Chenx Boyuan Zhengx Peihang Lix Fangyu Leix Ruisheng Caox Yeqiao Fux Dongchan Shinx Martin Shinx
Jiarui Hux Yuyan Wangx Jixuan Chenx Yuxiao Yex Danyang Zhangx Yipu Wangm Heng Wangm
Diyi Yangs Victor Zhongw Y. Charlesm Zhilin Yangm Tao Yu†x
x

s

XLANG Lab, The University of Hong Kong m Moonshot AI
Stanford University w University of Waterloo c Carnegie Mellon University

Project Page: https://opencua.xlang.ai

Abstract
Vision-language models have demonstrated impressive capabilities as computer-use
agents (CUAs) capable of automating diverse computer tasks. As their commercial
potential grows, critical details of the most capable CUA systems remain closed.
As these agents will increasingly mediate digital interactions and execute consequential decisions on our behalf, the research community needs access to open
CUA frameworks to study their capabilities, limitations, and risks. To bridge this
gap, we propose O PEN CUA, a comprehensive open-source framework for scaling
CUA data and foundation models. Our framework consists of: (1) an annotation
infrastructure that seamlessly captures human computer-use demonstrations; (2)
AGENT N ET, the first large-scale computer-use task dataset spanning 3 operating
systems and 200+ applications and websites; (3) a scalable pipeline that transforms
demonstrations into state–action pairs with reflective long Chain-of-Thought reasoning that sustain robust performance gains as data scales. Our end-to-end agent
models demonstrate strong performance across CUA benchmarks. In particular,
O PEN CUA-72B achieves an average success rate of 45.0% on OSWorld-Verified,
establishing a new state-of-the-art (SOTA) among open-source models. Further
analysis confirms that our approach generalizes well across domains and benefits
significantly from increased test-time computation. We release our annotation tool,
datasets, code, and models to build open foundations for further CUA research:
https://opencua.xlang.ai

Figure 1: OSWorld-Verified Performance [44]: Left: OpenCUA recipe helps performance scaling
with data size and model size. Right: OpenCUA-72B outperforms current open-source models and is
comparable with Claude 4 Sonnet [2].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

