FlashBias: Fast Computation of Attention with Bias

Haixu Wu1 , Minghao Guo2 , Yuezhou Ma1 , Yuanxu Sun1 , Jianmin Wang1 ,
Wojciech Matusik2 , Mingsheng Long1
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University, 2 MIT CSAIL
{wuhaixu98,guomh2014}@gmail.com, {mayz20,sunyuanx22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {wojciech}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Attention with bias, which extends standard attention by introducing prior knowledge as an additive bias matrix to the query-key scores, has been widely deployed in
vision, language, protein-folding and other advanced scientific models, underscoring its status as a key evolution of this foundational module. However, introducing
bias terms creates a severe efficiency bottleneck in attention computation. It disrupts
the tightly fused memory-compute pipeline that underlies the speed of accelerators
like FlashAttention, thereby stripping away most of their performance gains and
leaving biased attention computationally expensive. Surprisingly, despite its common usage, targeted efficiency optimization for attention with bias remains absent,
which seriously hinders its application in complex tasks. Diving into the computation of FlashAttention, we prove that its optimal efficiency is determined by the rank
of the attention weight matrix. Inspired by this theoretical result, this paper presents
FlashBias based on the low-rank compressed sensing theory, which can provide
fast-exact computation for many widely used attention biases and a fast-accurate
approximation for biases in general formalizations. FlashBias can fully take advantage of the extremely optimized matrix multiplication operation in modern GPUs,
achieving 1.5× speedup for Pairformer in AlphaFold 3, and over 2× speedup for
attention with bias in vision and language models without loss of accuracy. Code
is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/FlashBias.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Transformer [40] has enabled impressive achievements in extensive areas, including
computer vision [25, 45], natural language processing [2, 39], scientific applications [1, 18, 42], etc.
Especially, as the core design of Transformer, the attention mechanism with powerful relation modeling capacity has emerged as a foundation module in deep learning models, making its optimization of
vital importance. As a seminal progress, FlashAttention [10, 9] speeds up the computation of standard
attention by successfully reducing the read-write cost of GPU high bandwidth memory (HBM) with
IO-aware techniques. Afterwards, researchers further extend FlashAttention to support diverse kinds
of masks [35, 41], such as causal mask in decoder-only Transformers or sliding window mask.
While standard attention or attention with masks has enjoyed elaborative efficiency optimization, we
notice that attention with bias is a similarly important extension in dealing with complex tasks, where
useful prior knowledge is introduced as a bias term of dot-product attention weights to guide the
model learning. For example, in vision and language Transformers, the relative distance among tokens
is a well-established attention bias and has been proven essential to the final performance of various
tasks [25, 24, 30]. Also, for scientific problems with rich domain-specific prior [42], attention bias is
an indispensable component, such as the pair representation bias in AlphaFold [1, 18, 34]. However,
the targeted efficiency optimization for attention with bias is still lacking. All previous research in
extending standard attention is centered on the speedup of attention with masks [35, 41], where the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

