Generalizable Hand-Object Modeling from
Monocular RGB Images via 3D Gaussians

Xingyu Liu* , Pengfei Ren* , Qi Qi, Haifeng Sun, Zirui Zhuang,
Jing Wang, Jianxin Liao, Jingyu Wang†
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{liuxingyu, rpf, qiqi8266, hfsun, zhuangzirui,
wangjing, liaojx, wangjingyu}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in hand-object interaction modeling have employed implicit representations, such as Signed Distance Functions (SDF) and Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) to reconstruct hands and objects with arbitrary topology and photo-realistic
detail. However, these methods often rely on dense 3D surface annotations, or
are tailored to short clips constrained in motion trajectories and scene contexts,
limiting their generalization to diverse environments and movement patterns. In
this work, we present HOGS, an adaptively perceptive 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) framework for generalizable hand-object modeling from unconstrained
monocular RGB images. By integrating photometric cues from the visual modality
with the physically grounded structure of 3D Gaussians, HOGS disentangles inherent geometry from transient lighting and motion-induced appearance changes. This
endows hand-object assets with the ability to generalize to unseen environments
and dynamic motion patterns. Experiments on two challenging datasets demonstrate that HOGS outperforms state-of-the-art methods in monocular hand-object
reconstruction and photo-realistic rendering.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained hand-object modeling is crucial for immersive AR/VR applications. Existing methods
largely rely on dense 3D annotations or pre-scanned object models [16, 35, 47, 48, 15, 14], which
incur high labeling costs and limit scalability. Leveraging the ubiquity and accessibility of monocular
RGB images to reconstruct interactions, by contrast, offers a more practical avenue for seamless
integration into consumer-grade AR/VR ecosystems. Recent works [50, 7] achieve hand-object
reconstruction from short RGB clips but remain restricted to fixed environments and limited motion
trajectories, requiring scene-specific optimization and retraining for new conditions. We present a
cross-scene and cross-motion generalizable paradigm for photo-realistic hand-object modeling from
monocular RGB images, reducing novel-scene setup from hours to seconds without post-training
adaptation.
Recent studies have extensively explored implicit representations, such as signed distance functions
(SDF) and Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [29], to advance fine-grained hand-object modeling.
SDF-based methods [20, 3, 2, 27] densely optimize the zero-level set of a spatially continuous
signed-distance field, to capture high-density hand-object surface with arbitrary topology. Neural
implicit approaches [12, 31, 7] continuously encode scenes as volume density and view-dependent
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

