CRRL: Learning Channel-invariant Neural
Representations for High-performance Cross-day
Decoding

1

Xianhan Tan1,2,3 † , Binli Luo4 † , Yu Qi1,2,3,5∗, Yueming Wang1
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration, Zhejiang University
2
Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital, Zhejiang University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Central South University
5
State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Brain-computer interfaces have shown great potential in motor and speech rehabilitation, but still suffer from low performance stability across days, mostly due to
the instabilities in neural signals. These instabilities, partially caused by neuron
deaths and electrode shifts, leading to channel-level variabilities among different
recording days. Previous studies mostly focused on aligning multi-day neural signals onto a low-dimensional latent manifold to reduce the variabilities, while faced
with difficulties when neural signals exhibit significant drift. Here, we propose to
learn a channel-level invariant neural representation to address the variabilities in
channels across days. It contains a channel-rearrangement module to learn stable
representations against electrode shifts, and a channel reconstruction module to
handle the missing neurons. The proposed method achieved the state-of-the-art performance with cross-day decoding tasks over two months, on multiple benchmark
BCI datasets. The proposed approach showed good generalization ability that can
be incorporated to different neural networks.

1

Introduction

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have paved a new way for motor and speech rehabilitation (Card
et al., 2024; Metzger et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2019). However, the long-term stability of BCIs remains a
critical problem due to the channel-wise variability of neural signals. BCI systems commonly require
frequent recalibration in use, which hinders the user experience (Ajiboye et al., 2017).
The channel-wise variability can stem from diverse reasons (Degenhart et al., 2020). First, the
appearance of new neurons and the disappearance of existing neurons can happen across different
experimental days (Figure 1a). These changes affect the distribution of the channel signal, leading
to inconsistencies in the input space used for decoding (Flesher et al., 2021; Sussillo et al., 2016).
Second, the movement of neurons or electrodes can also drift in the recorded neural signals at each
channel (Figure 1b). The situations that cause channel-wise variability can be highly diverse, such
that directly learning a channel-wise invariant neural representation can be a challenging problem.
Existing studies addressed this problem from several aspects. The first group is the data alignment
approaches, which aim to align the low-dimensional manifolds of neural signals of different days.
Researchers have demonstrated that neural signals contain a consistent low-dimensional neural
manifold over long periods of time (Gallego et al., 2017). Study (Degenhart et al., 2020) tries to
∗

Corresponding author (qiyu@zju.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

