Sample-Efficient Tabular Self-Play for
Offline Robust Reinforcement Learning

Na Li
Zhejiang University
nlee@zju.edu.cn

Hangguan Shan
Zhejiang University
hshan@zju.edu.cn

Zewu Zheng
The Chinese University
of Hong Kong
zhengzw@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Wei Ni
Edith Cowan University
and University of New South Wales
wei.ni@ieee.org

Wenjie Zhang
University of New South Wales
wenjie.zhang@unsw.edu.au

Xinyu Li
Huazhong University
of Science and Technology
lixinyu@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), as a thriving field, explores how
multiple agents independently make decisions in a shared dynamic environment.
Due to environmental uncertainties, policies in MARL must remain robust to
tackle the sim-to-real gap. We focus on robust two-player zero-sum Markov games
(TZMGs) in offline settings, specifically on tabular robust TZMGs (RTZMGs).
We propose a model-based algorithm (RTZ-VI-LCB) for offline RTZMGs, which
is optimistic robust value iteration combined with a data-driven Bernstein-style
penalty term for robust value estimation. By accounting for distribution shifts
in the historical dataset, the proposed algorithm establishes near-optimal sample
complexity guarantees under partial coverage and environmental uncertainty. An
information-theoretic lower bound is developed to confirm the tightness of our algorithm’s sample complexity, which is optimal regarding both state and action spaces.
To the best of our knowledge, RTZ-VI-LCB is the first to attain this optimality, sets
a new benchmark for offline RTZMGs, and is validated experimentally.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), which focuses on developing algorithms that enable
multiple agents to learn and make decisions in dynamic environments, has garnered significant
attention in gaming [35] and autonomous driving [4]. Offline MARL, addresses the high cost
of interacting with the environment by leveraging historical data collected from past interactions
generated under unknown or biased behavior policies [22]. The dynamic and non-stationary nature of
real-world environments introduces critical uncertainties. Robustness becomes important in ensuring
stable decision-making, because standard MARL algorithms under ideal conditions are highly
sensitive and prone to catastrophic failures when faced with even minor adversarial perturbations [48,
45, 46]. In this sense, robust guarantees are particularly vital in offline MARL, highlighting the core
of offline robust MARL. Two-player zero-sum Markov games (TZMGs) represent a compelling setting
of MARL, giving rise to the field of robust TZMGs (RTZMGs) from robust MARL.
A key challenge in offline RTZMGs is addressing environmental uncertainties with as few samples
as possible under partial and limited coverage. Historical data often only offers partial and limited
coverage of the state-action space, leading to poor estimates of model parameters and unreliable
policy. Besides, environmental uncertainties arise from model mismatches, system noise, and the
disparity between simulation and real-world scenarios. To address uncertainties, RTZMGs incorporate
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

