Large Language Bayes

Justin Domke
University of Massachusetts Amherst

Abstract
Many domain experts do not have the time or expertise to write formal Bayesian
models. This paper takes an informal problem description as input, and combines
a large language model and a probabilistic programming language to define a joint
distribution over formal models, latent variables, and data. A posterior over latent
variables follows by conditioning on observed data and integrating over formal
models. This presents a challenging inference problem. We suggest an inference
recipe that amounts to generating many formal models from the large language
model, performing approximate inference on each, and then doing a weighted average. This is justified and analyzed as a combination of self-normalized importance
sampling, MCMC, and importance-weighted variational inference. Experimentally, this produces sensible predictions from only data and an informal problem
description, without the need to specify a formal model.

1

Introduction

Why isn’t Bayesian inference more popular? Arguably, a major reason is simply that creating
probabilistic models is hard. Most people interested in analyzing data are neither programmers nor
experts in statistics. Yet, writing a probabilistic model requires learning a probabilistic programming
language (PPL), fluency with a range of statistical distributions, and experience formalizing problem
intuitions. Even for experts, this is difficult and error-prone.
A natural idea is to ask the user to describe their problem in plain language and then use a Large
Language Model (LLM) to generate a formal probabilistic model. While LLMs can write serviceable
models, in practice they struggle in the same way as humans—sometimes the models they create are
good and sometimes they aren’t [27].
Yet LLMs have one major advantage over humans: they don’t mind being asked to create many
different candidate models for the same problem.
The central idea of this paper is to mathematically “glue” an LLM to a PPL. Given an informal
description of a problem, a joint distribution is defined over (1) formal probabilistic models, (2)
observed data, and (3) unobserved target variables. We then condition on data and marginalize out
the space of formal models to get a final posterior over target variables.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• A new problem definition, in which an informal description and a dataset define a posterior via an
LLM and a PPL. (Sec. 2)
• A broad algorithmic recipe for solving the resulting inference problem. (Sec. 3)
• Experiments illustrating that the final approximated posterior captures user intent and is typically
better than taking a naive average of formal models. (Sec. 4)
• Theory analyzing the expected accuracy of the suggested inference recipe. (Sec. 5)
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

