Bayesian Concept Bottleneck Models with LLM Priors

Jean Feng, Avni Kothari, Luke Zier
University of California,
San Francisco

Chandan Singh
Microsoft Research

Yan Shuo Tan
National University
of Singapore

Abstract
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) have been proposed as a compromise between
white-box and black-box models, aiming to achieve interpretability without sacrificing accuracy. The standard training procedure for CBMs is to predefine a candidate
set of human-interpretable concepts, extract their values from the training data, and
identify a sparse subset as inputs to a transparent prediction model. However, such
approaches are often hampered by the tradeoff between exploring a sufficiently
large set of concepts versus controlling the cost of obtaining concept extractions,
resulting in a large interpretability-accuracy tradeoff. This work investigates a
novel approach that sidesteps these challenges: BC-LLM iteratively searches over
a potentially infinite set of concepts within a Bayesian framework, in which Large
Language Models (LLMs) serve as both a concept extraction mechanism and prior.
Even though LLMs can be miscalibrated and hallucinate, we prove that BC-LLM
can provide rigorous statistical inference and uncertainty quantification. Across
image, text, and tabular datasets, BC-LLM outperforms interpretable baselines and
even black-box models in certain settings, converges more rapidly towards relevant
concepts, and is more robust to out-of-distribution samples. 1

1

Introduction

Although machine learning (ML) algorithms have demonstrated remarkable predictive performance,
many lack the interpretability and transparency necessary for human experts to audit their accuracy,
fairness, and safety [1, 2]. This has limited their adoption in high-stakes applications such as
medicine [3] and settings where regulatory agencies require algorithms to be explainable [4]. Recent
works have explored Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [5, 6] as a potential solution: these
methods leverage black-box algorithms to extract a small number of interpretable concepts, which
are subsequently processed by a fully transparent tabular model to predict a target label. Thus, in
principle, CBMs are much safer for use in high-stakes applications because humans can audit and, if
necessary, modify the extracted concepts to fix predictions.
Nevertheless, CBMs have yet to fully realize this promise. Early CBM methods were difficult to scale
because they relied on human experts to specify and annotate concepts on training data. Recent works
have proposed using LLMs to suggest and even annotate concepts [7–10], as LLMs are cheaper,
often have sufficient world knowledge to hypothesize useful concepts, and can provide (relatively)
high-quality concept annotations [9, 10]. This introduces new problems such as LLM hallucinations
and inconsistencies but, more critically, does not resolve the fundamental problem that standard
CBMs sacrifice a significant amount of accuracy to gain interpretability [11]. Recent proposals try
to address this by encoding concepts using “soft” continuous values, such as through embedding
similarity [8], rather than “hard” binary values. However, “soft” CBMs can leak information about
the label that would otherwise not have been available [12–16]; this risk is particularly severe when
1
Code for running BC-LLM and reproducing results in the paper are available at https://github.com/
jjfeng/bc-llm.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

