Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning As Neural
Manifold Packing

Guanming Zhang1,2
1

David J. Heeger2,3

Stefano Martiniani1,2,4,5

Center for Soft Matter Research, Department of Physics, New York University
2
Center for Neural Science, New York University
3
Department of Psychology, New York University
4
Simons Center for Computational Physical Chemistry, New York University
5
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
{gz2241, david.heeger, sm7683}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Contrastive self-supervised learning based on point-wise comparisons has been
widely studied for vision tasks. In the visual cortex of the brain, neuronal responses
to distinct stimulus classes are organized into geometric structures known as neural
manifolds. Accurate classification of stimuli can be achieved by effectively separating these manifolds, akin to solving a packing problem. We introduce Contrastive
Learning As Manifold Packing (CLAMP), a self-supervised framework that recasts
representation learning as a manifold packing problem. CLAMP introduces a loss
function inspired by the potential energy of short-range repulsive particle systems,
such as those encountered in the physics of simple liquids and jammed packings.
In this framework, each class consists of sub-manifolds embedding multiple augmented views of a single image. The sizes and positions of the sub-manifolds are
dynamically optimized by following the gradient of a packing loss. This approach
yields interpretable dynamics in the embedding space that parallel jamming physics,
and introduces geometrically meaningful hyperparameters within the loss function.
Under the standard linear evaluation protocol, which freezes the backbone and
trains only a linear classifier, CLAMP achieves competitive performance with
state-of-the-art self-supervised models. Furthermore, our analysis reveals that
neural manifolds corresponding to different categories emerge naturally and are
effectively separated in the learned representation space, highlighting the potential
of CLAMP to bridge insights from physics, neural science, and machine learning.

1

Introduction

Learning image representations that are both robust and broadly transferable remains a major challenge in computer vision, with critical implications for the efficiency and accuracy of training
across downstream tasks. State-of-the-art models address this problem by employing contrastive
self-supervised learning (SSL), wherein embeddings are treated as vectors and optimized using
pairwise losses to draw together positive samples, augmented views of the same image, and push
apart negative samples, views of different images [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. While SSL has advanced significantly, and in some cases, surpassed supervised methods [7, 8], its geometric foundations remain
largely underexplored. In visual cortex, neural activity often resides within geometric structures
known as neural manifolds — which span the embedding space [9] and may exhibit low intrinsic
dimensionality [10] that capture much of the observed variability in neural activity. Neural manifolds
have been characterized in a number of neural systems supporting a variety of cognitive processes
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

