Max Entropy Moment Kalman Filter for Polynomial
Systems with Arbitrary Noise

Sangli Teng∗
sanglit@umich.edu
Ashkan Jasour §
jasour@jpl.caltech.edu

Harry Zhang†‡
harryz@mit.edu

David Jin†‡
jindavid@mit.edu

Ram Vasudevan∗
ramv@umich.edu

Maani Ghaffari∗
maanigj@umich.edu

Luca Carlone†
lcarlone@mit.edu

Abstract
Designing optimal Bayes filters for nonlinear non-Gaussian systems is a challenging task. The main difficulties are: 1) representing complex beliefs, 2) handling
non-Gaussian noise, and 3) marginalizing past states. To address these challenges,
we focus on polynomial systems and propose the Max Entropy Moment Kalman
Filter (MEM-KF). To address 1), we represent arbitrary beliefs by a MomentConstrained Max-Entropy Distribution (MED). The MED can asymptotically
approximate almost any distribution given an increasing number of moment constraints. To address 2), we model the noise in the process and observation model
as MED. To address 3), we propagate the moments through the process model
and recover the distribution as MED, thus avoiding symbolic integration, which is
generally intractable. All the steps in MEM-KF, including the extraction of a point
estimate, can be solved via convex optimization. We showcase the MEM-KF in
challenging robotics tasks, such as localization with unknown data association.

1

Introduction

The Kalman Filter (KF) is an optimal estimator for linear Gaussian systems in the sense that it
provably computes a minimum-variance estimate of the system’s state. From the perspective of
the Bayes Filter, the KF recursively computes a Gaussian distribution that captures the mean and
covariance of the state. However, the optimality of the KF breaks down when dealing with nonlinear
systems or non-Gaussian noise. A plethora of extensions of the KF has been developed to deal with
nonlinearity and non-Gaussianity. For example, linearization-based methods, such as the Extended
Kalman Filter (EKF) [1], linearize the process and measurement models and propagate the covariance
using a standard KF. Other techniques, such as the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) [2], rely on
deterministic sampling to better capture the nonlinearities of the system but then still fit a Gaussian
distribution to the belief. Unfortunately, these extensions do not enjoy the desirable theoretical
properties of the KF: they are not guaranteed to produce an optimal estimate and —in the nonlinear
or non-Gaussian case— their mean and covariance might be far from describing the actual belief
distribution. Consider for example a system with non-Gaussian noise sampled from a discrete
∗

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
‡
Equal contributions
§
Team 347T-Robotic Aerial Mobility, Jet Propulsion Lab, Pasadena, CA, 91109, USA
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

