The Mirage of Performance Gains:
Why Contrastive Decoding Fails to Mitigate Object
Hallucinations in MLLMs?

1

Hao Yin1 Guangzong Si1,2 Zilei Wang1,∗
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo

{yinhnavi, guangzongsi}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Contrastive decoding strategies are widely used to reduce object hallucinations in
multimodal large language models (MLLMs). These methods work by constructing contrastive samples to induce hallucinations and then suppressing them in the
output distribution. However, this paper demonstrates that such approaches fail to
effectively mitigate the hallucination problem. The performance improvements
observed on POPE Benchmark are largely driven by two misleading factors: (1)
crude, unidirectional adjustments to the model’s output distribution and (2) the
adaptive plausibility constraint, which reduces the sampling strategy to greedy
search. To further illustrate these issues, we introduce a series of spurious improvement methods and evaluate their performance against contrastive decoding
techniques. Experimental results reveal that the observed performance gains in
contrastive decoding are entirely unrelated to its intended goal of mitigating hallucinations. Our findings challenge common assumptions about the effectiveness
of contrastive decoding strategies and pave the way for developing genuinely effective solutions to hallucinations in MLLMs. The source code is available at
https://github.com/ustc-hyin/cd_rethink

1

Introduction

The hallucination problem [1, 2, 3, 4] in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [5, 6, 7] refers
to the generation of outputs that are factually incorrect or misaligned with the input data. This issue
arises from challenges in aligning diverse data modalities, such as text and images, which amplify
reasoning errors. Such hallucinations can have serious consequences in critical domains, including
autonomous driving [8, 9, 10, 11] (e.g., false object detection leading to accidents) and healthcare
[12, 13] (e.g., incorrect diagnostic interpretations).
Contrastive decoding methods [14, 15, 16] are widely recognized as an effective approach to addressing object hallucination in generative models. As illustrated in Figure 1, these methods construct
contrastive samples designed to induce hallucinations, then suppress the corresponding output distributions, ensuring closer alignment between model outputs and visual inputs. Representative
approaches within this framework include Visual Contrastive Decoding (VCD) [17], Instruction
Contrastive Decoding (ICD) [18], and Self-Introspective Decoding (SID) [19]. Their training-free
nature and purported ability to address hallucinations have made them highly regarded in the field.
Although methods like VCD have demonstrated remarkable performance improvements on the POPE
benchmark [1], we reveal in Section 4 that these results are highly misleading. In reality, these
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

