From Programs to Poses: Factored Real-World
Scene Generation via Learned Program Libraries

Joy Hsu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
joycj@stanford.edu

Emily Jin
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
emilyjin@stanford.edu

Jiajun Wu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
jiajunwu@cs.stanford.edu

Niloy J. Mitra
Department of Computer Science
University College London
n.mitra@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Real-world scenes, such as those in ScanNet, are difficult to capture, with highly
limited data available. Generating realistic scenes with varied object poses remains
an open and challenging task. In this work, we propose FactoredScenes, a framework that synthesizes realistic 3D scenes by leveraging the underlying structure of
rooms while learning the variation of object poses from lived-in scenes. We introduce a factored representation that decomposes scenes into hierarchically organized
concepts of room programs and object poses. To encode structure, FactoredScenes
learns a library of functions capturing reusable layout patterns from which scenes
are drawn, then uses large language models to generate high-level programs, regularized by the learned library. To represent scene variations, FactoredScenes learns
a program-conditioned model to hierarchically predict object poses, and retrieves
and places 3D objects in a scene. We show that FactoredScenes generates realistic,
real-world rooms that are difficult to distinguish from real ScanNet scenes.

1

Introduction
Program generation

Real-world scenes are inherently noisy, varied, and livedin. For instance, chairs are often arranged based on how
people interact within a room, and monitors may be angled
to face specific seating arrangements. Capturing these nuanced rooms with noisy object poses remains challenging
and labor-intensive; hence, high-quality 3D scene datasets
such as ScanNet [1] are still scarce. How can we learn to
generate such realistic scenes from limited data?
Our key insight is that, despite inherent noisiness, indoor
scenes retain significant underlying structure based on how
rooms were intentionally designed, following social norms
and preferences. Chairs are grouped around tables, and
coffee tables are positioned by couches. We propose to
leverage this (hidden) structure by first generating programmatic layouts that align with the foundational design
of rooms, then modeling the realistic variation of lived-in
scenes through a pose prediction model for orienting ob-

couch = furniture(
x_min=500,
y_min=800,
x_max=1100,
y_max=1000
)
coffee_table =
cluster_placement(
couch_1,
[(0, -150)],
(200, 50)
)[0]
...

Pose prediction
Factored scene
representation

Figure 1: We propose FactoredScenes,
a framework that generates layout programs which encode underlying room
structure, and predicts objects poses that
capture nuanced variation in real-world,
lived-in scenes.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

