Revolutionizing Training-Free NAS: Towards Efficient
Automatic Proxy Discovery via Large Language
Models

1

Haidong Kang1∗ Lihong Lin1 Hanling Wang2
2
Northeastern University, China
Pengcheng Laboratory, China

hdkang@stumail.neu.edu.cn, linlh@mails.neu.edu.cn, wanghl03@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
The success of computer vision tasks is mainly attributed to the architectural
design of neural networks. This highlights the need to automatically design highperformance architectures via Neural Architecture Search (NAS). To accelerate
the search process, training-free NAS is proposed, which aims to search highperformance architectures at initialization via zero-cost proxies (ZCPs). However,
existing zero-cost proxies heavily rely on manual design, which is often laborintensive and requires extensive expert knowledge. In addition, these crafted
proxies often suffer from poor correlation with final model performance and high
computational complexity, severely limiting NAS efficiency in real-world applications. To address those issues, this paper proposes a novel Large Language
Models (LLMs)-driven Automatic Proxy Discovery (APD) framework, which
revolutionizes the design paradigm of ZCPs by leveraging LLMs to automatically
discover optimal ZCPs for Training-Free NAS. Moreover, we utilize actor-critic
based reinforcement learning to optimize prompts, enabling to generate better
ZCPs in the next generation. We conduct extensive experiments on mainstream
NAS benchmarks, demonstrating APD excels in both performance and efficiency.
Besides, we firmly believe that our APD will dramatically benefit the deep learning
community through providing novel paradigm of design algorithms via LLMs.

1

Introduction

Neural networks plays an indispensable role in computer vision tasks due to its superior performance,
which raises a trend to deploy neural networks (i.e., ResNet He et al. [2016]) on resource-intensive
scenarios. However, conventional neural networks designed by human experts suffer from Out-OfMemory (OOM) problems due to dramatically limited resources Xie et al. [2023], Kang et al. [2025].
Therefore, this highlights the need to design lightweight architectures, liberating the handicraft neural
networks from the OOM bottleneck.
Recently, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) Liu et al. [2018], Ye et al. [2022], Kang has emerged
as a promising paradigm for its searching high-performance architectures in an automatic manner,
while disrupting the conventional paradigm of manually designed architecture. Despite its potential,
NAS still suffers from a key bottleneck of huge computational budgets Ma et al. [2024]. To tackle
this, training-free NAS Mellor et al. [2021], Abdelfattah et al. [2021], Wang et al. [2020], Chen et al.
[2022], Lee and Ham [2024], Peng et al. [2024] is proposed to liberate NAS from the computational
bottleneck via the lens of without gradient descent. Essentially, the training-free NAS leverages ZCPs,
predicting the accuracy ranking of architectures in a training-free manner. Specifically, the ZCPs rely
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

