Sharp Matrix Empirical Bernstein Inequalities

Hongjian Wang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
hjnwang@cmu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aramdas@cmu.edu

Abstract
We present two sharp, closed-form empirical Bernstein inequalities for symmetric
random matrices with bounded eigenvalues. By sharp, we mean that both inequalities adapt to the√
unknown variance in a tight manner: the deviation captured by
the first-order 1/ n term asymptotically matches the matrix Bernstein inequality
exactly, including constants, the latter requiring knowledge of the variance. Our
first inequality holds for the sample mean of independent matrices, and our second
inequality holds for a mean estimator under martingale dependence at stopping
times.

1

Introduction

We are interested in nonasymptotic confidence sets for the common mean of independent or
martingale-dependent bounded random matrices that optimally adapt to the unknown underlying
variance. We first review the scalar case to set some context.
1.1

Background: Scalar Empirical Bernstein Inequalities

The classical Bennett-Bernstein inequality (see Lemma 5 of Audibert et al. [2009]; also Appendix B.1)
states that, for the average X n of independent random scalars X1 , . . . , Xn with common expected
value
almost sure upper bound |Xi | ⩽ B, and second moment upper bound
Pn µ =2 EXi , common
2
EX
⩽
nσ
,
i
i=1
!
r
B log(1/α)
2σ 2 log(1/α)
P Xn − µ ⩾
⩽ α.
(1)
+
3n
n
It
clear that (1) remains true if the assumptions are centered instead: |Xi − µ| ⩽ B and
Pis
n
2
if σ 2 ≈ EX12 ≪ B 2 , the deviation is
i=1 Var(Xi ) ⩽ nσ . A crucial feature
p of (1) is that 
dominated by the “variance term" Θ
n−1 σ 2 log(1/α) , tighter than the “boundedness term”
p
Θ( n−1 B 2 log(1/α)) that dominates if Hoeffding’s inequality [1963] is applied instead in the
absence of the variance bound σ 2 .
In practice, one often knows B but has no prior access to the possibly much smaller σ. Thus, such
bounds are usually only used in theoretical analysis, but not to practically construct confidence bounds
for the mean. For the latter task, so-called nonasymptotic empirical Bernstein (EB) inequalities are
therefore of particular interest. These inequalities often only assume the almost sure upper bound B
of the random variables and are agnostic and adaptive to the true variances
Var(Xi ), tothe effect
p
−1
that the final deviation is still dominated by an asymptotically Θ
n σ 2 log(1/α) variance
p
term, instead of Θ( n−1 B 2 log(1/α)) from Hoeffding’s inequality under the same boundedness
assumption.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

