Neural Attention Search
Difan Deng
Leibniz University Hannover
d.deng@ai.uni-hannover.de

Marius Lindauer
Leibniz University Hannover
L3S Research Center
m.lindauer@ai.uni-hannover.de

Abstract
We present Neural Attention Search (NAtS), an end-to-end learnable sparse transformer that automatically evaluates the importance of each token within a sequence
and determines if the corresponding token can be dropped after several steps. To
this end, we design a search space that contains three token types: (i) Global
Tokens will be preserved and queried by all the following tokens; (ii) Local Tokens
survive until the next global token appears; and (iii) Sliding Window Tokens have
an impact on the inference of a fixed size of the next following tokens. Similar to
the One-Shot Neural Architecture Search approach, this token-type information
can be learned jointly with the architecture weights via a learnable attention mask.
Experiments on both training a new transformer from scratch and fine-tuning existing large language models show that NAtS can efficiently reduce the KV cache size
and the inference costs for the models while maintaining the models’ performance.

1

Introduction

The ability to understand and infer from long-context information is crucial for many tasks such
as long document summarization [94] and question answering [20, 48], code generation [35, 56]
or multi-round dialogues [91]. Thanks to the ability to query the information from any position of
the historical sequence, transformer-based large language models [11, 14, 32, 34, 42] extend their
context length up to millions of tokens.
However, querying information from historical sequences requires a complexity of O(L2 ) w.r.t. the
input sequence length L. KV caching could reduce this time complexity to O(L) by storing all the
historical KV values. Nevertheless, with the increasing model size of recent LLMs, even the O(L)
time-wise and memory-wise complexity could become a bottleneck during inference time.
Indeed, not all the tokens in a sequence are equally important [46]. Many of them are redundant and
do not contribute to the final output. Humans can recognize this information without pre-defined fixed
rules and summarize or discard the context information into much smaller content. Transformers
could also learn this ability implicitly: Many tokens in the attention map might only have very low
weights [96] and only have little influence on the final predictions. However, as the transformer learns
this information implicitly, we might not know how the important tokens would be distributed in the
context. Selecting these tokens and recognizing the attention distributions might require extra human
experts’ knowledge by either looking at the attention maps [27, 58, 95, 96] or applying specific fixed
rules [13, 16, 17, 31, 84]. Since this knowledge is already contained in the transformer models, we
could also ask the model to evaluate the importance of each token and learn to predict the optimal
type for the given input tokens automatically.
Unlike prior works that rely on human expertise or predefined rules to identify important tokens [15,
27, 28, 31, 54, 84, 85, 96], we propose a novel approach to evaluate the importance of each token
by assigning different roles to each of the tokens. For example, some tokens will be preserved until
the end, while other tokens might only survive for a short amount of time. These roles measure
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

