Reasoning Beyond Points: A Visual Introspective
Approach for Few-Shot 3D Segmentation

Changshuo Wang
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London, United Kingdom
wangchangshuo1@gmail.com

Shuting He
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai, China
heshuting555@gmail.com

Xiang Fang∗
Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
xfang9508@gmail.com

Jia-Hong Huang
Information Institute
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands
j.huang@uva.nl

Yixian Shen
Information Institute
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands
y.shen@uva.nl

Zhijian Hu
LAAS
CNRS
Toulouse, France
huzhijian1991@gmail.com
Prayag Tiwari
School of Information Technology
Halmstad University
Halmstad, Sweden
prayag.tiwari@ieee.org

Abstract
Point Cloud Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation (PC-FSS) aims to segment unknown
categories in query samples using only a small number of annotated support samples. However, scene complexity and insufficient representation of local geometric
structures pose significant challenges to PC-FSS. To address these issues, we
propose a novel pre-training-free Visual Introspective Prototype Segmentation
network (VIP-Seg). Specifically, we design a Visual Introspective Prototype (VIP)
module that employs a multi-step reasoning approach to tackle intra-class diversity
and domain gaps between support and query sets. The VIP module consists of
a Prototype Enhancement Module (PEM) and a Prototype Difference Module
(PDM), which work alternately to progressively refine prototypes. The PEM enhances prototype discriminability and reduces intra-class diversity, while the PDM
learns common representations from the differences between query and support
features, effectively eliminating semantic inconsistencies caused by domain gaps.
To further reduce intra-class diversity and enhance point discriminative ability,
we propose a Dynamic Power Convolution (DyPowerConv) that leverages learnable power functions to effectively capture local geometric structures and detailed
features of point clouds. Extensive experiments on S3DIS and ScanNet demonstrate that our proposed VIP-Seg significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art
methods, proving its effectiveness in PC-FSS tasks. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/changshuowang/VIP-Seg .

∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

