Soft-consensual Federated Learning for Data
Heterogeneity via Multiple Paths

Sheng Huang1 , Lele Fu1 , Fanghua Ye2 , Tianchi Liao1 , Bowen Deng1 , Chuanfu Zhang1 ,
Chuan Chen1∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Tencent Inc., Shenzhen, China
{huangsh253, fulle, liaotch, dengbw3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{zhangchf9, chenchuan}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
fanghua.ye.21@gmail.com

Abstract
Federated learning enables collaborative training while preserving the privacy of
all participants. However, the heterogeneity in data distribution across multiple
training nodes poses significant challenges to the construction of federated models.
Prior studies were dedicated to mitigating the effects of data heterogeneity by using
global information as a blueprint and restricting the local update of the model for
reaching a “hard consensus”. But this practice makes it difficult to balance local and
global information, and it neglects to negotiate amicably between local and global
models to reach mutually agreeable results, called “soft consensus”. In this paper,
a multiple-path solving method is proposed to balance global and local features
and combine these two feature preference paths to reach a soft consensus. Rather
than relying on global information as the sole criterion, a negotiation process
is employed to address the same objective by accommodating diverse feature
preferences, thereby facilitating the discovery of a more plausible solution through
multiple distinct pathways. Considering the overwhelming power of local features
during local training, a swapping strategy is applied to weaken them to balance the
solution paths. Moreover, to minimize the additional communication cost caused
by the introduction of multiple paths, the solution of the task network is converted
into data adaptation to reduce the amount of parameter transmission. Extensive
experiments are conducted to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a privacy-preserving distributed learning paradigm [1, 2, 3] that can coordinate
several training nodes to jointly train a unified global model without exchanging raw data [4, 5, 6].
It is able to federate data from multiple parties to capture a diverse data distribution [7, 8]. As the
significance of privacy has been increasingly emphasized [9, 10, 11], federated learning has been
widely applied in fields [12, 13] with high privacy requirements, such as medical image processing
[14, 15], recommendation systems [16, 17], Internet of Things [18] and so on.
As a classic federated learning method, FedAvg [19] establishes an important training paradigm.
Numerous subsequent works [20, 21] are performed on the basis of this fundamental training paradigm.
However, this training paradigm faces several challenges. Particularly, the problem of imbalanced
data distribution [22] is widespread in the setting where federated learning is applied and can be
attributed to the nature of distributed learning: joining multiple different data sources to participate in
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

