A Private Approximation of the 2nd-Moment Matrix
of Any Subsamplable Input

Bar Mahpud
Faculty of Engineering
Bar-Ilan University
Israel
mahpudb@biu.ac.il

Or Sheffet
Faculty of Engineering
Bar-Ilan University
Israel
or.sheffet@biu.ac.il

Abstract
We study the problem of differentially private second moment estimation and
present a new algorithm that achieve strong privacy-utility trade-offs even for
worst-case inputs under subsamplability assumptions on the data. We call an input
(m, α, β)-subsamplable if a random subsample of size m (or larger) preserves w.p
≥ 1 − β the spectral structure of the original second moment matrix up to a multiplicative factor of 1 ± α. Building upon subsamplability, we give a recursive algorithmic framework similar to Kamath et al. (2019) that abides zero-Concentrated
Differential Privacy (zCDP) while preserving w.h.p the accuracy of the second
moment estimation upto an arbitrary factor of (1 ± γ). We then show how to apply our algorithm to approximate the second moment matrix of a distribution D,
even when a noticeable fraction of the input are outliers.

1

Introduction

Estimating the second moment matrix (or equivalently, the covariance matrix) of a dataset is a fundamental task in machine learning, statistics, and data analysis. In a typical setting, given a dataset of n
points in Rd , one aims to compute an empirical second moment (or covariance) matrix that is close,
in spectral norm, to the true second moment matrix. However, as modern datasets increasingly contain sensitive information, maintaining strong privacy guarantees has become a key consideration.
A natural way to protect sensitive data is through differential privacy (DP). In this paper, we focus on
the zero-Concentrated Differential Privacy (zCDP) framework (Bun & Steinke, 2016), which offers
elegant composition properties and somewhat tighter privacy-utility trade-offs compared to traditional (ϵ, δ)-DP. While there have been works regarding the estimation of the second moment matrix
(and PCA), they mostly focused on Gaussian input or well-conditioned input (see Related Work
below). In contrast, our work focuses on a general setting, where the input’s range is signiﬁcantly
greater than λmin , the least eigenvalue of the 2nd-moment matrix.
Suppose indeed we are in a situation where the ﬁrst and least eigenvalues of the input’s 2nd moment
matrix are very different. By and large, this could emanate from one of two options: either it is
the result of a few outliers, in which case it is unlikely to approximate the 2nd moment matrix
well with DP; or it is the case that the underlying distribution of the input does indeed have very
different variances along different axes, and here DP approximation of the input is plausible. Our
work is focuses therefore on the latter setting, which we deﬁne using the notion of subsamplability.
Namely that from a sufﬁciently large random subsample, one can recover a spectral approximation
to the original second moment matrix with high probability. This property resonates with classical
matrix-concentration results (namely, matrix Bernstein bounds), yet – as our analysis shows – our
subsamplability assumption offers a less nuanced path to controlling the tail behavior of the data.
In this work we formalize this notion of subsamplability – which immediately gives a non-private
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

