Bridging Time and Linguistics: LLMs as Time Series
Analyzer through Symbolization and Segmentation

Jianyang Qin1 , Chaoyang Li1,2 , Jinhao Cui1 , Lingzhi Wang1 , Zhao Liu2 , Qing Liao1,2∗
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{22b351005, 22b951022, cuijinhao}@stu.hit.edu.cn,
{liuzhao08}@pcl.ac.cn, {wanglingzhi, liaoqing}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies reveal that Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit strong sequential reasoning capabilities, allowing them to replace specialized time-series models
and serve as foundation models for complex time-series analysis. To activate the
capabilities of LLMs for time-series tasks, numerous studies have attempted to
bridge the gap between time series and linguistics by aligning textual representations with time-series patterns. However, it is a non-trivial endeavor to losslessly
capture the infinite time-domain variability using natural language, leading to
suboptimal alignment performance. Beyond representation, contextual differences,
where semantics in time series are conveyed by consecutive points, unlike in text
by individual tokens, are often overlooked by existing methods. To address these,
we propose S2 TS-LLM, a simple yet effective framework to repurpose LLMs for
universal time series analysis through the following two main paradigms: (i) a
spectral symbolization paradigm transforms time series into frequency-domain
representations characterized by a fixed number of components and prominent
amplitudes, which enables a limited set of symbols to effectively abstract key
frequency features; (ii) a contextual segmentation paradigm partitions the sequence
into blocks based on temporal patterns and reassigns positional encodings accordingly, thereby mitigating the structural mismatch between time series and natural
language. Together, these paradigms bootstrap the LLMs’ perception of temporal
patterns and structures, effectively bridging time series and linguistics. Extensive
experiments show that S2 TS-LLM can serve as a powerful time series analyzer,
outperforming state-of-the-art methods across time series tasks.

1

Introduction

Time series analysis [1] is widely applied across diverse domains such as transportation, energy,
climate, finance, and healthcare, supporting a variety of tasks such as forecasting and classification.
Owing to its practical applications, time series analysis has seen significant progress, giving rise to
various specialized models tailored for certain tasks and datasets [2, 3, 4]. Recently, Large Language
Models (LLMs) [5] exhibit remarkable reasoning performance, generalization ability, and multimodal
knowledge, which are gradually replacing specialized models to serve as foundation models applied
in various time series analysis tasks [6]. However, the inherent disparity between natural language
and time series poses significant alignment challenges when leveraging LLMs for time series analysis.
The primary distinction between language and time series arises from their representational nature:
natural language is composed of discrete tokens, whereas time series are continuously recorded
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

