DISCO: Disentangled Communication Steering for
Large Language Models

Max Torop∗ Aria Masoomi Masih Eskandar
Northeastern University

Jennifer Dy

Abstract
A variety of recent methods guide large language model outputs via the inferencetime addition of steering vectors to residual-stream or attention-head representations. In contrast, we propose to inject steering vectors directly into the query
and value representation spaces within attention heads. We provide evidence
that a greater portion of these spaces exhibit high linear discriminability of concepts –a key property motivating the use of steering vectors– than attention head
outputs. We analytically characterize the effect of our method, which we term
DISentangled COmmunication (DISCO) Steering, on attention head outputs. Our
analysis reveals that DISCO disentangles a strong but underutilized baseline, steering attention head inputs, which implicitly modifies queries and values in a rigid
manner. In contrast, DISCO’s direct modulation of these components enables
more granular control. We find that DISCO achieves superior performance over a
number of steering vector baselines across multiple datasets on LLaMA 3.1 8B and
Gemma 2 9B, with steering efficacy scoring up to 19.1% higher than the runner-up.
Our results support the conclusion that the query and value spaces are powerful
building blocks for steering vector methods. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/MaxTorop/DISCO.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly prevalent for a variety of use cases, from
general purpose chat-bots [1, 47], assistive writing [28], finance [42] and coding [32] to education [22,
45], it is important that we can flexibly control their outputs. For instance, one may wish to personalize
LLMs for different users on the fly to best suit their needs and personality, whether that be to make
the model more blunt, sensitive or agreeable. Additionally, different use-cases necessitate different
value systems and behaviors: a tendency toward wealth-seeking may be appropriate for a financial
chat-bot but not an assistive coder; an edgy personality may be desirable for certain types of creative
writing, but inappropriate for educational programs geared toward young children. Finally, behaviors
that align with human values, such as truthfulness, are arguably universally desirable to promote.
A growing class of methods known as Representation Engineering [62] (RepE) seek to promote
desired behaviors or concepts in LLM outputs via inference time manipulation of the LLM’s internal
representations. RepE methods modify few or no model parameters, requiring far less computation
than traditional fine-tuning [19] to set up, and applying them can be more efficient than in-context
learning, since they do not add to the context length [25]. We focus on the most popular RepE
approach: translating representations with steering vectors [53, 39]. A steering vector is a direction
in representation space along which the expression of a concept increases, and against which it
decreases. Their existence hinges upon the linear representation hypothesis [31, 33], which holds
when representations of texts which exhibit the concept are linearly separable from those which
do not (see Fig. 1c). Steering vectors are particularly efficient to estimate and apply [24, 25], are
∗

Correspondence to torop.m@northeastern.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

