CellCLIP – Learning Perturbation Effects in Cell
Painting via Text-Guided Contrastive Learning

Mingyu Lu∗, Ethan Weinberger∗, Chanwoo Kim, Su-In Lee
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
{mingyulu,ewein,chanwkim,suinlee}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
High-content screening (HCS) assays based on high-throughput microscopy techniques such as Cell Painting have enabled the interrogation of cells’ morphological
responses to perturbations at an unprecedented scale. The collection of such data
promises to facilitate a better understanding of the relationships between different
perturbations and their effects on cellular state. Towards achieving this goal, recent
advances in cross-modal contrastive learning could, in theory, be leveraged to
learn a unified latent space that aligns perturbations with their corresponding morphological effects. However, the application of such methods to HCS data is not
straightforward due to substantial differences in the semantics of Cell Painting images compared to natural images, and the difficulty of representing different classes
of perturbations (e.g. small molecule vs CRISPR gene knockout) in a single latent
space. In response to these challenges, here we introduce CellCLIP, a cross-modal
contrastive learning framework for HCS data. CellCLIP leverages pre-trained
image encoders coupled with a novel channel encoding scheme to better capture
relationships between different microscopy channels in image embeddings, along
with natural language encoders for representing perturbations. Our framework outperforms current open-source models, demonstrating the best performance in both
cross-modal retrieval and biologically meaningful downstream tasks while also
achieving significant reductions in computation time. Code for our reproducing our
experiments is available at https://github.com/suinleelab/CellCLIP.

1

Introduction

A grand challenge in cellular biology is understanding the impacts of different perturbations, such as
exposure to chemical compounds or gene knockouts, on cellular function. In pursuit of this goal, a
number of high-content screening (HCS) techniques have been developed that combine image-based
deep phenotyping with high-throughput perturbations [20, 30]. For example, the Cell Painting
protocol [4] stains cells with six fluorescent dyes highlighting distinct cellular components (e.g.
Hoescht staining for nuclear DNA), which are then imaged in five channels via automated microscopy
(Figure 1a). Cell Painting is now routinely combined with other biotechnological advances to measure
cells’ response to thousands of chemical and/or genetic perturbations in parallel at low cost [40, 36].
Despite the promise of this data, extracting meaningful representations of cells’ underlying states from
their images presents formidable challenges. Traditional HCS data analyses use custom software tools
to extract domain-expert-crafted morphological features (e.g. nucleus size) from each image, with the
resulting collection of features referred to as a cell’s profile [6, 8]. More recent works have found that
self-supervised deep learning methods based on DINO [7, 33] or masked autoencoder (MAE; [21])
∗

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

