RrED: Black-box Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
via Rectifying-reasoning Errors of Diffusion

Yuwu Lu∗ †
School of Artificial Intelligence
South China Normal University
Foshan, Guangdong, China
luyuwu2008@163.com

Chunzhi Liu†
School of Artificial Intelligence
South China Normal University
Foshan, Guangdong, China
2023024323@m.scnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Black-box Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (BUDA) aims to transfer source
domain knowledge to an unlabeled target domain, without accessing the source
data or trained source model. Recent diffusion models have significantly advanced
the ability to generate images from texts. While they can produce realistic visuals
across diverse prompts and demonstrate impressive compositional generalization,
these diffusion-based domain adaptation methods focus solely on composition,
overlooking their sensitivity to textual nuances. In this work, we propose a novel
diffusion-based method, called Rectifying-reasoning Errors of Diffusion (RrED)
for BUDA. RrED is a two-stage learning strategy under diffusion supervision to
effectively enhance the target model via the decomposed text and visual encoders
from the diffusion model. Specifically, RrED consists of two stages: DiffusionTarget model Rectification (DTR) and Self-rectifying Reasoning Model (SRM).
In DTR, we decouple the image and text encoders within the diffusion model:
the visual encoder integrates our proposed feature-sensitive module to generate
inferentially-enhanced visuals, while the text encoder enables multi-modal joint
fine-tuning. In SRM, we prioritize the BUDA task itself, leveraging the target
model’s differential reasoning capability to rectify errors during learning. Extensive
experiments confirm that RrED significantly outperforms other methods on four
benchmark datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in enhancing reasoning and
generalization abilities.

1

Introduction

To address domain shift in training deep neural networks [1], domain generalization (DG) methods
[2, 3] only use source data for model learning to achieve generalization. However, in scenarios with
accessible target samples, domain adaptation (DA) methods [4–15] show a significant performance
advantage. Traditional unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods [4–8] focus on adapting
models trained on a fully labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, aiming to alleviate
the constraints of data collection and annotation. However, in scenarios like personal medical
records, privacy-preserving policies restrict access to source data, thus limiting the application of
UDA techniques. To address this, source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) methods [9–12] have
been recently introduced, assuming that only unlabeled target domain data and a pre-trained source
model are available during the adaptation process. Even though SFDA methods lower the possibility
of privacy leaks by utilizing the pre-trained source model rather than source data, [15] found that
certain generation techniques like [13, 14] have the potential to reconstruct the source data through
∗
†

Corresponding author.
Both authors contributed equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

