PREAMBLE: Private and Efficient Aggregation via
Block Sparse Vectors

Hilal Asi
Apple

Vitaly Feldman
Apple

Hannah Keller∗
Aarhus University

Guy N. Rothblum
Apple

Kunal Talwar
Apple

Abstract
We revisit the problem of secure aggregation of high-dimensional vectors in a
two-server system such as Prio. These systems are typically used to aggregate
vectors such as gradients in private federated learning, where the aggregate itself
is protected via noise addition to ensure differential privacy. Existing approaches
require communication scaling with the dimensionality, and thus limit the dimensionality of vectors one can efficiently process in this setup.
We propose PREAMBLE: Private Efficient Aggregation Mechanism via BLocksparse Euclidean Vectors. PREAMBLE builds on an extension of distributed point
functions that enables communication- and computation-efficient aggregation of
block-sparse vectors, which are sparse vectors where the non-zero entries occur in
a small number of clusters of consecutive coordinates. We show that these blocksparse DPFs can be combined with random sampling and privacy amplification
by sampling results, to allow asymptotically optimal privacy-utility trade-offs for
vector aggregation, at a fraction of the communication cost. When coupled with
recent advances in numerical privacy accounting, our approach incurs a negligible
overhead in noise variance, compared to the Gaussian mechanism used with Prio.

1

Introduction

Secure Aggregation is a fundamental primitive in multiparty communication, and underlies several large-scale deployments of federated learning and statistics. Motivated by applications to private federated learning, we study the problem of aggregation of high-dimensional vectors, each of
bounded Euclidean norm. We will study this problem in the same trust model as Prio [CB17], where
at least one of two servers is assumed to be honest. This setup has been deployed at large scale in
practice and our goal in this work is to design algorithms for estimating the sum of a large number of
high-dimensional vectors, while keeping the device-to-server communication, as well as the client
and server computation small.
This problem was studied in the original Prio paper, as well as in several subsequent
works [BBC+ 19, Tal22, AGJ+ 22, RSWP22, RU23, ROCT24]. In Prio, the client creates additive secret-shares of its vector and sends those to the two servers. One of the shares can be replaced
by a short seed, and thus the communication out of the client for sending D-dimensional vector is
D + O(1) field elements. Additionally, such deployments typically require resistance to malicious
clients, which can be ensured by sending zero-knowledge proofs showing that the secret-shared
vector has bounded norm. Existing protocols [ROCT24] allow for very efficient proofs that incur
negligible communication overhead.
In recent years, the size of models that are used on device has significantly increased. Recent work
has shown that in some contexts, larger models are easier to train in the private federated learning
setup [APF+ 23, CCT+ 24]. While approaches have been developed to fine-tuning models while
∗

Research done while at Apple.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

