From Likelihood to Fitness: Improving Variant Effect
Prediction in Protein and Genome Language Models

Charles W. J. Pugh1,2,3

Paulina G. Nuñez-Valencia1,2,3

Mafalda Dias1,2,3,∗ Jonathan Frazer1,2,3,∗
1

Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology,
Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain
2
Barcelona Collaboratorium for Modelling and Predictive Biology
3
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain
{mafalda.dias, jonathan.frazer}@crg.eu

Abstract
Generative models trained on natural sequences are increasingly used to predict
the effects of genetic variation, enabling progress in therapeutic design, disease
risk prediction, and synthetic biology. In the zero-shot setting, variant impact
is estimated by comparing the likelihoods of sequences, under the assumption
that likelihood serves as a proxy for fitness. However, this assumption often
breaks down in practice: sequence likelihood reflects not only evolutionary fitness
constraints, but also phylogenetic structure and sampling biases, especially as
model capacity increases. We introduce Likelihood-Fitness Bridging (LFB), a
simple and general strategy that improves variant effect prediction by averaging
model scores across sequences subject to similar selective pressures. Assuming an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model of evolution, LFB can be viewed as a way to marginalize
the effects of genetic drift, although its benefits appear to extend more broadly.
LFB applies to existing protein and genomic language models without requiring
retraining, and incurs only modest computational overhead. Evaluated on largescale deep mutational scans and clinical benchmarks, LFB consistently improves
predictive performance across model families and sizes. Notably, it reverses the
performance plateau observed in larger protein language models, making the largest
models the most accurate when combined with LFB. These results suggest that
accounting for phylogenetic and sampling biases is essential to realizing the full
potential of large sequence models in variant effect prediction.

1

Introduction

What do we learn when we fit a model to a distribution of natural protein or DNA sequences? A
particularly important finding has been that the likelihood assigned to a sequence by such a model
can serve as a zero-shot, nucleotide-resolution, measure of fitness. This insight is at the heart of
methods which are transforming fields as diverse as therapeutic design, agriculture, materials science,
pathogen forecasting and genetic diagnosis. And yet, at the same time, this finding is flawed.
A model trained on sequences from diverse organisms, whether whole genomes or protein sequences,
learns patterns of nucleotide conservation shaped by natural selection. The likelihood thus provides a
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

