High Resolution UDF Meshing via Iterative Networks
Federico Stella1 , Nicolas Talabot1 , Hieu Le2 , Pascal Fua1
1

1
2
CVLab, EPFL
UNC Charlotte
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch, 2 hle40@charlotte.edu

Abstract
Unsigned Distance Fields (UDFs) are a natural implicit representation for open
surfaces but, unlike Signed Distance Fields (SDFs), are challenging to triangulate
into explicit meshes. This is especially true at high resolutions where neural UDFs
exhibit higher noise levels, which makes it hard to capture fine details.
Most current techniques perform within single voxels without reference to their
neighborhood, resulting in missing surface and holes where the UDF is ambiguous
or noisy. We show that this can be remedied by performing several passes and by
reasoning on previously extracted surface elements to incorporate neighborhood
information. Our key contribution is an iterative neural network that does this and
progressively improves surface recovery within each voxel by spatially propagating
information from increasingly distant neighbors. Unlike single-pass methods,
our approach integrates newly detected surfaces, distance values, and gradients
across multiple iterations, effectively correcting errors and stabilizing extraction
in challenging regions. Experiments on diverse 3D models demonstrate that our
method produces significantly more accurate and complete meshes than existing
approaches, particularly for complex geometries, enabling UDF surface extraction
at higher resolutions where traditional methods fail.

1

Introduction

Implicit Neural Representations [35, 12, 26] have become powerful tools to accurately model objects
whose topology is a priori unknown and without being bound to a specific mesh resolution. Those
based on Occupancy Fields [23] or Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) [27] are best at handling
watertight surfaces. They can be used to represent open surfaces by wrapping a thin volume
around them, but this is less than ideal. Unsigned Distance Fields (UDFs) offer a more effective
alternative [6, 44, 46, 30, 45, 11, 40] and are used by many surface reconstruction methods [20, 21, 19].
In a typical scenario, a neural network is used to parametrize the field, which is then converted into
an explicit mesh for downstream tasks through a meshing process. There are many algorithms to do
this conversion well when the field features sign changes to signal surface locations [18, 15, 32, 29].
However, there are no such sign changes in the UDF case and the field is expected to be exactly zero
at the surface location.
Most current approaches to meshing UDFs [46, 41, 14, 36] rely on Marching Cubes or Dual
Contouring-like algorithms that operate on the vertices of individual voxels to recover the surface that may or may not traverse them. However neural UDFs are notoriously noisy [13, 36, 14],
which makes it hard to retrieve the correct surface. Counterintuitively - and contrary to SDFs increasing the meshing resolution to retrieve finer surface details actually worsens the problem, as
shown in the results section (Fig. 5). This is because, at high resolutions, UDF values often become
noisier or ambiguous within a voxel, and these local, single-pass methods lack the necessary context
to infer the surface reliably, resulting in poorly recovered geometry. As shown in Fig. 1, when the
neural UDF fails to reach sufficiently low values, a hole appears in the reconstructed surface. This is
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

