Equilibrium Policy Generalization: A Reinforcement
Learning Framework for Cross-Graph Zero-Shot
Generalization in Pursuit-Evasion Games
Runyu Lu1,2 , Peng Zhang3 , Ruochuan Shi2,1 , Yuanheng Zhu2,1,† ,
Dongbin Zhao2,1,† , Yang Liu3 , Dong Wang3 , Cesare Alippi4,5
lurunyu17@mails.ucas.ac.cn
njzhangpeng@mail.dlut.edu.cn
{shiruochuan2025,yuanheng.zhu,dongbin.zhao}@ia.ac.cn
{ly,wdice}@dlut.edu.cn
cesare.alippi@usi.ch
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences∗
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Dalian University of Technology
4
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera italiana 5 Politecnico di Milano
†
Corresponding Authors

Abstract
Equilibrium learning in adversarial games is an important topic widely examined
in the fields of game theory and reinforcement learning (RL). Pursuit-evasion game
(PEG), as an important class of real-world games from the fields of robotics and
security, requires exponential time to be accurately solved. When the underlying
graph structure varies, even the state-of-the-art RL methods require recomputation or at least fine-tuning, which can be time-consuming and impair real-time
applicability. This paper proposes an Equilibrium Policy Generalization (EPG)
framework to effectively learn a generalized policy with robust cross-graph zeroshot performance. In the context of PEGs, our framework is generally applicable to
both pursuer and evader sides in both no-exit and multi-exit scenarios. These two
generalizability properties, to our knowledge, are the first to appear in this domain.
The core idea of the EPG framework is to train an RL policy across different graph
structures against the equilibrium policy for each single graph. To construct an
equilibrium oracle for single-graph policies, we present a dynamic programming
(DP) algorithm that provably generates pure-strategy Nash equilibrium with nearoptimal time complexity. To guarantee scalability with respect to pursuer number,
we further extend DP and RL by designing a grouping mechanism and a sequence
model for joint policy decomposition, respectively. Experimental results show that,
using equilibrium guidance and a distance feature proposed for cross-graph PEG
training, the EPG framework guarantees desirable zero-shot performance in various
unseen real-world graphs. Besides, when trained under an equilibrium heuristic
proposed for the graphs with exits, our generalized pursuer policy can even match
the performance of the fine-tuned policies from the state-of-the-art PEG methods.

∗
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants
62293541, 62293542, and 62476044; in part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4232056;
in part by the Beijing Nova Program under Grant 20240484514; and in part by the International Partnership
Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences under Grant 104GJHZ2022013GC.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

