Asymmetric REINFORCE for off-Policy
Reinforcement Learning:
Balancing positive and negative rewards

Charles Arnal
FAIR, MSL, Meta

Gaëtan Narozniak
FAIR, MSL, Meta

Vivien Cabannes
FAIR, MSL, Meta

Julia Kempe
FAIR, MSL, Meta
NYU Courant Institute and CDS

Yunhao Tang
Anthropic (ex-Meta)

Rémi Munos
FAIR, MSL, Meta

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is increasingly used to align large language models
(LLMs). Off-policy methods offer greater implementation simplicity and data
efficiency than on-policy techniques, but often result in suboptimal performance. In
this work, we study the intermediate range of algorithms between off-policy RL and
supervised fine-tuning by analyzing a simple off-policy REINFORCE algorithm,
where the advantage is defined as A = r − V , with r a reward and V some
tunable baseline. Intuitively, lowering V emphasizes high-reward samples, while
raising it penalizes low-reward ones more heavily. We first provide a theoretical
analysis of this off-policy REINFORCE algorithm, showing that when the baseline
V lower-bounds the expected reward, the algorithm enjoys a policy improvement
guarantee. Our analysis reveals that while on-policy updates can safely leverage
both positive and negative signals, off-policy updates benefit from focusing more
on positive rewards than on negative ones. We validate our findings experimentally
in a controlled stochastic bandit setting and through fine-tuning state-of-the-art
LLMs on reasoning tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has long been applied to align Large Language Models (LLMs) to
users’ preferences using human feedback [Christiano et al., 2017, Ouyang et al., 2022, Dubey et al.,
2024]; more recently, it has been used to augment models in more general ways, and in particular to
develop their reasoning, coding and tool use capacities [Shao et al., 2024, Guo et al., 2025, Meta,
2025, OpenAI, 2025]. As RL theoretically allows models to learn beyond the limits of existing
training data (see e.g. Silver et al. [2016], AlphaEvolve-team [2025]), we can expect it to play an
increasingly crucial role in years to come as models begin pushing scientific boundaries. So far,
on-policy techniques, in which models are trained on samples that they generated, have been preferred
to off-policy methods, in which models are trained using samples generated from another source,
which can e.g. be an outdated version of themselves [Tang et al., 2024]. However, strictly on-policy
RL can be difficult or even impossible to implement in many use cases; it also suffers from sample
inefficiency, as each trajectory generated cannot be used for more than a single gradient update. This
makes some degree of off-policyness unavoidable, and in fact desirable.
As such, we are interested in the study of off-policy RL techniques, with LLMs finetuning as our
motivating example. Various sophisticated methods exist that deal with off-policyness; while classical
solutions based on Q-learning or value functions often struggle in the context of language modeling
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

