Simple Distillation for One-Step Diffusion Models

Huaisheng Zhu1 , Teng Xiao3,4 , Shijie Zhou2 ,
Zhimeng Guo1 , Hangfan Zhang1 , Siyuan Xu1 , Vasant Honavar1
1
Pennsylvania State University, 2 University at Buffalo
3
Allen Institute for AI (AI2) 4 University of Washington
hvz5312@psu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have established themselves as leading techniques for image
generation. However, their reliance on an iterative denoising process results in slow
sampling speeds, which limits their applicability to interactive and creative applications. An approach to overcoming this limitation involves distilling multistep
diffusion models into efficient one-step generators. However, existing distillation
methods typically suffer performance degradation or require complex iterative
training procedures which increase their complexity and computational cost. In this
paper, we propose Contrastive Energy Distillation (CED), a simple yet effective
approach to distill multistep diffusion models into effective one-step generators.
Our key innovation is the introduction of an unnormalized joint energy-based
model (EBM) that represents the generator and an auxiliary score model. CED
optimizes a Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) objective to efficiently transfers
knowledge from a multistep teacher diffusion model without additional modules or
iterative training complexity. We further show that CED implicitly optimizes the
KL divergence between the distributions modeled by the multistep diffusion model
and the one-step generator. We present results of experiments which show that CED
achieves performance comparable to that of representative baselines for distilling
multi-step diffusion models while maintaining excellent memory efficiency.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have become the prominent method for image generation, capable of producing
highly realistic and diverse outputs through a stable training process [18, 45, 49, 44]. Unlike
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [14] and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [26], diffusion
models rely on an iterative denoising procedure that progressively refines an initial Gaussian noise
into detailed images [18, 50]. This method, while effective, is computationally intensive, often
requiring dozens or even hundreds of neural network evaluations. Consequently, the slow sampling
speed significantly reduces the practicality of diffusion models in interactive, creative applications.
To address this issue, several efforts have aimed at reducing the sampling steps required in reverse
diffusion processes [34, 36, 67, 68, 52]. These approaches still require multiple steps to generate
images. To significantly improve the efficiency of diffusion models, one-step diffusion methods have
been proposed. In particular, distillation techniques have become increasingly popular for one-step
generation, achieving state-of-the-art performance [70]. One line of work is score-based distillation,
which includes iteratively training an auxiliary score model with the one-step generator [35, 47, 61, 65]
or using an additional discriminator to create a GAN [69, 64], both obtaining great results.
However, these methods heavily rely on auxiliary models and the iterative training of multiple
components, leading to substantial GPU consumption, prolonged training times, and increased
complexity due to the additional hyperparameters introduced by these extra components, which
require careful tuning. In contrast, trajectory-based distillation offers a more lightweight alternative
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

