Meta-Learning Objectives for Preference Optimization

Carlo Alfano∗†
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Silvia Sapora∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Jakob N. Foerster
Department of Engineering
University of Oxford

Yee Whye Teh
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Abstract
Evaluating preference optimization (PO) algorithms on LLM alignment is a challenging task that presents prohibitive costs, noise, and several variables like model
size and hyper-parameters. In this work, we show that it is possible to gain insights
on the efficacy of PO algorithm on simpler benchmarks. We design a diagnostic
suite of MuJoCo tasks and datasets, which we use to systematically evaluate PO algorithms, establishing a more controlled and cheaper benchmark. We then propose
a novel family of PO algorithms based on mirror descent, which we call Mirror Preference Optimization (MPO). Through evolutionary strategies, we search this class
to discover algorithms specialized to specific properties of preference datasets, such
as mixed-quality or noisy data. We demonstrate that our discovered PO algorithms
outperform all known algorithms in the targeted MuJoCo settings. Finally, based
on the insights gained from our MuJoCo experiments, we design a PO algorithm
that significantly outperform existing baselines in an LLM alignment task.

1

Introduction

Learning from human preferences (Christiano et al., 2017) is a paradigm which enables the alignment
of machine learning systems to relative human preferences, without requiring access to absolute
rewards. While the framework was developed for robotic and games applications with experiments
on MuJoCo simulations and Atari (Akrour et al., 2012; Biyik & Sadigh, 2018; Ibarz et al., 2018), this
paradigm has been successfully applied to Large Language Models (Team et al., 2023; Achiam et al.,
2023). In particular, fine-tuning pre-trained LLMs with human preferences has become a popular
strategy to adapt them to specific tasks and to improve their safety and helpfulness.
Within this framework, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is one of the
most popular methods. It consists in learning a reward function using a preference dataset and
then optimizing the estimated reward using Reinforcement Learning methods such as Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). However, the training pipeline of RLHF is quite
complex, which is why implicit approaches such as Direct Preference Optimisation (DPO) (Schulman
et al., 2017) have gained traction thanks to their simplicity. These methods do not learn a reward
model but estimate it implicitly using the policy of the agent. Many follow ups to DPO have been
proposed (Yuan et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Azar et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024a; Hong et al., 2024;
Park et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2024), but comparing their performance in LLM alignment is a complex
task that incurs high costs, noise, and the inherent difficulty in judging a response better than another.
In this work, we provide a comprehensive analysis of PO algorithms, examining their behavior on
automatically generated preference datasets. We return to the roots of RLHF by performing this
* Equal contribution, order decided by coin flip.
†

Now at Amazon.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

