Adaptive Data-Borrowing for Improving Treatment
Effect Estimation using External Controls

Qinwei Yang1 , Jingyi Li2 , and Peng Wu1∗
Beijing Technology and Business University1 , National University of Singapore2

Abstract
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) often exhibit limited inferential efficiency
in estimating treatment effects due to small sample sizes. In recent years, the
combination of external controls has gained increasing attention as a means of
improving the efficiency of RCTs. However, external controls are not always
comparable to RCTs, and direct borrowing without careful evaluation can introduce
substantial bias and reduce the efficiency of treatment effect estimation. In this
paper, we propose a novel influence-based adaptive sample borrowing approach that
effectively quantifies the “comparability” of each sample in the external controls
using influence function theory. Given a selected set of borrowed external controls,
we further derive a semiparametric efficient estimator under an exchangeability
assumption. Recognizing that the exchangeability assumption may not hold for all
possible borrowing sets, we conduct a detailed analysis of the asymptotic bias and
variance of the proposed estimator under violations of exchangeability. Building on
this bias-variance trade-off, we further develop a data-driven approach to select the
optimal subset of external controls for borrowing. Extensive simulations and realworld applications demonstrate that the proposed approach significantly enhances
treatment effect estimation efficiency in RCTs, outperforming existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are regarded as the gold standard for estimating treatment
effects, as randomization effectively eliminates confounding bias [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, their inferential efficiency is often limited by small sample sizes, due to high costs and lengthy recruitment
periods [5, 6, 7, 8]. To address this challenge, there has been growing interest in novel clinical trial
designs that leverage external real-world datasets containing only control arms, referred to as external
controls, to improve treatment effect estimation in RCTs. For example, in digital marketing, platforms
may combine small-scale A/B test data with historical single-arm user behavior logs to enhance inference [9]. In medical research, oncology trials often incorporate historical control data to strengthen
causal conclusions [10]. Similarly, rare disease studies frequently augment small randomized trials
with matched external controls from disease registries to improve statistical power [11].
To fully exploit external controls, most studies rely on the exchangeability assumption [12], which
posits that the distribution of potential outcomes under control remains invariant between RCTs
and external controls when conditioned on baseline covariates [13, 14, 15, 12, 16]. However, the
exchangeability assumption requires that individuals in both RCTs and external controls follow the
same pattern between the covariates and the potential outcome under control, which may be less
plausible in real-world applications due to individual heterogeneity [17, 18, 19]. In practice, external
controls usually have significantly larger sample sizes than RCTs and often exhibit greater individual
heterogeneity [15, 12, 20]. When some individuals in the external controls display patterns that differ
from those in the RCTs, the exchangeability assumption is violated and leads to biased conclusions.
∗

Corresponding author: pengwu@btbu.eud.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

