Flattening Hierarchies with Policy Bootstrapping

John L. Zhou
University of California, Los Angeles
john.ly.zhou@gmail.com

Jonathan C. Kao
University of California, Los Angeles
kao@seas.ucla.edu

Abstract
Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) is a promising approach
for pretraining generalist policies on large datasets of reward-free trajectories, akin
to the self-supervised objectives used to train foundation models for computer
vision and natural language processing. However, scaling GCRL to longer horizons
remains challenging due to the combination of sparse rewards and discounting,
which obscures the comparative advantages of primitive actions with respect to
distant goals. Hierarchical RL methods achieve strong empirical results on longhorizon goal-reaching tasks, but their reliance on modular, timescale-specific
policies and subgoal generation introduces significant additional complexity and
hinders scaling to high-dimensional goal spaces. In this work, we introduce an
algorithm to train a flat (non-hierarchical) goal-conditioned policy by bootstrapping
on subgoal-conditioned policies with advantage-weighted importance sampling.
Our approach eliminates the need for a generative model over the (sub)goal space,
which we find is key for scaling to high-dimensional control in large state spaces.
We further show that existing hierarchical and bootstrapping-based approaches
correspond to specific design choices within our derivation. Across a comprehensive suite of state- and pixel-based locomotion and manipulation benchmarks, our
method matches or surpasses state-of-the-art offline GCRL algorithms and scales
to complex, long-horizon tasks where prior approaches fail.
Project page: https://johnlyzhou.github.io/saw/

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) specifies tasks by desired outcomes, alleviating the
burden of defining reward functions over the state-space and enabling the training of general policies
capable of achieving a wide range of goals. Offline GCRL extends this paradigm to existing datasets
of reward-free trajectories, and has been likened to the simple self-supervised objectives that have
been successful in training foundation models for other areas of machine learning [58, 37]. However,
the conceptual simplicity of offline GCRL belies practical challenges in learning accurate value
functions and, consequently, effective policies for goals requiring complex, long-horizon behaviors.
These limitations call into question its applicability as a general and scalable objective for learning
foundation policies [5, 39, 41] that can be efficiently adapted to diverse control tasks.
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) is commonly used to address these challenges and is
particularly well-suited to the recursive subgoal structure of goal-reaching tasks, where reaching
distant goals entails first passing through intermediate subgoal states. Goal-conditioned HRL exploits
this structure by learning a hierarchy composed of multiple levels: one or more high-level policies,
tasked with generating intermediate subgoals between the current state and the goal; and a lowlevel actor, which operates over the primitive action space to achieve the assigned subgoals. These
approaches have achieved state-of-the-art results in both online [29, 33] and offline GCRL [36], and
are especially effective in long-horizon tasks with sparse rewards.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

