Foundations of Top-k Decoding for Language Models

Sunay Joshi

1

Georgy Noarov1∗ Soham Mallick1∗ Tao Wang1∗
Yan Sun2 Yangxinyu Xie1 Mengxin Yu3 Edgar Dobriban1
1

2

University of Pennsylvania
New Jersey Institute of Technology 3 Washington University in St. Louis

Abstract
Top-k decoding is a widely used method for sampling from LLMs: at each token,
only the largest k next-token-probabilities are kept, and the next token is sampled
after renormalizing them to sum to unity. Top-k and other sampling methods are
motivated by the intuition that true next-token distributions are sparse, and the
noisy LLM probabilities need to be truncated. However, to our knowledge, a
precise theoretical motivation for the use of top-k decoding is missing. In this
work, we develop a theoretical framework that both explains and generalizes top-k
decoding. We view decoding at a fixed token as the recovery of a sparse probability
distribution. We introduce Bregman decoders obtained by minimizing a separable
Bregman divergence (for both the primal and dual cases) with a sparsity-inducing
ℓ0 -regularization; in particular, these decoders are adaptive in the sense that the
sparsity parameter k is chosen depending on the underlying token distribution.
Despite the combinatorial nature of the sparse Bregman objective, we show how to
optimize it efficiently for a large class of divergences. We prove that (i) the optimal
decoding strategies are greedy, and further that (ii) the objective is discretely
convex in k, such that the optimal k can be identified in logarithmic time. We
note that standard top-k decoding arises as a special case for the KL divergence,
and construct new decoding strategies with substantially different behaviors (e.g.,
non-linearly up-weighting larger probabilities after renormalization).

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are powerful generative AI tools for producing text. When pre-trained
on large text corpora and aligned according to human preferences, they can be used for a wide range
of tasks. On a technical level, they are probability distributions over text: given any user text prompt
x, an LLM samples an answer Y ∼ π(·|x) from a probability distribution π(·|x) over text. However,
even after obtaining a pre-trained, fine-tuned, and human preference-aligned model π, it is uncommon
to directly sample from the model. Instead, several sampling/decoding methods are commonly used,
including top-k [21] or top-p sampling [32]. Due to their improved empirical performance compared
to direct sampling, they are used by default or as an option in many popular LLMs, including the
GPT series, Gemini, and Claude. From a broader perspective, per-token samplers/decoders belong to
an expanding collection of post-hoc methods for improving LLM performance, which range from
pre-sampling transforms (e.g. temperature decoding), to sequence-level decoding strategies (e.g.
beam search), to post-hoc selection (e.g. best-of-N or self-consistency), to a variety of test-time
scaling approaches; see e.g., [12, 21, 32].
In this paper, we focus on decoding methods that modify each next-token-probability distribution
to induce sparsity, i.e., to keep only a small number of tokens with a nonzero probability. This
includes the widely used top-k [21] and top-p [32] sampling methods, among others. These methods
∗
Co-first authors. Correspondence to: gnoarov@seas.upenn.edu, kcillam@wharton.upenn.edu,
tawan@wharton.upenn.edu, dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

