TensorRL-QAS: Reinforcement learning with tensor
networks for improved quantum architecture search

Akash Kundu
QTF Centre of Excellence
Department of Physics
University of Helsinki, Finland
akash.kundu@helsinki.fi

Stefano Mangini
QTF Centre of Excellence
Department of Physics
University of Helsinki, Finland,
Algorithmiq
stefano.mangini@helsinki.fi

Abstract
Variational quantum algorithms hold the promise to address meaningful quantum problems already on noisy intermediate-scale quantum hardware. In spite
of the promise, they face the challenge of designing quantum circuits that both
solve the target problem and comply with device limitations. Quantum architecture
search (QAS) automates the design process of quantum circuits, with reinforcement
learning (RL) emerging as a promising approach. Yet, RL-based QAS methods
encounter significant scalability issues, as computational and training costs grow
rapidly with the number of qubits, circuit depth, and hardware noise. To address
these challenges, we introduce TensorRL-QAS, an improved framework that combines tensor network methods with RL for QAS. By warm-starting the QAS with a
matrix product state approximation of the target solution, TensorRL-QAS effectively narrows the search space to physically meaningful circuits and accelerates
the convergence to the desired solution. Tested on several quantum chemistry
problems of up to 12-qubit, TensorRL-QAS achieves up to a 10-fold reduction in
CNOT count and circuit depth compared to baseline methods, while maintaining
or surpassing chemical accuracy. It reduces classical optimizer function evaluation
by up to 100-fold, accelerates training episodes by up to 98%, and can achieve
50% success probability for 10-qubit systems, far exceeding the <1% rates of
baseline. Robustness and versatility are demonstrated both in the noiseless and
noisy scenarios, where we report a simulation of an 8-qubit system. Furthermore,
TensorRL-QAS demonstrates effectiveness on systems on 20-qubit quantum systems, positioning it as a state-of-the-art quantum circuit discovery framework for
near-term hardware and beyond.

1

Introduction

Despite the promise of quantum computing in recent years, the practical realization of quantum
advantage remains elusive, primarily due to the limitations of current noisy intermediate-scale
quantum (NISQ) hardware [1]. These devices are characterized by restricted qubit counts, limited
connectivity, and significant noise, severely constraining the complexity of quantum circuits that
can be reliably executed. As a result, most foundational quantum algorithms are not yet feasible on
available quantum hardware [2], underscoring the urgent need for novel algorithmic strategies that
are both effective and hardware-friendly.
To bridge this gap, hybrid quantum-classical approaches have emerged as a practical solution.
Among these, variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) have become the leading paradigm for NISQ
devices [3, 4, 5, 6]. VQAs operate by iteratively optimizing the parameters of a parameterized
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

