QuanDA: Quantile-Based Discriminant Analysis for
High-Dimensional Imbalanced Classification

Qian Tang
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
tang1015@umn.edu

Yuwen Gu
Department of Statistics
University of Connecticut
Storrs, Connecticut, 06269
yuwen.gu@uconn.edu

Boxiang Wang∗
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA, 52246
boxiang-wang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
Binary classification with imbalanced classes is a common and fundamental task,
where standard machine learning methods often struggle to provide reliable predictive performance. Although numerous approaches have been proposed to address this issue, classification in low-sample-size and high-dimensional settings
still remains particularly challenging. The abundance of noisy features in highdimensional data limits the effectiveness of classical methods due to overfitting,
and the minority class is even difficult to detect because of its severe underrepresentation with low sample size. To address this challenge, we introduce Quantile-based
Discriminant Analysis (QuanDA), which builds upon a novel connection with quantile regression and naturally accounts for class imbalance through appropriately
chosen quantile levels. We provide comprehensive theoretical analysis to validate
QuanDA in ultra-high dimensional settings. Through extensive simulation studies
and high-dimensional benchmark data analysis, we demonstrate that QuanDA
overall outperforms existing classification methods for imbalanced data, including
cost-sensitive large-margin classifiers, random forests, and SMOTE.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional binary classification is a fundamental yet challenging machine learning task,
particularly in problems where sample sizes are small and class distributions are heavily imbalanced.
The situation commonly arises in many application fields, such as disease diagnostics (Krawczyk
et al., 2016; Bae and Yoon, 2015; Azari et al., 2015), where data acquisition is costly due to the
involvement of human and animal experiments in clinical studies (Evans and Ildstad, 2001). As
a result, the number of features often far exceeds the number of data points, leading to the socalled high-dimensional-low-sample-size (HDLSS) problem (Hall et al., 2005; Aoshima et al., 2018).
Besides data scarcity, class imbalance further complicates the challenge: the positive class, such as
disease occurrence, is typically much rarer than the negative one. Similar challenges are prevalent in
many other applications such as image detection (Kubat et al., 1997), cybersecurity (Cieslak et al.,
2006), fraud detection (Wei et al., 2013; Sanz et al., 2014), text categorization (Wu et al., 2014), and
fault diagnostics (Wu et al., 2018; Zhu and Song, 2010; Santos et al., 2018).
∗

The corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

