Measuring the Faithfulness of Thinking Drafts in
Large Reasoning Models

Zidi Xiong1∗, Shan Chen1 , Zhenting Qi1 , Himabindu Lakkaraju1
1
Harvard University

Abstract
Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) have significantly enhanced their capabilities
in complex problem-solving by introducing a thinking draft that enables multipath Chain-of-Thought explorations before producing final answers. Ensuring
the faithfulness of these intermediate reasoning processes is crucial for reliable
monitoring, interpretation, and effective control. In this paper, we propose a systematic counterfactual intervention framework to rigorously evaluate thinking draft
faithfulness. Our approach focuses on two complementary dimensions: (1) IntraDraft Faithfulness, which assesses whether individual reasoning steps causally
influence subsequent steps and the final draft conclusion through counterfactual
step insertions; and (2) Draft-to-Answer Faithfulness, which evaluates whether
final answers are logically consistent with and dependent on the thinking draft,
by perturbing the draft’s concluding logic. We conduct extensive experiments
across six state-of-the-art LRMs. Our findings show that current LRMs demonstrate selective faithfulness to intermediate reasoning steps and frequently fail to
faithfully align with the draft conclusions. These results underscore the need for
more faithful and interpretable reasoning in advanced LRMs.
Data

1

Github

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive reasoning capabilities, particularly
by decomposing complex tasks into step-by-step solutions through chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [25]. Recent advancements in Large Reasoning Models (LRMs)–such as OpenAI o1/o3 [15, 19],
DeepSeek R1 [11], and Claude 3.7 Sonnet Extended Thinking [2]–have extended this paradigm
by structurally decoupling the reasoning generation process into two distinct stages: a thinkingstage, which produces a series of intermediate reasoning traces known as the thinking draft, and an
answer-stage, which synthesizes this draft into an optional explanatory CoT and the final answer.
Unlike standard CoT prompting—which typically unfolds as a single, forward reasoning trajectory—LRMs leverage reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) [11, 16] or distillation
from RLVR post-trained models to enhance the thinking draft with richer cognitive behaviors [9].
These include explicit backtracking, self-reflection, and exploration of alternative paths. As a result,
the thinking draft forms a non-linear, multi-path exploration space, allowing the model to revise or
refine its reasoning before converging on a final answer during the answer-stage [18].
As LRMs become increasingly capable of tackling challenging tasks, it is critical to ensure that their
reasoning behaviors can be reliably overseen to prevent unintended damage. For instance, prior work
attempts to monitor model reasoning using weaker models to inspect reasoning steps inside thinking
∗
Correspondence to:
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Zidi

Xiong

zidixiong@g.harvard.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

and

Himabindu

Lakkaraju

