EUGens: Efficient, Unified, and General Dense Layers

Sang Min Kim∗1 Byeongchan Kim∗1 Arijit Sehanobish∗2 Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury∗3
Rahul Kidambi∗3
Dongseok Shim1 Avinava Dubey∗3 Snigdha Chaturvedi4
Min-hwan Oh1 Krzysztof Choromanski∗5,6
1
Seoul National University 2 Independent 3 Google Research 4 UNC Chapel Hill
5
Google DeepMind 6 Columbia University

Abstract
Efficient neural networks are essential for scaling machine learning models to
real-time applications and resource-constrained environments. Fully-connected
feedforward layers (FFLs) introduce computation and parameter count bottlenecks
within neural network architectures. To address this challenge, in this work,
we propose a new class of dense layers that generalize standard fully-connected
feedforward layers, Efficient, Unified and General dense layers (EUGens). EUGens
leverage random features to approximate standard FFLs and go beyond them by
incorporating a direct dependence on the input norms in their computations. The
proposed layers unify existing efficient FFL extensions and improve efficiency by
reducing inference complexity from quadratic to linear time. They also lead to the
first unbiased algorithms approximating FFLs with arbitrary polynomial activation
functions. Furthermore, EuGens reduce the parameter count and computational
overhead while preserving the expressive power and adaptability of FFLs. We also
present a layer-wise knowledge transfer technique that bypasses backpropagation,
enabling efficient adaptation of EUGens to pre-trained models. Empirically, we
observe that integrating EUGens into Transformers and MLPs yields substantial
improvements in inference speed (up to 27%) and memory efficiency (up to 30%)
across a range of tasks, including image classification, language model pre-training,
and 3D scene reconstruction. Overall, our results highlight the potential of EUGens
for the scalable deployment of large-scale neural networks in real-world scenarios.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning (ML) have revolutionized the design and deployment of
intelligent systems, with applications in robotics [8, 49], computer vision [40], natural language
processing (NLP) [18, 91, 94, 1], and 3D scene understanding [61]. These advancements have been
primarily driven by large-scale machine learning models, which are capable of solving increasingly
challenging tasks. Despite the effectiveness of these models, computational inefficiencies often hinder
their real-world deployment. Therefore, improving the efficiency of both training and inference of
such models is essential to applying these methods in fast-paced, safety-critical domains.
A major source of computational cost in modern ML models is the use of fully connected feedforward
layers (FFLs), which are central to many architectures. FFLs are integral to Transformers [97]—the
backbone of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs)—and to implicit
neural representations (INRs) like Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [61] for 3D scene modeling. These
layers account for a substantial portion of the model parameters and computation. In Transformers,
fully connected feedforward layers (FFLs) are major contributors to the overall model size. Similarly,
∗

Equal Contribution
Correspondence to: tkdals9082@snu.ac.kr, arijit.sehanobish1@gmail.com, kchoro@google.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

