Tackling Biased Evaluators in Dueling Bandits

Ming Tang
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Southern Univ. of Science and Technology
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
tangm3@sustech.edu.cn

Yuxuan Zhou
Dept. of Mathematics
Southern Univ. of Science and Technology
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
zhouyx8@mail.sustech.edu.cn
∗

Chao Huang
School of Computing
Montclair State University
Montclair, New Jersey, USA
huangch@montclair.edu

Abstract
In dueling bandits, an agent explores and exploits choices (i.e., arms) by learning
from their stochastic feedback in the form of relative preferences. Prior related
studies focused on unbiased feedback. In practice, however, the feedback provided
by evaluators can be biased. For example, human users are likely to provide biased
evaluation towards large language models due to their heterogeneous background.
In this work, we aim to minimize the regret in dueling bandits considering evaluators’ biased feedback. We begin with a benchmark case where evaluators’ bias
information is known. Solving the known-bias case is nontrivial, because the
bias cannot be easily decoupled from the feedback. We overcome this challenge
and propose an unbiased arm performance estimator and a bias-sensitive dueling
bandits algorithm. We manage to analyze the regret, dealing with the complex
form of the estimator, and show that the feedback either matching or opposing
the ground-truth reduces the regret. Then, we study the case where evaluators’
bias information is unknown. The associated estimator can hardly be solved in
closed-form due to the non-convexity of the estimator solving problem. We address
this challenge and propose an extended bias-sensitive algorithm by incorporating
block coordinate descent. This algorithm is proven to achieve the same order of
regret (as in the known bias case) with a bounded error. Experiments show that
when compared with baselines, our algorithms reduces the regret by up to 86.9%.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation and Background

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) [1] is a widely used approach for online learning. It explores and exploits
a given set of choices (i.e., arms) to minimize a long-term regret. In standard MAB, the reward of
the selected arm is commonly represented by a real number, e.g., if pulling an arm of a slot machine
returns 5 dollars, then the reward can be represented by 5. As a result, the exploration and exploitation
decisions can be made based on these real-valued reward feedback. However, in many practical
systems, the real-valued reward feedback is unavailable. For example, consider a company that aims
at providing its users with high-quality user experience for question answering tasks by selecting
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

