Distributional Training Data Attribution:
What do Influence Functions Sample?

Bruno Mlodozeniec ♦1 2 Isaac Reid ♦1 Sam Power♦3 David S. Krueger♦4
Murat A. Erdogdu ♣5 6 Richard E. Turner ♣ 1 7 Roger B. Grosse ♣ 5 6
University of Cambridge 2Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
University of Bristol 4Mila - Quebec AI Institute 5University of Toronto
6Vector Institute
7Alan Turing Institute
1

3

bkm28@cam.ac.uk

ir337@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Randomness is an unavoidable part of training deep learning models, yet something that traditional training data attribution algorithms fail to rigorously account
for. They ignore the fact that, due to stochasticity in the initialisation and batching,
training on the same dataset can yield different models. In this paper, we address
this shortcoming through introducing distributional training data attribution (dTDA), the goal of which is to predict how the distribution of model outputs
(over training runs) depends upon the dataset. Intriguingly, we find that influence
functions (IFs), a popular data attribution tool, are ‘secretly distributional’: they
emerge from our framework as the limit to unrolled differentiation, without
requiring restrictive convexity assumptions. This provides a new perspective on
the effectiveness of IFs in deep learning. We demonstrate the practical utility of
d-TDA in experiments, including improving data pruning for vision transformers
and identifying influential examples with diffusion models.

1 Introduction
Training data attribution (TDA) techniques are of fundamental interest in machine learning, shedding
light on the relationship between a model’s properties and its training data. TDA is typically framed
as a counterfactual prediction problem: estimating how a model’s behaviour would change upon
removal of particular examples from the training dataset [1, 2] . This invites the concept of influence.
Training examples are deemed ‘influential’ if the model’s behaviour would change significantly
upon their exclusion. The practical utility of TDA has been demonstrated in applications including
interpreting, debugging and improving models [2, 3], dataset curation [4], and data valuation [1, 5].
Influence Functions. It is typically prohibitively expensive to compute influence by retraining with
different datapoints removed. This has motivated a number of TDA methods designed to approximate influence, but without actually retraining. Amongst such TDA methods, a leading example
is influence functions (IFs) [2, 6]. This classical technique from robust statistics uses the implicit
function theorem to estimate the optimal model parameters’ sensitivity to downweighting a training
datapoint. IFs have been deployed to investigate the generalisation patterns of 52 billion parameter
large language models [3], and for data attribution of diffusion models [7]. Separately, researchers
have proposed an alternative TDA method called unrolled differentiation [8, 9, 10]. Here, one differ-

♦

Equal contribution first authors. Order decided by who can swim the furthest underwater.

♣

Shared senior authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

