Thinker: Learning to Think Fast and Slow

Stephen Chung∗
University of Cambridge

Wenyu Du∗
The University of Hong Kong

Jie Fu
Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
Recent studies show that the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLMs) can be improved by applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to questionanswering (QA) tasks in areas such as math and coding. With a long context length,
LLMs may learn to perform search, as indicated by the self-correction behavior
observed in DeepSeek R1. However, this search behavior is often imprecise
and lacks confidence, resulting in long, redundant responses and highlighting
deficiencies in intuition and verification. Inspired by the Dual Process Theory in
psychology, we introduce a simple modification to the QA task that includes four
stages: Fast Thinking, where the LLM must answer within a strict token budget;
Verification, where the model evaluates its initial response; Slow Thinking, where
it refines the initial response with more deliberation; and Summarization, where
it distills the refinement from the previous stage into precise steps. Our proposed
task improves average accuracy from 25.6% to 27.3% for Qwen2.5-1.5B, and from
45.9% to 51.0% for DeepSeek-R1-Qwen-1.5B. Notably, for Qwen2.5-1.5B, the
Fast Thinking mode alone achieves 25.2% accuracy using fewer than 1000 tokens,
demonstrating substantial inference efficiency gains. These findings suggest that
intuition and deliberative reasoning are distinct, complementary systems benefiting
from targeted training. Additionally, we have open-sourced both the trained models
and the source code.

1

Introduction

Multiple studies have shown that the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) can
be enhanced by applying Reinforcement Learning (RL) to question-answering (QA) tasks [1, 2, 3],
demonstrating impressive mathematical and coding performance across benchmarks. With long
context lengths, an interesting emergent behavior is self-correction within the chain-of-thought
(CoT), where the LLM learns to perform search, such as verifying its steps, backtracking, and trying
alternative paths.
However, it has been observed that this emergent search tends to be inefficient—the CoT is often
long and redundant [4, 5]. For example, Deepseek R1’s reasoning typically involves excessive
backtracking and verification [1]. A likely cause is inefficient temporal credit assignment: for
instance, in the GRPO algorithm used to train Deepseek R1, the entire generation sequence receives
the same scalar advantage. That is, if the final answer is correct, the probability of the whole
sequence is increased—regardless of which parts were actually useful. As a result, futile search
paths and uncertain verifications are also rewarded, as long as the correct solution is eventually
produced. Consequently, intuition—the ability to identify promising search paths rapidly—and
verification—the ability to evaluate a search path confidently—are not explicitly trained and may
therefore be underdeveloped.
A typical RL solution to this issue is to use more precise temporal credit assignment, such as
incorporating a critic to compute a more accurate advantage for each token, as in PPO [6]. However,
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: mhc48@cam.ac.uk.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

