Hierarchical Self-Attention: Generalizing Neural
Attention Mechanics to Multi-Scale Problems
Saeed Amizadeh, Sara Abdali, Yinheng Li, and Kazuhito Koishida
Microsoft
Redmond, WA 98052
{saamizad, saraabdali, yinhengli, kazukoi}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Transformers and their attention mechanism have been revolutionary in the field of
Machine Learning. While originally proposed for the language data, they quickly
found their way to the image, video, graph, etc. data modalities with various
signal geometries. Despite this versatility, generalizing the attention mechanism
to scenarios where data is presented at different scales from potentially different
modalities is not straightforward. The attempts to incorporate hierarchy and multimodality within transformers are largely based on ad hoc heuristics, which are not
seamlessly generalizable to similar problems with potentially different structures.
To address this problem, in this paper, we take a fundamentally different approach:
we first propose a mathematical construct to represent multi-modal, multi-scale
data. We then mathematically derive the neural attention mechanics for the proposed construct from the first principle of entropy minimization. We show that
the derived formulation is optimal in the sense of being the closest to the standard
Softmax attention while incorporating the inductive biases originating from the
hierarchical/geometric information of the problem. We further propose an efficient algorithm based on dynamic programming to compute our derived attention
mechanism. By incorporating it within transformers, we show that the proposed
hierarchical attention mechanism not only can be employed to train transformer
models in hierarchical/multi-modal settings from scratch, but it can also be used to
inject hierarchical information into classical, pre-trained transformer models post
training, resulting in more efficient models in zero-shot manner.

1

Introduction

The field of Deep Learning has recently experienced a spectacular breakthrough with the rise of
Large Language Models (LLMs). It is no secret that this success is largely owed to the Transformer
architecture [90] and its self-attention mechanism. Although they were originally proposed to work
with language [24, 52, 13, 18], transformers have found their way to deal with images [25, 100, 85],
video [9, 65, 14, 46], audio [32, 91, 45, 16], graphs [101, 61, 72, 76], groups [42, 83], manifolds
[38] and point clouds [33, 107] without significantly altering their basic neural attention mechanism.
This is mainly due to the fact that, unlike many other architectures, transformers incorporate data
geometry not by architectural priors but by explicit, black-box, position embedding functions, which
can be easily replaced from one domain to another.
Despite this versatility, information quite often comes in different modalities and at different scales.
In terms of geometry, this means that we deal with problems where each datapoint may occupy
multiple, mutually-inconsistent geometries at potentially different scales. This is indeed challenging,
even for transformers! To this end, various novel (often heuristic) neural architectures have been
proposed to deal with multi-modal [55, 44, 109, 87, 23, 103, 40, 69] and hierarchical data [54, 105,
67, 94, 19, 106, 110].
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

