Audio Flamingo 3: Advancing Audio Intelligence
with Fully Open Large Audio Language Models

Sreyan Ghosh★12 , Arushi Goel★1 , Jaehyeon Kim1 , Sonal Kumar2 , Zhifeng Kong1 , Sang-gil Lee1 ,
Chao-Han Huck Yang1 , Ramani Duraiswami2 , Dinesh Manocha2 , Rafael Valle1 , Bryan Catanzaro1
NVIDIA, USA1 , University of Maryland, College Park, USA2
★

Equally contributed and led the project. Work done by Sreyan during an internship at NVIDIA.
Correspondence: arushig@nvidia.com, sreyang@umd.edu
Project: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/adlr/AF3/

Abstract
We present Audio Flamingo 3 (AF3), a fully open state-of-the-art (SOTA) large
audio-language model that advances reasoning and understanding across speech,
sound, and music. AF3 introduces: (i) AF-Whisper, a unified audio encoder trained
using a novel strategy for joint representation learning across all 3 modalities of
speech, sound, and music; (ii) flexible, on-demand thinking, allowing the model
to do chain-of-thought-type reasoning before answering; (iii) multi-turn, multiaudio chat; (iv) long audio understanding and reasoning (including speech) up
to 10 minutes; and (v) voice-to-voice interaction. To enable these capabilities,
we propose several large-scale training datasets curated using novel strategies,
including AudioSkills-XL, LongAudio-XL, AF-Think, and AF-Chat, and train
AF3 with a novel five-stage curriculum-based training strategy. Trained on only
open-source audio data, AF3 achieves new SOTA results on over 20+ (long) audio
understanding and reasoning benchmarks, surpassing both open-weight and closedsource models trained on much larger datasets.

1

Introduction

Audio—including speech, sounds, and music—is central to human perception and interaction. It enables
us to understand our surroundings, engage in conversations, express emotions, interpret videos, and enjoy
music. For AI systems to approach artificial general
intelligence (AGI) [88], they must similarly develop the
ability to comprehend and reason over diverse audio signals. While Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at
language-based reasoning, their audio comprehension
remains limited — both in accessibility and capability [54, 106]. Extending LLMs to process and reason
over audio is essential for building truly context-aware,
intelligent agents.
Audio-Language Models (ALMs) extend the capabilities of LMs to the auditory domain. Early works such
as CLAP [33] align audio and text in a shared embedding space, enabling them with tasks like retrieval [89].

Audio Flamingo 3
Previous SOTA (Open Source)
Previous SOTA (Closed Source)

NSynth Inst.
CMM

MMSU
(avg.)

ClothoAQA
(unan.)

70%

80%

90%

100%

MMAU
(avg.)

Libri
(Clean)

LongAudioBench

SPGI
OpenAudioBench
(alpaca)

Figure 1: AF3 vs. prior SOTA LALMs (values
normalized and WER=100-WER). AF3 outperforms most open-source/weights (e.g., Qwen2.5Omni) and closed (e.g., Gemini 2.5 Pro) LALMs
while being fully open.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

