Rethinking Verification for LLM Code Generation:
From Generation to Testing

Zihan Ma1,2,3,∗ , Taolin Zhang1,∗ , Maosong Cao1 , Junnan Liu1 , Wenwei Zhang1 ,
Minnan Luo2,3,† , Songyang Zhang1,†, ‡ , Kai Chen1,†
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
{mazihan880}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{zhangtaolin,zhangsongyang}@pjlab.org.cn
{minnluo}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have recently achieved notable success in
code-generation benchmarks such as HumanEval and LiveCodeBench. However, a
detailed examination reveals that these evaluation suites often comprise only a limited number of homogeneous test cases, resulting in subtle faults going undetected.
This not only artificially inflates measured performance but also compromises accurate reward estimation in reinforcement learning frameworks utilizing verifiable
rewards (RLVR). To address these critical shortcomings, we systematically investigate the test-case generation (TCG) task by proposing multi-dimensional metrics
designed to rigorously quantify test-suite thoroughness. Furthermore, we introduce
a human-LLM collaborative method (SAGA), leveraging human programming
expertise with LLM reasoning capability, aimed at significantly enhancing both
the coverage and the quality of generated test cases. In addition, we develop a
TCGBench to facilitate the study of the TCG task. Experiments show that SAGA
achieves a detection rate of 90.62% and a verifier accuracy of 32.58% on TCGBench. The Verifier Accuracy (Verifier Acc) of the code generation evaluation
benchmark synthesized by SAGA is 10.78% higher than that of LiveCodeBench-v6.
These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. We hope
this work contributes to building a scalable foundation for reliable LLM code
evaluation, further advancing RLVR in code generation, and paving the way for
automated adversarial test synthesis and adaptive benchmark integration. 1

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have triggered a paradigm shift in automatic code generation,
demonstrating capabilities on par with or even exceeding human programmers on numerous benchmark tasks. As LLMs become increasingly integrated into software development workflows, ensuring
the quality and reliability of the code they produce is paramount. This necessitates reliable evaluation
methodologies, where code verifiers—typically powered by test suites—play a critical role. This
raises a crucial question: Are the test cases of current benchmarks for evaluating models’ code
capabilities robust enough?
Initial analyses of benchmarks like HumanEval [6] (avg. 7.7 tests/problem), MBPP [3] (3 tests/problem), and EvalPlus [28, 29] (which saw a 15% pass rate drop with 80× more tests) indicate the
1

† means corresponding authors, ‡ means project lead, ∗ means authors contributed equally.
The data demo and prompts can be accessed via https://github.com/open-compass/SAGA

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

