Learning with Restricted Boltzmann Machines:
Asymptotics of AMP and GD in High Dimensions

Yizhou Xu
Information, Learning & Physics Laboratory
Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Florent Krzakala
Information, Learning & Physics Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Lenka Zdeborová
Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
The Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) is one of the simplest generative neural
networks capable of learning input distributions. Despite its simplicity, the analysis
of its performance in learning from the training data is only well understood in
cases that essentially reduce to singular value decomposition of the data. Here, we
consider the limit of a large dimension of the input space and a constant number of
hidden units. In this limit, we simplify the standard RBM training objective into a
form that is equivalent to the multi-index model with non-separable regularization.
This opens a path to analyze training of the RBM using methods that are established
for multi-index models, such as Approximate Message Passing (AMP) and its state
evolution, and the analysis of Gradient Descent (GD) via the dynamical mean-field
theory. We then give rigorous asymptotics of the training dynamics of RBMs on
data generated by the spiked covariance model as a prototype of a structure suitable
for unsupervised learning. We show in particular that RBMs reach the optimal
computational weak recovery threshold, aligning with the Baik-Ben Arous-Péché
(BBP) transition, in the spiked covariance model.

1

Introduction

The Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [Hinton, 2002, Salakhutdinov et al., 2007] is a foundational generative model that effectively learns input distributions in an unsupervised manner and can
be extended to multi-layer architectures [Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009]. RBMs have significantly
influenced machine learning development and, despite not being state-of-the-art for e.g.,image generation, remain of scientific interest and can enhance interpretability [Hu et al., 2018]. They are in
particular very popular in modeling the quantum wave function in many-body quantum problems
[Carleo and Troyer, 2017, Melko et al., 2019, Krenn et al., 2023, Nys et al., 2024] in physics and in
modeling protein folding [Morcos et al., 2011, Muntoni et al., 2021].
In the wake of generative AI’s recent successes, achieving a precise mathematical understanding
of how RBMs learn from data is a natural first step toward tackling the more intricate dynamics of
modern architectures. Yet, the learning behavior of RBMs remains poorly understood, primarily
due to the intractability of the likelihood function. In practice, stochastic approximations such as
contrastive divergence are widely used. While exactly solvable models—such as Gaussian-Gaussian
and Gaussian-Spherical RBMs [Karakida et al., 2016, Decelle and Furtlehner, 2020, Genovese and
Tantari, 2020]—are well understood, they essentially reduce to singular value decomposition (SVD)
and fail to capture the mechanisms underlying empirical performance. Heuristic analyses using the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

