S2M-Former: Spiking Symmetric Mixing
Branchformer for Brain Auditory Attention Detection

Jiaqi Wang1,2 , Zhengyu Ma2∗, Xiongri Shen1 , Chenlin Zhou2,3 , Leilei Zhao1 , Han Zhang2,4
Yi Zhong1,5 , Siqi Cai1,6 , Zhenxi Song1 , Zhiguo Zhang1,6∗
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Pengcheng Laboratory 3 Peking University
4
Harbin Institute of Technology 5 Great Bay University 6 Shenzhen Loop Area Institute
{mhwjq1998}@gmail.com; {mazhy}@pcl.ac.cn; {zhiguozhang}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Auditory attention detection (AAD) aims to decode listeners’ focus in complex
auditory environments from electroencephalography (EEG) recordings, which is
crucial for developing neuro-steered hearing devices. Despite recent advancements,
EEG-based AAD remains hindered by the absence of synergistic frameworks that
can fully leverage complementary EEG features under energy-efficiency constraints.
We propose S2 M-Former, a novel spiking symmetric mixing framework to address
this limitation through two key innovations: i) Presenting a spike-driven symmetric
architecture composed of parallel spatial and frequency branches with mirrored
modular design, leveraging biologically plausible token-channel mixers to enhance
complementary learning across branches; ii) Introducing lightweight 1D token sequences to replace conventional 3D operations, reducing parameters by 14.7×. The
brain-inspired spiking architecture further reduces power consumption, achieving a
5.8× energy reduction compared to recent ANN methods, while also surpassing
existing SNN baselines in terms of parameter efficiency and performance. Comprehensive experiments on three AAD benchmarks (KUL, DTU and AV-GC-AAD)
across three settings (within-trial, cross-trial and cross-subject) demonstrate that
S2 M-Former achieves comparable state-of-the-art (SOTA) decoding accuracy, making it a promising low-power, high-performance solution for AAD tasks. Code is
available at https://github.com/JackieWang9811/S2M-Former.

1

Introduction

The “cocktail party effect” refers to the remarkable ability of the human auditory system to isolate
and focus on a specific speaker’s speech in a competitive background and noise environment [1, 2].
This capacity, realized through dynamic neural processing in the auditory cortex and top-down
attentional modulation [3], has profound implications for understanding human auditory cognition
and developing neuroengineering applications. Auditory attention detection (AAD) investigates
the brain’s selective hearing ability by detecting which sound stream a listener is focusing on,
based on neural recordings, as illustrated in Figure. 1. It aims to address a critical challenge in
neural rehabilitation: How to restore natural auditory scene analysis for individuals with hearing
impairments.
Recent advances [4, 5, 6, 7] in non-invasive electroencephalography (EEG)-based approaches have
demonstrated remarkable success in reconstructing attentional selection patterns from cortical responses. On the one hand, AAD enables hearing aids to dynamically amplify the speech stream that
the user is focusing on, providing more natural and adaptive listening. On the other hand, integrating
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

