Formal Models of Active Learning from
Contrastive Examples

Farnam Mansouri
University of Waterloo
f5mansou@uwaterloo.ca

Hans U. Simon
Ruhr-University Bochum
hans.simon@rub.de

Adish Singla
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Yuxin Chen
University of Chicago
chenyuxin@uchicago.edu

Sandra Zilles
University of Regina and Amii
sandra.zilles@uregina.ca

Abstract
Machine learning can greatly benefit from providing learning algorithms with
pairs of contrastive training examples—typically pairs of instances that differ only
slightly, yet have different class labels. Intuitively, the difference in the instances
helps explain the difference in the class labels. This paper proposes a theoretical
framework in which the effect of various types of contrastive examples on active
learners is studied formally. The focus is on the sample complexity of learning
concept classes and how it is influenced by the choice of contrastive examples.
We illustrate our results with geometric concept classes and classes of Boolean
functions. Interestingly, we reveal a connection between learning from contrastive
examples and the classical model of self-directed learning.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, contrastive data has been used for various purposes, most notably in order
to reduce the number of training samples needed to make high-quality predictions, or to explain
the predictions of black-box models. A contrastive example for a labeled training data point (x, b)
with label b ∈ {0, 1} could be, e.g., a labeled point (x′ , 1 − b), such that x′ fulfills some additional
predefined property. This additional property could be defined in a way so as to convey helpful
information for learning. For instance, a constraint on x′ could be that it is the closest point to x (in
the given pool of data points, and with respect to a fixed underlying metric) that has a different label
from b. Such examples are often called counterfactuals and have proven useful in various learning
settings, including explanation-based supervised learning [8], but also reinforcement learning [16, 22],
and learning recommender systems [24].
Intuitively, counterfactuals present a learning algorithm with an important feature or property of a
data object that crucially affects its classification. For example, a training data point x might be
an image of a cat, together with its class label (the subspecies of cat). A counterfactual piece of
information might be an image x′ of a cat that looks similar to the cat in x, yet belongs to a different
subspecies. The main feature distinguishing x′ from x could be highlighted in the image, as a means
of explaining the classification of x. Similarly, contrastive information can be used in natural language
processing and many other applications, and was applied successfully in representation learning, see,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

