Multiscale guidance of protein structure prediction
with heterogeneous cryo-EM data

Rishwanth Raghu
Princeton University
rraghu@princeton.edu

Axel Levy
Stanford University
axlevy@stanford.edu

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University
gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

Ellen D. Zhong
Princeton University
zhonge@princeton.edu

Abstract
Protein structure prediction models are now capable of generating accurate 3D
structural hypotheses from sequence alone. However, they routinely fail to capture
the conformational diversity of dynamic biomolecular complexes, often requiring
heuristic MSA subsampling approaches for generating alternative states. In parallel,
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) has emerged as a powerful tool for imaging
near-native structural heterogeneity, but is challenged by arduous pipelines to
transform raw experimental data into atomic models. Here, we bridge the gap
between these modalities, combining cryo-EM density maps with the rich sequence
and biophysical priors learned by protein structure prediction models. Our method,
CryoBoltz, guides the sampling trajectory of a pretrained biomolecular structure
prediction model using both global and local structural constraints derived from
density maps, driving predictions towards conformational states consistent with
the experimental data. We demonstrate that this flexible yet powerful inferencetime approach allows us to build atomic models into heterogeneous cryo-EM
maps across a variety of dynamic biomolecular systems including transporters and
antibodies.

1

Introduction

Proteins and other macromolecules in our cells are constantly vibrating, deforming, and interacting
with other surrounding molecules. Characterizing the variability of their atomic structures, i.e., of the
relative 3-dimensional (3D) locations of their atoms, can deepen our understanding of the complex
chemical mechanisms underlying basic biological systems. For example, understanding how a driver
mutation can alter the probability of certain conformational states has applications ranging from drug
design [25] to molecular engineering [21].
A variety of experimental methods for protein structure determination have been developed, with
X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) being the most widely used today. In
cryo-EM, a series of breakthroughs in both hardware [80, 9, 24, 29] and software [69, 27, 68, 64]
led to the so-called “resolution revolution” [47], resulting in routine near-atomic resolution structure
determination for well-behaved purified protein samples. Cryo-EM, in particular, also possesses
the ability to measure and reconstruct the conformational landscape of dynamic biomolecular complexes [68, 64, 94, 10, 62, 63]. However, these experiments are still complex, costly, and time
consuming, requiring expensive microscopes and facilities, as well as hours to days of data processing through iterative computational pipelines [49]. Notably, current reconstruction algorithms
only output 3D “density maps” that approximate the electron scattering potential of the molecule.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

