Distance Adaptive Beam Search for Provably Accurate
Graph-Based Nearest Neighbor Search

Yousef Al-Jazzazi
New York University
Abu Dhabi
ya2225@nyu.edu

Haya Diwan
New York University
hd2371@nyu.edu

Jinrui Gou
New York University
jg6226@nyu.edu

Cameron Musco
UMass Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Christopher Musco
New York University
cmusco@nyu.edu

Torsten Suel
New York University
torsten.suel@nyu.edu

Abstract
Nearest neighbor search is central in machine learning, information retrieval, and
databases. For high-dimensional datasets, graph-based methods such as HNSW,
DiskANN, and NSG have become popular thanks to their empirical accuracy
and efficiency. These methods construct a directed graph over the dataset and
perform beam search on the graph to find nodes close to a given query. While
significant work has focused on practical refinements and theoretical understanding
of graph-based methods, many questions remain. We propose a new distance-based
termination condition for beam search to replace the commonly used condition
based on beam width. We prove that, as long as the search graph is navigable, our
resulting Adaptive Beam Search method is guaranteed to approximately solve the
nearest-neighbor problem, establishing a connection between navigability and the
performance of graph-based search. We also provide extensive experiments on our
new termination condition for both navigable graphs and approximately navigable
graphs used in practice, such as HNSW and Vamana graphs. We find that Adaptive
Beam Search outperforms standard beam search over a range of recall values, data
sets, graph constructions, and target number of nearest neighbors. It thus provides
a simple and practical way to improve the performance of popular methods.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional nearest neighbor search is a basic building block in many areas, including image
and video processing [18, 26], information retrieval [6, 51], and algorithm design [10, 28]. It
is central to modern machine learning, underlying document and media search based on learned
embeddings [9, 40, 48], as well as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems for large language
models [37, 46]. Nearest neighbor search also plays a role in hard-negative mining [62], accelerating
transformer architectures [29], and other applications across machine learning [58].
Formally, in the k-nearest neighbor search problem, we are given a set of data points, often machinelearned vector embeddings of documents, images, or other media [12, 14]. We are also given a
distance measure, such as the Euclidean distance, or something more exotic like Chamfer distance
[25]. The goal is to pre-process the dataset into a search data structure so that, given any query point
q, we can efficiently find the k data points closest to q with respect to the distance measure.
Solving this problem exactly is notoriously difficult in high dimensions, so applications typically rely
on approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) methods that attempt to find most of the k closest neighbors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

