IDOL: Meeting Diverse Distribution Shifts with Prior
Physics for Tropical Cyclone Multi-Task Estimation

Hanting Yan1 , Pan Mu1 , Shiqi Zhang1 , Yuchao Zhu1 , Jinglin Zhang2 , Cong Bai1,3∗
1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology, China
2
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, China
3
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing, China

Abstract
Tropical Cyclone (TC) estimation aims to accurately estimate various TC attributes
in real time. However, distribution shifts arising from the complex and dynamic
nature of TC environmental fields, such as varying geographical conditions and
seasonal changes, present significant challenges to reliable estimation. Most
existing methods rely on multi-modal fusion for feature extraction but overlook
the intrinsic distribution of feature representations, leading to poor generalization
under out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. To address this, we propose an effective
Identity Distribution-Oriented Physical Invariant Learning framework (IDOL),
which imposes identity-oriented constraints to regulate the feature space under
the guidance of prior physical knowledge, thereby dealing distribution variability
with physical invariance. Specifically, the proposed IDOL employs the wind field
model and dark correlation knowledge of TC to model task-shared and task-specific
identity tokens. These tokens capture task dependencies and intrinsic physical
invariances of TC, enabling robust estimation of TC wind speed, pressure, innercore, and outer-core size under distribution shifts. Extensive experiments conducted
on multiple datasets and tasks demonstrate the outperformance of the proposed
IDOL, verifying that imposing identity-oriented constraints based on prior physical
knowledge can effectively mitigates diverse distribution shifts in TC estimation.
Code is available at https://github.com/Zjut-MultimediaPlus/IDOL.

1

Introduction

As a typical natural disaster, Tropical Cyclones (TCs) endanger human life and the environment each
year. Accurate estimation of TC intensity and size is thus essential in the field of weather service, as it
helps reduce casualties and property losses. Driven by the strong capability of deep learning in feature
representation and nonlinear modeling, recent TC multi-task estimation methods [7, 8] primarily employ deep neural networks to jointly estimate multiple TC attributes, including intensity and size. Generally speaking, deep learning models rely on the assumption that the training and test data are drawn
from the same underlying distribution, referred to as in-distribution [11], to make reliable predictions.
However, in real-world scenarios, the spatiotemporal heterogeneity of TC environmental fields often
gives rise to complex and diverse developmental pathways [10], resulting in out-of-distribution (OOD)
data during inference. Consequently, ignoring the inherent distribution of network embeddings, existing methods may fail to learn features that capture all possible variations in TC evolution. This,
in turn, severely limits the models’ ability to generalize effectively when learning from previously
unseen TCs. To verify the presence of OOD data, we use violin plots to visualize the distributions of
input X and output Y across different datasets or tasks. As shown in Figure 7 in Appendix A, the
varying shapes and spreads of the violins reveal notable discrepancies in the TC data distributions.
∗

Corresponding author. Email: congbai@zjut.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

