S P E X: A Spectral Approach to Explainable Clustering

Tal Argov
Tel Aviv University
talargov1@mail.tau.ac.il

Tal Wagner
Tel Aviv University
talwag@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Explainable clustering by axis-aligned decision trees was introduced by [33] and
has gained considerable interest. Prior work has focused on minimizing the price
of explainability for specific clustering objectives, lacking a general method to fit
an explanation tree to any given clustering, without restrictions. In this work, we
propose a new and generic approach to explainable clustering, based on spectral
graph partitioning. With it, we design an explainable clustering algorithm that can
fit an explanation tree to any given non-explainable clustering, or directly to the
dataset itself. Moreover, we show that prior algorithms can also be interpreted
as graph partitioning, through a generalized framework due to [45] wherein cuts
are optimized in two graphs simultaneously. Our experiments show the favorable
performance of our method compared to baselines on a range of datasets.

1

Introduction

As machine learning increasingly permeates
daily life and forms the basis for consequential
decision making in the real world, explaining
its outputs in a manner that is interpretable to
humans often becomes imperative. In a recent
influential work, Moshkovitz et al. [33] proposed a model of explainability in clustering.
In their model, a clustering of points in a feature space Rd is explainable if it is described
by a binary decision tree, where each internal
node corresponds to thresholding the points
along a single coordinate. Thus, the assignment of points to clusters can be described by
a sequence of individual feature thresholds, arguably making it easy to explain and interpret.
See Figure 1 for illustration.

Figure 1: Illustration of explainable clustering.
Clusters are generated from three gaussians. The
dashed lines on the left and the decision tree on
the right define the explainable clustering regions,
with some points attributed to the wrong cluster.

Moshkovitz et al. [33] presented the Iterative Mistake Minimization (IMM) algorithm, which takes
as input an already computed k-medians or k-means clustering of the data, called the reference
clustering, and “rounds” into an explainable clustering. It works by fitting the reference clustering
with a decision tree that greedily minimizes wrong point-to-cluster assignments. They proved that the
loss in clustering cost, called the price of explainability, can be bounded as a function of k. This has
led to surge of theoretical work on bounding the price of explainability, culminating in tight bounds
for k-medians and nearly tight bounds for k-means [26, 28, 30, 31, 32, 12, 7, 19, 20, 4, 27].
This voluminous body of work has so far mostly focused on k-medians and k-means. These methods
require the reference clustering to be endowed with centroids in order to work. This fails to capture
widely used notions of clustering that do not produce centroids, like kernel k-means or spectral
clustering [40, 10, 47], which one might wish to use as the reference clustering. [15] recently took
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

