Towards Resilient Safety-driven Unlearning for
Diffusion Models against Downstream Fine-tuning

Boheng Li1 , Renjie Gu2 , Junjie Wang3 , Leyi Qi4 , Yiming Li1∗
Run Wang3 , Zhan Qin4 , Tianwei Zhang1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Central South University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing,
Ministry of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, China

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have achieved impressive image generation
quality and are increasingly fine-tuned for personalized applications. However,
these models often inherit unsafe behaviors from toxic pretraining data, raising
growing safety concerns. While recent safety-driven unlearning methods have
made promising progress in suppressing model toxicity, they are found to be fragile
to downstream fine-tuning, as we reveal that state-of-the-art methods largely fail to
retain their effectiveness even when fine-tuned on entirely benign datasets. To mitigate this problem, in this paper, we propose ResAlign, a safety-driven unlearning
framework with enhanced resilience against downstream fine-tuning. By modeling downstream fine-tuning as an implicit optimization problem with a Moreau
envelope-based reformulation, ResAlign enables efficient gradient estimation to
minimize the recovery of harmful behaviors. Additionally, a meta-learning strategy
is proposed to simulate a diverse distribution of fine-tuning scenarios to improve
generalization. Extensive experiments across a wide range of datasets, fine-tuning
methods, and configurations demonstrate that ResAlign consistently outperforms
prior unlearning approaches in retaining safety, while effectively preserving benign
generation capability. Our code and pretrained models are publicly available here.
. Disclaimer: This paper includes AI-generated images containing partially nude
human figures and other sensitive content, shown only for research purposes.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have emerged as a dominant class of generative AI due to
their unprecedented ability to synthesize high-quality, diverse, and aesthetically compelling general
images from natural language descriptions [67, 58]. Beyond synthesizing general images, there is
also a growing interest in customizing pretrained models for personalized generation, e.g., generating
images of specific facial identities or artistic styles that are underrepresented in the original training
data [45]. This is typically achieved by fine-tuning the pretrained base model on a small reference
dataset for a few steps [69, 39, 76]. The development of several advanced fine-tuning methods
[24, 69, 20] as well as the rapid proliferation of “fine-tuning-as-a-service” platforms [5] has made
personalization widely accessible, fueling a surge in applications such as stylized avatars, fan art, and
thematic illustrations, which are becoming increasingly popular especially among younger users [74].
Yet alongside the rapid advancements of diffusion models, growing concerns have emerged regarding
their potential to generate inappropriate or harmful content (e.g., sexually explicit imagery) [13, 70].
∗

Corresponding Author: Yiming Li (e-mail: liyiming.tech@gmail.com).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

