CAS-Spec: Cascade Adaptive Self-Speculative
Decoding for On-the-Fly Lossless Inference
Acceleration of LLMs
Zhiyuan Ning1,2∗ Jiawei Shao1 Ruge Xu2 Xinfei Guo2
Jun Zhang3 Chi Zhang1† Xuelong Li1†
1
2
TeleAI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
{telegraphpolehead,schrodinger,xinfei.guo}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{shaojw2,zhangc120}@chinatelecom.cn, eejzhang@ust.hk, xuelong_li@ieee.org

Abstract
Speculative decoding has become a widely adopted as an effective technique for
lossless inference acceleration when deploying large language models (LLMs).
While on-the-fly self-speculative methods offer seamless integration and broad
utility, they often fall short of the speed gains achieved by methods relying on
specialized training. Cascading a hierarchy of draft models promises further acceleration and flexibility, but the high cost of training multiple models has limited
its practical application. In this paper, we propose a novel Cascade Adaptive
Self-Speculative Decoding (CAS-Spec) method which constructs speculative draft
models by leveraging dynamically switchable inference acceleration (DSIA) strategies, including layer sparsity and activation quantization. Furthermore, traditional
vertical and horizontal cascade algorithms are inefficient when applied to selfspeculative decoding methods. We introduce a Dynamic Tree Cascade (DyTC)
algorithm that adaptively routes the multi-level draft models and assigns the draft
lengths, based on the heuristics of acceptance rates and latency prediction. Our
CAS-Spec method achieves state-of-the-art acceleration compared to existing
on-the-fly speculative decoding methods, with an average speedup from 1.1×
to 2.3× over autoregressive decoding across various LLMs and datasets. DyTC
improves the average speedup by 47% and 48% over cascade-based baseline and
tree-based baseline algorithms, respectively. CAS-Spec can be easily integrated
into most existing LLMs and holds promising potential for further acceleration as
self-speculative decoding techniques continue to evolve.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), such as Llama [1], Mixtral [2], and Qwen [3] are rapidly evolving
and increasingly adopted in various applications. However, their autoregressive generation process, where tokens are produced sequentially, coupled with their massive parameter sizes, leads to
substantial inference latency and high computational cost. To mitigate this bottleneck, speculative
decoding [4–6] has emerged as a highly effective and widely adopted approach, achieving significant
speedup without compromising the quality of the generated text. It operates by utilizing a smaller,
faster “draft” model to generate a sequence of multiple future tokens concurrently, which are then
verified by the larger, more accurate “target” model in parallel, thereby reducing the number of
expensive forward passes.
∗
†

Work done during an internship at TeleAI
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

