Where Graph Meets Heterogeneity: Multi-View
Collaborative Graph Experts

Zhihao Wu1∗, Jinyu Cai2∗, Yunhe Zhang3 , Jielong Lu1 , Zhaoliang Chen4 , Shuman Zhuang5 ,
Haishuai Wang1†
1
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems,
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
3
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
4
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
5
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
{zhihaowu1999,jinyucai1995,zhangyhannie}@gmail.com, jielonglu2022@163.com,
chenzl23@outlook.com, shumanzhuang@163.com, haishuai.wang@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The convergence of graph learning and multi-view learning has propelled the emergence of multi-view graph neural networks (MGNNs), offering strong capabilities
to address complex real-world data characterized by heterogeneous and interconnected information. While existing MGNNs exploit the potential of multi-view
graphs, the inherent conflict persists between the two critical inductive biases of
multi-view learning, consistency and complementarity. Consequently, the challenge of defining and resolving this tension in the new context of multi-view
graphs remains largely underexplored. To bridge this gap, we propose Multiview Collaborative Graph Experts (MvCGE), a novel framework grounded in the
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) paradigm. MvCGE establishes architectural consistency
through shared parameters while preserving complementarity via layer-wise collaborative graph experts, which are dynamically activated by a graph-aware routing
mechanism that adapts to the structural nuances of each view. This dual-level
design is further reinforced by two novel components: a load equilibrium loss to
prevent expert collapse and ensure balanced specialization, and a graph discrepancy
loss based on distributional divergence to enhance inter-view complementarity.
Extensive experiments on diverse datasets demonstrate MvCGE’s superiority.

1

Introduction

With the advancement of data collection and analysis capabilities, modern data is no longer treated
as isolated or singular. Instead, entities are now understood to be deeply interconnected through
complex and pervasive relationships, which are captured with increasing fidelity. Graphs, due to their
universality, are widely used to represent these relationships as a powerful modeling tool. They excel
at capturing complex dependencies and have become a cornerstone of machine learning, leading
to advanced techniques for learning representations from structured data [Liang et al., 2024; Cai
et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2016]. Beyond inter-entity relationships, the ‘non-isolation’ of data is also
manifested in the heterogeneous information sources, referred to as different views. For instance,
in social networks, a user may be associated with various types of interactions (e.g., friendship
ties vs. behavioral interactions); With multimedia systems, objects can be described using multiple
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Haishuai Wang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

