Dual Prototype-Enhanced Contrastive Framework for
Class-Imbalanced Graph Domain Adaptation

Xin Ma1∗, Yifan Wang2∗, Siyu Yi3 , Wei Ju1†, Junyu Luo4 , Yusheng Zhao4 ,
Xiao Luo5 , Jiancheng Lv1
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
2
School of Information Technology & Management,
University of International Business and Economics
3
College of Mathematics, Sichuan University 4 Peking University 5 UCLA
maxin88@stu.scu.edu.cn, juwei@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph transfer learning, especially in unsupervised domain adaptation, aims to
transfer knowledge from a label-abundant source graph to an unlabeled target graph.
However, most existing approaches overlook the common issue of label imbalance
in the source domain, typically assuming a balanced label distribution that rarely
holds in practice. Moreover, they face challenges arising from biased knowledge in
the source graph and substantial domain distribution shifts. To remedy the above
challenges, we propose a dual-branch prototype-enhanced contrastive framework
for graph domain adaptation under a class-imbalanced scenario. Specifically, we
introduce a dual-branch graph encoder to capture both local and global information,
generating class-specific prototypes from a distilled anchor set. Then, a prototypeenhanced contrastive learning framework is introduced. On the one hand, we encourage class alignment between the two branches based on constructed prototypes
to alleviate the bias introduced by class imbalance. On the other hand, we infer
the pseudo-labels for the target domain and align sample pairs across domains that
share similar semantics to reduce domain discrepancies. Experimental results show
that our ImGDA outperforms the state-of-the-art methods across multiple datasets
and settings. The code is available at: https://github.com/maxin88scu/ImGDA.

1

Introduction

Graph serves as a versatile data structure to represent complex relationships [12, 47] in a number of
fields such as social networks [2], molecular biology [13, 55] and recommender systems [20, 44].
One fundamental task for graph-structured data is node classification, which endeavors to predict
the category of each node within the graph and is widely applied in various applications, i.e.,
community detection [51], smart city [58] and knowledge graph [49]. Nevertheless, the effectiveness
of this task heavily relies on label information, which is time-consuming and costly [9]. Graph
transfer learning [19, 61] has emerged as an effective framework for tackling this problem by
leveraging labeled information from a source graph to facilitate learning on an unlabeled target graph,
significantly enhancing the model’s ability to generalize on the target graph.
Actually, there are several approaches that apply graph transfer learning for domain adaptation in
the node classification task. Thanks to the powerful capabilities of graph neural networks (GNNs),
unsupervised graph domain adaptation focuses on reducing the distribution discrepancy between
∗
†

Equal Contributions
Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

