Regret Bounds for Adversarial Contextual Bandits
with General Function Approximation and Delayed
Feedback
Orin Levy∗
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
orinlevy@mail.tau.ac.il
Alon Cohen
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research
alonco@tauex.tau.ac.il

Liad Erez∗
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
liaderez@mail.tau.ac.il
Yishay Mansour
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract
We present regret minimization algorithms for the contextual multi-armed bandit
(CMAB) problem over K actions in the presence of delayed feedback, a scenario where loss observations arrive with delays chosen by an adversary. As a
preliminary result, assuming direct access
pto a finite policy
pclass Π we establish
an optimal expected regret bound of O( KT log |Π| + D log |Π|) where D
is the sum of delays. For our main contribution, we study the general function
approximation setting over a (possibly infinite) contextual loss function class F
with access to an online least-square regression
p oracle O over√F. In this setting,
we achieve an expected regret bound of O( KT RT (O) + dmax Dβ) assuming FIFO order, where dmax is the maximal delay, RT (O) is an upper bound
on the oracle’s regret and β is a stability parameter associated with the oracle.
We complement this general result by presenting a novel stability analysis of a
Hedge-based version of Vovk’s aggregating forecaster as an oracle implementation for least-square regression over a finite function class F and show that its
stability
bounded by log |F|, resulting in an expected regret bound
p parameter β isp
√
of O( KT log |F|p+ dmax D logp
|F|) which is a dmax factor away from the
lower bound of Ω( KT log |F| + D log |F|) that we also present.

1

Introduction

Contextual Multi-Armed Bandit (CMAB) is a natural extension of the well-studied Multi-Armed
Bandit (MAB) model that has gained considerable attention over the past decade. (See, e.g., [24, 34]).
CMAB describes a sequential decision-making problem with exterior factors that affect the decision
taken by the learner. We refer to this side information as the context. In this setting, the context x is
revealed to the learner at the start of each round. Then, the learner chooses an action a out of a finite
set A containing K actions and suffers a loss for that choice, where the context determines the loss.
The learner’s goal is to minimize the cumulative loss incurred throughout an interaction of T rounds.
In this model, action selection strategies are context-dependent and referred to as policies, and the
*

Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

