Nemotron-Flash: Towards Latency-Optimal Hybrid
Small Language Models

Yonggan Fu†∗, Xin Dong†∗, Shizhe Diao† , Matthijs Van Keirsbilck† , Hanrong Ye† ,
Wonmin Byeon† , Yashaswi Karnati† , Lucas Liebenwein† , Maksim Khadkevich† ,
Alexander Keller† , Jan Kautz† , Yingyan (Celine) Lin†‡ , Pavlo Molchanov†
†
NVIDIA Research, ‡ Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Efficient deployment of small language models (SLMs) is essential for numerous
real-world applications with stringent latency constraints.While previous work
on SLM design has primarily focused on reducing the number of parameters
to achieve parameter-optimal SLMs, parameter efficiency does not necessarily
translate into proportional real-device speed-ups. This work aims to identify the
key determinants of SLMs’ real-device latency and offer generalizable principles
and methodologies for SLM design and training when real-device latency is the
primary consideration. Specifically, we identify two central architectural factors:
depth–width ratios and operator choices. The former is crucial for small-batchsize latency, while the latter affects both latency and large-batch-size throughput.
In light of this, we first study latency-optimal depth–width ratios, with the key
finding that although deep–thin models generally achieve better accuracy under
the same parameter budget, they may not lie on the accuracy–latency trade-off
frontier. Next, we explore emerging efficient attention alternatives to evaluate their
potential as candidate building operators. Using the identified promising operators,
we construct an evolutionary search framework to automatically discover latencyoptimal combinations of these operators within hybrid SLMs, thereby advancing
the accuracy–latency frontier. In addition to architectural improvements, we further
enhance SLM training using a weight normalization technique that enables more
effective weight updates and improves final convergence. This technique can serve
as a generalizable component for future SLMs. Combining these methods, we
introduce a new family of hybrid SLMs, called Nemotron-Flash, which significantly
advances the accuracy–efficiency frontier of state-of-the-art SLMs, e.g., achieving
over +5.5% average accuracy, 1.3×/1.9× lower latency, and 18.7×/45.6× higher
throughput compared to Qwen3-1.7B/0.6B, respectively.
Models on Hugging Face: Nemotron-Flash-1B | 3B | 3B-Instruct

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have driven remarkable breakthroughs across
a wide range of applications and industries. Despite their impressive capabilities, the substantial
computational demands and high latency of LLMs present significant barriers to practical deployment,
particularly in latency-sensitive scenarios or on resource-constrained hardware. This challenge has
intensified the demand for small language models (SLMs).
Most existing SLM designs prioritize parameter reduction to achieve efficiency; however, parameterefficient models do not necessarily yield proportional latency reductions, especially on hardware AI
∗

Co-first author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

