Optimistic Online-to-Batch Conversions
for Accelerated Convergence and Universality

Yu-Hu Yan, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{yanyh, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we study offline convex optimization with smooth objectives, where
the classical Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient (NAG) method achieves the optimal accelerated convergence. Extensive research has aimed to understand NAG
from various perspectives, and a recent line of work approaches this from the
viewpoint of online learning and online-to-batch conversion, emphasizing the
role of optimistic online algorithms for acceleration. In this work, we contribute
to this perspective by proposing novel optimistic online-to-batch conversions that
incorporate optimism theoretically into the analysis, thereby significantly simplifying the online algorithm design while preserving the optimal convergence
rates. Specifically, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our conversions through
the following results: (i) when combined with simple online gradient descent,
our optimistic conversion achieves the optimal accelerated convergence; (ii) our
conversion also applies to strongly convex objectives, and by leveraging both optimistic online-to-batch conversion and optimistic online algorithms, we achieve the
optimal accelerated convergence rate for strongly convex and smooth objectives,
for the first time through the lens of online-to-batch conversion; (iii) our optimistic
conversion can achieve universality to smoothness — applicable to both smooth
and non-smooth objectives without requiring knowledge of the smoothness coefficient — and remains efficient as non-universal methods by using only one gradient
query in each iteration. Finally, we highlight the effectiveness of our optimistic
online-to-batch conversions by a precise correspondence with NAG.

1

Introduction

Convex optimization [Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004, Nesterov, 2018] is a core problem in optimization theory. Its simple theoretical foundations and algorithms have made it essential for solving a
wide range of real-world problems. Specifically, we focus on the simplest and most standard form:
min f (x),

x∈X

(1)

where f (·) is a convex objective function and X ⊆ Rd is the feasible domain. In this paper, we
focus on the function-value convergence. Specifically, we aim to minimize the suboptimality gap
f (XT ) − minx∈X f (x), where XT denotes the final output of an algorithm after T iterations.
1.1

Accelerated Convergence

When the objective function f (·) is Lipschitz-continuous, the simple Gradient Descent (GD) is
sufficient to achieve the optimal convergence rates, specifically, O(T −1/2 ) for convex functions and
∗

Correspondence: Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

