Estimation of Stochastic Optimal Transport Maps

Sloan Nietert
EPFL
sloan.nietert@epfl.ch

Ziv Goldfeld
Cornell University
goldfeld@cornell.edu

Abstract
The optimal transport (OT) map is a geometry-driven transformation between
high-dimensional probability distributions which underpins a wide range of tasks
in statistics, applied probability, and machine learning. However, existing statistical
theory for OT map estimation is quite restricted, hinging on Brenier’s theorem
(quadratic cost, absolutely continuous source) to guarantee existence and uniqueness of a deterministic OT map, on which various additional regularity assumptions
are imposed to obtain quantitative error bounds. In many real-world problems
these conditions fail or cannot be certified, in which case optimal transportation
is possible only via stochastic maps that can split mass. To broaden the scope of
map estimation theory to such settings, this work introduces a novel metric for
evaluating the transportation quality of stochastic maps. Under this metric, we
develop computationally efficient map estimators with near-optimal finite-sample
risk bounds, subject to easy-to-verify minimal assumptions. Our analysis further
accommodates common forms of adversarial sample contamination, yielding estimators with robust estimation guarantees. Empirical experiments are provided
which validate our theory and demonstrate the utility of the proposed framework
in settings where existing theory fails. These contributions constitute the first
general-purpose theory for map estimation, compatible with a wide spectrum of
real-world applications where optimal transport may be intrinsically stochastic.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) is a principled framework for comparing and transforming probability
distributions according to the geometry of the underlying metric space [Villani, 2003, Santambrogio,
2015]. Central to OT theory is the transport map, which performs said transformation. For X , Y ⊆ Rd ,
we say that T : X → Y is a transport map from source distribution µ ∈ P(X ) to target ν ∈ P(Y) if
the pushforward measure T♯ µ = µ ◦ T −1 coincides with ν. An optimal transport map T ⋆ , if it exists,
is a solution to the Monge OT problem from µ to ν, which reads as follows for the p-Wasserstein cost:
inf

T : T♯ µ=ν

1

Eµ [∥X − T (X)∥p ] p .

(1)

Monge maps are employed for many applications, including domain adaptation [Courty et al., 2017,
Redko et al., 2019], single-cell genomics [Schiebinger et al., 2019, Bunne et al., 2023], style transfer
[Kolkin et al., 2019, Mroueh, 2020], and generative modeling [Zhang et al., 2018, Vesseron et al.,
2025]. An important special case is when p = 2 and µ is absolutely continuous with respect to
(w.r.t.) the Lebesgue measure; then, Brenier’s theorem guarantees the existence of a unique Monge
map, often called the Brenier map, given as the gradient of a convex potential [Brenier, 1991]. More
generally, existence of optimal maps is guaranteed if µ is absolutely continuous and uniqueness holds
if further p > 1 (see, e.g., Section 2.4 of Villani, 2003).
There is a rich literature on formal guarantees for estimation of Brenier maps [Hütter and Rigollet,
2021, Pooladian and Niles-Weed, 2021, Deb et al., 2021, Manole et al., 2024] (see related work).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

