Non-monotone Submodular Optimization:
p-Matchoid Constraints and Fully Dynamic Setting

Kiarash Banihashem∗
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
kiarash@umd.edu

Samira Goudarzi∗
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
samirag@umd.edu

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi∗
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
hajiagha@umd.edu

Morteza Monemizadeh∗
TU Eindhoven
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
M.Monemizadeh@tue.nl

Peyman Jabbarzade∗
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
peymanj@umd.edu

Abstract
Submodular maximization subject to a p-matchoid constraint has various applications in machine learning, particularly in tasks such as feature selection, video and
text summarization, movie recommendation, graph-based learning, and constraintbased optimization. We study this problem in the dynamic setting, where a sequence
of insertions and deletions of elements to a p-matchoid M(V, I) occurs over time
and the goal is to efficiently maintain an approximate solution. We propose a dynamic algorithm for non-monotone submodular maximization under a p-matchoid
constraint. For a p-matchoid M(V, I) ofprank k, defined by a collection of m matroids, our algorithm guarantees a (2p + 2 p(p + 1) + 1 + ϵ)-approximate solution
at any time t in the update sequence, with an expected amortized query complexity
of O(ϵ −3 pk4 log2 (k)) per update.

1

Introduction

A p-matchoid M(V, I) consists of m matroids M1 (V1 , I1 ), M2 (V2 , I2 ), . . . , Mm (Vm , Im ), where
each element in the ground set V appears in the ground sets of at most p of these matroids. Additionally, every subset X ⊆ V is an independent set in I if X ∩ Vi ∈ Ii for any matroid Mi (Vi , Ii ). In the
context of submodular maximization subject to a p-matchoid constraint M(V, I), the objective is
to find an independent set I ∗ ∈ I that maximizes f (I ∗ ), where f : 2V → R≥0 is a (non-monotone)
submodular function defined over subsets of the ground set V.
The p-matchoid constraint has various applications in machine learning, particularly in tasks involving
optimization and constraint satisfaction including the followings:
Feature selection: In feature selection, where the goal is to pick a subset of features that works
well while keeping things simple, p-matchoids can be used to model constraints on the relationships
between features. For example, if certain features are highly correlated or redundant, a p-matchoid
constraint can ensure that only a limited number of such features are chosen together Das and Kempe
[2008], Khanna et al. [2017], Elenberg et al. [2016], Qian and Singer [2019], Quinzan et al. [2023].
Video summarization and movie recommendation tasks: Submodular maximization under pmatchoid constraints is crucial for video summarization Feldman et al. [2018], Mirzasoleiman et al.
[2018], Gu et al. [2023] and movie recommendation Harshaw et al. [2022], Badanidiyuru et al. [2020],
∗

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

