Continuous-time Riemannian SGD and SVRG Flows
on Wasserstein Probabilistic Space

Mingyang Yi1∗, Bohan Wang2
1
Renmin University of China
2
Alibaba Group
yimingyang@ruc.edu.cn
bhwangfy@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, optimization on the Riemannian manifold have provided valuable insights
to the optimization community. In this regard, extending these methods to to the
Wasserstein space is of particular interest, since optimization on Wasserstein space
is closely connected to practical sampling processes. Generally, the standard
(continuous) optimization method on Wasserstein space is Riemannian gradient
flow (i.e., Langevin dynamics when minimizing KL divergence). In this paper, we
aim to enrich the family of continuous optimization methods in the Wasserstein
space, by extending the gradient flow on it into the stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) flow and stochastic variance reduction gradient (SVRG) flow. By leveraging
the property of Wasserstein space, we construct stochastic differential equations
(SDEs) to approximate the corresponding discrete Euclidean dynamics of the
desired Riemannian stochastic methods. Then, we obtain the flows in Wasserstein
space by Fokker-Planck equation. Finally, we establish convergence rates of the
proposed stochastic flows, which align with those known in the Euclidean setting.

1

Introduction

As a valuable extension of Euclidean space optimization, generalizing the parameter space to a
Riemannian manifold—such as a matrix manifold [1] or a probability measure space [10]—has
greatly enriched the toolbox of the optimization community. Technically, optimization on a manifold
can be derived from Euclidean techniques by defining corresponding Riemannian gradients and
transport rules [1]. For example, several widely used gradient-based optimization methods have been
generalized to this setting, including gradient descent (GD) [53], stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
[4], and stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG) [52].
On the other hand, optimization over probability measure spaces has attracted considerable attention
due to its connection to sampling processes [17]. Interestingly, for a specific type of probability
measure space—the second-order Wasserstein space—techniques from Riemannian optimization
can be directly applied [9], owing to its manifold-like geometric structure. For example, minimizing
the KL divergence via Riemannian gradient flow is equivalent to employing Langevin diffusion
[35], a standard method for sampling from a target distribution. Therefore, advancing Riemannian
optimization in the Wasserstein space may lead to the development of novel sampling techniques.
To this end, we focus on Riemannian SGD [25, 20] and SVRG [33] in Wasserstein space, which
are standard stochastic optimization methods known for their lower computational complexity in
Euclidean settings [5]. Specifically, we investigate the continuous counterparts (flows) of these
two previously unexplored Riemannian methods, as continuous formulations provide a powerful
∗

Corresponding to: Mingyang Yi and Bohan Wang

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

