Towards Straggler-Resilient Split Federated Learning:
An Unbalanced Update Approach

Dandan Liang
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, New York
dl5974@rit.edu

Jianing Zhang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana
zhan4670@purdue.edu

Zhe Li
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, New York
zl4063@rit.edu

Evan Chen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana
chen4388@purdue.edu

Rui Li
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, New York
rxlics@rit.edu

Haibo Yang
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, New York
hbycis@rit.edu

Abstract
Split Federated Learning (SFL) enables scalable training on edge devices by
combining the parallelism of Federated Learning (FL) with the computational
offloading of Split Learning (SL). Despite its great success, SFL suffers significantly from the well-known straggler issue in distributed learning systems. This
problem is exacerbated by the dependency between Split Server and clients: the
Split Server side model update relies on receiving activations from clients. Such
synchronization requirement introduces significant time latency, making straggler
a critical bottleneck to the scalability and efficiency of the system. To mitigate
this problem, we propose MU-SplitFed, a straggler-resilient SFL algorithm in
zeroth-order optimization that decouples training progress from straggler delays
via a simple yet effective unbalanced update mechanism. By enabling the server to
perform τp
local updates per client round, MU-SplitFed achieves a convergence
rate of O( d/(τ T )) for non-convex objectives, demonstrating a linear speedup of
τ in communication rounds. Experiments demonstrate that MU-SplitFed consistently outperforms baseline methods with the presence of stragglers and effectively
mitigates their impact through adaptive tuning of τ . The code for this project is
available at https://github.com/Johnny-Zip/MU-SplitFed.

1

Introduction

Split Federated Learning (SFL) [1–3] integrates the strengths of Federated Learning (FL) [4] and
Split Learning (SL) [5, 6], enabling efficient training on resource-constrained devices. FL offers
parallel client updates but imposes heavy computation on edge devices [7], while SL reduces client
load by offloading computation to the server but suffers from high latency due to its sequential nature.
SFL balances these trade-offs, making it a promising framework for scalable training, especially as
model sizes grow. However, the relay-based training mechanism in SFL introduces synchronization
bottlenecks due to stragglers: clients with the slowest computation or communication speeds delay
the overall process [8, 9]. Both global aggregation and client-side updates must wait for the slowest
participant, limiting scalability [10]. This issue is a well-known bottleneck in distributed learning that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

