PhySense: Sensor Placement Optimization for
Accurate Physics Sensing

Yuezhou Ma, Haixu Wu, Hang Zhou, Huikun Weng, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng Long
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{mayuezhou20,wuhaixu98}@gmail.com, {zhou-h23,wenghk22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Physics sensing plays a central role in many scientific and engineering domains,
which inherently involves two coupled tasks: reconstructing dense physical fields
from sparse observations and optimizing scattered sensor placements to observe
maximum information. While deep learning has made rapid advances in sparse-data
reconstruction, existing methods generally omit optimization of sensor placements,
leaving the mutual enhancement between reconstruction and placement on the
shelf. To change this suboptimal practice, we propose PhySense, a synergistic twostage framework that learns to jointly reconstruct physical fields and to optimize
sensor placements, both aiming for accurate physics sensing. The first stage
involves a flow-based generative model enhanced by cross-attention to adaptively
fuse sparse observations. Leveraging the reconstruction feedback, the second
stage performs sensor placement via projected gradient descent to satisfy spatial
constraints. We further prove that the learning objectives of the two stages are
consistent with classical variance-minimization principles, providing theoretical
guarantees. Extensive experiments across three challenging benchmarks, especially
a 3D geometry dataset, indicate PhySense achieves state-of-the-art physics sensing
accuracy and discovers informative sensor placements previously unconsidered.
Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/PhySense.

1

Introduction

Physics sensing remains a foundational task across several domains [45, 23, 47], including fluid
dynamics [32, 15, 50], meteorology [39, 5], and industrial applications [13, 3]. The task aims to
reconstruct the spatiotemporal information of a physical system from limited sparse observations
gathered by pre-placed sensors. In real-world scenarios, the number of sensors is usually limited due
to spatial constraints, power consumption, and environmental restrictions. As a result, allocating the
limited sensors to the most informative positions is crucial for high reconstruction accuracy. Poorly
placed sensors lead to spatial blind spots and information loss, resulting in insufficient observations,
while well-placed sensors enable the recovery of fine-scale physical patterns. Therefore, advancing
accurate physics sensing requires not only improving the capabilities of reconstruction models, but
also developing principled strategies to determine optimal sensor placements.
Recent advances in deep learning have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in sparse-data reconstruction, owing to its ability to approximate highly nonlinear mappings [16, 44, 37] between scattered
observations and dense physical fields. Current reconstruction methods fall into two categories: deterministic and generative. Deterministic methods such as VoronoiCNN [14] employ Voronoi-tessellated
grids for CNN-based reconstruction, while Senseiver [41] utilizes implicit neural representations [19]
to establish correlations between sparse measurements and query points. Moreover, due to the inherently ill-posed nature [22] of the reconstruction task, where sparse observations provide insufficient
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

