MPC ACHE: MPC-Friendly KV Cache Eviction
For Efficient Private LLM Inference
Wenxuan Zeng1 , Ye Dong2 , Jinjin Zhou3 , Jin Tan3 , Lei Wang3
Tao Wei3 , Runsheng Wang1 , Meng Li1∗
1
Peking University 2 National University of Singapore 3 Ant Group
zwx.andy@stu.pku.edu.cn, meng.li@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Private large language model (LLM) inference based on secure multi-party computation (MPC) achieves formal data privacy protection but suffers from significant
latency overhead, especially for long input sequences. While key-value (KV) cache
eviction and sparse attention algorithms have been proposed for efficient LLM
inference in plaintext, they are not designed for MPC and cannot benefit private
LLM inference directly. In this paper, we propose an accurate and MPC-friendly
KV cache eviction framework, dubbed MPC ACHE, building on the observation that
historical tokens in a long sequence may have different effects on the downstream
decoding. Hence, MPC ACHE combines a look-once static eviction algorithm to
discard unimportant KV cache and a query-aware dynamic selection algorithm to
activate only a small subset of KV cache for attention computation. MPC ACHE further incorporates a series of optimizations for efficient dynamic KV cache selection,
including MPC-friendly similarity approximation, hierarchical KV cache clustering, and cross-layer index-sharing strategy. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that MPC ACHE consistently outperforms prior-art KV cache eviction baselines
across different generation tasks and achieves 1.8 ∼ 2.01× and 3.39 ∼ 8.37×
decoding latency and communication reduction on different sequence lengths,
respectively. The code can be found here.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable ability in a wide range of
applications such as document summarization [32, 57, 86], question answering [37, 15, 80], and
dialogue systems [69, 11, 68]. However, LLM-based machine learning as a service (MLaaS) on
the cloud has raised serious privacy concerns as the users are required to upload their prompts to
the cloud, which may contain sensitive personal information. Meanwhile, the service provider is
unwilling to offload the trained model to the user to protect the proprietary model weights. In recent
years, secure multi-party computation (MPC)-based LLM inference has become a prevailing and
mainstream research trend to address privacy concerns [53, 31, 19, 25, 60, 62, 94, 48], which enables
the users and the cloud to conduct the LLM inference jointly, but nothing else can be derived beyond
the final inference results.
However, MPC-based LLM inference illustrated in Figure 1(a) faces serious efficiency challenges,
especially for long sequences. We profile the decoding efficiency of GPT-2 with the Secretflow
framework [55] using recent 2-party computation (2PC) [53] and 3-party computation (3PC) protocols
[19]. As can be observed in Figure 1(b) and (c), attention computation dominates the latency and
communication for both 2PC and 3PC protocols. Moreover, Softmax accounts for the majority of the
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

