Cycle-Sync: Robust Global Camera Pose Estimation
through Enhanced Cycle-Consistent Synchronization

Shaohan Li*
Yunpeng Shi†
Gilad Lerman*
* School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota
†
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Davis
nicklsh1996@gmail.com, lerman@umn.edu, ypshi@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
We introduce Cycle-Sync, a robust and global framework for estimating camera
poses (both rotations and locations). Our core innovation is a location solver that
adapts message-passing least squares (MPLS)—originally developed for group
synchronization—to camera location estimation. We modify MPLS to emphasize
cycle-consistent information, redefine cycle consistencies using estimated distances
from previous iterations, and incorporate a Welsch-type robust loss. We establish
the strongest known deterministic exact-recovery guarantee for camera location
estimation, showing that cycle consistency alone—without access to inter-camera
distances—suffices to achieve the lowest sample complexity currently known. To
further enhance robustness, we introduce a plug-and-play outlier rejection module
inspired by robust subspace recovery, and we fully integrate cycle consistency into
MPLS for rotation synchronization. Our global approach avoids the need for bundle
adjustment. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets show that Cycle-Sync
consistently outperforms leading pose estimators, including full structure-frommotion pipelines with bundle adjustment.

1

Introduction

Structure-from-Motion (SfM) is a central task in 3D computer vision [21], aimed at reconstructing
the 3D structure of a scene from 2D images captured by cameras with unknown poses. It plays a
critical role in applications such as virtual and augmented reality, robotics, and autonomous driving.
A core challenge in SfM is accurate camera pose estimation, which is also foundational to modern 3D
techniques such as neural radiance fields [17] and Gaussian splatting [8], where camera parameters
serve as priors or inputs for rendering and synthesis.
A typical SfM pipeline begins by estimating essential matrices between pairs of cameras, from which
local pose information is extracted. It then infers absolute camera orientations from relative ones—a
step commonly referred to as rotation synchronization (or averaging). Next, it estimates camera
locations from relative direction vectors. Once the camera poses are determined, a standard final step
is to recover the 3D structure of the scene. The aim of this work is to revisit both pose estimation tasks
and propose global solutions that eliminate reliance on the highly incremental and computationally
intensive bundle adjustment step [31], which is ubiquitous in current SfM pipelines. We refer to our
robust location solver as Cycle-Sync1 , and use the same name for the full pipeline that incorporates
this solver along with robust direction and rotation estimation.
Mathematically, these problems are formulated on a graph G([n], E), where nodes correspond to
cameras, and an edge (i, j) ∈ E indicates the availability of relative pose information between
cameras i and j. The goal of rotation synchronization is to estimate the ground-truth camera rotations
1

The Matlab code is released at https://github.com/sli743/Cycle-Sync

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

