Federated Multi-armed Bandits with
Efficient Bit-Level Communications
Haoran Zhang
Nanjing University
602023710004@smail.nju.edu.cn
Xuchuang Wang
University of Massachusetts Amherst
xuchuangw@gmail.com
Hao Qiu
Università degli Studi di Milano
hao.qiu@unimi.it

Yang Xu
Nanjing University
yang.xu@smail.nju.edu.cn
Hao-Xu Chen
Nanjing University
2718522637@qq.com

Lin Yang∗
Nanjing University
linyang@nju.edu.cn

Yang Gao
Nanjing University
gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we study the federated multi-armed bandit (FMAB) problem, where
a set of agents collaboratively aim to minimize cumulative regret. Unlike traditional centralized bandit models, agents in FMAB settings are connected via a
communication graph and cannot share data freely due to bandwidth limitations or
privacy constraints. This raises a fundamental challenge: how to achieve optimal
learning performance under stringent communication budgets. We propose a novel
communication-efficient algorithm containing two points: one for eliminating
suboptimal arms through early and frequent communication of key decisions, and
the other for refining global estimates using incremental epoch, quantized, and
differentially transmitted statistics. Incremental Epoch-based Successive Elimination Algorithm (EpoInc-SE) is presented by carefully balancing communication
frequency and precision of global estimates. Theoretically, we derive tight upper
bounds on both individual cumulative regret and group regret, and prove that our
method asymptotically matches the lower bound of regret in federated settings.
Experimental results on synthetic data validate the effectiveness of EpoInc-SE in
various settings and under heterogeneous feedback.

1

Introduction

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a classic and influential research topic in the
field of sequential decision-making [Bandits, Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020]. In this model, a
decision-maker must select an arm from a set of actions at each time step to pull and receive a
random reward. The core objective is to maximize cumulative rewards, or equivalently, minimize
cumulative regret, which is defined as the reward lost compared to always selecting the optimal arm.
Due to its powerful modeling capabilities and wide applicability, the MAB framework has been
successfully applied in numerous domains, such as clinical trials [Wang, 1991], online advertising
recommendations [Tang et al., 2015] and resource allocation [Lattimore et al., 2015].
In recent years, with the development of distributed systems and increasing awareness of data privacy,
traditional single-agent MAB models have gradually extended to multi-agent collaborative scenarios,
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

