MoEMeta: Mixture-of-Experts Meta Learning for
Few-Shot Relational Learning

Han Wu1,2 , Jie Yin1∗
The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Peking University, China
{han.wu, jie.yin@sydney.edu.au}
1

Abstract
Few-shot knowledge graph relational learning seeks to perform reasoning over
relations given only a limited number of training examples. While existing approaches largely adopt a meta-learning framework for enabling fast adaptation to
new relations, they suffer from two key pitfalls. First, they learn relation metaknowledge in isolation, failing to capture common relational patterns shared across
tasks. Second, they struggle to effectively incorporate local, task-specific contexts
crucial for rapid adaptation. To address these limitations, we propose MoEMeta, a
novel meta-learning framework that disentangles globally shared knowledge from
task-specific contexts to enable both effective model generalization and rapid adaptation. MoEMeta introduces two key innovations: (i) a mixture-of-experts (MoE)
model that learns globally shared relational prototypes to enhance generalization,
and (ii) a task-tailored adaptation mechanism that captures local contexts for fast
task-specific adaptation. By balancing global generalization with local adaptability,
MoEMeta significantly advances few-shot relational learning. Extensive experiments and analyses on three KG benchmarks show that MoEMeta consistently
outperforms existing baselines, achieving state-of-the-art performance.1

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) encode real-world knowledge in the form of factual triplets (h, r, t), where
each triplet represents a relationship r between a head entity h and a tail entity t (Bollacker et al.,
2008; Suchanek et al., 2007; Vrandečić and Krötzsch, 2014).KGs are crucial for powering various
intelligent applications, such as question answering (Wu et al., 2016), Web search (Fang et al.,
2017), and advanced recommendation systems (Cao et al., 2019). Despite their widespread adoption,
real-world KGs are inherently incomplete. Although numerous KG completion methods (Bordes
et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2015; Trouillon et al., 2016) have been proposed to infer missing facts based
on observed triplets, their effectiveness is severely hindered by data sparsity, especially for long-tail
or emerging relations with only a handful of known training triplets.
In response, few-shot relational learning (FSRL) has emerged as a promising direction for reasoning
over few-shot relations with limited training triplets, enabling generalization to novel relations in
data-scarce scenarios. Most existing FSRL methods (Chen et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2021; Niu et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2023) are built upon model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), a
gradient-based meta-learning framework that learns a set of global parameters as an initialization for
rapid task adaptation using only one or a few steps of gradient descent updates. In FSRL, each task is
relation-centric, comprising only a few training triplets of a single relation, and the objective is to
∗
1

Corresponding author.
The code is available at: https://github.com/alexhw15/MoEMeta.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

