Identifiability of Deep Polynomial Neural Networks

Konstantin Usevich∗, Ricardo Borsoi, Clara Dérand, Marianne Clausel
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, CRAN
Nancy, F-54000, France
firstname.lastname@univ-lorraine.fr†

Abstract
Polynomial Neural Networks (PNNs) possess a rich algebraic and geometric structure. However, their identifiability—a key property for ensuring interpretability—
remains poorly understood. In this work, we present a comprehensive analysis
of the identifiability of deep PNNs, including architectures with and without bias
terms. Our results reveal an intricate interplay between activation degrees and layer
widths in achieving identifiability. As special cases, we show that architectures
with non-increasing layer widths are generically identifiable under mild conditions,
while encoder-decoder networks are identifiable when the decoder widths do not
grow too rapidly compared to the activation degrees. Our proofs are constructive
and center on a connection between deep PNNs and low-rank tensor decompositions, and Kruskal-type uniqueness theorems. We also settle an open conjecture on
the dimension of PNN’s neurovarieties, and provide new bounds on the activation
degrees required for it to reach the expected dimension.

1

Introduction

Neural network architectures which use polynomials as activation functions—polynomial neural
networks (PNN)—have emerged as architectures that combine competitive experimental performance
(capturing high-order interactions between input features) while allowing a fine grained theoretical
analysis. On the one hand, PNNs have been employed in many problems in computer vision [1–3],
image representation [4], physics [5] and finance [6], to name a few. On the other hand, the geometry
of function spaces associated with PNNs, called neuromanifolds, can be analyzed using tools from
algebraic geometry. Properties of such spaces, such as their dimension, shed light on the impact
of a PNN architecture (layer widths and activation degrees) on the expressivity of feedforward,
convolutional and self-attention PNN architectures [7–11]. They also determine the landscape of
their loss function and the dynamics of their training process [7, 12, 13].
Moreover, PNNs are also closely linked to low-rank tensor decompositions [14–18], which play a
fundamental role in the study of latent variable models due to their identifiability properties [19]. In
fact, single-output 2-layer PNNs are equivalent to low-rank symmetric tensors [7]. Identifiability—
whether the parameters and, consequently, the hidden representations of a NN can be determined
from its response up to some equivalence class of trivial ambiguities such as permutations of its
neurons—is a key question in NN theory [20–32]. Identifiability is critical to ensure interpretability
in representation learning [33–35], to provably obtain disentangled representations [36], and in
the study of causal models [37]. It is also critical to understand how the architecture affects the
inference process and to support manipulation or “stitching” of pretrained models and representations
[35, 38, 39]. Moreover, it has important links to learning and optimization of PNNs [40, 9, 13].
∗

Corresponding author
In this version, the appendices have been reworked for better readability. Appendix E explains the changes
between the submitted and the camera-ready version.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

