Tight Bounds for Maximum Weight Matroid
Independent Set and Matching in the Zero
Communication Model
Ilan Doron-Arad
Department of Computer Science
Technion
ilan.d.a.s.d@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent years have revealed an unprecedented demand for AI-based technology,
leading to a common setting where immense data is distributed across multiple
locations. This creates a communication bottleneck among the storage facilities,
often aiming to jointly solve tasks of small solution size k from input of astronomically large size n. Motivated by federated and distributed machine learning
applications, we study two fundamental optimization problems, maximum weight
matroid independent set (MW-IS) and maximum weight matching (MWM), in a zero
communication computational model. In this model, the data is dispersed between
m servers. Without any communication, each server has to send a message to
a central coordinator which is required to compute an optimal solution for the
original (large) instance. The goal is to minimize the size of the maximum message
sent. For this natural restrictive model, we obtain
deterministic algorithms that use

O(k)-data per server for MW-IS and O k 2 -data per server for MWM, where k is
the solution size (given to each server). We complement these results with tight
lower bounds – ruling out any asymptotic improvement even if randomization is
allowed. Our algorithms are simple and run in nearly linear time. Interestingly,
we show how our zero communication
algorithms
yield deterministic parallel al√


gorithms with running times O
k · log n and O k 4 · log n for MW-IS and
MWM, respectively.

1

Introduction

Recent years have revealed an unprecedented demand for AI-based technology. Consequently, data
and computing resources are often distributed across multiple locations [61, 59, 42] either due to
difficulties of storing immense data in a single location [17] or privacy and security concerns [41].
Furthermore, communication among the storage facilities is often a bottleneck or prohibited.
This data storage shift has a significant effect on the relevant algorithmic model of computation.
Classic sequential algorithms, where the entire data is given to a single processor, are no longer
applicable to the most urgent algorithmic challenges we face today. In response, the algorithmic
community focuses on the core fundamental problems on new computational models. This include
distributed algorithms [44], parallel computing [54], online algorithms [2], dynamic and streaming
algorithms [49], and many more computational models.
Motivated by federated and distributed machine learning applications [59, 40, 42], this work focuses
on an ultra-restrictive model of computation, which allows zero communication between different
parties (aka, servers) holding parts of large data. Each server sends without any communication a
subset of its data to a central coordinator who is obligated to find an optimal solution for the original
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

