Pairwise Calibrated Rewards for Pluralistic Alignment

Daniel Halpern1 Evi Micha2 Ariel D. Procaccia1 Itai Shapira1
1
Harvard University 2 University of Southern California

Abstract
Current alignment pipelines presume a single, universal notion of desirable behavior.
However, human preferences often diverge across users, contexts, and cultures. As
a result, disagreement collapses into the majority signal and minority perspectives
are discounted. To address this, we propose reflecting diverse human preferences
through a distribution over multiple reward functions, each inducing a distinct
aligned policy. The distribution is learned directly from pairwise preference without
annotator identifiers or predefined groups. Instead, annotator disagreements are
treated as informative soft labels. Our central criterion is pairwise calibration: for
every pair of candidate responses, the proportion of reward functions preferring
one response matches the fraction of annotators with that preference. We prove
that even a small outlier-free ensemble can accurately represent diverse preference
distributions. Empirically, we introduce and validate a practical training heuristic
to learn such ensembles, and demonstrate its effectiveness through improved
calibration, implying a more faithful representation of pluralistic values.

1

Introduction

The alignment problem focuses on guiding AI systems to act in ways compatible with human values
and intentions. At a high level, current methods steer models toward desired behaviors using curated
sets of human preferences that capture behaviors that humans consider desirable or appropriate. The
most successful approach is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [1], which first
trains a reward model—typically via the Bradley-Terry (BT) framework [2], on pairwise-preference
data [3, 4]—and then fine-tunes a pre-trained model to align with the learned reward signal.
Implicit in current RLHF implementations is the assumption of a shared human intuition—a common
ground among evaluators about what constitutes desirable behavior. While this assumption may hold
for alignment objectives such as ensuring model safety, it generally does not apply to tasks where
interpretations of “right” behavior inherently diverge across backgrounds, cultures, and beliefs [5–8].
BT-based reward models compress these diverse inputs into one scalar, blurring conflicting viewpoints
into a one-size-fits-all model. This aggregation leads to a misspecified objective [9, 10] that struggles
when faced with plural or contradictory feedback, marginalizing minority perspectives and failing to
capture the full spectrum of human values [11–14]. Once such a reward is learned, algorithms like
PPO [15] then push the policy to maximize this signal, triggering preference collapse [16], where
majority views are further amplified, and response diversity is reduced [17–21].
To address these shortcomings, we replace the single-reward assumption with a distribution over
reward functions; each independently assigns desirability scores to responses and they collectively
span plausible interpretations of human judgment. By fine-tuning a distinct LLM for each reward in
the support, the approach yields a distribution over policies. At inference time, these policies can be
used in several ways [22, 23]: present a range of viewpoints or fold them into one inclusive answer,
let users pick the policy that matches their taste, or sample responses directly from the distribution.
A straightforward approach to derive a distribution over reward functions is to partition annotators
into predefined groups—such as demographic segments—or to cluster them by the similarity of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

