Not All Data are Good Labels:
On the Self-supervised Labeling for Time Series
Forecasting

Yuxuan Yang1,2 , Dalin Zhang3 , Yuxuan Liang4 , Hua Lu5 , Gang Chen1, 2 , Huan Li1,2 B
1
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Space Information Research Institute, Hangzhou Dianzi University
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
5
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
{yangyuxuan, cg, lihuan.cs}@zju.edu.cn
zhangdalin@hdu.edu.cn, yuxliang@outlook.com, luhua@cs.aau.dk

Abstract
Time Series Forecasting (TSF) is a crucial task in various domains, yet existing TSF
models rely heavily on high-quality data and insufficiently exploit all available data.
This paper explores a novel self-supervised approach to re-label time series datasets
by inherently constructing candidate datasets. During the optimization of a simple
reconstruction network, intermediates are used as pseudo labels in a self-supervised
paradigm, improving generalization for any predictor. We introduce the SelfCorrection with Adaptive Mask (S CAM), which discards overfitted components
and selectively replaces them with pseudo labels generated from reconstructions.
Additionally, we incorporate Spectral Norm Regularization (SNR) to further suppress overfitting from a loss landscape perspective. Our experiments on eleven
real-world datasets demonstrate that S CAM consistently improves the performance
of various backbone models. This work offers a new perspective on constructing
datasets and enhancing the generalization of TSF models through self-supervised
learning. The code is available at https://github.com/SuDIS-ZJU/SCAM.

1

Introduction

Time Series Forecasting (TSF) is a crucial task with extensive applications in energy, finance,
engineering, and many other domains. Recent advances in deep learning have resulted in TSF
methods that outperform traditional methods in precision, robustness, and scalability [53, 31, 36].
Nevertheless, deep learning-based TSF methods still face significant challenges such as overfitting,
dependence on high-quality datasets, and inconsistent performance across datasets — issues exacerbated by flawed evaluation practices [34, 30]. Central to these challenges is the problem of
low-quality labels1 , associated with inherent noise and anomalies in raw data. Existing strategies,
such as multimodal data integration [43, 4] and dataset scaling [35], focus on augmenting or refining
datasets but fail to address the core limitation: the reliance on raw labels as ground truth. To address
this, we pose two critical questions:
1. Can the reliance on high-quality labeled time series datasets be alleviated, given their scarcity?
1

In TSF, given two adjacent windows in a time series, x (input window) and y (output window), “labels"
refer to y fitted by predictions ŷ = f (x; θ) in a supervised learning setting.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

