AdaLRS: Loss-Guided Adaptive Learning Rate Search
for Efficient Foundation Model Pretraining

Hongyuan Dong, Dingkang Yang, Xiao Liang, Chao Feng† , Jiao Ran
ByteDance Inc.
d_ousia@icloud.com, yangdingkang@bytedance.com, liangxiao.ilx@bytedance.com
chaofeng.zz@bytedance.com, ranjiao@bytedance.com

Abstract
Learning rate is widely regarded as crucial for effective foundation model pretraining. Recent research explores and demonstrates the transferability of learning rate
configurations across varying model and dataset sizes, etc. Nevertheless, these
approaches are constrained to specific training scenarios and typically necessitate extensive hyperparameter tuning on proxy models. In this work, we propose
AdaLRS, a plug-in-and-play adaptive learning rate search algorithm that conducts
online optimal learning rate search via optimizing loss descent velocities. We
provide theoretical and experimental analyzes to show that foundation model pretraining loss and its descent velocity are both convex and share the same optimal
learning rate. Relying solely on training loss dynamics, AdaLRS involves few extra
computations to guide the search process, and its convergence is guaranteed via
theoretical analysis. Experiments on both LLM and VLM pretraining show that
AdaLRS adjusts suboptimal learning rates to the neighborhood of optimum with
marked efficiency and effectiveness, with model performance improved accordingly. We also show the robust generalizability of AdaLRS across varying training
scenarios, such as different model sizes, training paradigms, base learning rate
scheduler choices, and hyperparameter settings.

1

Introduction

Learning rate (LR) is regarded as a critical hyperparameter for foundation model pretraining, e.g.
Large Language Model (LLM), Vision Language Model (VLM), etc. With the development of
foundation model pretraining techniques [1, 29, 46, 50, 12, 11, 16, 25], a series of studies seek to
find the optimal learning rate for effective pretraining [39, 49, 26, 35]. Although reducing the costs
of hyperparameter searches to some extent, these methods are bound to specific pretraining scenarios
or necessitate resource-consuming hyperparameter searches on proxy models to take effect.
One line of work predicts the optimal learning rate settings directly via summarizing model performance dynamics w.r.t. hyperparameter settings. Under certain model structure designs, the optimal
learning rate can be expressed as a function of a series of training hyperparameters [24, 5, 26, 35],
such as model size, batch size, training budget, etc. Nevertheless, the resulting correlation laws lack
desired generalizability to new training scenarios, where large-scale learning rate search experiments
are required to establish the model performance dynamic patterns.
Another line of research explores transferring hyperparameter search results obtained from proxy
models to larger ones. Tensor Program series work [48, 49] proves the zero-shot transferability of
hyperparameter settings across model sizes for transformer models. As long as the model design
†Email corresponding
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

