RoMa: A Robust Model Watermarking Scheme for
Protecting IP in Diffusion Models

1

Yingsha Xie1,2 , Rui Min3 , Zeyu Qin3 , Fei Ma2 , Li Shen1,2,4∗, Fei Yu2 , Xiaochun Cao1
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), China
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
4
Center for AI Theoretical Foundation and Systems, Shenzhen Loop Area Institute, China
xieysh26@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, mathshenli@gmail.com

Abstract
Preserving intellectual property (IP) within a pre-trained diffusion model is critical
for protecting the model’s copyright and preventing unauthorized model deployment. In this regard, model watermarking is a common practice for IP protection
that embeds traceable information within models and allows for further verification. Nevertheless, existing watermarking schemes often face challenges due to
their vulnerability to fine-tuning, limiting their practical application in general pretraining and fine-tuning paradigms. Inspired by using mode connectivity to analyze
model performance between a pair of connected models, we investigate watermark
vulnerability by leveraging Linear Mode Connectivity (LMC) as a proxy to analyze
the fine-tuning dynamics of watermark performance. Our results show that existing
watermarked models tend to converge to sharp minima in the loss landscape, thus
making them vulnerable to fine-tuning. To tackle this challenge, we propose RoMa,
a Robust Model watermarking scheme that improves the robustness of watermarks
against fine-tuning. Specifically, RoMa decomposes watermarking into two components, including Embedding Functionality, which preserves reliable watermark
detection capability, and Path-specific Smoothness, which enhances the smoothness
along the watermark-connected path to improve robustness. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets MS-COCO-2017 and CUB-200-2011 demonstrate
that RoMa significantly improves watermark robustness against fine-tuning while
maintaining generation quality, outperforming baselines. The code is available at
https://github.com/xiekks/RoMa.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [20, 19, 52, 45] have demonstrated significant advancements across various generative fields [22, 61, 73, 6], which are largely driven by the widespread practice of fine-tuning
pre-trained models [67, 47]. While pre-trained diffusion models are the foundation of many applications, training them typically necessitates millions of high-quality training images [50] as well as
significant computational resources [54]. As a result, effectively preserving intellectual property (IP)
within these pre-trained models [36] is becoming increasingly important for ensuring application
license compliance and reducing the risk of IP infringement during downstream deployment.
In this literature, model watermarking [72, 63, 13, 26, 28, 7, 58, 12] has proven to be a common and
effective practice for protecting the IP within a diffusion model. By embedding traceable information
within the model weights, the detector can leverage a predefined detection mechanism for further
∗

Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

