DERD-Net: Learning Depth from Event-based
Ray Densities

1

Diego Hitzges∗1 Suman Ghosh∗1 Guillermo Gallego1,2
Technische Universität Berlin, Einstein Center Digital Future, Robotics Institute Germany
2
Science of Intelligence Excellence Cluster, Germany

Events

Camera poses

Disparity Space Image (DSI)

Backprojection

Pixel-wise depth estimation

DERD-Net

Sub-DSI
Z
X

Figure 1: Overview. We present a deep-learning–based method to predict depth from event-ray
densities (Disparity Space Images –DSIs) obtained by back-projecting events using camera poses.
Our deep neural network, DERD-Net, operates in parallel on local volumetric neighborhoods of the
DSI data, called Sub-DSIs (in orange).

Abstract
Event cameras offer a promising avenue for multi-view stereo depth estimation
and Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) due to their ability to detect
blur-free 3D edges at high-speed and over broad illumination conditions. However,
traditional deep learning frameworks designed for conventional cameras struggle
with the asynchronous, stream-like nature of event data, as their architectures are
optimized for discrete, image-like inputs. We propose a scalable, flexible and
adaptable framework for pixel-wise depth estimation with event cameras in both
monocular and stereo setups. The 3D scene structure is encoded into disparity space
images (DSIs), representing spatial densities of rays obtained by back-projecting
events into space via known camera poses. Our neural network processes local
subregions of the DSIs combining 3D convolutions and a recurrent structure to
recognize valuable patterns for depth prediction. Local processing enables fast
inference with full parallelization and ensures constant ultra-low model complexity
and memory costs, regardless of camera resolution. Experiments on standard
benchmarks (MVSEC and DSEC datasets) demonstrate unprecedented effectiveness: (i) using purely monocular data, our method achieves comparable results to
existing stereo methods; (ii) when applied to stereo data, it strongly outperforms
all state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches, reducing the mean absolute error by at
least 42%; (iii) our method also allows for increases in depth completeness by
more than 3-fold while still yielding a reduction in median absolute error of at
least 30%. Given its remarkable performance and effective processing of eventdata, our framework holds strong potential to become a standard approach for
using deep learning for event-based depth estimation and SLAM. Project page:
https://github.com/tub-rip/DERD-Net
*

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

