Sampled Estimators For Softmax Must Be Biased

Li-Chung Lin
National Taiwan University
r08922141@ntu.edu.tw

Yaxu Liu∗
National Taiwan University
d08944045@ntu.edu.tw
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
yaxu.liu@mbzuai.ac.ae

Chih-Jen Lin
National Taiwan University
cjlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
chihjen.lin@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Models requiring probabilistic outputs are ubiquitous and used in fields such as natural language processing, contrastive learning, and recommendation systems. The
standard method of designing such a model is to output unconstrained logits, which
are normalized into probabilities with the softmax function. The normalization
involves computing a summation across all classes, which becomes prohibitively
expensive for problems with a large number of classes. An important strategy to
reduce the cost is to sum over a sampled subset of classes in the softmax function,
known as the sampled softmax. It was known that the sampled softmax is biased;
the expectation taken over the sampled classes is not equal to the softmax function.
Many works focused on reducing the bias by using a better way of sampling the
subset. However, while sampled softmax is biased, it is unclear whether an unbiased function different from sampled softmax exists. In this paper, we show that
all functions that only access a sampled subset of classes must be biased. With this
result, we prevent efforts in finding unbiased loss functions and validate that past
efforts devoted to reducing bias are the best we can do.

1

Introduction

Training losses based on the softmax function are extensively used across various fields, e.g., natural
language processing [12, 13, 17, 1], contrastive learning [5, 4], and recommendation systems [6, 22].
The most common loss is to take the log of the softmax function, known as the log-softmax or
cross-entropy loss,
L(ŷ + , ŷ1− , . . . , ŷn− ) = log Softmax(ŷ + , ŷ1− , . . . , ŷn− ).
In this loss, the softmax function gives the probability of a class by
+

Softmax(ŷ + , ŷ1− , . . . , ŷn− ) =

eŷ+ +

eŷ
Pn

i=1 e

ŷi−

,

(1)

where ŷ + ∈ R is the logit of the target class, ŷi− ∈ R for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n are the logits of all negative
classes, and there are n + 1 total classes. By summing this loss over all training data, we obtain the
overall learning objective.
∗

Work mainly done while visiting Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

