Top-H Decoding: Adapting the Creativity and
Coherence with Bounded Entropy in Text Generation

Erfan Baghaei Potraghloou †, Seyedarmin Aziziu †, Souvik Kundui , and Massoud Pedramu
u

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA
i
Intel AI, USA
† Equal contribution authors
{baghaeip, seyedarm, pedram}@usc.edu, souvikk.kundu@intel.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs), despite their impressive performance across a
wide range of tasks, often struggle to balance two competing objectives in openended text generation: fostering diversity and creativity while preserving logical
coherence. Existing truncated sampling techniques, including temperature scaling, top-p (nucleus) sampling, and min-p sampling, aim to manage this trade-off.
However, they exhibit limitations, particularly in the effective incorporation of
the confidence of the model into the corresponding sampling strategy. For example, min-p sampling relies on a single top token as a heuristic for confidence,
eventually underutilizing the information of the probability distribution. To effectively incorporate the model confidence, this paper presents top-H decoding.
We first establish the theoretical foundation of the interplay between creativity
and coherence in truncated sampling by formulating an entropy-constrained
minimum divergence problem. We then prove this minimization problem to be
equivalent to an entropy-constrained mass maximization (ECMM) problem,
which is NP-hard. Finally, we present top-H decoding, a computationally efficient
greedy algorithm to solve the ECMM problem. Extensive empirical evaluations
demonstrate that top-H outperforms the state-of-the-art (SoTA) alternative of min-p
sampling by up to 25.63% on creative writing benchmarks, while maintaining
robustness on question-answering datasets such as GPQA, GSM8K, and MT-Bench.
Additionally, an LLM-as-judge evaluation confirms that top-H indeed produces
coherent outputs even at higher temperatures, where creativity is especially critical. In summary, top-H advances SoTA in open-ended text generation and can
be easily integrated into creative writing applications. The code is available at
https://github.com/ErfanBaghaei/Top-H-Decoding.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited impressive abilities in open-ended generation tasks,
including creative writing and multi-turn dialogue (Lee et al., 2022). However, these models often
need to deal with the challenge of balancing creativity and coherence, accepting less likely and more
imaginative token choices while avoiding incoherent or nonsensical output. This trade-off is complex,
as indiscriminate broadening of the sampling pool can lead to fragmented or disjoint text (Holtzman
et al., 2019).
To navigate this balance, various sampling strategies have emerged, including temperature scaling (Ackley et al., 1985), top-k (Fan et al., 2018), top-p (nucleus) (Holtzman et al., 2019), η (Hewitt
et al., 2022), and min-p sampling (Nguyen et al., 2024). They generally apply heuristics to control
diversity and risk. Specifically, min-p sampling (Nguyen et al., 2024) stands out for its dynamic
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

