Efficient Kernelized Learning
in Polyhedral Games beyond Full Information:
From Colonel Blotto to Congestion Games

Andreas Kontogiannis*
NTUA & Archimedes / Athena RC

Vasilis Pollatos*
NKUA & Archimedes / Athena RC

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP
LIG 38000 Grenoble, France & Archimedes / Athena RC

Gabriele Farina
MIT

Ioannis Panageas
UC Irvine
Archimedes / Athena RC

Abstract
We examine the problem of efficiently learning coarse correlated equilibria (CCE)
in polyhedral games, that is, normal-form games with an exponentially large
number of actions per player and an underlying combinatorial structure—such as
the classic Colonel Blotto game or congestion games. Achieving computational
efficiency in this setting requires learning algorithms whose regret and per-iteration
complexity scale at most polylogarithmically with the size of the players’ action sets.
This challenge has recently been addressed in the full-information setting, primarily
through the use of kernelization; however, in the more realistic partial information
setting, the situation is much more challenging, and existing approaches result in
suboptimal and impractical runtime complexity to learn CCE. We address this gap
via a novel kernelization-based framework for payoff-based learning in polyhedral
games, which we then apply to certain key classes of polyhedral games—namely
Colonel Blotto, graphic matroid and network congestion games. In so doing, we
obtain a range of computationally efficient payoff-based learning algorithms which
significantly improve upon prior work in terms of the runtime for learning CCE.

1

Introduction

Learning dynamics for computing equilibria in games have been extensively studied over recent
decades. The origins trace back to the work of Brown and Robinson in the 1950s [21; 51], who
introduced and analyzed fictitious play. A major conceptual breakthrough came with Blackwell’s
approachability theorem [16], which laid the foundation for the field of online learning and, in
particular, for the development of no-regret learning [23]. Several influential learning algorithms—
such as multiplicative weights update (MWU) [7], follow-the-regularized-leader [54], and follow-theperturbed-leader [37]—have been shown to satisfy the no-regret property. These algorithms typically
maintain a probability distribution (commonly referred to as a “policy”) over actions and update it
iteratively, with per-iteration complexity that is polynomial in the number of actions.
Remarkably, no-regret algorithms can be used as a black-box in repeated games under the fullinformation setting, where each player observes the cost of all available actions, to recover wellestablished equilibrium concepts, such as coarse correlated equilibria (CCE). The no-regret property
is of great importance for learning in games, as it guarantees that the time-average cost of any player
using such an algorithm is no worse than the cost of the best fixed action in hindsight—regardless of
* Equal contribution.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

