ReplaceMe: Network Simplification via Depth Pruning
and Transformer Block Linearization
Dmitriy Shopkhoev ∗
MWS AI, ITMO University
Valentin Malykh
MWS AI, ITMO University,
IITU University

Ammar Ali ∗
MWS AI, ITMO University
Stamatios Lefkimmiatis
MWS AI

Magauiya Zhussip
MWS AI

Nikos Komodakis
University of Crete, IACM-Forth,
Archimedes Athena RC

Sergey Zagoruyko
Polynome

Abstract
We introduce ReplaceMe, a generalized training-free depth pruning method that
effectively replaces transformer blocks with a linear operation, while maintaining
high performance for low compression ratios. In contrast to conventional pruning
approaches that require additional training or fine-tuning, our approach requires
only a small calibration dataset that is used to estimate a linear transformation,
which approximates the pruned blocks. The estimated linear mapping can be seamlessly merged with the remaining transformer blocks, eliminating the need for any
additional network parameters. Our experiments show that ReplaceMe consistently
outperforms other training-free approaches and remains highly competitive with
state-of-the-art pruning methods that involve extensive retraining/fine-tuning and
architectural modifications. Applied to several large language models (LLMs),
ReplaceMe achieves up to 25% pruning while retaining approximately 90% of
the original model’s performance on open benchmarks—without any training or
healing steps, resulting in minimal computational overhead. We provide an opensource library implementing ReplaceMe alongside several state-of-the-art depth
pruning techniques, available at https://github.com/mts-ai/ReplaceMe.

1

Introduction

In recent years, transformers have achieved unprecedented success across a wide range of tasks
on both computer vision and natural language processing. Modern large language models (LLMs)
typically scale up to billions or even hundreds of billions of parameters, significantly increasing the
computational and memory requirements for both training and inference stages. This substantial
resource demand poses a critical challenge for their wider practical deployment and usability.
Due to the excessive size of modern LLMs, there has been significant research effort to make such
models accessible to users with limited hardware capabilities. These efforts primarily focus on three
key strategies: quantization, distillation, and pruning. Pruning, which is the focus of the current
work, involves identifying and removing less important parameters or entire structural components to
streamline the model, thereby reducing computational overhead without significantly compromising
the performance. Structured pruning is different from unstructured pruning in that it focuses on
entire groups of parameters or layers, allowing their complete removal. This approach not only
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

