Understanding Adam Requires Better Rotation
Dependent Assumptions

Tianyue H. Zhang1,2,†
Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau4

Lucas Maes1,2,†
Ioannis Mitliagkas1,2,5,6

Simon Lacoste-Julien1,2,4,5

Alan Milligan3
Damien Scieur2,4

Charles Guille-Escuret1,2

1

Mila, Quebec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal
University of British Columbia 4 Samsung SAIL Montreal
5
Canada CIFAR AI Chair 6 Archimedes Unit, Athena Research Center
3

Abstract
Despite its widespread adoption, Adam’s advantage over Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) lacks a comprehensive theoretical explanation. This paper investigates
Adam’s sensitivity to rotations of the parameter space. We observe that Adam’s
performance in training transformers degrades under random rotations of the parameter space, indicating a crucial sensitivity to the choice of basis in practice.
This reveals that conventional rotation-invariant assumptions are insufficient to capture Adam’s advantages theoretically. To better understand the rotation-dependent
properties that benefit Adam, we also identify structured rotations that preserve or
even enhance its empirical performance. We then examine the rotation-dependent
assumptions in the literature and find that they fall short in explaining Adam’s
behaviour across various rotation types. In contrast, we verify the orthogonality of
the update as a promising indicator of Adam’s basis sensitivity, suggesting it may
be the key quantity for developing rotation-dependent theoretical frameworks that
better explain its empirical success.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities as their scale
grows [Brown et al., 2020, Kaplan et al., 2020]. However, this unprecedented growth in model
scale has led to a proportional increase in the economic [Dong and Xie, 2024, Sharir et al., 2020,
Varoquaux et al., 2024] and environmental [Luccioni et al., 2023, 2019] costs associated with their
training. Despite this clear motivation, Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) [Kingma and Ba, 2015]
has persisted as the go-to optimizer especially for language models, with only minor modifications
such as AdamW [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019] becoming widely adopted since Adam’s inception.
This success has prompted extensive research to provide theoretical justification for Adam’s performance. While the original convergence proof for Adam was later found to be flawed [Rubio, 2017],
recent studies have proposed rigorous convergence proofs under plausible assumptions [Li et al.,
2023b, Chen et al., 2019, Défossez et al., 2022].
However, these proofs do not elucidate Adam’s advantages over SGD when training transformer
models [Vaswani et al., 2017]. Numerous works attempted to explain Adam’s superiority, employing
†

Equal Contribution, correspondence to: tianyue.zhang@mila.quebec

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

