Sample and Map from a Single Convex Potential:
Generation using Conjugate Moment Measures

Nina Vesseron
CREST-ENSAE, IP Paris
nina.vesseron@ensae.fr

Louis Béthune
Apple
l_bethune@apple.com

Marco Cuturi
CREST-ENSAE, Apple
cuturi@apple.com

Abstract
The canonical approach in generative modeling is to split model fitting into two
blocks: define first how to sample noise (e.g. Gaussian) and choose next what
to do with it (e.g. using a single map or flows). We explore in this work an
alternative route that ties sampling and mapping. We find inspiration in moment
measures [Cordero-Erausquin and Klartag, 2015], a result that states that for any
measure ρ, there exists a unique convex potential u such that ρ = ∇u ♯ e−u . While
this does seem to tie effectively sampling (from log-concave distribution e−u )
and action (pushing particles through ∇u), we observe on simple examples (e.g.,
Gaussians or 1D distributions) that this choice is ill-suited for practical tasks. We
study an alternative factorization, where ρ is factorized as ∇w∗ ♯ e−w , where w∗
is the convex conjugate of a convex potential w. We call this approach conjugate
moment measures, and show far more intuitive results on these examples. Because
∇w∗ is the Monge map between the log-concave distribution e−w and ρ, we rely
on optimal transport solvers to propose an algorithm to recover w from samples
of ρ, and parameterize w as an input-convex neural network. We also address
the common sampling scenario in which the density of ρ is known only up to a
normalizing constant, and propose an algorithm to learn w in this setting.

1

Introduction

A decade after the introduction of GANs [Goodfellow et al., 2014] and VAEs [Kingma and Welling,
2014], the field of generative modeling has grown into one of the most important areas of research in
machine learning. Both canonical approaches follow the template of learning a transformation that can
map random codes to meaningful data. These transformations can be learned in supervised manner,
as in the dimensionality reduction pipeline advocated in VAEs, or distributionally as advocated in the
purely generative literature. In the latter, the variety of such transforms has gained remarkably in
both complexity, using increasingly creative inductive biases, from Neural-ODEs[Chen et al., 2018,
Grathwohl et al., 2018], diffusions [Song et al., 2020, Ho et al., 2020], optimal transport [Korotin
et al., 2020] to flow-matching [Lipman et al., 2023, Tong et al., 2023, Pooladian et al., 2023].
Sample first, move next. All of these approaches are grounded, however, on choosing a standard
Gaussian multivariate distribution to sample noise/codes. For both GANs and VAEs, that choice is
usually made because of its simplicity, but also, in the case of diffusion models, because Gaussian
distributions can be recovered quickly with suitable stochastic processes (Ornstein–Uhlenbeck).
Other works have considered optimizing prior noise distributions [Tomczak and Welling, 2018, Lee
et al., 2021, Liang et al., 2022] but still do so in a two step approach where mappings are estimated
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

