Robust Equilibria in Continuous Games:
From Strategic to Dynamic Robustness

Kyriakos Lotidis
Stanford University
klotidis@stanford.edu

Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
bambos@stanford.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP
LIG 38000 Grenoble, France
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr
Jose Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we examine the robustness of Nash equilibria in continuous games,
under both strategic and dynamic uncertainty. Starting with the former, we introduce the notion of a robust equilibrium as those equilibria that remain invariant to
small—but otherwise arbitrary—perturbations to the game’s payoff structure, and
we provide a crisp geometric characterization thereof. Subsequently, we turn to
the question of dynamic robustness, and we examine which equilibria may arise
as stable limit points of the dynamics of “follow the regularized leader” (FTRL)
in the presence of randomness and uncertainty. Despite their very distinct origins,
we establish a structural correspondence between these two notions of robustness:
strategic robustness implies dynamic robustness, and, conversely, the requirement
of strategic robustness cannot be relaxed if dynamic robustness is to be maintained.
Finally, we examine the rate of convergence to robust equilibria as a function
of the underlying regularizer, and we show that entropically regularized learning
converges at a geometric rate in games with affinely constrained action spaces.

1

Introduction

A fundamental requirement in game theory—which predates even the cornerstone notion of a Nash
equilibrium—concerns the robustness that should be inherent in any axiomatization of rational
behavior. To quote a famous passage by von Neumann & Morgenstern [53, p. 32]: “In whatever way
we formulate the guiding principles and the objective justification of rational behavior, provisos will
have to be made for every possible conduct of “the others.” If the superiority of rational behavior
over any other kind is to be established, then its description must include rules of conduct for all
conceivable situations—including those where “the others” behaved irrationally in the sense of the
standards which the theory will set for them.”
As a byproduct of this tenet, there has been a flurry of activity since the 1970s in proposing refinements
of the Nash equilibrium concept, all in an effort to dismiss equilibria that are highly fragile or
otherwise implausible (e.g., because they involve threats that are not credible).1 This pursuit of
robustness has recently gained increased momentum owing to the applications of game theory to
machine learning and data science, two fields where the notion of robustness has been likewise elusive.
Here, even though many game-theoretic solutions perform extremely well on specific tasks—such as
a well-trained generative adversarial network (GAN) at equilibrium—the resulting models tend to
1 For a masterful introduction to the topic, see the textbook of van Damme [52].

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

