CHiQPM: Calibrated Hierarchical Interpretable
Image Classification

Thomas Norrenbrock, Timo Kaiser & Bodo Rosenhahn
Institute for Information Processing (tnt)
L3S - Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany
{norrenbr,kaiser,rosenhahn}@tnt.uni-hannover.de
Sovan Biswas & Neslihan Kose
Intel Labs, Germany
{sovan.biswas,neslihan.kose.cihangir}@intel.com
Ramesh Manuvinakurike
Intel Labs, USA
ramesh.manuvinakurike@intel.com

Abstract
Globally interpretable models are a promising approach for trustworthy AI in safetycritical domains. Alongside global explanations, detailed local explanations are a
crucial complement to effectively support human experts during inference. This
work proposes the Calibrated Hierarchical QPM (CHiQPM) which offers uniquely
comprehensive global and local interpretability, paving the way for human-AI complementarity. CHiQPM achieves superior global interpretability by contrastively
explaining the majority of classes and offers novel hierarchical explanations that
are more similar to how humans reason and can be traversed to offer a built-in
interpretable Conformal prediction (CP) method. Our comprehensive evaluation
shows that CHiQPM achieves state-of-the-art accuracy as a point predictor, maintaining 99% accuracy of non-interpretable models. This demonstrates a substantial
improvement, where interpretability is incorporated without sacrificing overall
accuracy. Furthermore, its calibrated set prediction is competitively efficient to
other CP methods, while providing interpretable predictions of coherent sets along
its hierarchical explanation.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning has made remarkable advances and is being used more widely, including in highstakes domains like medicine [1] or autonomous driving [27]. Using more transparent models, e.g.
those that are interpretable by-design, is a promising approach to facilitate safety, robustness, and
trust [53] and is even required by law for some applications [61]. For domains like autonomous
driving, with no expert present during inference, models with built-in global interpretability, that can
generally explain their behavior, are valuable as their reasoning can be robustly tested and verified
before deployment. QPM and Q-SENN [40, 41] follow that goal by enforcing very compact class
representations, that are made up of general, diverse and contrastive features, which are properties
of human-friendly explanations [35]. The generality of these features is in contrast to prototypical
networks like ProtoTree [37], which seem inherently interpretable, as they use the similarity between
image patches as crucial element of their computation. However, the space in which the similarity is
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

