BNMusic: Blending Environmental Noises into
Personalized Music
Chi Zuo1 , Martin B. Møller2 , Pablo Martínez-Nuevo2 , Huayang Huang1 , Yu Wu∗,1 , Ye Zhu3,4
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Bang & Olufsen A/S, Denmark
3
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, USA
4
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris, France
{zuoc97,wuyucs,hyhuang}@whu.edu.cn
{mim,pmn}@bang-olufsen.dk
ye.zhu@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
While being disturbed by environmental noises, the acoustic masking technique is a
conventional way to reduce the annoyance in audio engineering that seeks to cover
up the noises with other dominant yet less intrusive sounds. However, misalignment
between the dominant sound and the noise—such as mismatched downbeats—often
requires an excessive volume increase to achieve effective masking. Motivated by
recent advances in cross-modal generation, in this work, we introduce an alternative
method to acoustic masking, aiming to reduce the noticeability of environmental
noises by blending them into personalized music generated based on user-provided
text prompts. Following the paradigm of music generation using mel-spectrogram
representations, we propose a Blending Noises into Personalized Music (BNMusic)
framework with two key stages. The first stage synthesizes a complete piece of
music in a mel-spectrogram representation that encapsulates the musical essence of
the noise. In the second stage, we adaptively amplify the generated music segment
to further reduce noise perception and enhance the blending effectiveness, while
preserving auditory quality. Our experiments with comprehensive evaluations on
MusicBench, EPIC-SOUNDS, and ESC-50 demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework, highlighting the ability to blend environmental noise with rhythmically
aligned, adaptively amplified, and enjoyable music segments, minimizing the
noticeability of the noise, thereby improving overall acoustic experiences. Project
page: https://d-fas.github.io/BNMusic_page/.

1

Introduction

In public environments like subway trains, passengers are often exposed to persistent and irritating
noise. While active noise cancellation (ANC) [12] is effective in personal audio devices, its individualoriented nature limits its practicality in group settings. Equipping every passenger with ANC
headphones is unrealistic, and such systems often struggle with high-frequency noise. To address this,
we propose a new task: rather than eliminating noise for individuals through destructive interference
techniques, we aim to blend the environmental noise with correctly designed music in a way that
reduces its perceptual salience for a group of listeners, as shown in Fig.1 (a). This perceptual
blending shifts the goal from directly suppressing noise to reducing its impact through harmonious
audio masking, enabling a scalable auditory enhancement in shared environments, providing a more
comfortable auditory experience without requiring personal devices. Beyond public transportation,
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

