Learning-Augmented Algorithms for k-median via
Online Learning
Anish Hebbar
Duke University
anishshripad.hebbar@duke.edu

Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Amit Kumar
IIT Delhi
amitk@cse.iitd.ac.in

Debmalya Panigrahi
Duke University
debmalya@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
The field of learning-augmented algorithms seeks to use ML techniques on past
instances of a problem to inform an algorithm designed for a future instance. In
this paper, we introduce a novel model for learning-augmented algorithms inspired
by online learning. In this model, we are given a sequence of instances of a
problem and the goal of the learning-augmented algorithm is to use prior instances
to propose a solution to a future instance of the problem. The performance of the
algorithm is measured by its average performance across all the instances, where
the performance on a single instance is the ratio between the cost of the algorithm’s
solution and that of an optimal solution for that instance. We apply this framework
to the classic k-median clustering problem, and give an efficient learning algorithm
that can approximately match the average performance of the best fixed k-median
solution in hindsight across all the instances. We also experimentally evaluate our
algorithm and show that its empirical performance is close to optimal, and also that
it automatically adapts the solution to a dynamically changing sequence.

1

Introduction

The field of learning-augmented algorithms has seen rapid growth in recent years, with the aim of harnessing the ever-improving capabilities of machine learning (ML) to solve problems in combinatorial
optimization. Qualitatively, the goal in this area can be stated in simple terms: apply ML techniques
on prior problem instances to inform algorithmic choices for a future instance. This broad objective
has been interpreted in a variety of ways – online algorithms with better competitive ratios using
ML predictions, faster (offline) algorithms based on ML advice, better approximation factors for
(offline) NP-hard problems using ML advice, etc. This breadth of interpretation has led to a wealth of
interesting research at the intersection of algorithm design and machine learning.
In this paper, we take inspiration from the field of online learning to propose a new model for
learning-augmented algorithms. The stated goal of learning-augmented algorithms of using prior
instances to inform the solution of a future instance bears striking similarity with online learning. In
its simplest form, online learning comprises a sequence of instances in which the learner has to select
from a set of actions to minimize unknown loss functions. The choice of the learner is based on the
performance of these actions on prior instances defined by their respective loss functions. The goal is
to optimize the performance of the learner in the long run – it aims to match the average performance
of the best fixed action in hindsight. Viewing learning-augmented algorithms through the lens of
online learning, we ask:
Can a learning-augmented algorithm compete in average performance over a
sequence of problem instances with the best fixed solution in hindsight?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

