The Persistence of Neural Collapse Despite Low-Rank
Bias
Connall Garrod
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford
connall.garrod@maths.ox.ac.uk

Jonathan P. Keating
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford

Abstract
Neural collapse (NC) and its multi-layer variant, deep neural collapse (DNC), describe a structured geometry that occurs in the features and weights of trained deep
networks. Recent theoretical work by Sukenik et al. using a deep unconstrained
feature model (UFM) suggests that DNC is suboptimal under mean squared error
(MSE) loss. They heuristically argue that this is due to low-rank bias induced
by L2 regularization. In this work, we extend this result to deep UFMs trained
with cross-entropy loss, showing that high-rank structures—including DNC—are
not generally optimal. We characterize the associated low-rank bias, proving a
fixed bound on the number of non-negligible singular values at global minima as
network depth increases. We further analyze the loss surface, demonstrating that
DNC is more prevalent in the landscape than other critical configurations, which
we argue explains its frequent empirical appearance. Our results are validated
through experiments in deep UFMs and deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Many researchers have explored the geometric structures that emerge in well-trained deep neural
networks (DNNs) applied to classification tasks [35, 11, 36]. Among these structures is neural
collapse (NC) [36], which refers to the tendency of overparameterized neural networks to form a
simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF) in their final-layer features and weights. Researchers have
sought to explain the ubiquity of NC [24]. A common approach involves the unconstrained feature
model (UFM) [32], which treats the last-layer features as optimization variables and optimizes them
jointly with the last-layer weights, effectively abstracting away the rest of the network. Within this
framework, NC has been shown to be a global optimum in various settings [32, 21], and the associated
optimization function has been characterized as a strict saddle function [58, 56, 52, 57].
While NC was originally observed in the last layer, researchers have empirically verified that similar
structure emerges in earlier layers of the network [13, 39, 37]—a phenomenon known as deep neural
collapse (DNC). Theoretical investigations of DNC have been facilitated by an extension of the
UFM, referred to as the deep UFM, which isolates multiple layers from the network’s approximated
component. While DNC has been shown to be optimal in a variety of restricted contexts [6, 45, 43],
a recent study by Sukenik et al. [42] demonstrated that in the ReLU MSE case, DNC is generally not
optimal in the deep UFM. They argue that suboptimality arises due to a low-rank bias induced by L2
regularization. This is illustrated by constructing lower-rank solutions that achieve lower loss than
any DNC configuration.
While this finding is significant, Sukenik et al. do not analyze whether DNC or their low-rank
solutions are local minima. Consequently, the interplay between nonlinearity, the loss function, and
low-rank bias remains poorly understood. Their work additionally raises a central question: why
does DNC often emerge in practice despite being suboptimal? Sukenik et al. offer some empirical
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

