OVS Meets Continual Learning: Towards Sustainable
Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Dongjun Hwang1
1

Yejin Kim1

Sogang University

2

Minyoung Lee1

Seong Joon Oh2,3

University of Tübingen

3

Junsuk Choe1†

Tübingen AI Center

Abstract
Open-Vocabulary Segmentation (OVS) aims to segment classes that are not present
in the training dataset. However, most existing studies assume that the training data
is fixed in advance, overlooking more practical scenarios where new datasets are
continuously collected over time. To address this, we first analyze how existing
OVS models perform under such conditions. In this context, we explore several
approaches such as retraining, fine-tuning, and continual learning but find that each
of them has clear limitations. To address these issues, we propose ConOVS, a novel
continual learning method based on a Mixture-of-Experts framework. ConOVS
dynamically combines expert decoders based on the probability that an input
sample belongs to the distribution of each incremental dataset. Through extensive
experiments, we show that ConOVS consistently outperforms existing methods
across pre-training, incremental, and zero-shot test datasets, effectively expanding
the recognition capabilities of OVS models when data is collected sequentially.
Code is available at: https://github.com/dongjunhwang/ConOVS

1

Introduction

In fields such as robotics [9] and autonomous driving [24, 47], there is a growing demand for models
that can segment novel objects not included in the training dataset. However, conventional closed-set
segmentation models, which are restricted to recognizing only the classes seen during training, fall
short in meeting this demand. To address this limitation, Open-Vocabulary Segmentation (OVS) has
emerged, aiming to enable segmentation of unseen classes that are not included in the training dataset.
OVS continues to be an active area of research, particularly through methods that leverage foundation
models such as CLIP [52, 58].
Most previous studies [49, 52, 55, 59] on OVS assume a scenario in which the model is trained once
using a pre-training dataset. However, in practice, trainable datasets often arrive sequentially as new
data are collected over time. Considering this setting, we first discuss how existing OVS models
perform under such conditions. To facilitate a clearer discussion, we measure the relative performance
of OVS models on seen and unseen classes using a reference baseline. We adopt OneFormer [18] for
this role. It represents the state-of-the-art in closed-set segmentation and shares the same ConvNeXt
backbone [27] as the OVS model [52], enabling a fair comparison in model capacity.
The most straightforward approach is to use the existing OVS model as is. In our experiments
(Figure 1a), the existing OVS model achieves 86.4% of OneFormer’s performance on the pre-training
dataset COCO [26]. In contrast, its performance drops to 46.9% on a new dataset ADE20K [57],
which contains unseen classes as well. These results indicate that the OVS model fails to perform
well on datasets it has not encountered during training.
† Corresponding author (jschoe@sogang.ac.kr).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

