Regret-Optimal Q-Learning with Low Cost for
Single-Agent and Federated Reinforcement Learning

1

Haochen Zhang1,∗ , Zhong Zheng1,∗ , Lingzhou Xue1,†
Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University
{hqz5340,zvz5337,lzxue}@psu.edu

Abstract
Motivated by real-world settings where data collection and policy deployment—
whether for a single agent or across multiple agents—are costly, we study the
problem of on-policy single-agent reinforcement learning (RL) and federated RL
(FRL) with a focus on minimizing burn-in costs (the sample sizes needed to reach
near-optimal regret) and policy switching or communication costs. In parallel
finite-horizon episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with S states and A
actions, existing methods either require superlinear burn-in costs in S and A or
fail to achieve logarithmic switching or communication costs. We propose two
novel model-free RL algorithms—Q-EarlySettled-LowCost and FedQ-EarlySettledLowCost—that are the first in the literature to simultaneously achieve: (i) the best
near-optimal regret among all known model-free RL or FRL algorithms, (ii) low
burn-in cost that scales linearly with S and A, and (iii) logarithmic policy switching
cost for single-agent RL or communication cost for FRL. Additionally, we establish
gap-dependent theoretical guarantees for both regret and switching/communication
costs, improving or matching the best-known gap-dependent bounds.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [78] is a subfield of machine learning focused on sequential decisionmaking. Often modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), RL tries to obtain an optimal policy
through sequential interactions with the environment. It finds applications in various fields, such as
games [73, 74, 75, 82], robotics [32, 45], and autonomous driving [101]. We assume the presence
of a central server and M local agents in the system. Each agent interacts independently with an
episodic MDP consisting of S states, A actions, and H steps per episode.
In this paper, we focus on model-free online RL and federated RL for tabular episodic Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) with inhomogeneous transition kernels, consisting of S states, A actions,
and H steps per episode. It is known that the √
regret information-theoretic lower bound for any
tabular MDP and any learning algorithm is Ω( H 2 SAT ), where T denotes the total number of
steps [37]. The model-based algorithm UCBVI [9] first reaches this lower bound up to a logarithmic
factor. Model-free algorithms—commonly called Q-learning—are widely used in practice due to
their simplicity of implementation and lower memory requirements [37]. Specifically, model-based
methods typically require memory that scales quadratically with the number of states S for storing
the estimated transition kernel. Model-free methods require memory that only scales linearly with S
but generally face greater challenges in achieving comparable regret.
[37] proposed the first two model-free algorithms with theoretical guarantees: both attaining suboptimal regrets compared with the information-theoretic lower bound. [10] modified their algorithms
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

