Keeping an Eye on LLM Unlearning: The Hidden
Risk and Remedy

Jie Ren1 , Zhenwei Dai2 , Xianfeng Tang2 , Yue Xing1 , Shenglai Zeng1 , Hui Liu2 ,
Jingying Zeng2 , Qiankun Peng2 , Samarth Varshney2 , Suhang Wang3 , Qi He2 ,
Charu C. Aggarwal4 , Hui Liu1
1
Michigan State University, 2 Amazon, 3 The Pennsylvania State University,
4
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
{renjie3,xingyue1,zengshe1,liuhui7}@msu.edu
{zwdai, xianft, liunhu, zejingyi, qiankunp, varshsam, qih}@amazon.com
szw494@psu.edu, charu@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Although Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a wide range of tasks, growing concerns have emerged over the
misuse of sensitive, copyrighted, or harmful data during training. To address these
concerns, unlearning techniques have been developed to remove the influence of
specific data without retraining from scratch. However, this paper reveals a critical
vulnerability in fine-tuning-based unlearning: a malicious user can craft a manipulated forgetting request that stealthily degrades the model’s utility for benign users.
We demonstrate this risk through a red-teaming Stealthy Attack (SA), which is
inspired by two key limitations of existing unlearning—the inability to constrain
the scope of unlearning effect and the failure to distinguish benign tokens from
unlearning signals. Prior work has shown that unlearned models tend to memorize
forgetting data as unlearning signals, and respond with hallucinations or feigned
ignorance when unlearning signals appear in the input. By subtly increasing the
presence of common benign tokens in the forgetting data, SA enhances the connection between benign tokens and unlearning signals. As a result, when normal
users include such tokens in their prompts, the model exhibits unlearning behaviors,
leading to unintended utility degradation. To address this vulnerability, we propose
Scope-aware Unlearning (SU), a lightweight enhancement that introduces a scope
term into the unlearning objective, encouraging the model to localize the forgetting
effect. Our method requires no additional data processing, integrates seamlessly
with existing fine-tuning frameworks, and significantly improves robustness against
SA. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of both SA and SU. Our code
is available at github.com/renjie3/sa_su.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of
tasks, such as question answering [1], machine translation [2], text summarization [3], and dialogue
generation [4]. This rapid advancement has been largely driven by training on massive datasets.
However, growing concerns have been raised about the potential misuse of undesirable data in
training, such as copyrighted materials, privacy-sensitive information, or harmful content [5, 6]. For
instance, New York Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft for using its articles for training1 . Under the
1

https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/27/business/media/new-york-times-open-ai-microsoft-lawsuit.html

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

