DuetGraph: Coarse-to-Fine Knowledge Graph
Reasoning with Dual-Pathway Global-Local Fusion

1

Jin Li1,3,† , Zezhong Ding2,3,† , Xike Xie1,3∗
School of Biomedical Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data Science, USTC
3
Data Darkness Lab, Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC
{lijinstu,zezhongding}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xkxie@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are vital for enabling knowledge reasoning across various domains. Recent KG reasoning methods that integrate both global and local
information have achieved promising results. However, existing methods often
suffer from score over-smoothing, which blurs the distinction between correct and
incorrect answers and hinders reasoning effectiveness. To address this, we propose DuetGraph, a coarse-to-ﬁne KG reasoning mechanism with dual-pathway
global-local fusion. DuetGraph tackles over-smoothing by segregating—rather
than stacking—the processing of local (via message passing) and global (via attention) information into two distinct pathways, preventing mutual interference and
preserving representational discrimination. In addition, DuetGraph introduces a
coarse-to-ﬁne optimization, which partitions entities into high- and low-score subsets. This strategy narrows the candidate space and sharpens the score gap between the two subsets, which alleviates over-smoothing and enhances inference
quality. Extensive experiments on various datasets demonstrate that DuetGraph
achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, with up to an 8.7% improvement in
reasoning quality and a 1.8× acceleration in training efﬁciency. Our code is available at https://github.com/USTC-DataDarknessLab/DuetGraph.git.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are structured representations of real-world entities and their relationships,
widely applied in domains such as information retrieval [1, 2], logical reasoning [3, 4], recommendation systems [5, 6], materials science [7, 8], and biomedical research [9, 10]. However, existing KGs
are often incomplete, missing certain factual information [11, 12], which limits their effectiveness in
downstream applications. As a result, inferring and completing missing entity information through
KG reasoning is essential.
KG reasoning faces two fundamental challenges. Firstly, it requires effective aggregation and propagation of local neighborhood information to capture multi-hop and subgraph patterns among entities.
Secondly, it must capture global structure and long-range dependencies across large-scale graphs to
understand complex relationships that span multiple intermediate nodes. To address these challenges, a substantial line of previous research has been dedicated to developing methods to capture
local neighborhood and global structure for KG reasoning. These methods can be categorized into
two types: message passing-based methods and transformer-based methods.
Message passing-based KG reasoning methods [13, 14, 5] effectively capture local structural information via message passing mechanism [15], but often fail to model long-range dependencies and
∗

Corresponding Author

†

Equal Contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

