Tensor Decomposition Networks for Fast Machine
Learning Interatomic Potential Computations
Yuchao Lin1,2∗, Cong Fu1∗, Zachary Krueger1 , Haiyang Yu1 , Maho Nakata3 ,
Jianwen Xie2 , Emine Kucukbenli4 , Xiaofeng Qian5 , Shuiwang Ji1,5,6†,
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, USA
2
Lambda, Inc., USA
3
RIKEN Cluster for Pioneering Research, RIKEN, Japan
4
NVIDIA, USA
5
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, USA
6
Mike Walker ’66 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University, USA

Abstract
SO(3)-equivariant networks are the dominant models for machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs). The key operation of such networks is the ClebschGordan (CG) tensor product, which is computationally expensive. To accelerate
the computation, we develop tensor decomposition networks (TDNs) as a class
of approximately equivariant networks in which CG tensor products are replaced
by low-rank tensor decompositions, such as the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP)
decomposition. With the CP decomposition, we prove (i) a uniform bound on the
induced error of SO(3)-equivariance, and (ii) the universality of approximating any
equivariant bilinear map. To further reduce the number of parameters, we propose
path-weight sharing that ties all multiplicity-space weights across the O(L3 ) CG
paths into a single shared parameter set without compromising equivariance, where
L is the maximum angular degree. The resulting layer acts as a plug-and-play
replacement for tensor products in existing networks, and the computational complexity of tensor products is reduced from O(L6 ) to O(L4 ). We evaluate TDNs on
PubChemQCR, a newly curated molecular relaxation dataset containing 105 million DFT-calculated snapshots. We also use existing datasets, including OC20, and
OC22. Results show that TDNs achieve competitive performance with dramatic
speedup in computations. Our code is publicly available as part of the AIRS library
(https://github.com/divelab/AIRS/).

1

Introduction

Symmetry is a fundamental aspect of molecular and material systems [1], making it a crucial
consideration in developing machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs). Equivariant graph
neural networks have emerged as dominant frameworks in this domain. Usually, equivariant models
incorporate directional features and spherical harmonics to maintain equivariance under rotation
symmetry [2, 3, 4]. Among these, tensor product (TP) operations play a central role in fusing
equivariant features, providing a powerful mechanism for building expressive models that adhere to
SO(3)-equivariance [5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
However, the computational cost of tensor product operations grows rapidly with the maximum
angular degree L, reaching O(L6 ) in conventional implementations. Recent efforts to mitigate this
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

