Exploiting the Asymmetric Uncertainty Structure of
Pre-trained VLMs on the Unit Hypersphere

Li Ju∗† Max Andersson† Stina Fredriksson† Edward Glöckner†
Andreas Hellander† Ekta Vats † Prashant Singh†‡

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) as foundation models have significantly enhanced
performance across a wide range of visual and textual tasks, without requiring
large-scale training from scratch for downstream tasks. However, these deterministic VLMs fail to capture the inherent ambiguity and uncertainty in natural language
and visual data. Recent probabilistic post-hoc adaptation methods address this
by mapping deterministic embeddings onto probability distributions; however,
existing approaches do not account for the asymmetric uncertainty structure of the
modalities, and the constraint that meaningful deterministic embeddings reside on
a unit hypersphere, potentially leading to suboptimal performance. In this paper,
we address the asymmetric uncertainty structure inherent in textual and visual data,
and propose AsymVLM to build probabilistic embeddings from pre-trained VLMs
on the unit hypersphere, enabling uncertainty quantification. We validate the effectiveness of the probabilistic embeddings on established benchmarks, and present
comprehensive ablation studies demonstrating the inherent nature of asymmetry in
the uncertainty structure of textual and visual data.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in understanding visual
and linguistic information, by constructing a joint embedding space that aligns image and text embeddings [4, 29]. Models like CLIP [18] and BLIP [14], enable a wide range of downstream applications,
such as zero-shot classification [1], image-to-text retrieval [5], optical character recognition [27].
However, due to the inherent ambiguity within text and image data, aligned point estimates for
text and image embeddings produced by deterministic VLMs may not fully capture the complex
relationships between the visual and linguistic embedding spaces.
Alternatively, instead of learning deterministic point estimate embeddings, probabilistic embedding
methods [8] map text and language data onto probability distributions, more effectively capturing the
ambiguity and uncertainty of the data. However, they entail training probabilistic VLMs from scratch
on massive datasets – an expensive process that forgoes the strengths of established deterministic
VLMs. To explore post-hoc methods for constructing probabilistic embeddings from pretrained deterministic VLMs, recent frameworks such as ProbVLM [25] and BayesVLM [3] have been proposed.
However, the abmiguous nature of text-to-image retrieval is due to both textual abstraction and image
variability, while image-to-text ambiguity arises from the multiplicity of textual descriptions. Existing
methods overlook this asymmetric nature in texts and images, and the fact that the embeddings of
most pre-trained VLMs reside on a unit hypersphere, instead of the Euclidean space.
∗

Corresponding author (li.ju@it.uu.se)
Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
‡
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

