Why Masking Diffusion Works: Condition on the
Jump Schedule for Improved Discrete Diffusion

Alan N. Amin
New York University
alanamin@nyu.edu

Nate Gruver
New York University
nvg7279@nyu.edu

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University
andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Discrete diffusion models, like continuous diffusion models, generate high-quality
samples by gradually undoing noise applied to datapoints with a Markov process.
Gradual generation in theory comes with many conceptual benefits; for example,
inductive biases can be incorporated into the noising Markov process, and access to
improved sampling algorithms. In practice, however, the consistently best performing discrete diffusion model is, surprisingly, masking diffusion, which does not
denoise gradually. Here we explain the superior performance of masking diffusion
by noting that it makes use of a fundamental difference between continuous and
discrete Markov processes: discrete Markov processes evolve by discontinuous
jumps at a fixed rate and, unlike other discrete diffusion models, masking diffusion
builds in the known distribution of jump times and only learns where to jump
to. We show that we can similarly bake in the known distribution of jump times
into any discrete diffusion model. The resulting models — schedule-conditioned
diffusion (SCUD) — generalize classical discrete diffusion and masking diffusion.
By applying SCUD to models with noising processes that incorporate inductive
biases on images, text, and protein data, we build models that outperform masking.

1

Introduction

Discrete diffusion models provide state-of-the-art conditional generation of discrete sequences. In
biological sequence design, for example, they allow one to generate sequences flexibly conditioned
on protein structure [15], DNA function [22], protein family [1], and other properties [9, 16]. They
are also nearing state-of-the-art generation on language data [20].
A diffusion model is defined by a “forward” process, which gradually transforms data token-by-token
into noise, and a “backward” transformation that turns noise into data, learned by optimizing an
evidence lower bound (ELBO). In principle, the quality of the learned model should benefit from a
forward process that captures structure in the data distribution. For example, works have suggested
forward processes that are more likely to transform tokens into similar tokens – a more “gradual”
noising process [2, 1] – as well as “state-dependent” processes that transform certain tokens more
quickly than others [23]. Surprisingly, these methods are all outperformed by “masking diffusion”
which has the simplest possible forward process – transforming each token into a masking token at a
uniform rate [2, 1, 23]. Having seemingly arrived at the optimal forward process, work on discrete
diffusion has instead shifted its focus to sampling [26, 18, 13, 7, 4] and scaling [15, 20].
Here we explore the causes of the superior performance of masking diffusion. We propose that
masking diffusion benefits from a parameterization that forces the distribution of corruption or
transition events, the “transition schedule”, in the backward process to match the distribution in the
forward process. Rather than allow us to conclude that masking is optimal, this insight allows us to
expand the design space of discrete diffusion models to give any forward process the same property;
we call models in this expanded design space schedule conditioned diffusion (SCUD). We show that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

