Strategic Cost Selection in Participatory Budgeting

Piotr Faliszewski
AGH University
Kraków, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

Łukasz Janeczko
AGH University
Kraków, Poland
ljaneczk@agh.edu.pl

Andrzej Kaczmarczyk
University of Chicago
Chicago, USA
akaczmarczyk@uchicago.edu

Grzegorz Lisowski
University of Groningen
Groningen, The Netherlands
g.a.lisowski@rug.nl

Piotr Skowron
University of Warsaw
Warsaw, Poland
p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl

Stanisław Szufa
CNRS, Université Paris Dauphine-PSL
Paris, France
s.szufa@gmail.com

Mateusz Szwagierczak
AGH University
Kraków, Poland
matiszw@student.agh.edu.pl

Abstract
We study strategic behavior of project proposers in the context of approval-based
participatory budgeting (PB). In our model we assume that the votes are fixed and
known and the proposers want to set as high project prices as possible, provided
that their projects get selected and the prices are not below the minimum costs of
their delivery. We study the existence of pure Nash equilibria (NE) in such games,
focusing on the AV/Cost, Phragmén, and Method of Equal Shares rules. We also
provide an experimental study of cost selection on real-life PB election data.

1

Introduction

Consider a city that implements participatory budgeting (PB) [Cabannes, 2004; Goel et al., 2019;
Rey and Maly, 2023]. The city council allocates a fixed amount of funds for the initiative and invites
citizens to submit project proposals, for which the funding decisions will be made through voting.
One natural question that the proposers face is how much money should they realistically request. It
is tempting to propose expensive projects, as higher costs are typically associated with better quality
and broader scope, but overly expensive projects risk rejection due to a limited budget.
Indeed, evidence suggests that the costs of the projects are often set strategically. For example, in
10% of participatory budgeting elections held in the city of Wrocław, Poland, all project proposals had costs equal to the maximum allowed amount (see the Pabulib database [Faliszewski et al.,
2023]) in the corresponding instance. Moreover, in 85% of these elections, more than half of the
proposals were priced at the maximum value. A similar phenomenon, if less pronounced, also occurs in other cities. For instance, in 25% of Pabulib PB instances approximately half of the projects
have costs reaching at least 90% of the maximum allowed value in the corresponding instance. In
another 50% of these instances, more than 30% of the projects are priced at or above 50% of the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

