Adam Reduces a Unique Form of Sharpness:
Theoretical Insights Near the Minimizer Manifold

Xinghan Li∗ Haodong Wen∗ † Kaifeng Lyu‡
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
{xh-li22,whd25}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn klyu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the popularity of the Adam optimizer in practice, most theoretical analyses
study Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) as a proxy for Adam, and little is known
about how the solutions found by Adam differ. In this paper, we show that Adam
implicitly reduces a unique form of sharpness measure shaped by its adaptive
updates, leading to qualitatively different solutions from SGD. More specifically,
when the training loss is small, Adam wanders around the manifold of minimizers
and takes semi-gradients to minimize this sharpness measure in an adaptive manner,
a behavior we rigorously characterize through a continuous-time approximation
using stochastic differential equations. We further demonstrate how this behavior
differs from that of SGD in a well-studied setting: when training overparameterized
models with label noise, SGD has been shown to minimize the trace of the Hessian
matrix, tr(H), whereas we prove that Adam minimizes tr(Diag(H)1/2 ) instead.
In solving sparse linear regression with diagonal linear networks, this distinction
enables Adam to achieve better sparsity and generalization than SGD. Finally, our
analysis framework extends beyond Adam to a broad class of adaptive gradient
methods, including RMSProp, Adam-mini, Adalayer and Shampoo, and provides a
unified perspective on how these adaptive optimizers reduce sharpness, which we
hope will offer insights for future optimizer design.

1

Introduction

Due to the non-convexity of the loss landscape, neural networks trained in different ways can perform
very differently on the test set, even if they achieve the same training loss or accuracy [Zhang et al.,
2017, Keskar et al., 2017, Liu et al., 2023, Saunshi et al., 2024]. To mathematically understand the
generalization of neural networks, especially for over-parameterized models that admit many global
minimizers, a key step is to understand the implicit bias of optimization methods [Neyshabur et al.,
2014, Soudry et al., 2018]. That is, beyond just minimizing the training loss, what kinds of solutions
are different optimizers implicitly biased towards?
Many theoretical works on implicit bias focus on (full-batch) gradient descent or its continuous variant,
gradient flow. This includes the works on the implicit bias towards max-margin classifiers [Soudry
et al., 2018, Nacson et al., 2019, Lyu and Li, 2020, Ji and Telgarsky, 2020], implicit bias towards
min-norm solutions [Lyu et al., 2024], and equivalence to kernel methods [Jacot et al., 2018, Chizat
et al., 2019]. However, these characterizations do not highlight the specific role of stochasticity in
SGD, although it is more widely used in practice than gradient flow or full-batch gradient descent.
∗

Equal contribution; alphabet ordering
Most work was done while Haodong was at Xi’an Jiaotong University.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

