Dynamic Siamese Expansion Framework for
Improving Robustness in Online Continual Learning
Fei Ye1 , Yulong Zhao1 , Qihe Liu1 ∗, Junlin Chen1 , Adrian G. Bors2
Jingling Sun1 , Rongyao Hu1 , Shijie Zhou1
1
School of Information and Software Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York
{ feiye@uestc.edu.cn, yulongzhao913@outlook.com, qiheliu@uestc.edu.cn,
adrian.bors@york.ac.uk, jlsun@uestc.edu.cn, ryhu@uestc.edu.cn,
sjzhou@uestc.edu.cn }

Abstract
Continual learning requires the model to continually capture novel information
without forgetting prior knowledge. Nonetheless, existing studies predominantly
address catastrophic forgetting, often neglecting enhancements in model robustness. Consequently, these methodologies fall short in real-time applications, such
as autonomous driving, where data samples frequently exhibit noise due to environmental and lighting variations, thereby impairing model efficacy and causing
safety issues. In this paper, we address robustness in continual learning systems
by introducing an innovative approach, the Dynamic Siamese Expansion Framework (DSEF) that employs a Siamese backbone architecture, comprising static
and dynamic components, to facilitate the learning of both global and local representations over time. Specifically, the proposed framework dynamically generates
a lightweight expert for each novel task, leveraging the Siamese backbone to
enable rapid adaptation. A novel Robust Dynamic Representation Optimization
(RDRO) approach is proposed to incrementally update the dynamic backbone
by maintaining all previously acquired representations and prediction patterns of
historical experts, thereby fostering new task learning without inducing detrimental
knowledge transfer. Additionally, we propose a novel Robust Feature Fusion (RFF)
approach to incrementally amalgamate robust representations from all historical
experts into the expert construction process. A novel mutual information-based
technique is employed to derive adaptive weights for feature fusion by assessing the
knowledge relevance between historical experts and the new task, thus maximizing
positive knowledge transfer effects. A comprehensive experimental evaluation,
benchmarking our approach against established baselines, demonstrates that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance even under adversarial attacks. Code
is released at https://github.com/seSysdl/DSEF.

1

Introduction

Continual/Lifelong Learning (CL) has emerged as a pivotal subject within the domain of deep learning,
significantly contributing to the progression of artificial intelligence systems [22]. In contrast to
conventional deep learning methodologies, continual learning introduces a unique training framework
wherein the model is exposed to a constrained set of samples, with prior data samples rendered
inaccessible. This learning paradigm encounters a critical challenge termed catastrophic forgetting
∗

corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

