ReSim: Reliable World Simulation
for Autonomous Driving

Jiazhi Yang1,3 Kashyap Chitta4,7 Shenyuan Gao8 Long Chen5 Yuqian Shao6
Xiaosong Jia6 Hongyang Li2 Andreas Geiger7 Xiangyu Yue1† Li Chen2,3†
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong
OpenDriveLab at Shanghai AI Lab 4 NVIDIA Research 5 Xiaomi EV
6
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 7 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center 8 HKUST
3

https://opendrivelab.com/ReSim

Abstract
How can we reliably simulate future driving scenarios under a wide range of
ego driving behaviors? Recent driving world models, developed exclusively on
real-world driving data with expert trajectories, struggle to represent hazardous
or non-expert behaviors that are rare in training corpus. This limitation restricts
their applicability to tasks such as policy evaluation. In this work, we address this
challenge by enriching real-world human demonstrations with diverse non-expert
data collected from a driving simulator (e.g., CARLA), and building a controllable
world model trained on this heterogeneous corpus. Starting with a video generator
featuring a diffusion transformer architecture, we devise several strategies to effectively integrate conditioning signals and improve prediction controllability and
fidelity. The resulting model, ReSim, enables Reliable Simulation of diverse openworld driving scenarios under various actions, including hazardous non-expert ones.
To close the gap between high-fidelity simulation and applications that require
reward signals to judge different actions, we introduce a Video2Reward module
that estimates a reward from ReSim’s simulated future. Our ReSim paradigm
achieves up to 44% higher visual fidelity, improves controllability for both expert
and non-expert actions by over 50%, and boosts planning and policy selection
performance on NAVSIM by 2% and 25%, respectively.

1

Introduction

Learning a world model capable of predicting plausible future outcomes is now envisioned as a key
milestone in achieving autonomy [1, 2, 3]. Over the past decade, researchers have leveraged visual
world models to learn compact representations [4, 5], guide test-time planning [6, 7, 8], and develop
reinforcement learning agents [9, 10] across various domains [11, 12, 13]. Unlike general-purpose
video generators, which prioritize visual fidelity and generalization, world models simulate futures
with precise control over ego actions.
In the autonomous driving domain, recent driving world models have also made rapid improvements
in visual fidelity and generalization by scaling to massive driving datasets [14, 15, 16] and integrating
frontier video generation techniques [17, 18]. However, the ability to accurately follow actions, which
is an essential requirement for precise reward estimation and effective planning [19, 20], remains
challenging [21]. As real-world data continues to grow, a critical question emerges: Is real-world
human data alone sufficient to guarantee simulation reliability? A notable limitation of real-world
data is that it predominantly consists of safe expert demonstrations, where the state-action space
is inherently restricted by safety and regulation concerns [22, 23]. Consequently, safety-critical or
†

Corresponding authors. Primary contact to Jiazhi Yang at: jzyang@link.cuhk.edu.hk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

