Data Selection Matters: Towards Robust Instruction
Tuning of Large Multimodal Models

Xu Yang1 Chen Liu† 1 Ying Wei† 2
City University of Hong Kong 2 Zhejiang University
xyang337-c@my.cityu.edu.hk chen.liu@cityu.edu.hk ying.wei@zju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Selecting a compact subset of visual instruction–following data has emerged as
an effective way to align large multimodal models with human intentions while
avoiding the high cost of full-dataset training. Yet we observe that both full-data
training and existing state-of-the-art data selection methods tend to inherit underlying dataset biases such as position bias and spurious correlations, leading to biased
model behaviors. To address this issue, we introduce ARDS, a robustness-aware
targeted visual instruction-selection framework that explicitly mitigates these weaknesses, sidestepping the need for access to downstream data or time-consuming
gradient computation. Specifically, we first identify the worst-case evaluation subgroups through visual and textual task-specific perturbations. The robust training
mixture is then constructed by prioritizing samples that are semantically closer to
these subgroups in a rich multimodal embedding space. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that ARDS substantially boosts both robustness and data efficiency for
visual instruction tuning. We also showcase that the robust mixtures produced with
a smaller model transfer effectively to larger architectures. Our code and selected
datasets that have been demonstrated transferable across models are available at
https://github.com/xyang583/ARDS.

1

Introduction

Large multimodal models (LMMs) [23, 9, 30, 123, 64, 115, 75] have garnered significant attention
due to their strong zero-shot capabilities, enabling a wide range of applications in real-world scenarios.
Visual instruction tuning [64] has proven effective in enhancing these models’ abilities to follow user
instructions and reason deeply based on visual cues. Recent efforts have demonstrated that improved
performance after visual instruction tuning can be achieved by adjusting image resolutions [59],
optimizing training pipelines [75], and scaling up the data used during pre-training and instruction
tuning [9, 23, 32, 53, 117, 63, 115].
Despite these advances, existing LMMs often experience significant performance degradation when
exposed to minor input perturbations [118, 125]. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, LLaVA1.5 [63], trained on the original dataset, suffers nearly 32% drop in accuracy on the ScienceQA
benchmark [70] when answer choices are shuffled or option letters are replaced. Such vulnerabilities
are often attributed to dataset biases that inadvertently encourage shortcut learning or spurious
correlations [31, 90, 92, 96, 25, 80]. To mitigate the biases, past works have employed post-training
strategies such as prompt-based in-context learning [81, 28, 24] or inference-time calibration [118].
However, such methods are limited by researchers’ prior and incur additional computational costs
during inference. Therefore, we hope to be able to prevent LMMs from learning biased behaviors
during visual instruction tuning.
†

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

