When Can Model-Free Reinforcement Learning be
Enough for Thinking?

Josiah P. Hanna
Computer Sciences Department
University of Wisconsin – Madison
jphanna@cs.wisc.edu

Nicholas E. Corrado
Computer Sciences Department
University of Wisconsin – Madison
ncorrado@wisc.edu

Abstract
Recent work on large language models has demonstrated the use of model-free
reinforcement learning (RL) to train reasoning-like capabilities. The emergence of
"thinking" through model-free RL is interesting as thinking actions neither produce
reward nor change the external world state to one where the agent is more likely
to get reward. This paper seeks to build a domain-independent understanding
of when model-free RL will lead to such "thinking" as a strategy for reward
maximization. To build this understanding, we first introduce a theoretical model
which we call a thought Markov decision process (MDP). Thought MDPs minimally
extend the classical MDP model to include an abstract notion of thought state and
thought action. Using the thought MDP model, we prove the importance of policy
initialization in determining whether or not thinking emerges and show formally
that thought actions are equivalent to the agent choosing to perform a step of policy
improvement before continuing to act. We then show that open-source LLMs
satisfy the conditions that our theory predicts are necessary for model-free RL to
produce thinking-like behavior. Finally, we hypothesize sufficient conditions that
would enable thinking to be learned outside of language generation and introduce a
toy domain where a combination of multi-task pre-training and designated thought
actions enable more data-efficient RL compared to non-thinking agents.

1

Introduction

Dual process theory divides cognitive processing into System 1 and System 2 processing [Wason
and Evans, 1974, Kahneman, 2003]. System 1 processing is fast, effortless, but potentially imprecise, whereas System 2 is slow, effortful, but potentially produces better decisions. In the field of
computational reinforcement learning (RL), model-free learning is reminiscent of System 1 behavior,
whereas model-based decision-time planning is reminiscent of System 2. While dual process theory
is a popular model for understanding human cognition [Kahneman, 2011], there is no single clear
candidate architecture for its duplication in artificial agents.
In the context of large language models (LLMs), recent work by Guo et al. proposed a unified
model whereby System 2 type “thinking” emerged as a consequence of model-free RL applied to
solve mathematics problems (2025). While this “thinking" appears to resemble thoughts that a
human would have when answering a given query, these outputs arise solely as subservient to reward
maximization. The approach is interesting as it suggests that a form of System 2 processing can
emerge when we view thinking as control and reinforce thought patterns that lead to reward. Our
objective is to develop a domain-independent understanding of the conditions under which model-free
RL will select for thinking behavior. Specifically, we want to answer the question:
Under what conditions will model-free reinforcement learning give rise to thinking as a strategy for
reward maximization?
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

