SAVVY: Spatial Awareness via Audio-Visual LLMs
through Seeing and Hearing

Mingfei Chen ∗†
Jinlin Xiang †

Zijun Cui ∗†

Yang Zheng †

Jingyuan Li †

Xiulong Liu ∗†
Eli Shlizerman ‡†§

Abstract
3D spatial reasoning in dynamic, audio-visual environments is a cornerstone of
human cognition yet remains largely unexplored by existing Audio-Visual Large
Language Models (AV-LLMs) and benchmarks, which predominantly focus on
static or 2D scenes. We introduce SAVVY-Bench, the first benchmark for 3D spatial
reasoning in dynamic scenes with synchronized spatial audio. SAVVY-Bench is
comprised of thousands of carefully curated question–answer pairs probing both
directional and distance relationships involving static and moving objects, and
requires fine-grained temporal grounding, consistent 3D localization, and multimodal annotation. To tackle this challenge, we propose SAVVY, a novel trainingfree reasoning pipeline that consists of two stages: (i) Egocentric Spatial Tracks
Estimation, which leverages AV-LLMs as well as other audio-visual methods to
track the trajectories of key objects related to the query using both visual and spatial
audio cues, and (ii) Dynamic Global Map Construction, which aggregates multimodal queried object trajectories and converts them into a unified global dynamic
map. Using the constructed map, a final QA answer is obtained through a coordinate
transformation that aligns the global map with the queried viewpoint. Empirical
evaluation demonstrates that SAVVY substantially enhances performance of stateof-the-art AV-LLMs, setting a new standard and stage for approaching dynamic 3D
spatial reasoning in AV-LLMs.
"This is (from) a Phoenix local artist."

Egocentric QA

Allocentric QA

Q: Imagine you are the
camera wearer, when
the speech topic
"identifying the artist as
phoenix local" comes up,
relative to where you are
facing, where is the
other person: front-left,
front-right, back-left, or
back-right?

Q: Imagine you are a
robot standing by the
china cabinet and facing
the TV, when the speech
topic: "identifying the
figures_final.p
artist as phoenix local"
comes up,ptx
relative to
where you are facing,
where is the speaker:
left, right, or back?

Speaker's View

Speech Topic

A: back-right.

A: right.

Figure 1: 3D spatial reasoning in dynamic audio-visual environments. The task requires fine-grained
3D question answering across egocentric and allocentric frames in dynamic scenes.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
‡
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
§
Corresponding author: shlizee@uw.edu
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

