Spike4DGS: Towards High-Speed Dynamic Scene
Recontruction with 4D Gaussian Splatting via a Spike
Camera Array

Qinghong Ye1,3,∗, Yiqian Chang2,3,∗ , Jianing Li4 , Haoran Xu3,5 , Xuan Wang2 ,
Wei Zhang3,†, Yonghong Tian1,3,4,† , Peixi Peng1,3,†
1
Shenzhen Graduate School of Peking University
2
Shenzhen Campus of Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
School of Computer Science, Peking University
5
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
Spike camera with high temporal resolution offers a new perspective on highspeed dynamic scene rendering. Most existing rendering methods rely on Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) or 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for static scenes using a
monocular spike camera. However, these methods struggle with dynamic motion,
while a single camera suffers from limited spatial coverage, making it challenging
to reconstruct fine details in high-speed scenes. To address these problems, we
propose Spike4DGS, the first high-speed dynamic scene rendering framework with
4D Gaussian Splatting using spike camera arrays. Technically, we first build a
multi-view spike camera array to validate our solution, then establish both synthetic
and real-world multi-view spike-based reconstruction datasets. Then, we design a
multi-view spike-based dense initialization module that obtains dense point clouds
and camera poses from continuous spike streams. Finally, we propose a spikepixel synergy constraint supervision to optimize Spike4DGS, incorporating both
rendered image quality loss and dynamic spatiotemporal spike loss. The results
show that our Spike4DGS outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of novel
view rendering quality on both synthetic and real-world datasets. More details are
available at the project page.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis [16] is a cornerstone of many cutting-edge applications, enabling the creation
of precise novel views from ideal image sequences. However, conventional cameras struggle in
high-speed motion scenarios, where rapid movement causes motion blur and significantly degrades
reconstruction quality [39]. While some approaches [30, 44] attempt to improve reconstruction from
motion-blurred images, they remain fundamentally limited by the sampling rates of RGB cameras.
As a result, the use of new vision sensors for high-quality rendering in high-speed scenes has garnered
increasing attention.
Spike cameras [9, 20, 48] with high temporal resolution offer a new perspective on high-speed scene
rendering. Unlike conventional cameras, they asynchronously encode absolute light intensity into
continuous spike streams at rates of up to 20k Hz. This unique property makes them particularly
∗

Qinghong Ye and Yiqian Chang contributed equally to the paper.
Peixi Peng,Yonghong Tian({pxpeng,yhtian}@pku.edu.cn ), and Wei Zhang(zhangwei1213052@126.com)
are corresponding authors.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

