Hadamard Test is Sufficient for Efficient Quantum
Gradient Estimation with Lie Algebraic Symmetries

Mohsen Heidari∗1 ,
Indiana University

1

2

Masih Mozakka1 ,
Wojciech Szpankowski2,3
CSoI, Purdue University 3 Jagiellonian University

Abstract
Gradient estimation is a central challenge in training parameterized quantum circuits (PQCs) for hybrid quantum-classical optimization and learning problems.
This difficulty arises from several factors, including the exponential dimensionality of the Hilbert spaces and the information loss in quantum measurements.
Existing estimators, such as finite difference and the parameter shift rule, often
fail to adequately address these challenges for certain classes of PQCs. In this
work, we propose a novel gradient estimation framework that leverages the underlying Lie algebraic structure of PQCs, combined with the Hadamard test. By
analyzing the differential of the matrix exponential in Lie algebras, we derive an
expression for the gradient as a linear combination of expectation values obtained
via Hadamard tests. The coefficients in this decomposition depend solely on the
circuit’s parameterization and can be computed efficiently. Furthermore, these
expectation values can be estimated using state-of-the-art shadow tomography
techniques. Our approach enables efficient gradient estimation, requiring a number
of measurement shots that scales logarithmically with the number of parameters,
and with polynomial classical and quantum time. This is an exponential reduction
in the measurement cost and a polynomial speed-up in time compared to existing
works.

1

Introduction

Hybrid quantum-classical strategies have emerged as a leading approach for quantum optimization and
learning [BLSF19, CAB+ 21], and have been extensively studied across a broad range of domains,
including optimization [FGG14], quantum chemistry [JEM+ 19, AWGP21, GEBM19, DAJ+ 21],
and quantum machine learning from classical and quantum data [FN18, SK19, MNKF18, LW18,
HCT+ 19, HPS21, HS24, HS23, HBM+ 21]. Variational quantum algorithm (VQA) particularly has
been a promising paradigm for quantum learning and inference, where a PQC (a.k.a ansatz) is trained
in a classical-quantum loop. Gradient-based training methods have gained significant attention in
the literature [HN21, SWM+ 20, SBG+ 18, FGG14, FN18, SK19, MNKF18] and have demonstrated
significant advantages in convergence rates compared to gradient-free methods.
However, estimation of the gradient can be computationally challenging due to several factors
including the exponential dimensionality of the Hilbert spaces, the no-cloning, information loss of
quantum measurements, and non-commutativity of Hamiltonian terms. Therefore, each gradient
estimation can have an exponential sample complexity leading to a high overhead and hence a
bottleneck for the scalability of gradient-based VQAs.
Several approaches have been introduced to estimate the gradient [FN18, MNKF18, SWM+ 20,
HGS22, HN21, SBG+ 18, MKF19, WLW+ 24, SKP24]; but they often yield suboptimal gradient
circuits for certain PQCs. Methods based on finite differences evaluate the objective function in
∗

Corresponding author. Email: mheidar@iu.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

