MESS+: Dynamically Learned Inference-Time LLM
Routing in Model Zoos with Service Level Guarantees

Herbert Woisetschläger
Technical University of Munich
h.woisetschlaeger@tum.de

Ryan Zhang
Horace Greeley High School
ryzhangofficial@gmail.com

Shiqiang Wang
IBM Research
shiqiang.wang@ieee.org

Hans-Arno Jacobsen
University of Toronto
jacobsen@eecg.toronto.edu

Abstract
Open-weight large language model (LLM) zoos provide access to numerous highquality models, but selecting the appropriate model for specific tasks remains
challenging and requires technical expertise. Most users simply want factually
correct, safe, and satisfying responses without concerning themselves with model
technicalities, while inference service providers prioritize minimizing operating
costs. These competing interests are typically mediated through service level
agreements (SLAs) that guarantee minimum service quality. We introduce MESS+,
a stochastic optimization algorithm for cost-optimal LLM request routing while
providing rigorous SLA compliance guarantees. MESS+ learns request satisfaction
probabilities of LLMs in real-time as users interact with the system, based on
which model selection decisions are made by solving a per-request optimization
problem. Our algorithm includes a novel combination of virtual queues and request
satisfaction prediction, along with a theoretical analysis of cost optimality and
constraint satisfaction. Across a wide range of state-of-the-art LLM benchmarks,
MESS+ achieves an average of 2× cost savings compared to existing LLM routing
techniques.

1

Introduction

As the number of open-weight large language models (LLMs), such as Llama [8], Granite [11] or
Qwen [19], increases rapidly, deep learning infrastructure providers and end users are confronted
with an abundance of models (model zoo) for their language processing tasks. Typically, each LLM
family comes with at least three models, each with different capabilities and resource requirements
(Figure 1). Sometimes, there is an update to the model weights that is released as a minor checkpoint
(e.g., Llama 3.1 70B and Llama 3.3 70B). This leaves many users questioning what is the best model
to use and whether common benchmark results apply to their specific needs [16]. Currently, the best
way to approach model selection is educated guessing, using LLM benchmarks as a proxy to estimate
model performance, or spending significant efforts to curate human-preference datasets for request
routing [18]. Since working with LLMs can be expensive [22], minimizing costs is an equally high
priority for end users and inference endpoint operators. This leaves us with the following tri-fold
problem.
End-users primarily care about a factually correct and safe model output. When inquiring about
text information, e.g., by asking questions or requesting language translation, end users are mostly
interested in obtaining factually correct and sufficiently clear language output [26]. Additionally,
many users are unfamiliar with the technical details of LLMs, making it challenging for them to
select the right model for the job, i.e., their primary references are domain-specific benchmark
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

