PoGDiff: Product-of-Gaussians Diffusion Models for
Imbalanced Text-to-Image Generation

Ziyan Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology
wzy@gatech.edu

Sizhe Wei
Georgia Institute of Technology
swei@gatech.edu

Xiaoming Huo
Georgia Institute of Technology
huo@gatech.edu

Hao Wang
Rutgers University
hw488@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have made significant advancements in recent years. However,
their performance often deteriorates when trained or fine-tuned on imbalanced
datasets. This degradation is largely due to the disproportionate representation of
majority and minority data in image-text pairs. In this paper, we propose a general
fine-tuning approach, dubbed PoGDiff, to address this challenge. Rather than
directly minimizing the KL divergence between the predicted and ground-truth
distributions, PoGDiff replaces the ground-truth distribution with a Product of
Gaussians (PoG), which is constructed by combining the original ground-truth
targets with the predicted distribution conditioned on a neighboring text embedding. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that our method effectively
addresses the imbalance problem in diffusion models, improving both generation
accuracy and quality.

1

Introduction

The development of diffusion models [1, 2] and their subsequent extensions [3–5] has significantly
advanced the learning of complex probability distributions across various data types, including
images [6–9], audio [10], and 3D biomedical imaging data [11–14]. For these generative models, the
amount of training data plays a critical role in determining both the accuracy of probability estimation
and the model’s ability to generalize, which enables effective extrapolation within the probability
space.
Data diversity and abundance are key to improving the generative capabilities of large-scale models,
enabling them to capture intricate details within a vast probability space [15–19]. However, many
data-driven modeling tasks often rely on small, imbalanced real-world datasets, leading to poor
generation quality, particularly for minority groups. For example, when training and fine-tuning a
diffusion model with an imbalanced dataset of individuals, existing models often struggle to generate
accurate images for those who appear less frequently in the training data (Fig. 1). This challenge
is further compounded when accuracy is prioritized over simply high resolution. For example,
generated images of individuals need to match the identity of at least one individual in the training
set (Fig. 1). Addressing this gap is crucial for deploying diffusion models in real-world applications
where correctness is paramount, such as personalized content generation or medical imaging.
This limitation is true even for finetuning large diffusion models pretrained on large-scale datasets like
LAION-5B [21], e.g., Stable Diffusion [7]. Imagine an imbalanced dataset consisting of employees
in a small company, senior employees might have more photos available, while new employees only
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

