Go With the Flow: Fast Diffusion for Gaussian
Mixture Models
George Rapakoulias 1 ∗

Ali Reza Pedram 1,2

Fengjiao Liu 3

Lingjiong Zhu 4

Panagiotis Tsiotras 1
1

Department of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
2
School of Computer Science, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
3
Department of ECE, FAMU-FSU College of Engineering, Tallahassee, FL
4
Department of Mathematics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL

Abstract
Schrödinger Bridges (SBs) are diffusion processes that steer, in finite time, a given
initial distribution to another final one while minimizing a suitable cost functional.
Although various methods for computing SBs have recently been proposed in the
literature, most of these approaches require computationally expensive training
schemes, even for solving low-dimensional problems. In this work, we propose
an analytic parametrization of a set of feasible policies for steering the distribution
of a dynamical system from one Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to another. Instead of relying on standard non-convex optimization techniques, the optimal policy within the set can be approximated as the solution of a low-dimensional linear
program whose dimension scales linearly with the number of components in each
mixture. The proposed method generalizes naturally to more general classes of
dynamical systems, such as controllable linear time-varying systems, enabling efficient solutions to multi-marginal momentum SBs between GMMs, a challenging
distribution interpolation problem. We showcase the potential of this approach in
low-to-moderate dimensional problems such as image-to-image translation in the
latent space of an autoencoder, learning of cellular dynamics using multi-marginal
momentum SBs, and various other examples. The implementation is publicly
available at https://github.com/georgeRapa/GMMflow.

1

Introduction and Background

The problem of finding mappings between distributions of data, originally known as the Optimal
Transport (OT) problem in mathematics, has received significant attention in recent years in multiple
research fields, due to its application in problems such as generative AI (Ruthotto & Haber, 2021;
Arjovsky et al., 2017), biology (Bunne et al., 2023b; Bunne & Rätsch, 2023; Tong et al., 2020),
mean field problems (Liu et al., 2022) and control theory (Chen et al., 2015a,b; Rapakoulias &
Tsiotras, 2024) among many others. Despite appearing static in nature, reformulating OT in the
context of dynamical systems imbues it with further structure and unlocks tools from the literature
on dynamical systems that can be employed for its efficient solution (Benamou & Brenier, 2000).
To set the stage, consider two distributions ρ0 , ρ1 , supported on the d-dimensional Euclidean space,
denoted by Rd , and consider the regularized version of the static OT optimization problem, known
as the Entropic Optimal Transport (EOT) problem (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019):
Z
1
∥x0 − x1 ∥2 dπ(x0 , x1 ) − ϵH(π),
(1)
min
π∈Π(ρ0 ,ρ1 ) Rd ×Rd 2
∗

Corresponding author: grap@gatech.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

