HM3: Hierarchical Multi-Objective Model Merging
for Pretrained Models
Yu Zhou1

Xingyu Wu1∗ Jibin Wu1,2 Liang Feng3 Kay Chen Tan1∗
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
zy-yu.zhou@connect.polyu.hk {xingy.wu, jibin.wu, kctan}@polyu.edu.hk
liangf@cqu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Model merging is a technique that combines multiple large pretrained models into
a single model, enhancing performance and broadening task adaptability without
original data or additional training. However, most existing model merging methods
focus primarily on exploring the parameter space, merging models with identical
architectures. Despite its potential, merging in the architecture space remains
in its early stages due to the vast search space and challenges related to layer
compatibility. This paper designs a hierarchical model merging framework named
HM3, formulating a bilevel multi-objective model merging problem across both
parameter and architecture spaces. At the parameter level, HM3 integrates existing
merging methods to quickly identify optimal parameters. Based on these, an actorcritic strategy with efficient policy discretization is employed at the architecture
level to explore inference paths with Markov property in the layer-granularity
search space for reconstructing these optimal models. By training reusable policy
and value networks, HM3 learns Pareto optimal models to provide customized
solutions for various tasks. Experimental results on language and vision tasks
demonstrate that HM3 outperforms methods focusing solely on the parameter or
architecture space.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large pretrained models and large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance and strong generalization abilities across various domains, such as
natural language processing [8, 84, 68]. Open-source communities have provided many pretrained
models for various data types, as well as fine-tuned versions tailored to specific tasks. However,
fine-tuning large models is often a complex process that requires vast amounts of high-quality data
and computational resources [28, 16]. To address the challenge of building foundational models
capable of handling diverse tasks under limited computational resources, model merging has gained
increasing attention [35, 77]. Model merging leverages existing pretrained models to flexibly transfer
and integrate knowledge without requiring the original training data or additional model training
[66, 48, 37]. This approach enables the creation of new models with stronger generalization capabilities, suited to multiple tasks and scenarios [73]. In recent years, model merging has become a simple
yet powerful approach for large foundational model development, with merged models showing
significant potential on the Open LLM leaderboard [44]. Current model merging methods primarily
focus on merging models with the same architecture in the parameter space [58, 57]. They discard
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

