Tracking and Understanding Object Transformations
Yihong Sun
Cornell University

Xinyu Yang
Cornell University

Jennifer J. Sun
Cornell University

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

Abstract
Real-world objects frequently undergo state transformations. From an apple being
cut into pieces to a butterfly emerging from its cocoon, tracking through these
changes is important for understanding real-world objects and dynamics. However,
existing methods often lose track of the target object after transformation, due to
significant changes in object appearance. To address this limitation, we introduce
the task of Track Any State: tracking objects through transformations while detecting and describing state changes, accompanied by a new benchmark dataset,
VOST-TAS. To tackle this problem, we present TubeletGraph, a zero-shot system
that recovers missing objects after transformation and maps out how object states
are evolving over time. TubeletGraph first identifies potentially overlooked tracks,
and determines whether they should be integrated based on semantic and proximity
priors. Then, it reasons about the added tracks and generates a state graph describing each observed transformation. TubeletGraph achieves state-of-the-art tracking
performance under transformations, while demonstrating deeper understanding of
object transformations and promising capabilities in temporal grounding and semantic reasoning for complex object transformations. Code, additional results, and
the benchmark dataset are available at https://tubelet-graph.github.io.

1

Introduction

As the Greek philosopher Heraclitus noted, nothing is permanent but change. All around us, objects
undergo transformations that can dramatically alter their appearance, geometry, and sometimes even
their identities. In nature, seeds give birth to plants, chicks emerge from eggs and a caterpillar
metamorphoses into a butterfly, while in our homes we slice apples and tomatoes, fold clothes and
build up chairs from pieces of wood (Figure 1). Understanding and tracking these transformations
is important for modern vision systems. For instance, embodied agents like kitchen robots need
to understand object pre- and post-conditions (such as the locations of sliced pieces of apples) to
ground actions [22]. As another example, wildlife monitoring systems must recognize and keep
track of the the butterflies emerging out of their chrysalis to keep tabs on the insect population.
More generally, understanding and tracking object transformations can improve capabilities in
action-grounding [36, 50], video editing [24], and scene modeling for augmented reality [56].
With these motivations in mind, we seek a system that, given a video and a prompt specifying a
particular object, maps out how the object evolves over time, detects state changes, and tracks the
resulting objects of these changes. We call this problem Track Any State. We observe that this is
a strictly harder problem than object tracking on the one hand (which does not care about object
transformations) and recognizing state change on the other (which does not track the change pre- and
post-conditions in space and time). Combining tracking with state change produces a more complete
representation that is useful for downstream tasks (Figure 1, bottom).
However, even the simpler problem of tracking objects through state transformations is challenging
for existing methods. Object trackers of all kinds (be they based on template matching [18], optical
flow [40], or supervised neural networks [35]) rely primarily on objects appearance, assuming that
they do not change drastically across time. However, as shown in Figure 1, transformations or state
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

