AdaptGrad: Adaptive Sampling to Reduce Noise

1

Linjiang Zhou1 Chao Ma2 Zepeng Wang2 Libing Wu2 Xiaochuan Shi2∗
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
{linjiang, chaoma, wangzepeng, wu, shixiaochuan}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Gradient smoothing is an efficient approach to reducing noise in gradient-based
model explanation methods. SmoothGrad adds Gaussian noise to mitigate much
of this noise. However, the crucial hyperparameter in this method, the variance
σ of the Gaussian noise, is often set manually or determined using a heuristic
approach. This results in the smoothed gradients containing extra noise introduced
by the smoothing process. In this paper, we aim to analyze the noise and its
connection to the out-of-range sampling in the smoothing process of SmoothGrad.
Based on this insight, we propose AdaptGrad, an adaptive gradient smoothing
method that controls out-of-range sampling to minimize noise. Comprehensive
experiments, both qualitative and quantitative, demonstrate that AdaptGrad could
effectively reduce almost all the noise in vanilla gradients compared to baseline
methods. AdaptGrad is simple and universal, making it a practical solution to
enhance gradient-based interpretability methods to achieve clearer visualization.
All code would be found in https://github.com/AiShare-WHU/AdaptGrad.

1

Introduction

Explanation of the deep learning model is a critical part of applications of artificial intelligence
(AI) with human interaction. For example, explanation methods are crucial in these data-sensitive
and decision-sensitive fields such as medical image analysis [4], financial data analysis [55] and
autonomous driving [1]. Additionally, given the prevalence of personal data protection laws in most
countries and regions, fully black-box AI models may face intense legal scrutiny [14].
In recent years, some explanation methods have attempted to explain neural network decisions by
visualizing the decision rationale and feature importance [31]. These local explanation techniques aim
to provide explanations for individual samples. Moreover, the explanation process of these methods
often leverages the gradients of the neural network. For example, Grad-CAM [35], Grad-CAM++
[11], and Score-CAM [46] use gradients to generate the weights of class activation maps.
Gradients of input samples are critical information for analyzing deep neural networks [41]. However,
these gradients often contain a significant amount of noise, primarily due to the complex structure
and numerous parameters in neural networks [30]. As highlighted in [2, 25, 51], this noise can
significantly affect the ability of explanation methods to extract latent learning features. Furthermore,
caused by both local noise and gradient saturation, sample gradients may fail to accurately explain
the influence of input values on model decisions [42]. Therefore, reducing the noise in gradients is an
important step toward improving the interpretability of deep learning models.
∗

Linjiang Zhou and Chao Ma contribute equally to this work. Xiaochuan Shi is the corresponding author of
this paper.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

