Diffusion Guided Adversarial State Perturbations in
Reinforcement Learning
Xiaolin Sun1 , Feidi Liu2 , Zhengming Ding1 , and Zizhan Zheng1
1
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
Shanghai Center for Mathematical Science, Fudan University
{xsun12,zding1,zzheng3}@tulane.edu, fdliu23@m.fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) systems, while achieving remarkable success across
various domains, are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. This is especially a concern
in vision-based environments where minor manipulations of high-dimensional
image inputs can easily mislead the agent’s behavior. To this end, various defenses have been proposed recently, with state-of-the-art approaches achieving
robust performance even under large state perturbations. However, after closer
investigation, we found that the effectiveness of the current defenses is due to
a fundamental weakness of the existing lp norm-constrained attacks, which can
barely alter the semantics of image input even under a relatively large perturbation
budget. In this work, we propose SHIFT, a novel policy-agnostic diffusion-based
state perturbation attack to go beyond this limitation. Our attack is able to generate
perturbed states that are semantically different from the true states while remaining
realistic and history-aligned to avoid detection. Evaluations show that our attack
effectively breaks existing defenses, including the most sophisticated ones, significantly outperforming existing attacks while being more perceptually stealthy.
The results highlight the vulnerability of RL agents to semantics-aware adversarial
perturbations, indicating the importance of developing more robust policies. Our
code can be found at this GitHub Repo.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen significant advancements in recent years, becoming a key
area of machine learning. RL’s ability to enable agents to learn optimal decision-making policies
through interaction with dynamic environments have led to breakthroughs in various fields. Beginning
from AlphaGo [44], RL-based systems show the ability to surpass human performance in complex
games. Beyond gaming, RL is driving innovations in robotics, self-driving cars [30], and industrial
automation, where agents learn to navigate, manipulate, and interact autonomously.
However, RL is vulnerable to various types of attacks, such as reward and state perturbations, action
space manipulations, and model inference and poisoning [26]. Recent studies have shown that an
RL agent can be manipulated by perturbing its observation [24, 60] and reward signals [25], and a
well-trained RL agent can be confounded by a malicious opponent behaving unexpectedly [17]. In
particular, a malicious agent can subtly manipulate the observations of a trained RL agent, resulting in
a significant drop in performance and cumulative reward [60, 47]. Such attacks exploit vulnerabilities
in the agent’s perception systems, including sensors and communication channels, without needing
to cause obvious disruptions. This susceptibility to minor perturbations raises major concerns,
particularly for RL applications in security-sensitive and safety-critical environments.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

