Global Prompt Refinement with Non-Interfering
Attention Masking for One-Shot Federated Learning

Zhuang Qi1 , Yu Pan1 , Lei Meng1,∗, Sijin Zhou2 , Han Yu3 , Xiaoxiao Li4,5 , Xiangxu Meng1
1
School of Software, Shandong University, China
2
AIM Lab, Faculty of Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Canada
5
Vector Institute, Canada
z_qi@mail.sdu.edu.cn, 202100300334@mail.sdu.edu.cn, lmeng@sdu.edu.cn,
sjzhou1995@gmail.com,han.yu@ntu.edu.sg, xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca, mxx@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Prompt Learning (FPL) enables communication-efficient adaptation by
tuning lightweight prompts on top of frozen pre-trained models. Existing FPL
methods typically rely on global information, which is only available after the
second training round, to facilitate collaboration among client models. Therefore,
they are inherently dependent on multi-round communication to fully exhibit their
strengths. Moreover, existing one-shot federated learning methods typically focus
on fitting seen tasks, but lack cross-task generalization. To bridge this gap, we
propose the Global Prompt Refinement with Non-Interfering Attention Masking
(GPR-NIAM) method for one-shot FPL. The core idea is to design a masking mechanism that restricts excessive interaction between the original text embeddings
and the learnable prompt embeddings. GPR-NIAM achieves this through the collaboration of two key modules. Firstly, the attention isolation module suppresses
attention from the learnable prompt tokens to the original text tokens, and reweights
the reverse attention which preserves generalization across tasks. Secondly, the
cross-silo collaborative refinement module integrates decentralized visual knowledge into a unified base and calibrates the global prompt through multi-source
cross-modal knowledge alignment, further mitigating the inconsistency caused by
data heterogeneity. Extensive experiments conducted on ten benchmark datasets
under two tasks show that GPR-NIAM outperforms eight state-of-the-art methods in
both class-level and domain-level generalization.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative modeling across data sources in a privacy-preserving
manner, which has gained traction across multiple domains [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. It learns global knowledge
by aggregating model weights or gradients instead of moving data to a central entity [6, 7, 8, 9].
Recently, Federated Prompt Learning (FPL) has emerged to support parameter-efficient fine-tuning
in this setting. It not only leverages pre-trained models (e.g., CLIP [10]) more effectively, but also
reduces communication overhead between FL clients and the FL server by transmitting only learnable
prompts [11, 12, 13, 14]. However, heterogeneous data distributions across clients often degrade
model aggregation performance and slow down convergence [15, 16]. This is because significant
differences in the update directions across local models can cause conflicts during aggregation
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

