Differentially Private Bilevel Optimization: Efficient
Algorithms with Near-Optimal Rates

Andrew Lowy∗
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
lowy.andrew1@gmail.com

Daogao Liu
Google Research
liudaogao@gmail.com

Abstract
Bilevel optimization, in which one optimization problem is nested inside another,
underlies many machine learning applications with a hierarchical structure—such
as meta-learning and hyperparameter optimization. Such applications often involve sensitive training data, raising pressing concerns about individual privacy.
Motivated by this, we study differentially private bilevel optimization. We first
focus on settings where the outer-level objective is convex, and provide novel upper
and lower bounds on the excess empirical risk for both pure and approximate
differential privacy. These bounds are nearly tight and essentially match the optimal rates for standard single-level differentially private ERM, up to additional
terms that capture the intrinsic complexity of the nested bilevel structure. We also
provide population loss bounds for bilevel stochastic optimization. The bounds
are achieved in polynomial time via efficient implementations of the exponential
and regularized exponential mechanisms. A key technical contribution is a new
method and analysis of log-concave sampling under inexact function evaluations,
which may be of independent interest. In the non-convex setting, we develop novel
algorithms with state-of-the-art rates for privately finding approximate stationary
points. Notably, our bounds do not depend on the dimension of the inner problem.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization has emerged as a key tool for solving hierarchical learning and decision-making
problems across machine learning and beyond. In a bilevel optimization problem, one task (the
upper-level problem) is constrained by the solution to another optimization problem (the lower-level
problem). This nested structure arises naturally in a variety of settings, including meta-learning [43],
hyperparameter optimization and model selection [21, 29], reinforcement learning [27], adversarial
training [49], and game theory [47], where the solution to one problem depends implicitly on the
outcome of another. Formally, a bilevel problem can be written as:
(
)
min Φ(x) := F (x, y ∗ (x))

x∈X

(1)

s.t. y ∗ (x) ∈ argminy∈Rdy G(x, y),
where x and y are the upper- and lower-level variables respectively, F is the upper-level objective, G
is the lower-level objective, X ⊂ Rdx is a domain. Solving (1) is challenging due to the dependency
of y ∗ (x) on x. The study of algorithms and complexities for solving (1) has received a lot of attention
from the optimization and ML communities in recent years [23, 30, 10, 16, 20, 39, 31, 33, 34, 14].
∗
Authors listed in reverse alphabetical order. Part of this work was completed while the first author was at
University of Wisconsin-Madison.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

