Stepsize Anything: A Unified Learning Rate Schedule
for Budgeted-Iteration Training

1

Anda Tang1
Yiming Dong1∗ Yutao Zeng2 Xun Zhou2 Zhouchen Lin1,3,4†
State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
ByteDance Seed
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
tanganda@pku.edu.cn, yimingdong ml@outlook.com,
yutao.zeng@outlook.com, zhouxun@bytedance.com, zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The expanding computational costs and limited resources underscore the critical need for budgeted-iteration training, which aims to achieve optimal learning
within predetermined iteration budgets. While learning rate schedules fundamentally govern the performance of different networks and tasks, particularly in
budgeted-iteration scenarios, their design remains largely heuristic, lacking theoretical foundations. In addition, the optimal learning rate schedule requires extensive
trial-and-error selection, making the training process inefficient. In this work,
we propose the Unified Budget-Aware (UBA) schedule, a theoretically grounded
learning rate schedule that consistently outperforms commonly-used schedules
among diverse architectures and tasks under different constrained training budgets.
First, we bridge the gap by constructing a novel training budget-aware optimization
framework, which explicitly accounts for the robustness to landscape curvature
variations. From this framework, we derive the UBA schedule, controlled by a
single hyper-parameter φ that provides a trade-off between flexibility and simplicity, eliminating the need for per-network numerical optimization. Moreover, we
establish a theoretical connection between φ and the condition number, adding
interpretation and justification to our approach. Besides, we prove the convergence
for different values of φ. We offer practical guidelines for its selection via theoretical analysis and empirical results. Extensive experimental results show that UBA
consistently surpasses the commonly-used schedules across diverse vision and
language tasks, spanning network architectures (e.g., ResNet, OLMo) and scales,
under different training-iteration budgets.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success across a wide range of domains, including computer
vision and natural language processing. However, despite continual advancements in hardware
technologies [45, 53], the training cost of neural networks has increased dramatically due to the
growing scale of models and datasets [4, 8, 47, 48]. As a result, resource constraints, including
computational power, memory, energy consumption, and time budgets, are emerging as significant
bottlenecks in the training process [41, 58]. These challenges highlight the pressing need for budgeted
training, which aims to achieve optimal model performance under fixed hardware and limited time.
∗
†

Work was done during an internship at ByteDance Seed.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

