Stochastic Process Learning via Operator Flow
Matching

Yaozhong Shi
California Institute of Technology
yshi5@caltech.edu

Zachary E. Ross
California Institute of Technology
zross@caltech.edu

Domniki Asimaki
California Institute of Technology
domniki@caltech.edu

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli
NVIDIA Corporation
kaazizzad@gmail.com

Abstract
Expanding on neural operators, we propose a novel framework for stochastic
process learning across arbitrary domains. In particular, we develop operator flow
matching (OFM) for learning stochastic process priors on function spaces. OFM
provides the probability density of the values of any collection of points and enables
mathematically tractable functional regression at new points with mean and density
estimation. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art models in stochastic process
learning, functional regression, and prior learning.

1

Introduction

Stochastic processes are foundational to many domains, from functional regression and physicsbased data assimilation, to financial markets, geophysics, and black box optimization. Stochastic
processes can serve as prior distributions over functions and can provide the density of any finite
collection of points. Conventionally, these priors are designed by hand from predefined Gaussian
processes (GP) and their variants, and therefore assume that they adequately describe the phenomena
of interest. However, many processes modeled in the natural world are not well described by GP,
Fig 2. Such models limit the flexibility and generalizability of these stochastic processes in real-world
applications, leaving behind significant challenges for more general stochastic process learning (SPL).
In SPL, the prior over the stochastic process is learned from data, i.e., a set of historical point
evaluations in past experiments. Learning the prior over the process is crucial for universal functional
regression (UFR), which is a recently proposed Bayesian scheme for functional regression and takes
GP-regression as a special case when the prior is Gaussian [1]. UFR is important to scientific and
engineering domains, including reanalysis, data completion-assimilation, uncertainty quantification,
and black box optimization.
In this paper, we introduce a novel operator learning framework termed operator flow matching
(OFM) for learning priors over stochastic processes through the joint distribution of any collection of
points. To achieve this, we theoretically and empirically generalize marginal optimal transport flow
matching [2] to infinite-dimensional function spaces where we map a GP into a prior over function
spaces through a flow differential equation. We then derive SPL from the function space derivation
and learn a prior over arbitrary sets of points. For SPL, we map any collection of pointwise evaluations
of a GP to pointwise evaluations of target functions. This allows us to learn prior distributions over
more general stochastic processes, hence enabling sampling values of any collection of points with
their associated density and facilitating efficient UFR. We leverage this capability by extending
neural operators [3]–designed initially to map functions between infinite-dimensional spaces–to maps
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

