Provable Gradient Editing of Deep Neural Networks

Aditya V. Thakur
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616, USA
avthakur@ucdavis.edu

Zhe Tao
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616, USA
zhetao@ucdavis.edu
zhe@zhe-tao.com

Abstract
In explainable AI, DNN gradients are used to interpret the prediction; in safetycritical control systems, gradients could encode safety constraints; in scientificcomputing applications, gradients could encode physical invariants. While recent
work on provable editing of DNNs has focused on input-output constraints, the
problem of enforcing hard constraints on DNN gradients remains unaddressed. We
present ProGrad, the first efficient approach for editing the parameters of a DNN to
provably enforce hard constraints on the DNN gradients. Given a DNN N with parameters θ, and a set S of pairs (x , Q) of input x and corresponding linear gradient
V
∂
constraints Q, ProGrad finds new parameters θb such that (x ,Q)∈S ∂x
N(x ; θb) ∈ Q
while minimizing the changes ∥θb − θ∥. The key contribution is a novel conditional variable gradient of DNNs, which relaxes the NP-hard provable gradient
editing problem to a linear program (LP), enabling ProGrad to use an LP solver
to efficiently and effectively enforce the gradient constraints. We experimentally
evaluated ProGrad via enforcing (i) hard Grad-CAM constraints on I MAGE N ET
ResNet DNNs; (ii) hard Integrated Gradients constraints on Llama 3 and Qwen 3
LLMs; (iii) hard gradient constraints in training a function-approximation DNN as
a proxy for safety constraints in control systems and physical invariants in scientific
applications. The results highlight the unique capability of ProGrad in enforcing
hard constraints on DNN gradients.

1

Introduction

Incorporating constraints into deep neural networks (DNNs) can enable learning with less data
(e.g., in scientific domains) and provide guarantees about their behavior (e.g., in safety-critical
applications). This has led to many recent works on provable editing of DNNs [41, 40], which
enforce hard constraints on input-output behavior of DNNs. However, the problem of enforcing hard
constraints on the gradients of DNNs remains unaddressed. This paper presents ProGrad, which
addresses the provable gradient editing problem defined below:

Definition 1.1. Given a DNN N : Rn → Rm with parameters θ, a set S ⊆ x | x ∈ Rn ×

def 
Q | Q ⊆ Rm×n of pairs (x , Q), where x ∈ Rn is an input and Q = J ∈ Rm×n | A vec(J ) ≤ b
∂
is the corresponding linear constraints on the Jacobian ∂x
N(x ; θb) ∈ Rm×n of the DNN N with
respect to the input x , we use vec(J ) to denote the Jacobian matrix J flattened as a vector. The
provable gradient editing problem is to find new parameters θb such that
min ∥θb − θ∥

s.t.

^
(x ,Q)∈S

∂
N(x ; θb) ∈ Q
∂x

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

(1) ■

