Federated Continual Learning via Orchestrating
Multi-Scale Expertise

Xiaoyang Yi1,3,4
Yang Liu2
Binhan Yang2
Jian Zhang1,2,3,4,∗
1
College of Cryptology and Cyber Science, Nankai University, China
2
College of Computer Science, Nankai University, China
3
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Network and Data Security Technology, Tianjin, China
4
Key Laboratory of Data and Intelligent System Security, Ministry of Education, Tianjin, China
{xiaoyangyi, liuyang99. yangbinhan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn
zhang.jian@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated continual learning (FCL) aims to maintain the model’s performance on
old tasks (i.e., stability) while enhancing its ability to acquire knowledge from
current tasks (i.e., plasticity). With the development of pre-trained models (PTMs),
fine-tuning PTMs on clients has become a promising approach to leveraging their
extensive knowledge in FCL. In this paper, we propose MultiFCL, a novel FCL
framework that fine-tunes PTMs to adapt to FCL while preserving their strong generalization capabilities. Specifically, to ensure the stability, MultiFCL introduces
lightweight adapters for task adaption, which are subsequently frozen to prevent
catastrophic forgetting. Moreover, by utilizing the semantic features of old tasks,
MultiFCL performs multi-modal initialization of new task class prototypes. To
enhance the plasticity, MultiFCL employs a multi-expert training mechanism that
integrates multi-scale feature learning with multi-teacher dynamic self-distillation.
Through intra-client and inter-client expert communication, MultiFCL facilitates
cross-task and cross-client knowledge fusion. Experimental results demonstrate
that MultiFCL achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple datasets and
settings, showcasing its effectiveness in FCL scenarios.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning paradigm that allows clients to collaboratively train models without sharing sensitive data (McMahan et al., 2017). In recent years, FL has
gained significant attention across various domains, such as healthcare (Yang et al., 2021; Ogier du
Terrail et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024b; Xie et al., 2024) and the internet of things (IoT) (Nguyen
et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2024a; Jia et al., 2024). Traditional FL approaches typically
assume that client data distributions do not change over time. However, this assumption is unrealistic
in practical applications, as client data usually evolves continuously (Ma et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2024).
For example, healthcare models must adapt to emerging diseases and their variants (Babakniya et al.,
2023), while IoT models need to keep pace with changes in user behaviors (Zhang et al., 2024). When
there are such shifts in data distributions, directly retraining existing models on new data can lead
to catastrophic forgetting (Smith et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024b), which significantly
impairs the model’s performance on previously learned tasks.
To address this, federated continual learning (FCL) integrates continual learning (CL) techniques into
FL (Yoon et al., 2021), aiming to seek a balance between stability (i.e., maintaining performance on
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

