ThinkSound: Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in
Multimodal Large Language Models for Audio
Generation and Editing

Huadai Liu1,2 , Kaicheng Luo2 , Jialei Wang3 , Wen Wang2
Qian Chen2 , Zhou Zhao3 , Wei Xue1 ∗
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
2
Tongyi Fun Team, Alibaba Group 3 Zhejiang University

Abstract
While end-to-end video-to-audio generation has greatly improved, producing highfidelity audio that authentically captures the nuances of visual content remains
challenging. Like professionals in the creative industries, this generation requires
sophisticated reasoning about items such as visual dynamics, acoustic environments,
and temporal relationships. We present ThinkSound, a novel framework that
leverages Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning to enable stepwise, interactive audio
generation and editing for videos. Our approach decomposes the process into three
complementary stages: foundational foley generation that creates semantically
coherent soundscapes, interactive object-centric refinement through precise user
interactions, and targeted editing guided by natural language instructions. At each
stage, a multimodal large language model generates contextually aligned CoT
reasoning that guides a unified audio foundation model. Furthermore, we introduce
AudioCoT, a comprehensive dataset with structured reasoning annotations that
establishes connections between visual content, textual descriptions, and sound
synthesis. Experiments demonstrate that ThinkSound achieves state-of-the-art
performance in video-to-audio generation across both audio metrics and CoT
metrics, and excels in the out-of-distribution Movie Gen Audio benchmark. The
project page is available at https://ThinkSound-Project.github.io.

1

Introduction

Traditional VT2A

Frame t1
The owl perches on the branch
with sound of chirping

Model

Generating realistic sound for video demands more
than recognizing objects; it requires reasoning about
complex visual dynamics and context – determining
when an owl is chirping versus flapping its wings,
identifying the subtle sway of tree branches, and synchronizing multiple sound events within a scene, as
illustrated in Figure 1. Current end-to-end video-toaudio (V2A) generation systems (Luo et al., 2024;
Xing et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), while having
largely improved, often struggle with this compositional complexity and contextual nuance. They may
produce generic sounds or fail to synchronize pre- Figure 1: ThinkSound with CoT: (1) CoTcisely with subtle visual cues, thus limiting fidelity driven foley synthesis captures semantic and
and user control.
temporal details (2) interactive object-centric
refinement for control (3) targeted editing.
∗

…

Video frames

Frame t2
The owl is ready to leave
with sound of flapping wings

…

Frame t3
The owl takes off
from the branch.
with sound of flapping wings
and swaying tree

Target:
1. Audio matching the temporal
information and subtle details
2. Allowing users optimize the audio step
by step with multimodal instruction

Prompt: The owl is chirping

temporal information ❌
complex audio details ❌

Unified Model

Video frames

CoT: Generate audio as follows
start with owl chirping
then it flaps its wings to fly away
which causes the trees to sway

Grounded-SAM-2
with user’s click prompt

Audio stage1

temporal information ✔
complex audio details ✔

Unified Model

Roi frames

Audio stage1

CoT: extract the sound emitted
by the owl , avoid introducing
the sound of the trees according
to the audio and video
Audio stage2 (Optional)

Unified Model

CoT: add more other birds’ chirp,

Audio stage1/2 maintain the original features of
the chirping owl.

Audio stage3 (Optional)

Interactive Step-by-step Generation and Editing

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

