PlayerOne: Egocentric World Simulator

Yuanpeng Tu1,2 ∗ Hao Luo2,3 Xi Chen1 Xiang Bai4 Fan Wang2
1
HKU 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Hupan Lab
https://playerone.github.io

First Frames

Human Motion Sequences

4

Hengshuang Zhao1,†
HUST

Simulated Videos

Figure 1: Simulated videos of our PlayerOne. Given an egocentric image as the scene to be explored, we can
simulate egocentric immersive videos that are accurately aligned with the user’s motion sequence captured by an
exocentric camera. All the users have been anonymized and action videos are shot with the front camera.

Abstract
We introduce PlayerOne, the first egocentric realistic world simulator, facilitating immersive and unrestricted exploration within vividly dynamic environments.
Given an egocentric scene image from the user, PlayerOne can accurately construct
the corresponding world and generate egocentric videos that are strictly aligned
with the real-scene human motion of the user captured by an exocentric camera.
PlayerOne is trained in a coarse-to-fine pipeline that first performs pretraining
on large-scale egocentric text-video pairs for coarse-level egocentric understanding, followed by finetuning on synchronous motion-video data extracted from
egocentric-exocentric video datasets with our automatic construction pipeline. Besides, considering the varying importance of different components, we design a
part-disentangled motion injection scheme, enabling precise control of part-level
movements. In addition, we devise a joint reconstruction framework that progressively models both the 4D scene and video frames, ensuring scene consistency
in the long-form video generation. Experimental results demonstrate its great
generalization ability in precise control of varying human movements and worldconsistent modeling of diverse scenarios. It marks the first endeavor into egocentric
real-world simulation and can pave the way for the community to delve into fresh
frontiers of world modeling and its diverse applications.
∗

Work during DAMO Academy internship. † Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

