Split Conformal Classification with
Unsupervised Calibration

Santiago Mazuelas
BCAM-Basque Center for Applied Mathematics and
IKERBASQUE-Basque Foundation for Science
Bilbao, Spain
smazuelas@bcamath.org

Abstract
Methods for split conformal prediction leverage calibration samples to transform
any prediction rule into a set-prediction rule that complies with a target coverage
probability. Existing methods provide remarkably strong performance guarantees
with minimal computational costs. However, they require the use calibration samples composed by labeled examples different to those used for training. This
requirement can be highly inconvenient, as it prevents the use of all labeled examples for training and may require acquiring additional labels solely for calibration. This paper presents an effective methodology for split conformal prediction
with unsupervised calibration for classification tasks. In the proposed approach,
set-prediction rules are obtained using unsupervised calibration samples together
with supervised training samples previously used to learn the classification rule.
Theoretical and experimental results show that the presented methods can achieve
performance comparable to that with supervised calibration, at the expenses of a
moderate degradation in performance guarantees and computational efficiency.

1 Introduction
Conformal prediction methods can significantly increase the reliability of machine learning techniques by providing prediction sets that contain the true response (class) with a coverage probability
that can be chosen in advance (see e.g., [1–3]). In particular, methods for split (aka inductive)
conformal prediction [2, 4] are particularly convenient since they can transform any prediction rule
(possibly highly unreliable) into a set-prediction rule that complies with a target coverage probability. In these methods, the set-prediction rule is obtained using a fresh set of examples referred to as
calibration samples. Existing methods for split conformal prediction provide remarkably strong performance guarantees with minimal computational costs. For general data distributions, they ensure a
small coverage gap between the actual and target coverage probabilities. In addition, these methods
only require to compute an empirical quantile from the calibration samples, which can be carried
out with quasilinear complexity and negligible running time in practice. While conformal prediction has been developed for both classification and regression tasks, this paper focuses exclusively on
classification problems, in line with other works for conformal prediction using weakly-supervised
data [5, 6].
Conventional methods for split conformal prediction require the use supervised calibration samples
composed by accurately labeled examples. This requirement forces to either leave aside a portion
of labeled examples during the training phase or to acquire new labels solely for calibration. Both
cases are problematic, the use of fewer samples for training can increase classification error, and
the acquisition of new labeled examples is often costly. It is worth highlighting that obtaining new
labels after the training phase may be even unfeasible in certain practical scenarios, including cases
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

