Distributional LLM-as-a-Judge

Luyu Chen1∗ , Zeyu Zhang1∗ , Haoran Tan1∗ , Quanyu Dai2 ,
Hao Yang1∗ , Zhenhua Dong2 , Xu Chen1†∗
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{luyu.chen,xu.chen}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
LLMs have emerged as powerful evaluators in the LLM-as-a-Judge paradigm,
offering significant efficiency and flexibility compared to human judgments. However, previous methods primarily rely on single-point evaluations, overlooking
the inherent diversity and uncertainty in human evaluations. This approach leads
to information loss and decreases the reliability of evaluations. To address this
limitation, we propose a novel training framework that explicitly aligns the LLMgenerated judgment distribution with human evaluation distributions. Specifically,
we propose a distributional alignment objective based on KL divergence, combined
with an auxiliary cross-entropy regularization to stabilize the training process.
Furthermore, due to limited human annotations, empirical human distributions are
merely noisy estimates of the true underlying distribution. We therefore incorporate adversarial training to ensure a robust alignment with this true distribution,
rather than overfitting to its imperfect approximation. Extensive experiments across
various LLM backbones and evaluation tasks demonstrate that our framework
significantly outperforms existing closed-source LLMs and conventional singlepoint alignment methods, with superior alignment quality, strong robustness, and
competitive evaluation accuracy.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable progress across various
tasks, such as natural language understanding [1, 2], reasoning [3–5], and evaluation [6, 7]. One
of their most significant applications is for automatic judgment, which employs LLMs to evaluate
specific targets based on predefined criteria or instructions [8, 9]. This LLM-as-a-Judge paradigm
offers significant advantages in efficiency and flexibility due to its capability to efficiently handle
large-scale data and adapt to diverse evaluation tasks. Therefore, using LLMs as judges has emerged
as a promising alternative to conventional human evaluations [10].
Most previous works adopt single-point judgment with LLMs, which just outputs a single result for
each sample [11–13]. Although this paradigm is straightforward, it overlooks the inherent diversity of
human evaluations. In real-world scenarios, human evaluations are rarely deterministic. Instead, they
follow a distribution that encodes valuable signals like the level of consensus and controversy. [14, 15].
Therefore, replacing this distributional human evaluations with a single-point LLM judgment may
cause information loss [15], which limits the comprehensiveness and reliability of evaluations. This
limitation is particularly critical in high-stakes domains like medical diagnosis or policy-making,
where reliance on a single prediction is inherently risky and unreliable [16].
In order to empower LLM judgment with the diversity and uncertainty of human evaluations, an
intuitive approach is to generate a judgment distribution based on LLMs. Although LLMs can
†
∗

Corresponding author.
Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance,
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

