Direct Alignment with Heterogeneous Preferences

Ali Shirali∗
UC Berkeley

Arash Nasr-Esfahany*
MIT

Abdullah Alomar
MIT & Ikigai Labs

Parsa Mirtaheri
UC San Diego

Rediet Abebe†
ELLIS Institute, MPI for Intelligent Systems, & Tübingen AI Center

Ariel Procaccia†
Harvard University

Abstract
Alignment with human preferences is commonly framed using a universal reward
function, even though human preferences are inherently heterogeneous. We formalize this heterogeneity by introducing user types and examine the limits of the
homogeneity assumption. We show that aligning to heterogeneous preferences
with a single policy is best achieved using the average reward across user types.
However, this requires additional information about annotators. We examine improvements under different information settings, focusing on direct alignment
methods. We find that minimal information can yield first-order improvements,
while full feedback from each user type leads to consistent learning of the optimal
policy. Surprisingly, however, no sample-efficient consistent direct loss exists in
this latter setting. These results reveal a fundamental tension between consistency
and sample efficiency in direct policy alignment.

1

Introduction

Human rewards and preferences are heterogeneous [1–5]. Despite this, learning from preference
data often bypasses this insight, relying on what we dub the preference homogeneity assumption.
This tension in assumptions is readily apparent in standard human-AI alignment methods—such
as reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [6–9] and direct preference optimization
(DPO) [10]—which assume a single reward function captures the interests of the entire population.
We study a heterogeneous population in which individuals belong to distinct user types, each defined
by its own reward function. Two main approaches address this setting [11]: personalizing policies
for each user type [12–17], or aggregating diverse rewards into a single objective and deploying
a universal policy [18, 19]. Our focus is on the latter, which is necessary when user types are
unobservable at inference time [20] or when the cost of maintaining specialized models is prohibitive.
A universal policy is also preferable when personalization undermines core values—such as truth or
safety—that benefit from broad consensus [21, 22].
One may notice that standard methods based on the preference homogeneity assumption implicitly
aggregate rewards. However, such aggregation can be undesirable or counterintuitive, leading to
unexpected behavior [23–25], as learning from heterogeneous preferences becomes unrealizable: A
single reward cannot capture the complexity of population preferences with multiple rewards [26, 11].
In the quest for a single policy that accommodates a heterogeneous population, we show that the only
aggregation of rewards across user types that yields a well-defined alignment problem is an affine
aggregation, with the average reward emerging as a natural choice. However, standard methods like
DPO do not maximize this user-weighted average reward. Building on insights by Siththaranjan et al.
∗
†

AS and AN contributed equally. AS conducted this work while visiting Harvard.
Equal advising

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

