Rethinking the Role of Verbatim Memorization in
LLM Privacy

Tom Sander∗
Meta FAIR
Mark Ibrahim
Meta FAIR

Bargav Jayaraman∗
Oracle Labs
Chuan Guo
Meta FAIR

Kamalika Chaudhuri
Meta FAIR

Abstract
Conventional wisdom in machine learning privacy research states that memorization directly implies a loss of privacy. In contrast, a well-generalized model only
remembers distributional patterns and preserves privacy of its training data. In
this work, we show that this relationship is much more complex for LLMs trained
for chat, and depends heavily on how knowledge is encoded and manipulated. To
this end, we fine-tune language models on synthetically generated biographical
information including PIIs, and try to extract them in different ways after instruction fine-tuning. We find counter to conventional wisdom that better verbatim
memorization does not necessarily increase data leakage via chat. We also find
that it is easier to extract information via chat from an LLM that is better able to
manipulate and process knowledge even if it is smaller, and that not all attributes
are equally extractable. This suggests that the relationship between privacy, memorization and language understanding of LLMs is very intricate, and that examining
memorization in isolation can lead to misleading conclusions.

1

Introduction

A large body of literature in machine learning privacy has studied the loss of privacy issue through
the lens of data memorization. If a model memorizes its training data, then this information can
possibly be extracted or inferred, leading to loss of privacy for people whose data was used in training.
In contrast, a well-generalized model only remembers distributional patterns and not individual
information. This argument has formed the basis of a number of empirical privacy tests, such as
membership inference (Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2021a), attribute inference (Fredrikson et al.,
2014; Jayaraman & Evans, 2019; Meehan et al., 2024) and training data extraction (Carlini et al.,
2019, 2021b). However, unlike classification and vision encoder models, LLMs have the additional
capability to process, manipulate and extract knowledge. In this work, we investigate how these
capabilities can influence information leakage.
Indeed, LLMs are known to memorize data, and the likelihood of verbatim memorization increases
with text repetition and model size (Carlini et al., 2021b). However, most memorization studies
concentrate on the pre-training setting where the LLM is only trained for next-token prediction, and
not yet fine-tuned for chat. To extract memorized training data from the model, adversaries prompt
them with the beginnings of paragraphs (Carlini et al., 2019, 2022) or rephrased versions (Ippolito
et al., 2022) to recover verbatim the rest of the paragraph. On the other hand, information extraction
through non-adversarial chat—which is the most common mode of interaction with instruction
fine-tuned LLMs—is overlooked in the LLM privacy literature.
∗

Core technical team (work done while Bargav was at FAIR). Correspondence at tomsander@meta.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

