Implicit Bias of Spectral Descent and Muon
on Multiclass Separable Data

Chen Fan
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Mark Schmidt
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Canada CIFAR AI Chair (Amii)

Christos Thrampoulidis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia

Abstract
Different gradient-based methods for optimizing overparameterized models can all
achieve zero training error yet converge to distinctly different solutions inducing
different generalization properties. We provide the first complete characterization
of implicit optimization bias for p-norm normalized steepest descent (NSD) and
momentum steepest descent (NMD) algorithms in multi-class linear classification
with cross-entropy loss. Our key theoretical contribution is proving that these algorithms converge to solutions maximizing the margin with respect to the classifier
matrix’s p-norm, with established convergence rates. These results encompass
important special cases including Spectral Descent and Muon, which we show
converge to max-margin solutions with respect to the spectral norm. A key insight
of our contribution is that the analysis of general entry-wise and Schatten p-norms
can be reduced to the analysis of NSD/NMD with max-norm by exploiting a natural
ordering property between all p-norms relative to the max-norm and its dual sumnorm. For the specific case of descent with respect to the max-norm, we further
extend our analysis to include preconditioning, showing that Adam converges
to the matrix’s max-norm solution. Our results demonstrate that the multi-class
linear setting, which is inherently richer than the binary counterpart, provides
the most transparent framework for studying implicit biases of matrix-parameter
optimization algorithms.

1

Introduction

The ever-increasing training cost of large language models (LLMs) has demanded better optimizer
designs with improved performance and efficiency [11, 1, 23]. The de facto standard optimizers
for deep learning training are Adam and AdamW [33, 39]. However, these algorithms that employ
diagonal preconditioners to independently adjust the learning rate of each coordinate, may fail to
capture their inter-dependencies and fully leverage the geometry of the loss landscape [79]. This
has spurred a series of research efforts on improving Adam or AdamW’s computational efficiency
[20, 24, 51, 80], with LLM-training as the target application domain [31, 67, 46, 37].
A noticeable work by Jordan et al. [31] proposed the Muon optimizer, which was shown to have
remarkable performances on NanoGPT benchmarks. More recently, it has been shown that Muon can
be used for large-scale LLM training with the potential to replace AdamW as the standard choice [37].
The key step in Muon is to orthogonalize the updates via the Newton-Schulz iteration [31, 7]. More
precisely, the update (denoted as ∆) is (approximately) replaced by the product of its singular-vector
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

