MultiNet: Adaptive Multi-Viewed Subgraph
Convolutional Networks for Graph Classification

Xinya Qin, Lu Bai1∗, Lixin Cui2 , Ming Li3,4 , Hangyuan Du5 , Edwin R. Hancock6
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.
2
School of Information, Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing, China.
3
Zhejiang Institute of Optoelectronics, Jinhua, China.
4
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application,
Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China.
5
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China.
6
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York, United Kingdom.
XinyaQin@mail.bnu.edu.cn, bailu@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The problem of over-smoothing has emerged as a fundamental issue for Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs). While existing efforts primarily focus on enhancing the discriminability of node representations for node classification, they
tend to overlook the over-smoothing at the graph level, significantly influencing
the performance of graph classification. In this paper, we provide an explanation of
the graph-level over-smoothing phenomenon and propose a novel Adaptive MultiViewed Subgraph Convolutional Network (MultiNet) to address this challenge.
Specifically, the MultiNet introduces a local subgraph convolution module that
adaptively divides each input graph into multiple subgraph views. Then a number
of subgraph-based view-specific convolution operations are applied to constrain the
extent of node information propagation over the original global graph structure, not
only mitigating the over-smoothing issue but also generating more discriminative
local node representations. Moreover, we develop an alignment-based readout
that establishes correspondences between nodes over different graphs, thereby
effectively preserving the local node-level structure information and improving
the discriminative ability of the resulting graph-level representations. Theoretical
analysis and empirical studies show that the MultiNet mitigates the graph-level
over-smoothing and achieves excellent performance for graph classification.

1

Introduction

Graph data analysis has become an important research area for deep learning, and has been widely
employed in various fields, including bioinformatics [36, 17], social networks [21, 22], and recommendation systems [33, 9]. However, traditional neural networks are originally designed for grid-like
data, such as images or sequences. They struggle to handle graphs due to the irregular structures
and non-Euclidean properties of graph data. To address these limitations, Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) have emerged as powerful tools for learning on graph-structured data.
In recent years, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have become the most popular architecture
in GNN research. The early spectral-based GCNs, such as the Spectral GNN [7], ChebNet [13],
and Vanilla GCN [18], interpret graphs as signals and define convolution operations in the spectral
domain. However, these methods are computationally expensive and rely on the eigenvalue spectrum
of the graph Laplacian matrix, making them less scalable. To improve the efficiency, an alternative
∗

The Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

