On Reasoning Strength Planning
in Large Reasoning Models

Leheng Sheng1 An Zhang2∗ Zijian Wu 1 Weixiang Zhao3 Changshuo Shen2 Yi Zhang2
Xiang Wang2 Tat-Seng Chua1
1
National University of Singapore
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
leheng.sheng@u.nus.edu, anzhang@u.nus.edu, zijianwu0522@gmail.com,
wxzhao@ir.hit.edu.cn, stephen_shen@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
zy1230@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xiangwang1223@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent studies empirically reveal that large reasoning models (LRMs) can automatically allocate more reasoning strengths (i.e., the number of reasoning tokens)
for harder problems, exhibiting difficulty-awareness for better task performance.
While this automatic reasoning strength allocation phenomenon has been widely
observed, its underlying mechanism remains largely unexplored. To this end, we
provide explanations for this phenomenon from the perspective of model activations. We find evidence that LRMs pre-plan the reasoning strengths in their
activations even before generation, with this reasoning strength causally controlled by the magnitude of a pre-allocated directional vector. Specifically,
we show that the number of reasoning tokens is predictable solely based on the
question activations using linear probes, indicating that LRMs estimate the required reasoning strength in advance. We then uncover that LRMs encode this
reasoning strength through a pre-allocated directional vector embedded in the
activations of the model, where the vector’s magnitude modulates the reasoning
strength. Subtracting this vector can lead to reduced reasoning token number
and performance, while adding this vector can lead to increased reasoning token
number and even improved performance. We further reveal that this direction
vector consistently yields positive reasoning length prediction, and it modifies the
logits of end-of-reasoning token </think> to affect the reasoning length. Finally,
we demonstrate two potential applications of our findings: overthinking behavior
detection and enabling efficient reasoning on simple problems. Our work provides new insights into the internal mechanisms of reasoning in LRMs and offers
practical tools for controlling their reasoning behaviors. Our code is available at
https://github.com/AlphaLab-USTC/LRM-plans-CoT.

1

Introduction

Large reasoning models (LRMs) [1–3] have demonstrated exceptional performance across a variety
of complex reasoning tasks, such as mathematical problem solving [4–6], code generation [7, 8],
and scientific question answering [9]. Here we take a closer look at LRMs’ ability to allocate
reasoning strength commonly quantified by the number of reasoning tokens generated during inference. Increasing reasoning strength has been shown to substantially improve model performance on
∗

An Zhang is the corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

