STaRFormer: Semi-Supervised Task-Informed
Representation Learning via Dynamic Attention-Based
Regional Masking for Sequential Data

Maximilian Forstenhäusler1,2,∗ Daniel Külzer1 Christos Anagnostopoulos2
Shameem Puthiya Parambath2 Natascha Weber1
1

BMW Group

2

University of Glasgow

Project Page: https://star-former.github.io

Abstract
Understanding user intent is essential for situational and context-aware decisionmaking. Motivated by a real-world scenario, this work addresses intent predictions
of smart device users in the vicinity of vehicles by modeling sequential spatiotemporal data. However, in real-world scenarios, environmental factors and sensor
limitations can result in non-stationary and irregularly sampled data, posing significant challenges. To address these issues, we propose STaRFormer, a Transformerbased approach that can serve as a universal framework for sequential modeling.
STaRFormer utilizes a new dynamic attention-based regional masking scheme
combined with a novel semi-supervised contrastive learning paradigm to enhance
task-specific latent representations. Comprehensive experiments on 56 datasets
varying in types (including non-stationary and irregularly sampled), tasks, domains,
sequence lengths, training samples, and applications demonstrate the efficacy of
STaRFormer, achieving notable improvements over state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Advancements in machine learning architectures, such as LSTM [1] and Transformer [2], have
enhanced the ability to model sequential data. However, these algorithms typically assume that the
data is fully observed, stationary, and sampled at regular intervals [3]. In reality, sensor technology and
external conditions often influence data collection, leading to non-stationary and irregularly sampled
time series. For instance, in the automotive industry, manufacturers have recently integrated UltraWideband (UWB) and Bluetooth Low-Energy (BLE) technologies to enhance the Digital Key (DK)
[4–8]. This integration ensures precise and secure vehicle access along with applications for connected
vehicles. Precise localization is achieved by performing time-of-flight calculations between each
UWB anchor in a vehicle and a smart device, leveraging UWB’s 2ns pulse duration [9]. Nonetheless,
the measuring algorithm for UWB ranging may yield irregularly recorded time-of-flight calculations,
resulting in irregularly sampled time series. Additionally, when recording real-world data using
UWB-capable ranging devices, external factors such as signal interference and device positioning can
introduce non-stationarity. These conditions may ultimately affect the overall performance of Machine
Learning (ML) algorithms. In the real-world Digital Key Trajectories (DKT) dataset provided by
the BMW Group (Appendix A and C.1.1), we confirmed, by Kwiatkowski–Phillips–Schmidt–Shin
(KPSS) and augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) tests, that approximately 79% of the sequences are
non-stationary. Based on the real-world trajectories generated from the DK, we focus on predicting
the smart device user’s intent, formulated as a specific classification task.
∗

Email: maximilian.forstenhaeusler@bmw.de, m.forstenhaeusler.1@research.glasgow.ac.uk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

