Error Feedback under (L0, L1)-Smoothness:
Normalization and Momentum
Sarit Khirirat
KAUST∗
sarit.khirirat@kaust.edu.sa

Abdurakhmon Sadiev
KAUST
abdurakhmon.sadiev@kaust.edu.sa

Artem Riabinin
KAUST
artem.riabinin@kaust.edu.sa

Eduard Gorbunov
MBZUAI†
eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We provide the first proof of convergence for normalized error feedback algorithms
across a wide range of machine learning problems. Despite their popularity and
efficiency in training deep neural networks, traditional analyses of error feedback
algorithms rely on the smoothness assumption that does not capture the properties
of objective functions in these problems. Rather, these problems have recently
been shown to satisfy generalized smoothness assumptions, and the theoretical understanding of error feedback algorithms under these assumptions remains largely
unexplored. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, all existing analyses under generalized smoothness either i) focus on single-node settings or ii) make
unrealistically strong assumptions for distributed settings, such as requiring data
heterogeneity, and almost surely bounded stochastic gradient noise variance. In this
paper, we propose√distributed error feedback algorithms that utilize normalization to
achieve the O(1/ K) convergence rate for nonconvex problems under generalized
smoothness. Our analyses apply for distributed settings without data heterogeneity
conditions, and enable stepsize tuning that is independent of problem parameters.
Additionally, we provide strong convergence guarantees of normalized error feedback algorithms for stochastic settings. Finally, we show that due to their larger
allowable stepsizes, our new normalized error feedback algorithms outperform
their non-normalized counterparts on various tasks, including the minimization of
polynomial functions, logistic regression, and ResNet-20 training.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models achieve impressive prediction and classification power by employing
sophisticated architectures, comprising vast numbers of model parameters, and requiring training
on massive datasets. Distributed training has emerged as an important approach, where multiple
∗

Sarit Khirirat, Abdurakhmon Sadiev, Artem Riabinin, and Peter Richtárik are with the Center of Excellence
for Generative AI, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
†
Eduard Gorbunov is with the Department of Statistics and Data Science, Mohamed bin Zayed University of
Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

