EvoBrain: Dynamic Multi-Channel EEG Graph
Modeling for Time-Evolving Brain Networks

Rikuto Kotoge1 Zheng Chen1 Tasuku Kimura1 Yasuko Matsubara1
Takufumi Yanagisawa2,3 Haruhiko Kishima2 Yasushi Sakurai1
1

2

SANKEN, The Univerity of Osaka, Japan
Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Osaka, Japan
3
Institute for Advanced Co-Creation Studies, The University of Osaka, Japan
1

{rikuto88, chenz, tasuku, yasuko, yasushi}@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp
2
{tyanagisawa, hkishima}@nsurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Dynamic GNNs, which integrate temporal and spatial features in Electroencephalography (EEG) data, have shown great potential in automating seizure
detection. However, fully capturing the underlying dynamics necessary to represent brain states, such as seizure and non-seizure, remains a non-trivial task and
presents two fundamental challenges. First, most existing dynamic GNN methods
are built on temporally fixed static graphs, which fail to reflect the evolving nature
of brain connectivity during seizure progression. Second, current efforts to jointly
model temporal signals and graph structures and, more importantly, their interactions remain nascent, often resulting in inconsistent performance. To address
these challenges, we present the first theoretical analysis of these two problems,
demonstrating the effectiveness and necessity of explicit dynamic modeling and
time-then-graph dynamic GNN method. Building on these insights, we propose
EvoBrain, a novel seizure detection model that integrates a two-stream Mamba
architecture with a GCN enhanced by Laplacian Positional Encoding, following
neurological insights. Moreover, EvoBrain incorporates explicitly dynamic graph
structures, allowing both nodes and edges to evolve over time. Our contributions
include (a) a theoretical analysis proving the expressivity advantage of explicit
dynamic modeling and time-then-graph over other approaches, (b) a novel and
efficient model that significantly improves AUROC by 23% and F1 score by 30%,
compared with the dynamic GNN baseline, and (c) broad evaluations of our method
on the challenging early seizure prediction task.

1

Introduction

Epileptic seizures are typically considered a network disorder (Burns et al., 2014a). The abnormal
connections across brain regions often serve as markers of seizure events (Li et al., 2021b). As such,
recent studies have leveraged graph neural networks (GNNs) to model these networks for automating
seizure detection (Cai et al., 2023; Ho and Armanfard, 2023). Considering the unfolding time-course
of brain dynamics, a recent trend models EEGs as a sequence of time-varying graphs. Temporal
models, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), integrated with GNNs, known as dynamic GNNs,
have been proposed to learn spatiotemporal features in EEGs (Tang et al., 2023). By modeling graphs
at fine-grained time steps and their sequential representations, these methods can capture how graphs
or brain states evolve over time, further enhancing seizure detection accuracy.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

