Training the Untrainable: Introducing Inductive Bias
via Representational Alignment

Vighnesh Subramaniam1∗, David Mayo1 , Colin Conwell2 ,
Tomaso Poggio1 , Boris Katz1 , Brian Cheung1†, Andrei Barbu1†
1
MIT CSAIL, CBMM 2 Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University
1

{vsub851,dmayo2,tp,boris,cheungb,abarbu}@mit.edu
2
cconwel2@jhu.edu

Abstract
We demonstrate that architectures which traditionally are considered to be ill-suited
for a task can be trained using inductive biases from another architecture. We call
a network untrainable when it overfits, underfits, or converges to poor results even
when tuning their hyperparameters. For example, fully connected networks overfit
on object recognition while deep convolutional networks without residual connections underfit. The traditional answer is to change the architecture to impose some
inductive bias, although the nature of that bias is unknown. We introduce guidance,
where a guide network steers a target network using a neural distance function. The
target minimizes its task loss plus a layerwise representational similarity against the
frozen guide. If the guide is trained, this transfers over the architectural prior and
knowledge of the guide to the target. If the guide is untrained, this transfers over
only part of the architectural prior of the guide. We show that guidance prevents
FCN overfitting on ImageNet, narrows the vanilla RNN–Transformer gap, boosts
plain CNNs toward ResNet accuracy, and aids Transformers on RNN-favored tasks.
We further identify that guidance-driven initialization alone can mitigate FCN
overfitting. Our method provides a mathematical tool to investigate priors and
architectures, and in the long term, could automate architecture design.
Project website at https://untrainable-networks.github.io

1

Introduction

When creating neural networks, as a community, we follow recipes that select among a few architectures that are known to work for particular tasks [63, 12, 25]. Architecture is critical, encoding
essential inductive biases i.e. priors that profoundly impact their learning capabilities and performance across various tasks. Convolutional nets revolutionized vision [47, 31], and Transformers
reshaped language [74, 20, 1]. Despite this, architecture design is a dark art because the precise
relationship between architectures and the priors they impose is poorly understood. For example,
there is discussion about exactly what the role of residual connections is [39]. This reflects a broader
challenge: we rarely understand exactly what inductive biases our architectures encode. Our lack
of understanding makes architecture design challenging. Given new application spaces for neural
networks with rising compute costs like inference-time scaling [56], this challenge has become even
more relevant.
Recent theorems [59] state that for each function which is efficiently Turing computable, there exists
a deep network that can approximate it well. Furthermore, a graph representing such a function is
∗
†

Corresponding author.
Equal senior contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

