Learning the Wrong Lessons: Syntactic-Domain
Spurious Correlations in Language Models

Chantal Shaib1,2∗

Vinith M. Suriyakumar2∗
1

Byron C. Wallace1

Marzyeh Ghassemi2

Northeastern University, 2 MIT

Abstract
For an LLM to correctly respond to an instruction it must understand both the semantics and the domain (i.e., subject area) of a given task-instruction pair. However,
syntax can also convey implicit information. Recent work shows that syntactic
templates—frequent sequences of Part-of-Speech (PoS) tags—are prevalent in
training data and often appear in model outputs. In this work we characterize
syntactic templates, domain, and semantics in task-instruction pairs. We identify
cases of spurious correlations between syntax and domain, where models learn to
associate a domain with syntax during training; this can sometimes override prompt
semantics. Using a synthetic training dataset, we find that the syntactic-domain
correlation can lower performance (mean 0.51±0.06) on entity knowledge tasks in
OLMo-2 models (1B-13B). We introduce an evaluation framework to detect this
phenomenon in trained models, and show that it occurs on a subset of the FlanV2
dataset in open (OLMo-2-7B; Llama-4-Maverick), and closed (GPT-4o) models.
Finally, we present a case study on the implications for LLM security, showing that
unintended syntactic-domain correlations can be used to bypass refusals in OLMo2-7B Instruct and GPT-4o. Our findings highlight two needs: (1) to explicitly test
for syntactic-domain correlations, and (2) to ensure syntactic diversity in training
data, specifically within domains, to prevent such spurious correlations.
Content Warning: This paper contains examples of harmful language.

1

Introduction

LLMs are increasingly being deployed in a variety of important domains [41, 24, 20, 3]. To be reliable
in such areas they should understand the semantics of instructions and the domains of the tasks [13],
yet recent work shows that the correctness of their responses can change when encountering subtle
linguistic variations in instructions [37, 5]. This raises a fundamental question:
Do LLMs leverage semantic and domain knowledge, or are they only exploiting shallow syntactic
patterns from their training data at scale?
Syntax, semantics, and domain interact together to provide structure, meaning, and content for
accurate language interpretation and task execution [6, 7, 12]. While the latter two are well-studied
in LLMs [28, 17, 23], the former has only recently gained traction as an important component
for understanding writing idiosyncrasies in model responses [35, 38, 33]. Recent work has shown
that model training data contains syntactic templates, i.e., frequently appearing n-grams of part-ofspeech in training data, and that these templates are learned and subsequently repeated by the model
[35, 39, 10].
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors: shaib.c@northeastern.edu, vinithms@mit.edu.
All experimentation and data processing done at MIT and NEU.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

