NoPo-Avatar: Generalizable and Animatable Avatars
from Sparse Inputs without Human Poses

Jing Wen Alexander G. Schwing Shenlong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{jw116, aschwing, shenlong}@illinois.edu
https://wenj.github.io/NoPo-Avatar/

Abstract
We tackle the task of recovering an animatable 3D human avatar from a single or a
sparse set of images. For this task, beyond a set of images, many prior state-of-theart methods use accurate “ground-truth” camera poses and human poses as input
to guide reconstruction at test-time. We show that pose-dependent reconstruction
degrades results significantly if pose estimates are noisy. To overcome this, we
introduce NoPo-Avatar, which reconstructs avatars solely from images, without
any pose input. By removing the dependence of test-time reconstruction on human
poses, NoPo-Avatar is not affected by noisy human pose estimates, making it
more widely applicable. Experiments on challenging THuman2.0, XHuman, and
HuGe100K data show that NoPo-Avatar outperforms existing baselines in practical
settings (without ground-truth poses) and delivers comparable results in lab settings
(with ground-truth poses).

1

Introduction

Animatable human rendering aims to 1) reconstruct an animatable 3D representation from given
images, and to 2) synthesize novel views of possible novel human poses. The task is of great utility
in VR/AR applications. Recent advances in rendering techniques have significantly improved the
realism and fidelity of the rendered results.
Concretely, recent generalizable human rendering approaches [8–10, 28] reconstruct an animatable
representation in a single deep net feed-forward pass. This significantly speeds up the reconstruction to
subsecond levels without compromising the rendering quality. In addition, large-scale training enables
these methods to perform well even with very sparse inputs. These advances make generalizable
human rendering more practical for real-world applications compared to per-scene optimized methods.
Despite the pros, most generalizable human rendering approaches assume that accurate camera poses
and human poses are available for reconstruction at test-time. These input poses serve as strong
guidance in locating the correspondences and gathering the aligned image features. However, the
use of accurate input poses during test-time reconstruction introduces a challenge, as illustrated in
Fig. 1: we assess the dependence of the rendering quality on test-time input pose quality used for
reconstruction, either by 1) injecting Gaussian noise of different standard deviations into accurate
ground-truth test-time input poses used for reconstruction; or by 2) using a predicted pose for
reconstruction at test-time. For the results shown in Fig. 1, we always used ground-truth poses for
test-time rendering. The noisier the test-time poses used for reconstruction, the worse the rendering
quality the methods achieve. For in-the-wild scenarios where poses are estimated, the performance
of existing methods degrades significantly, as shown in Fig. 1(a) horizontal axis label “pred”. This
sensitivity to input poses is not a desirable property. Ideally, we expect the method to produce
consistent and high-quality results, no matter the quality of the input poses at reconstruction.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

