TAPERED OFF-POLICY REINFORCE
Stable and efficient reinforcement learning for LLMs

Nicolas Le Roux∗,∇,1 Marc G. Bellemare∗,2
Jonathan Lebensold†,3 Arnaud Bergeron†,1 Joshua Greaves3
Alex Fréchette2 Carolyne Pelletier2 Eric Thibodeau-Laufer2
Sándor Toth2 Sam Work2
1
Mila 2 Reliant AI

Abstract
We propose a new algorithm for fine-tuning large language models using reinforcement learning. Tapered Off-Policy REINFORCE (TOPR) uses an asymmetric,
tapered variant of importance sampling to speed up learning while maintaining
stable learning dynamics, even without the use of KL regularization. TOPR can
be applied in a fully offline fashion, allows the handling of positive and negative
examples in a unified framework, and benefits from the implementational simplicity
that is typical of Monte Carlo algorithms. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach with a series of experiments on the GSM8K and MATH reasoning benchmarks, finding performance gains for training both a model for solution generation
as a generative verifier, and on a learning to search task, using the model as a query
expander. We show that properly leveraging positive and negative examples alike in
the off-policy regime simultaneously increases test-time accuracy and training data
efficiency, all the while avoiding the “wasted inference” that comes with discarding
negative examples. We find that this advantage persists over multiple iterations
of training and can be amplified by dataset curation techniques, enabling us to
match 70B-parameter model performance with 8B language models. As a corollary
to this work, we find that REINFORCE’s baseline parameter plays an important
and unexpected role in defining dataset composition in the presence of negative
examples, and is consequently critical in driving off-policy performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) and EM-type methods are rapidly becoming the dominant paradigm for
fine-tuning LLMs on complex tasks such as chain-of-thought reasoning. These methods can amplify
a base model’s performance without additional human data and can optimize for synthetic rewards
[53] and non-differentiable objectives [5]. While several popular methods rely solely on positive
examples to fine-tune an LLM [52, 17], the “trial and error” nature of RL algorithms is especially
well-positioned to leverage negative examples produced by the model, which are increasingly being
recognized as key to efficient learning [39, 45, 54, 13]. In fact, there is mounting evidence that the
simplest of all methods, REINFORCE [49], is a highly effective approach to fine-tuning LLMs [1].
However, REINFORCE is essentially an on-policy algorithm. In the presence of negative rewards,
its good behaviour can only be guaranteed when the training data distribution (or reference model)
matches, or is close to, the model’s own distribution. This limits its ability to reuse past data, and
∗
∗ Equal
contribution.
Equal contribution.
∇
Corresponding author: nicolas@le-roux.name
3
Work done at Reliant AI
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

