Time-o1: Time-Series Forecasting Needs
Transformed Label Alignment

Hao Wang1∗
Qingyang Dai4

Licheng Pan1∗
Zhichao Chen2
Xu Chen3†
3
5†
Lei Wang
Haoxuan Li
Zhouchen Lin2,6,7†
1
Xiaohongshu Inc.
2
State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
5
Center for Data Science, Peking University
6
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
7
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Abstract
Training time-series forecasting models poses unique challenges in loss function design. Most existing approaches adopt temporal mean squared error, but
this study reveals two critical limitations: ❶ it ignores the presence of label
autocorrelation, which biases it from the true label sequence likelihood; ❷ it
involves excessive number of tasks, which complicates optimization, especially
for long-term forecasting. To address these issues, we introduce Time-o1, a
transform-enhanced loss function for time-series forecasting. The central idea
is to transform the label sequence into decorrelated components with discriminated significance. Models are then trained to align the most significant components, thereby effectively mitigating label autocorrelation and reducing task
amount. Experiments demonstrate that Time-o1 achieves state-of-the-art performance and is compatible with various forecast models. Code is available at
https://github.com/Master-PLC/Time-o1.

1

Introduction

Time-series forecasting involves predicting future data from historical observations [62, 24] and
has been applied across diverse domains, such as air quality prediction in meteorology [29], user
behavior analysis in e-commerce [3], and process monitoring in manufacturing [49, 52]. To build
effective forecasting models, two questions warrant investigation: (1) How to design a neural network
architecture to encode historical observations, and (2) How to devise a loss function to train the
neural network. Both are critical for forecast model performance.
Recent research has primarily focused on developing neural network architectures [57, 61]. The key
challenge lies in exploiting the autocorrelation in history sequences. To this end, various architectures
have been proposed [25, 41, 53, 31]. Current progress centers on a debate between Transformers
and simple linear models. Transformers, equipped with self-attention mechanisms, offer superior
scalability [28, 35, 30]. In contrast, linear models, which encapsulate temporal dynamics using linear
layers, are straightforward to implement and demonstrate strong performance [67, 44, 65, 63]. These
advancements showcase the rapid evolution in neural architecture design for time-series forecasting.
∗
†

This work was done in the internship at Xiaohongshu Inc. Both authors have equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

