Distributive Fairness in Large Language Models:
Evaluating Alignment with Human Values

Hadi Hosseini
Penn State University, USA
hadi@psu.edu

Samarth Khanna
Penn State University, USA
samarth.khanna@psu.edu

Abstract
The growing interest in employing large language models (LLMs) for decision-making in social
and economic contexts has raised questions about their potential to function as agents in these
domains. A significant number of societal problems involve the distribution of resources, where
fairness, along with economic efficiency, play a critical role in the desirability of outcomes. In
this paper, we examine whether LLM responses adhere to fundamental fairness concepts such as
equitability, envy-freeness, and Rawlsian maximin, and investigate their alignment with human
preferences. We evaluate the performance of several LLMs, providing a comparative benchmark
of their ability to reflect these measures. Our results demonstrate a lack of alignment between
current LLM responses and human distributional preferences. Moreover, LLMs are unable to
utilize money as a transferable resource to mitigate inequality. Nonetheless, we demonstrate
a stark contrast when (some) LLMs are tasked with selecting from a predefined menu of
options rather than generating one. In addition, we analyze the robustness of LLM responses to
variations in semantic factors (e.g., intentions or personas) or non-semantic prompting changes
(e.g., templates or orderings). Finally, we highlight potential strategies aimed at enhancing the
alignment of LLM behavior with well-established fairness concepts.
§ Data and Code:

1

github.com/SamarthKhanna/Distributive-Fairness-LLMs

Introduction

The growing interest in deploying Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems in social or economic contexts
has sparked a wave of critical inquiry into their role as agents that interact with or simulate humans.
This exploration has largely focused on studying pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) in
representing collective human behavior [12, 106], performing complex decision-making [37, 72, 104],
modeling human values [52, 56], acting as research assistants [63], and representing human subjects
in social science [8] or market research [17], among other applications. The reliance on LLM-powered
systems highlights the critical need to understand the ethical values (e.g., fairness) these systems
represent, as misaligned representations of humans or their societal values—either due to mismatched
beliefs or failure to adhere to instructions [71, 77]—may result in detrimental outcomes with an
adverse effect on downstream applications.
Fairness is among the most essential societal principles for advancing ethical approaches in algorithmic decision-making. In particular, it serves as the fundamental driving force for achieving the
socially acceptable allocation of resources, goods, or responsibilities within a society. The study of
fairness has long been a focal point across diverse disciplines, inspiring systematic efforts to establish
rigorous mathematical foundations for fair division [14, 100], explore philosophical frameworks
underpinning distributive justice [88, 97], and address algorithmic challenges in achieving fairness
(see [18] for a brief introduction).
While there is broad consensus on the necessity and importance of fairness, there is no universally
accepted axiom of fairness that encapsulates its multi-dimensional essence. This has motivated
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

