Extragradient Method for (L0, L1)-Lipschitz
Root-finding Problems

Nicolas Loizou
AMS & MINDS
Johns Hopkins University
nloizou1@jhu.edu

Sayantan Choudhury
AMS & MINDS
Johns Hopkins University
schoudh8@jhu.edu

Abstract
Introduced by Korpelevich in 1976, the extragradient method (EG) has become a
cornerstone technique for solving min-max optimization, root-finding problems,
and variational inequalities (VIs). Despite its longstanding presence and significant
attention within the optimization community, most works focusing on understanding its convergence guarantees assume the strong L-Lipschitz condition. In this
work, building on the proposed assumptions by Zhang et al. [2020b] for minimization and Vankov et al. [2024] for VIs, we focus on the more relaxed α-symmetric
(L0 , L1 )-Lipschitz condition. This condition generalizes the standard Lipschitz
assumption by allowing the Lipschitz constant to scale with the operator norm,
providing a more refined characterization of problem structures in modern machine
learning. Under the α-symmetric (L0 , L1 )-Lipschitz condition, we propose a novel
step size strategy for EG to solve root-finding problems and establish sublinear
convergence rates for monotone operators and linear convergence rates for strongly
monotone operators. Additionally, we prove local convergence guarantees for weak
Minty operators. We supplement our analysis with experiments validating our
theory and demonstrating the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed step
sizes for EG.

1

Introduction

Min-max optimization problems have recently attracted significant interest due to their widespread
applications in machine learning, such as reinforcement learning [Brown et al., 2020, Sokota et al.,
2023], distributionally robust optimization [Namkoong and Duchi, 2016], and generative adversarial
network training [Goodfellow et al., 2020]. These problems are often formulated as variational
inequalities (VIs) [Ryu and Yin, 2022, Gidel et al., 2019, Sokota et al., 2023]. In the unconstrained
case, the VI problem simplifies to the root-finding problem [Luo and Tran-Dinh, 2022, Tran-Dinh,
2024], defined as follows [Gorbunov et al., 2022b]:
Find x∗ ∈ Rd such that F (x∗ ) = 0,

(1)

where F : Rd → Rd is an operator. Root finding problems of the form (1) encompass a variety of
problems as special cases, such as: (i) Unconstrained minimization: finding a stationary point of
minx∈Rd f (x), is equivalent to solving (1) with F (x) = ∇f (x), (ii) Min-max optimization: Let
minw1 ∈Rd1 maxw2 ∈Rd2 L(w1 , w2 ) where L : Rd1 × Rd2 → R. In this scenario, if in (1), the operator
is selected as follows:
⊤
F (x) ≡ ∇w1 L(w1 , w2 )⊤ , −∇w2 L(w1 , w2 )⊤ ,
(2)
⊤
⊤ ⊤
then solving (1) amounts to finding a stationary point x∗ = (w1∗
, w2∗
) ∈ Rd1 +d2 of the minmax problem, which for convex-concave functions L is a global solution (Nash equilibrium), i.e.,

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

