ROVER: Recursive Reasoning Over Videos with
Vision-Language Models for Embodied Tasks
Philip Schroeder1

Ondrej Biza2

Thomas Weng2

1

2

MIT CSAIL

Hongyin Luo1

James Glass1

RAI Institute

pschro@mit.edu

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) have exhibited impressive capabilities across diverse image understanding tasks, but still struggle in settings that require reasoning
over extended sequences of camera frames from a video. This limits their utility
in embodied settings, which require reasoning over long frame sequences from a
continuous stream of visual input at each moment of a task attempt. To address this
limitation, we propose ROVER (Reasoning Over VidEo Recursively), a framework
that enables the model to recursively decompose long-horizon video trajectories
into segments corresponding to shorter subtasks within the trajectory. In doing so,
ROVER facilitates more focused and accurate reasoning over temporally localized
frame sequences without losing global context. We evaluate ROVER, implemented
using an in-context learning approach, on diverse OpenX Embodiment videos and
on a new dataset derived from RoboCasa that consists of 543 videos showing both
expert and perturbed non-expert trajectories across 27 robotic manipulation tasks.
ROVER outperforms strong baselines across three video reasoning tasks: task
progress estimation, frame-level natural language reasoning, and video question answering. We observe that, by reducing the number of frames the model reasons over
at each timestep, ROVER mitigates hallucinations, especially during unexpected or
non-optimal moments of a trajectory. In addition, by enabling the implementation
of a subtask-specific sliding context window, ROVER’s time complexity scales
linearly with video length, an asymptotic improvement over baselines.
Demos, code, and data available at: https://rover-vlm.github.io

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities across a
wide range of tasks, including image captioning, visual question answering, and grounding language in
complex visual scenes [3, 22, 52]. These models excel at extracting high-level semantic understanding
from visual inputs and can generate fluent natural language that reflects this understanding [18, 56].
As a result, VLMs have become a key component in efforts to build general-purpose AI systems.
Given their success, VLMs are increasingly viewed as promising foundations for embodied intelligence: systems that perceive, reason about, and act within the physical world [38, 9, 19, 15, 31,
57, 25, 54, 63]. Embodied tasks require VLMs to recognize and reason about what is happening at
each moment in time (given a continuous stream of visual input from camera video) when attempting
to complete a task. Existing frameworks for VLM reasoning in this setting either perform highly
localized reasoning over a small set of frames [57, 25, 54, 63] or attempt to reason over the entire
sequence by concatenating all video frames into a single context [31]. Both strategies have limitations:
the former sacrifices global context, while the latter is computationally expensive and overwhelms the
model with irrelevant or redundant visual input. In this work, we seek to advance VLM capabilities
in embodied settings by enabling high-precision frame-by-frame reasoning, without compromising
efficiency or losing global context for the full task trajectory. With this motivation, we propose
Reasoning Over VidEo Recursively (ROVER).
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

