Parameter-free Algorithms for the Stochastically
Extended Adversarial Model
Shuche Wang1

Adarsh Barik2

Peng Zhao3,4

Vincent Y. F. Tan1,5,6

1
Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
5
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
6
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore

2

shuche.wang@u.nus.edu, adarshbarik1@iitd.ac.in,
zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn, vtan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We develop the first parameter-free algorithms for the Stochastically Extended
Adversarial (SEA) model, a framework that bridges adversarial and stochastic
online convex optimization. Existing approaches for the SEA model require prior
knowledge of problem-specific parameters, such as the diameter of the domain
D and the Lipschitz constant of the loss functions G, which limits their practical
applicability. Addressing this, we develop parameter-free methods by leveraging
the Optimistic Online Newton Step (OONS) algorithm to eliminate the need for
these parameters. We first establish a comparator-adaptive algorithm for the scenario with unknown domain diameter but known
achieving
p constant,
p Lipschitz

e ∥u∥2 + ∥u∥2 ( σ 2 + Σ2 ) , where u is the
an expected regret bound of O
2
1:T
1:T
2
comparator vector and σ1:T
and Σ21:T represent the cumulative stochastic variance
and cumulative adversarial variation, respectively. We then extend this to the
more general setting where both D and G are unknown, attaining the comparatorand Lipschitz-adaptive algorithm. Notably, the regret bound exhibits the same
2
dependence on σ1:T
and Σ21:T , demonstrating the efficacy of our proposed methods
even when both parameters are unknown in the SEA model.

1

Introduction

We focus on online convex optimization (OCO) [1, 2, 3], a broad framework for sequential decisionmaking. In each round t ∈ [T ], a learner chooses a point xt from a convex set X ⊆ Rd . The
environment then discloses a convex function ft : X → R, after which the learner incurs a loss ft (xt )
and updates their decision. The standard way to show the performance is via the regret, the total loss
PT
PT
relative to a comparator u ∈ X , defined as RT (u) = t=1 ft (xt ) − t=1 ft (u).
√
For convex problems, the regret can be bounded by O( T ) [4], which is known to be minimax
optimal [5]. OCO encompasses two primary frameworks: adversarial OCO [4, 6], which aims
to minimize regret against arbitrarily chosen loss functions, and stochastic OCO (SCO) [6, 7],
which minimizes excess risk under i.i.d. losses. While both frameworks are well-studied, realworld scenarios typically fall between these theoretical extremes of purely adversarial or stochastic
settings. The Stochastically Extended Adversarial (SEA) model proposed in [8] bridges the gap
between traditional adversarial and stochastic frameworks in OCO. This hybrid approach serves as
an intermediate formulation that captures aspects of both adversarial OCO and SCO settings.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

