Training-free Detection of AI-generated images via
Cropping Robustness

1

Sungik Choi1 Hankook Lee2 Moontae Lee1,3
LG AI Research 2 SungkyunKwan University 3 University of Illinois Chicago
sungik.choi@lgresearch.ai

Abstract
AI-generated image detection has become crucial with the rapid advancement of
vision-generative models. Instead of training detectors tailored to specific datasets,
we study a training-free approach leveraging self-supervised models without requiring prior data knowledge. These models, pre-trained with augmentations like
RandomResizedCrop, learn to produce consistent representations across varying
resolutions. Motivated by this, we propose WaRPAD, a training-free AI-generated
image detection algorithm based on self-supervised models. Since neighborhood
pixel differences in images are highly sensitive to resizing operations, WaRPAD
first defines a base score function that quantifies the sensitivity of image embeddings to perturbations along high-frequency directions extracted via Haar wavelet
decomposition. To simulate robustness against cropping augmentation, we rescale
each image to a multiple of the model’s input size, divide it into smaller patches,
and compute the base score for each patch. The final detection score is then obtained by averaging the scores across all patches. We validate WaRPAD on real
datasets of diverse resolutions and domains, and images generated by 23 different
generative models. Our method consistently achieves competitive performance and
demonstrates strong robustness to test-time corruptions. Furthermore, as invariance to RandomResizedCrop is a common training scheme across self-supervised
models, we show that WaRPAD is applicable across self-supervised models.

1

Introduction

AI-generated image detection aims to design reliable metrics that can distinguish between real and
synthetically generated images. This task has become increasingly critical with the advent of highly
capable text-to-image (T2I) generative models that can produce photorealistic outputs, which may be
exploited for vicious purposes (e.g., fake news [1], deepfakes [2]). Most existing detection approaches
[3, 4] are trained to recognize specific real data distributions (e.g., ImageNet [5], LSUN [6]). However,
the scope of real image distributions that current detection approaches can effectively cover remains
extremely limited compared to the diversity of generated images. Furthermore, a training dataset
for detection may contain artifacts (e.g., WebP compression in LSUN), which may lead the detector
to overfit the artifacts and may fail to be robust in test-time corruptions [7]. Consequently, there is
a growing need for detection methods that can operate universally across diverse domains without
relying on the constraints of predefined real image distributions.
In response to this growing demand, this paper focuses on training-free detection methods where no
prior knowledge of real image distributions is given. Prior training-free detection methods have design
score functions based on representations extracted from large-scale pre-trained foundation models.
One representative line of work leverages the representation of latent diffusion models (LDMs) (e.g.,
Stable Diffusion [8], Midjourney [9]). For instance, AEROBLADE [10] detects LDM-generated
images by measuring the autoencoder reconstruction loss, while Manifold Bias [11] proposes a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

