Token Bottleneck: One Token to Remember Dynamics

Taekyung Kim1

Dongyoon Han1 Byeongho Heo1 Jeongeun Park2
1
NAVER AI Lab 2 Korea University

{taekyung.k, dongyoon.han, bh.heo, sangdoo.yun}@navercorp.com

Sangdoo Yun1

baro0906@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Deriving compact and temporally aware visual representations from dynamic
scenes is essential for successful execution of sequential scene understanding tasks
such as visual tracking and robotic manipulation. In this paper, we introduce Token
Bottleneck (ToBo), a simple yet intuitive self-supervised learning pipeline that
squeezes a scene into a bottleneck token and predicts the subsequent scene using
minimal patches as hints. The ToBo pipeline facilitates the learning of sequential
scene representations by conservatively encoding the reference scene into a compact
bottleneck token during the squeeze step. In the reconstruction step, we guide
the model to capture temporal dynamics by predicting the target scene using the
bottleneck token along with few target patches as hints. This design encourages the
vision backbone to embed temporal dependencies, thereby enabling understanding
of dynamic transitions across scenes. Extensive experiments in diverse sequential
tasks, including video label propagation and robot manipulation in simulated
environments demonstrate the superiority of ToBo over baselines. Moreover,
deploying our pre-trained model on physical robots confirms its robustness and
effectiveness in real-world environments. We further validate the scalability of
ToBo across different model scales. Code is available at https://github.com/
naver-ai/tobo.

1

Introduction

With the increasing interest in deploying machines in real-world environments, ensuring seamless
perception and interaction with their surroundings has emerged a crucial challenge. These operations
are inherently sequential in nature, requiring the ability to trace objects (e.g., visual tracking) and
predict future actions (e.g., manipulation) based on current and immediate past observations. Such
understanding of the surrounding environments primarily depends on vision backbones. Therefore, a
strong and robust backbone capable of generalizing across diverse tasks and environments is essential
for effective sequential scene understanding.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) of visual representations has been highlighted as pivotal research in
vision domains, with the pre-trained models being widely adopted for effective backbone deployment.
A series of studies have introduced promising recipes for learning image [3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 14, 18] and
video representations [36, 44] without labeled data. However, these studies primarily focus on
understanding entire scenes or videos, which poses limitations for sequential scene understanding, as
it requires capturing temporal changes across consecutive scenes and conservatively encoding the
visual states of observed scenes.
To address the challenges, a sequence of studies [12, 16, 22] have attempted to incorporate correspondence learning into the MAE [18] framework, aiming to retain its strong localization capability while
enabling the model to match corresponding regions across consecutive scenes. However, we observe
that such additional considerations have a limited impact on the quality of scene representations
and may result in suboptimal performance in sequential scene understanding tasks, such as robotic
manipulation (§3.2). This limitation arises since recognizing temporal changes alone is insufficient;
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

