Understanding Prompt Tuning and In-Context
Learning via Meta-Learning

Tim Genewein∗

Li Kevin Wenliang ∗

Jordi Grau-Moya

Anian Ruoss

Laurent Orseau

Marcus Hutter

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Prompting is one of the main ways to adapt a pretrained model to target tasks.
Besides manually constructing prompts, many prompt optimization methods have
been proposed in the literature. Method development is mainly empirically driven,
with less emphasis on a conceptual understanding of prompting. In this paper we
discuss how optimal prompting can be understood through a Bayesian view, which
also implies some fundamental limitations of prompting that can only be overcome
by tuning weights. The paper explains in detail how meta-trained neural networks
behave as Bayesian predictors over the pretraining distribution, whose hallmark
feature is rapid in-context adaptation. Optimal prompting can be studied formally
as conditioning these Bayesian predictors, yielding criteria for target tasks where
optimal prompting is and is not possible. We support the theory with educational
experiments on LSTMs and Transformers, where we compare different versions
of prefix-tuning and different weight-tuning methods. We also confirm that soft
prefixes, which are sequences of real-valued vectors outside the token alphabet,
can lead to very effective prompts for trained and even untrained networks by
manipulating activations in ways that are not achievable by hard tokens. This adds
an important mechanistic aspect beyond the conceptual Bayesian theory.

1

Introduction

Perhaps the most impressive feature of today’s frontier models is their ability to swiftly adapt their
behavior to a wide range of contexts. Given relatively few tokens—whether from a user input, a
system prompt, or a number of in-context examples—models often rapidly infer the task at hand
and produce good continuations without any weight adaptation (in-context learning, Lampinen et al.
[2024]). From a meta-learning perspective, rapid in-context adaptation is expected to arise: log loss
minimization with a parametric sequential predictor (like a neural network) over a distribution of
stochastic data generators leads to a Bayesian predictor for the pretraining distribution [Ortega et al.,
2019]. The hallmark feature of such a predictor (Bayes-optimality) is most rapid in-context adaptation
and least (cumulative) prediction error on average. Accordingly, prompting, that is conditioning
of the Bayesian predictor, can be used to data-efficiently adapt the pretrained model to a target
task. An important question is: under which conditions is it possible to find a prompt such that the
prompted pretrained predictor becomes (near-) Bayes-optimal on a target task? We refer to this as
optimal prompting, which is possible in theory if the target task is one of the tasks covered by the
meta-distribution. If this is not the case, then optimal prompting may not be possible for an ideal
predictor, and weight adaptation may be necessary.
∗

Correspondence to {timgen, kevinliw}@google.com.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

