Surface-Aware Feed-Forward Quadratic Gaussian for
Frame Interpolation with Large Motion

Zaoming Yan 12

Yaomin Huang12
Pengcheng Lei 12
Qizhou Chen 1
12
Guixu Zhang
Faming Fang12∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
2
The KLATASDS & Shanghai Key Laboratory of MIP.
{yan_zaoming,pengchenglei1995}@163.com {ymhuang, qizhouchen}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
{gxzhang, fmfang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large motion poses a critical challenge in Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) task,
as it requires accurate modeling of object correspondences across frames. Existing
methods primarily rely on convolutional or attention-based models, which operate
at the pixel or patch level. This inherently limits them to local object correspondences, making it difficult to capture frame-level object correspondences and often
leading to failure under large motion. Inspired by the fundamental theorem of surface, we explore frame-level object correspondences through the lens of differential
surface. The core idea is to represent video frames as 3D surfaces and align them
by matching their surface properties, thereby achieving global surface alignment
and frame-level object alignment. To implement the core idea, we propose the
Surface-Aware Feed-Forward Quadratic Gaussian framework, mainly consisting
of the Feed-Forward Quadratic Gaussian and Surface Properties modules. FeedForward Quadratic Gaussian is designed to map frames to Quadratic Gaussian,
which flexibly fits the object surface. Unlike previous methods that compute local correspondences, Surface Properties facilitates global surface-level alignment,
which drives object correspondence alignment. Finally, we rasterize the surface
properties onto the interpolated camera plane and define loss functions to supervise
alignment explicitly. The outstanding performance on the large motion benchmark
demonstrates the effectiveness of our framework.

1

Introduction

Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) is a fundamental low-level vision task that aims to increase the frame
rate of a video by synthesizing intermediate frames between consecutive inputs. It has a wide range of
real-world applications, including slow-motion video generation [1, 2, 3], video compression [4, 5],
and novel view synthesis [6, 7, 8]. Despite recent progress, VFI remains challenging, particularly in
large and complex motion commonly found in casually captured videos. More recently, the emergence
of film agent frameworks [9, 10, 11] has introduced intelligent agents for cinematic content creation.
In such scenarios, handling large motion is critical for tasks such as scene composition, camera
planning, and visual continuity. These demands highlight the need for more robust VFI methods
capable of modeling long-range object correspondences.
At its core, VFI requires establishing accurate correspondences between objects across frames
[12]. Video frame interpolation methods can be broadly divided into two types: those based on
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

