Final-Model-Only Data Attribution
with a Unifying View of Gradient-Based Methods

Dennis Wei
IBM Research
dwei@us.ibm.com
Amit Dhurandhar
IBM Research

Inkit Padhi
IBM Research

Soumya Ghosh
Merck Research Labs

Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy
IBM Research

Maria Chang
IBM Research

Abstract
Training data attribution (TDA) is concerned with understanding model behavior
in terms of the training data. This paper draws attention to the common setting
where one has access only to the final trained model, and not the training algorithm or intermediate information from training. We reframe the problem in
this “final-model-only” setting as one of measuring sensitivity of the model to
training instances. To operationalize this reframing, we propose further training,
with appropriate adjustment and averaging, as a gold standard method to measure
sensitivity. We then unify existing gradient-based methods for TDA by showing
that they all approximate the further training gold standard in different ways. We
investigate empirically the quality of these gradient-based approximations to further training, for tabular, image, and text datasets and models. We find that the
approximation quality of first-order methods is sometimes high but decays with
the amount of further training. In contrast, the approximations given by influence
function methods are more stable but surprisingly lower in quality.

1

Introduction

Training data attribution (TDA, or sometimes simply “data attribution”) refers to the attribution or
explanation of ML model behavior in terms of its training data. Existing methods for TDA fall
into several categories: re-training-based approaches [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], gradient-based approaches
applied throughout training [8, 9, 10, 11], and gradient approaches applied only at the end [12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. We refer to the survey by [21] for a deeper look at these categories.
In this paper, rather than proposing another TDA method, we take a more reflective approach. First,
we draw attention to the fact that there exist multiple problem settings for TDA, alongside the multiple
categories of methods. These problem settings differ in the level of access assumed. In particular, we
focus on what we call the “final-model-only” (FiMO) setting in which we have access only to the
final trained model, and not the algorithm used to train the model or intermediate information from
training (for example checkpoints). The FiMO setting is motivated by the common scenario in which
TDA is performed by a different party than the one who developed the model. Models published on
platforms such as HuggingFace have now made this scenario ubiquitous.
We find that since the TDA literature has not clearly differentiated these problem settings, it is also
not clear on what should be the goal for TDA in the FiMO setting, and accordingly, what could be
an ideal “gold standard” method. Having such a goal and gold standard (as opposed to proxy tasks
such as mislabelled example detection) facilitates the development and evaluation of more practical
methods. We thus reframe the problem in the FiMO setting as one of quantifying sensitivity of the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

