Learning to Rank for In-Context Example Retrieval

Yuwen Ji,1,2∗
Haoran Que,4

Luodan Zhang,2∗
Ambyer Han,3∗
5
Lei Shi,
Wang Chao,3
Yue Zhang2†

1

3

Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University
Amap, Alibaba Group 4 Peking University 5 Beihang University
{zhangluodan, zhangyue, jiyuwen}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in retrieval-based in-context learning (ICL) train the retriever
using a classification objective, which categorizes in-context examples (ICEs) into
the most useful and the rest based on absolute scores. However, during inference,
ICEs are retrieved by score ranking rather than classification — The classification
training objective deviates from this test scenario. Hence, in this paper, we propose
a novel algorithm that trains a retrieval model by ranking formulation, where the
preference rankings between ICEs are given by comparing the likelihood of the
LLM generating the correct answer conditioned on each exemplar. By learning
to rank, we motivate the retriever to automatically learn diverse rationales why
specific examples are more useful for ICL decisions. This addresses the issue
that classification models poorly capture broader utility. Experimental results
demonstrate the top-1 performance of our proposal across 9 NLP tasks, with
ablation studies and case studies further validating the effectiveness of our design.
The code can be found in: https://github.com/2022neo/SeDPO_NIPS25

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3] have shown their versatility in addressing diverse problems
through in-context learning (ICL), which can be viewed as few-shot learning. ICL [4, 5, 6, 7] allows
providing a few in-context examples (ICEs) to guide LLMs in generating predictions for test inputs
without parameter updates. When there is a large set of labeled data, selecting the most useful few
examples can improve ICL performance. To this end, existing methods [8, 9] fine-tune LMs as dense
retrievers, typically in two steps: (1) Scoring a set of examples one by one or group by group using
the ICL LLM; (2) Training the retriever model on scored data to align with the ICL LLM.
Dominant approaches train the retriever using a classification objective [10], categorizing ICEs into
the most useful and the rest based on absolute scores. However, during inference, ICEs are retrieved
by score ranking rather than classification — The classification training objective deviates from this
test scenario, which leads to limitations. Taking math problems as an example, when there are no
reference answers for a test query, recommending other useful ICEs, e.g., relevant formulas, will be
more valuable. What we care about ultimately is not the absolute classification of examples, but the
relative orders conditioned by the test input — which sets of examples are more useful.
We formulate in-context example retrieval as an information retrieval (IR) task by adopting a learningto-rank (LTR) objective. LTR has been widely used in information retrieval [11], naturally capturing
the broader utility across examples with ranking formulation. However, it remains underexplored in
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

