Shallow Diffuse: Robust and Invisible Watermarking
through Low-Dim Subspaces in Diffusion Models

Wenda Li∗ Huijie Zhang∗ Qing Qu
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
The widespread use of AI-generated content from diffusion models has raised
significant concerns regarding misinformation and copyright infringement. Watermarking is a crucial technique for identifying these AI-generated images and
preventing their misuse. In this paper, we introduce Shallow Diffuse, a new watermarking technique that embeds robust and invisible watermarks into diffusion
model outputs. Unlike existing approaches that integrate watermarking throughout
the entire diffusion sampling process, Shallow Diffuse decouples these steps by
leveraging the presence of a low-dimensional subspace in the image generation
process. This method ensures that a substantial portion of the watermark lies in
the null space of this subspace, effectively separating it from the image generation
process. Our theoretical and empirical analyses show that this decoupling strategy
greatly enhances the consistency of data generation and the detectability of the watermark. Extensive experiments further validate that Shallow Diffuse outperforms
existing watermarking methods in terms of consistency.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1, 2] have recently become a new dominant family of generative models, powering
various commercial applications such as Stable Diffusion [3, 4], DALL-E [5, 6], Imagen [7], Stable
Audio [8] and Sora [9]. These models have significantly advanced the capabilities of text-to-image,
text-to-audio, text-to-video, and multi-modal generative tasks. However, the widespread usage of
AI-generated content from commercial diffusion models on the Internet has raised several serious
concerns: (a) AI-generated misinformation presents serious risks to societal stability by spreading
unauthorized or harmful narratives on a large scale [10–12]; (b) the memorization of training data
by those models [13–17] challenges the originality of the generated content and raises potential
copyright infringement issues; (c) iterative training on AI-generated content, known as model collapse
[18–22] can degrade the quality and diversity of outputs over time, resulting in repetitive, biased, or
low-quality generations that may reinforce misinformation and distortions in the wild Internet.
To deal with these challenges, watermarking is a crucial technique for identifying AI-generated
content and mitigating its misuse. Typically, it can be applied in two main scenarios: (a) the server
scenario, where given an initial random seed, the watermark is embedded into the image during
the generation process; and (b) the user scenario, where given a generated image, the watermark is
injected in a post-processing manner; (as shown in the left two blocks in Figure 2 top). Traditional
watermarking methods [23–26] are mainly designed for the user scenario, embedding detectable
watermarks directly into images with minimal modification. However, these methods are susceptible
to attacks. For example, the watermarks can become undetectable with simple corruptions such
as blurring on watermarked images. More recent methods considered the server scenario [27–32],
enhancing robustness by integrating watermarking into the sampling process of diffusion models.
∗

The first and second authors contribute equally to this work.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

