AR EA L: A Large-Scale Asynchronous Reinforcement
Learning System for Language Reasoning

Wei Fu12∗, Jiaxuan Gao1 , Xujie Shen2 , Chen Zhu2 , Zhiyu Mei12 ,
Chuyi He2 , Shusheng Xu12 , Guo Wei2 , Jun Mei2 , Jiashu Wang3 ,
Tongkai Yang2 , Binhang Yuan3 , Yi Wu1
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, 2 Ant Group, 3 HKUST
fuwth17@gmail.com, jxwuyi@gmail.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has become a trending paradigm for training large
language models (LLMs), particularly for reasoning tasks. Effective RL for LLMs
requires massive parallelization and poses an urgent need for efficient training
systems. Most existing large-scale RL systems for LLMs are synchronous by
alternating generation and training in a batch setting, where the rollouts in each
training batch are generated by the same (or latest) model. This stabilizes RL
training but suffers from severe system-level inefficiency. Generation must wait
until the longest output in the batch is completed before model update, resulting
in GPU underutilization. We present AReaL, a fully asynchronous RL system
that completely decouples generation from training. Rollout workers in AReaL
continuously generate new outputs without waiting, while training workers update
the model whenever a batch of data is collected. AReaL also incorporates a
collection of system-level optimizations, leading to substantially higher GPU
utilization. To stabilize RL training, AReaL balances the workload of rollout and
training workers to control data staleness, and adopts a staleness-enhanced PPO
variant to better handle outdated training samples. Extensive experiments on math
and code reasoning benchmarks show that AReaL achieves up to 2.77× training
speedup compared to synchronous systems with the same number of GPUs and
matched or even improved final performance. The code of AR EA L is available at
https://github.com/inclusionAI/AReaL/.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a new scaling paradigm for enhancing the capabilities of
large language models (LLMs) by enabling thinking abilities [52]. Given a prompt, RL allows an LLM
to generate thinking tokens before outputting a final answer, enabling test-time scaling [29, 47]. These
thinking LLMs are named Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) and have been shown to have particularly
strong capabilities on challenging reasoning problems, such as math [9, 5, 20], coding [3, 14, 15],
logic puzzles [22, 34], and agentic tasks [23, 57].
Effective RL training often requires massive parallelization to derive a large batch of rollouts for
sufficient exploration, which is the key to obtaining optimal model performance. For example,
popular RL algorithms, such as PPO [42] and GRPO [43], often require an effective training batch
of thousands of outputs [60, 61, 53]. Moreover, an LRM can generate tens of thousands of thinking
tokens for each input prompt [6], further posing an urgent need for an efficient training system to run
RL training on a large scale.
∗

This work was supported by Ant Group Research Intern Program

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

