The Rise of Parameter Specialization for Knowledge
Storage in Large Language Models

Yihuai Hong1,2∗ Yiran Zhao3

Wei Tang1

Yang Deng4

Yu Rong1

Wenxuan Zhang5†

1

Alibaba DAMO Academy 2 New York University
3
National University of Singapore
4
Singapore Management University 5 Singapore University of Technology and Design
yihuaihong@nyu.edu, wxzhang@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Over time, a growing wave of large language models from various series has been
introduced to the community. Researchers are striving to maximize the performance
of language models with constrained parameter sizes. However, from a microscopic
perspective, there has been limited research on how to better store knowledge in
model parameters, particularly within MLPs, to enable more effective utilization of
this knowledge by the model. In this work, we analyze twenty publicly available
open-source large language models to investigate the relationship between their
strong performance and the way knowledge is stored in their corresponding MLP
parameters. Our findings reveal that as language models become more advanced
and demonstrate stronger knowledge capabilities, their parameters exhibit increased
specialization. Specifically, parameters in the MLPs tend to be more focused
on encoding similar types of knowledge. We experimentally validate that this
specialized distribution of knowledge contributes to improving the efficiency of
knowledge utilization in these models. Furthermore, by conducting causal training
experiments, we confirm that this specialized knowledge distribution plays a critical
role in improving the model’s efficiency in leveraging stored knowledge.

1

Introduction

An increasing number of powerful large language models (LLMs) have emerged in recent years
(Touvron et al., 2023a; Achiam et al., 2023; Groeneveld et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2023; Team, 2025),
often demonstrating remarkable capabilities across various benchmarks and tests (Hendrycks et al.,
2021a; Chen et al., 2021a; Cobbe et al., 2021). Thanks to the large parameter space, they have shown
an exceptional ability to encode vast amounts of knowledge within their parameters, enabling superior
performance on knowledge-intensive tasks (Hendrycks et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2023).
To understand the internal mechanism of knowledge storage, many studies have been conducted. For
example, Geva et al. (2021b) interprets the MLP layers of the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) as key-value memories, where the factual knowledge encoded in the weights is retrieved and
transmitted to the output layer during inference (Geva et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2024).
Furthermore, researchers have observed that, in the final layer of the MLP, each vector in that value
matrix can act as a fundamental unit of knowledge storage (Geva et al., 2022a,b). However, there
has been limited research on how to better store and compress knowledge within constrained model
parameters to enable more effective utilization of that knowledge by the model.
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group, before joining New York University.
†

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

