Towards Generalizable Detector for Generated Image

Qianshu Cai1 Chao Wu2,3 Yonggang Zhang4 Jun Yu5 Xinmei Tian1 ∗
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Zhejiang University 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei Institute of Communications
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
The School of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

Abstract
The effective detection of generated images is crucial to mitigate potential risks
associated with their misuse. Despite significant progress, a fundamental challenge
remains: ensuring the generalizability of detectors. To address this, we propose
a novel perspective on understanding and improving generated image detection,
inspired by the human cognitive process: Humans identify an image as unnatural
based on specific patterns because these patterns lie outside the space spanned by
those of natural images. This is intrinsically related to out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection, which identifies samples whose semantic patterns (i.e., labels) lie outside
the semantic pattern space of in-distribution (ID) samples. By treating patterns of
generated images as OOD samples, we demonstrate that models trained merely
over natural images bring guaranteed generalization ability under mild assumptions.
This transforms the generalization challenge of generated image detection into
the problem of fitting natural image patterns. Based on this insight, we propose a
generalizable detection method through the lens of ID energy. Theoretical results
capture the generalization risk of the proposed method. Experimental results
across multiple benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Code
is available at https://github.com/dav-joy-thon/DEnD-Detection.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the development of generative AI has achieved significant breakthroughs. Specifically,
diffusion-based generative technologies [22, 44, 10, 56] demonstrate revolutionary progress in the
field of image synthesis. Advanced generative models, including Stable Diffusion [56], DALL-E
3 [50], Midjourney [41], and FLUX [29], enable users to generate highly realistic images through
simple text prompts. Furthermore, the advanced video generation model, Sora [47], can produce
high-definition, highly realistic videos and even simulate some physical effects. However, this rapid
technological progression is not without its potential risks and challenges. The misuse of generated
images for fraudulent purposes by malicious actors has sown seeds of doubt regarding the veracity of
information in media sources. Therefore, it is crucial to develop an effective generated image detector
with strong generalization capabilities to address these emerging threats.
In the realm of generated image detection, the majority of existing approaches are based on training
binary classifiers [69, 68, 64]. For instance, DIRE [69] employs diffusion reconstruction error as
an indicator to train a binary classifier. AEROBLADE [55] introduces a training-free approach
that leverages the reconstruction error of an autoencoder to detect images generated by the Latent
Diffusion Model (LDM) [56]. Unfortunately, AEROBLADE is limited to detecting LDM-generated
images and necessitates access to the autoencoder used for image generation. These methods,
∗

Corresponding author (xinmei@ustc.edu.cn)

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

