Sparse Gaussian Processes:
Structured Approximations and Power-EP Revisited

Thang D. Bui
Australian National University
thang.bui@anu.edu.au

Michalis K. Titsias
Google DeepMind
mtitsias@google.com

Abstract
Inducing-point-based sparse variational Gaussian processes have become the standard workhorse for scaling up GP models. Recent advances show that these methods can be improved by introducing a diagonal scaling matrix to the conditional
posterior density given the inducing points. This paper first considers an extension
that employs a block-diagonal structure for the scaling matrix, provably tightening
the variational lower bound. We then revisit the unifying framework of sparse
GPs based on Power Expectation Propagation (PEP) and show that it can leverage
and benefit from the new structured approximate posteriors. Through extensive
regression experiments, we show that the proposed block-diagonal approximation
consistently performs similarly to or better than existing diagonal approximations
while maintaining comparable computational costs. Furthermore, the new PEP
framework with structured posteriors provides competitive performance across
various power hyperparameter settings, offering practitioners flexible alternatives
to standard variational approaches.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a principled framework for modelling functions that offer calibrated
uncertainty and safeguard against overfitting, among many other benefits (see e.g., Rasmussen &
Williams, 2006). However, their computational requirement, cubic in the number of training data
N , is prohibitive for many practical applications. This bottleneck motivates the development of a
plethora of scalable approximation methods (Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Liu et al.,
2020), with sparse variational methods using inducing points arguably the most popular (Titsias,
2009; Hensman et al., 2013).
The key idea behind sparse variational GPs (SVGPs) is to approximate the posterior process using
a small set of M ≪ N inducing points, reducing the computational complexity to O(N M 2 ) or
O(M 3 ) in the batch and stochastic settings, respectively. A key assumption in the standard SVGP
approximation is the prior distribution of the non-inducing function values conditioned on the
inducing points remains unchanged in the approximate posterior, that is, q(f̸=u |u) = p(f̸=u |u).
Titsias (2025); Bui et al. (2025) recently showed that relaxing this assumption yields provably tighter
variational bounds. In particular, the key innovation is slightly adjusting covariance of q(f̸=u |u)
by a diagonal scaling matrix M, leading to improved predictive performance while maintaining
computational tractability. This approach has the original SVGP approach as a special case when
M = I. Such improvement begs the question: can we achieve even better approximations by
considering more expressive structures for M while preserving efficient computation?
To this end, we propose using block-diagonal structures for M and show that this choice leads to
provably tighter variational bounds compared to existing diagonal approximations while maintaining
the same computational complexity and ease of implementation. We then show that these structured
approximations can also help with other inference schemes beyond variational inference. Specifically,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

