High Dynamic Range Imaging with Time-Encoding
Spike Camera

Zhenkun Zhu1 Ruiqin Xiong1∗ Jiyu Xie2 Yuanlin Wang1 Xinfeng Zhang3 Tiejun Huang1
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Shanghai Radio Equipment Research Institute, Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zkzhu, wangyuanlin}@stu.pku.edu.cn,{rqxiong, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn,
xjy646@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xfzhang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
As a bio-inspired vision sensor, spike camera records light intensity by accumulating photons and firing a spike once a preset threshold is reached. For high-light
regions, the accumulated photons may reach the threshold multiple times within
a readout interval, while only one spike can be stored and read out, resulting in
incorrect intensity representation and a limited dynamic range. Multi-level (ML)
spike camera enhances the dynamic range by introducing a spike-firing counter
(SFC) to count spikes within each readout interval for each pixel, and uses different
spike symbols to represent the arrival of different amounts of photons. However,
when the light intensity becomes even higher, each pixel requires an SFC with
a higher bit depth, causing great cost to the manufacturing process. To address
these issues, we propose time-encoding (TE) spike camera, which transforms the
counting of spikes to recording of the time at which a specific number of spikes (i.e.,
an overflow) is reached. To encode time information with as few bits as possible, instead of directly utilising a timer, we leverage a periodic timing signal with a higher
frequency than the readout signal. Then the recording of overflow moment can be
transformed into recording the number of accumulated timing signal cycles until
the overflow occurs. Additionally, we propose an image reconstruction scheme for
TE spike camera, which leverages the multi-scale gradient features of spike data.
This scheme includes a similarity-based pyramid alignment module to align spike
streams across the temporal domain and a light intensity-based refinement module,
which utilises the guidance of light intensity to fuse spatial features of the spike
data. Experimental results demonstrate that TE spike camera effectively improves
the dynamic range of spike camera. The source codes and datasets are available
at https://github.com/zkzhu123/TESC.

1

Introduction

In applications such as autonomous driving and unmanned aerial vehicles, high-speed and highdynamic-range (HDR) scenes [26; 28] frequently occur. Some specialised sensors designed for
these scenarios have a bit depth exceeding 20 to accommodate dynamic ranges of 120dB or even
higher. How to achieve effective imaging in high-speed and HDR scenes has become a key challenge.
Conventional digital cameras usually require static scenes to achieve high-quality imaging results,
as object motion during the exposure time leads to motion blur. Consequently, the applicability of
conventional cameras in high-speed scenes is limited.
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

