Deep Continuous-Time State-Space Models
for Marked Event Sequences

Yuxin Chang∗
University of California, Irvine
Parminder Bhatia
GE HealthCare

Alex Boyd∗
GE HealthCare

Cao Xiao
GE HealthCare

Padhraic Smyth
University of California, Irvine

Taha Kass-Hout
GE HealthCare

Andrew Warrington
GE HealthCare

yuxinc20@uci.edu, smyth@ics.uci.edu
{alex.boyd, andrew.warrington}@gehealthcare.com

Abstract
Marked temporal point processes (MTPPs) model sequences of events occurring at
irregular time intervals, with wide-ranging applications in fields such as healthcare,
finance and social networks. We propose the state-space point process (S2P2)
model, a novel and performant model that leverages techniques derived for modern
deep state-space models (SSMs) to overcome limitations of existing MTPP models,
while simultaneously imbuing strong inductive biases for continuous-time event
sequences that other discrete sequence models (i.e., RNNs, transformers) do not
capture. Inspired by the classical linear Hawkes processes, we propose an architecture that interleaves stochastic jump differential equations with nonlinearities
to create a highly expressive intensity-based MTPP model, without the need for
restrictive parametric assumptions for the intensity. Our approach enables efficient
training and inference with a parallel scan, bringing linear complexity and sublinear scaling while retaining expressivity to MTPPs. Empirically, S2P2 achieves
state-of-the-art predictive likelihoods across eight real-world datasets, delivering
an average improvement of 33% over the best existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Marked temporal point processes (MTPPs) are used to model irregular sequences of events in
continuous time, where each event has an associated type, often called a mark. MTPPs model the
joint distribution of these sequences of event times and marks. They have been successfully applied
to modeling purchasing patterns in e-commerce [Türkmen et al., 2019a, Vassøy et al., 2019, Yang
et al., 2018], patient-specific medical events [Hua et al., 2022], disease propagation [Gajardo and
Müller, 2023], and event modeling and prediction across multiple other domains [Williams et al.,
2020, Sharma et al., 2018, Wang et al., 2024]. An MTPP can be fully characterized by a marked
intensity process, specifying the instantaneous rate of occurrence of each mark conditioned on history.
State-of-the-art neural methods compute hidden states to summarize the event history, which are
then used to compute marked intensities at any point in time. However, many models are limited by
inexpressive temporal dynamics, lack of support for long-range dependencies, and serial computation [Du et al., 2016, Mei and Eisner, 2017]. Recent advances in transformer-based MTPPs improved
performance and gained parallelism, but scale quadratically in sequence length [Zhang et al., 2020,
∗

Authors contributed equally

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

