LLMs Encode Harmfulness and Refusal Separately

Jiachen Zhao
Northeastern University
Zhengxuan Wu
Stanford University

Jing Huang
Stanford University

David Bau
Northeastern University

Weiyan Shi
Northeastern University

Abstract
LLMs are trained to refuse harmful instructions, but do they truly understand
harmfulness beyond just refusing? Prior work has shown that LLMs’ refusal
behaviors can be mediated by a one-dimensional subspace, i.e., a refusal direction.
In this work, we identify a new dimension to analyze safety mechanisms in LLMs,
i.e., harmfulness, which is encoded internally as a separate concept from refusal.
And there exists a harmfulness direction that is distinct from the refusal direction.
As causal evidence, steering along the harmfulness direction can lead LLMs to
interpret harmless instructions as harmful, but steering along the refusal direction
tends to elicit refusal responses directly without reversing the model’s judgment on
harmfulness. Furthermore, using our identified harmfulness concept, we find that
certain jailbreak methods work by reducing the refusal signals without suppressing
the model’s internal belief of harmfulness. We also find that adversarially finetuning models to accept harmful instructions has minimal impact on the model’s
internal belief of harmfulness. These insights lead to a practical safety application:
The model’s latent harmfulness representation can serve as an intrinsic safeguard
(Latent Guard) for detecting unsafe inputs and reducing over-refusals that is
robust to finetuning attacks. For instance, our Latent Guard achieves performance
comparable to or better than Llama Guard 3 8B, a dedicated finetuned safeguard
model, across different jailbreak methods. Our findings suggest that LLMs’
internal understanding of harmfulness is more robust than their refusal decision
to diverse input instructions, offering a new perspective to study AI safety1 .

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) go through multiple rounds of training to learn to refuse harmful
instructions and accept harmless ones [Bai et al., 2022, Rafailov et al., 2023, Zhou et al., 2023].
Despite efforts to make LLMs harmless and helpful at the same time, they still frequently fail
to achieve this goal. For instance, certain naive harmful prompts can still bypass LLMs’ refusal
mechanisms [Xie et al., 2025]. With more sophisticated jailbreak methods [Zeng et al., 2024, Zou
et al., 2023b, Yu et al., 2023], the refusal rate of harmful prompts will be even lower. Meanwhile,
LLMs suffer from over-refusal [Röttger et al., 2023, Cui et al., 2024, Bianchi et al., 2023, Shi et al.,
2024], where their refusal mechanisms are so strong that they sometimes refuse harmless prompts.
These failure cases highlight the need to understand LLMs’ internal reasoning for accepting or
refusing user instructions, particularly with respect to the instructions’ harmfulness. Past work
has identified that refusal is represented and mediated by a single direction in the latent space in
1
Our code is released at https://github.com/CHATS-lab/Llms_Encode_Harmfulness_Refusal_
Separately.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

