Any-stepsize Gradient Descent for Separable Data
under Fenchel–Young Losses

Han Bao∗
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
bao.han@ism.ac.jp

Shinsaku Sakaue∗
CyberAgent
shinsaku.sakaue@gmail.com

Yuki Takezawa
Kyoto University and OIST
takezawa@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
The gradient descent (GD) has been one of the most common optimizer in machine learning.
In particular, the loss landscape of a neural network is typically sharpened during the initial
phase of training, making the training dynamics hover on the edge of stability. This is beyond
our standard understanding of GD convergence in the stable regime where stepsize is chosen
sufficiently smaller. Recently, Wu et al. [63] have shown that GD converges with much larger
stepsize under linearly separable logistic regression. Although their analysis hinges on the
self-bounding property of the logistic loss, which seems to be a cornerstone to establish a
modified descent lemma, our pilot study shows that other loss functions without the selfbounding property can make GD attain arbitrarily small loss with large stepsize. To further
understand what property of a loss function matters in GD, we aim to show large-stepsize
GD convergence for a general loss function based on the framework of Fenchel–Young losses.
We essentially leverage the classical perceptron argument to derive the iteration complexity
for achieving ε-optimal loss, which is possible for a majority of Fenchel–Young losses. This
convergence result highlights that the self-bounding property may not be necessary for GD
to attain arbitrarily small loss. Moreover, when a loss function entails separation margin, a
notion relevant to the margin in support vector machines, GD often yields faster convergence
than typical GD rate T = Ω(ε−1 ) for convex smooth objectives. Specifically, GD with the
Tsallis entropy attains ε-optimal loss with the rate T = Ω(ε−1/2 ), and the Rényi entropy
achieves the far better rate T = Ω(ε−1/3 ).

1

Introduction

Gradient-based optimizers are prevalent in the modern machine learning community with deep
learning thanks to its scalability and plasticity. Among many variants, GD remains to be a standard
choice. GD with constant stepsize is written as follows:
wt+1 := wt − η∇L(wt ),

for t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1,

(GD)

d

where w ∈ R is the optimization variables, L(·) is the loss function, and η > 0 is stepsize fixed
across all steps. The descent lemma [42, Section 1.2.3] is a key to GD convergence: for β-smooth
objective L, the stepsize choice η < 2/β ensures that L(wt ) monotonically decreases. Nonetheless,
little optimization theory has been known beyond the threshold η > 2/β; though modern neural
networks exhibit much smaller smoothness values than practically used stepsize values [66, 57].
∗
This work was primarily conducted during the period when HB was affiliated with Kyoto University, and
SS with the University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

