The Rich and the Simple:
On the Implicit Bias of Adam and SGD

Bhavya Vasudeva

Jung Whan Lee Vatsal Sharan Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
{bvasudev,jlee7870,vsharan,soltanol}@usc.edu

Abstract
Adam is the de facto optimization algorithm for several deep learning applications,
but an understanding of its implicit bias and how it differs from other algorithms,
particularly standard first-order methods such as (stochastic) gradient descent
(GD), remains limited. In practice, neural networks (NNs) trained with SGD
are known to exhibit simplicity bias — a tendency to find simple solutions. In
contrast, we show that Adam is more resistant to such simplicity bias. First, we
investigate the differences in the implicit biases of Adam and GD when training
two-layer ReLU NNs on a binary classification task with Gaussian data. We
find that GD exhibits a simplicity bias, resulting in a linear decision boundary
with a suboptimal margin, whereas Adam leads to much richer and more diverse
features, producing a nonlinear boundary that is closer to the Bayes’ optimal
predictor. This richer decision boundary also allows Adam to achieve higher test
accuracy both in-distribution and under certain distribution shifts. We theoretically
prove these results by analyzing the population gradients. Next, to corroborate
our theoretical findings, we present extensive empirical results showing that this
property of Adam leads to superior generalization across various datasets with
spurious correlations where NNs trained with SGD are known to show simplicity
bias and do not generalize well under certain distributional shifts.

1

Introduction

Adaptive optimization algorithms, particularly Adam [1], have become ubiquitous in training deep
neural networks (NNs) due to their faster convergence rates and better performance, particularly on
large language models (LLMs), as compared to (stochastic) gradient descent (SGD) [2]. Despite its
widespread use, the theoretical understanding of how Adam works and when/why it outperforms
(S)GD remains limited.
Modern NNs are heavily overparameterized and thus the training landscape has numerous global
optima. As a result, different training algorithms may exhibit preferences or biases towards different
global optima a.k.a. implicit bias. There is extensive prior work on the implicit bias of GD [3, 4, 5, 6],
for both linear and nonlinear models (see Section 5 for a detailed discussion of related work).
However, there is limited work investigating the implicit bias of Adam. Recently, Zhang et al. [7]
showed that for linear logistic regression with separable data, Adam iterates directionally converge to
the minimum ℓ∞ -norm solution, in contrast to GD which converges to minimum ℓ2 -norm [3]. This
difference between the implicit bias of Adam vs GD in simple linear settings motivates the central
question of this paper:
What is the implicit bias of Adam for nonlinear models such as NNs, and how does
it differ from the implicit bias of (S)GD?
Given the popularity of Adam, surprisingly little is known about the implicit bias of Adam for
training NNs. A notable exception is the recent work Tsilivis et al. [8], which characterized the
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

