TabSTAR: A Tabular Foundation Model for Tabular
Data with Text Fields
Alan Arazi Eilam Shapira Roi Reichart
{alanarazi7, eilam.shapira, roireichart}@gmail.com
Technion - IIT

Abstract
While deep learning has achieved remarkable success across many domains, it has
historically underperformed on tabular learning tasks, which remain dominated
by gradient boosting decision trees. However, recent advancements are paving the
way for Tabular Foundation Models, which can leverage real-world knowledge and
generalize across diverse datasets, particularly when the data contains free-text.
Although incorporating language model capabilities into tabular tasks has been
explored, most existing methods utilize static, target-agnostic textual representations, limiting their effectiveness. We introduce TabSTAR: a Tabular Foundation
Model with Semantically Target-Aware Representations. TabSTAR is designed to
enable transfer learning on tabular data with textual features, with an architecture
free of dataset-specific parameters. It unfreezes a pretrained text encoder and takes
as input target tokens, which provide the model with the context needed to learn
task-specific embeddings. TabSTAR achieves state-of-the-art performance for both
medium- and large-sized datasets across known benchmarks of classification tasks
with text features, and its pretraining phase exhibits scaling laws in the number of
datasets, offering a pathway for further performance improvements.1

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has profoundly reshaped research and practice in computer vision
[50, 66, 33, 17] and natural language processing [56, 5, 79, 16, 13]. This transformation was notably
accelerated by the rise of foundation models [8, 88, 4], capable of cross-modal understanding and
generalization from massive pretraining across heterogeneous data sources. Importantly, they enabled
an end-to-end approach that outperformed previous modular alternatives [71, 1]. Moreover, deep
learning models excel at transfer learning [91], generalizing from their pretraining data to new tasks.
Their strength, combined with techniques like In-Context Learning (ICL) [13] and Parameter-Efficient
Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [41], has enabled rapid adaptation to new tasks with only limited labeled data.
Despite this progress, deep learning has historically lagged behind gradient-boosted decision trees
(GBDTs) on tabular data [12, 15, 60], in both classification and regression tasks [65, 11, 31, 55]. The
heterogeneity of tabular data, which lacks the spatial locality of images or the sequential order of
text, makes it more challenging for deep models to learn. Consequently, GBDTs have remained the
de facto standard for tabular learning, offering strong out-of-the-box performance, computational
efficiency, and built-in inductive biases (e.g., robustness to skewed feature distributions and automatic
feature selection) that make them especially well-suited to heterogeneous datasets [31]. Nonetheless,
GBDTs cannot be pretrained to reuse strong representations for downstream tasks. This limitation
becomes critical in low-data settings like those often found in healthcare applications [52]. Crucially,
they must rely on external embedding models to process unstructured data types like text and images,
yielding fixed feature representations that cannot be finetuned for a specific prediction task.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/alanarazi7/TabSTAR.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

