From Noise to Narrative: Tracing the Origins of
Hallucinations in Transformers
Praneet Suresh∗
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
praneet.suresh@mila.quebec

Jack Stanley∗
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
jack.stanley@mila.quebec

Sonia Joseph
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Meta AI
sonia.joseph@mila.quebec

Luca Scimeca
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
luca.scimeca@mila.quebec

Danilo Bzdok
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
bzdokdan@mila.quebec

Abstract
As generative AI systems become competent and democratized in science, business,
and government, deeper insight into their failure modes now poses an acute need.
The occasional volatility in their behavior, such as the propensity of transformer
models to hallucinate, impedes trust and adoption of emerging AI solutions in
high-stakes areas. In the present work, we establish how and when hallucinations
arise in pre-trained transformer models through concept representations captured
by sparse autoencoders, under scenarios with experimentally controlled uncertainty
in the input space. Our systematic experiments reveal that the number of semantic
concepts used by the transformer model grows as the input information becomes
increasingly unstructured. In the face of growing uncertainty in the input space,
the transformer model becomes prone to activate coherent yet input-insensitive
semantic features, leading to hallucinated output. At its extreme, for pure-noise
inputs, we identify a wide variety of robustly triggered and meaningful concepts in
the intermediate activations of pre-trained transformer models, whose functional
integrity we confirm through targeted steering. We also show that hallucinations
in the output of a transformer model can be reliably predicted from the concept
patterns embedded in transformer layer activations. This collection of insights
on transformer internal processing mechanics has immediate consequences for
aligning AI models with human values, AI safety, opening the attack surface for
potential adversarial attacks, and providing a basis for automatic quantification of
a model’s hallucination risk.

1

Introduction

Generative AI systems are becoming always more capable, demonstrating remarkable performance on
a wide range of tasks, across diverse data modalities. Yet, transformer models can at times confidently
misstate facts, invent details in generated content, and engage in confabulated reasoning. These
model behaviors occur even when accurate information for the task is abundantly present in the
models’ training data or even context window. These plausible-seeming yet incorrect outputs are
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

