RelationAdapter: Learning and Transferring Visual
Relation with Diffusion Transformers
Yan Gong1 Yiren Song2 Yicheng Li1 Chenglin Li1 Yin Zhang1∗
1
Zhejiang University 2 National University of Singapore
{gongyan, yichengli, chenglinli, zhangyin98}@zju.edu.cn
yiren@nus.edu.sg
(a) Low Level Image Processing

(b) Style Transfer

Input
(c) Image Editing

Result

Input

Result

Input
(d) Customized Generation

Input

Result

Result

Figure 1: Our framework, RelationAdapter, can effectively perform a variety of image editing tasks
by relying on exemplar image pairs and the original image. These tasks include (a) low-level editing,
(b) style transfer, (c) image editing, and (d) customized generation.

Abstract
Inspired by the in-context learning mechanism of large language models (LLMs),
a new paradigm of generalizable visual prompt-based image editing is emerging.
Existing single-reference methods typically focus on style or appearance adjustments and struggle with non-rigid transformations. To address these limitations, we
propose leveraging source-target image pairs to extract and transfer content-aware
editing intent to novel query images. To this end, we introduce RelationAdapter,
a lightweight module that enables Diffusion Transformer (DiT) based models to
effectively capture and apply visual transformations from minimal examples. We
also introduce Relation252K, a comprehensive dataset comprising 218 diverse editing tasks, to evaluate model generalization and adaptability in visual prompt-driven
scenarios. Experiments on Relation252K show that RelationAdapter significantly
improves the model’s ability to understand and transfer editing intent, leading to
notable gains in generation quality and overall editing performance. Project page:
https://github.com/gy8888/RelationAdapter

1

Introduction

Humans excel at learning from examples. When presented with just a single pair of images, comprising an original and its edited counterpart, we can intuitively infer the underlying transformation and
∗

Corresponding author: Yin Zhang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

