ArchCAD-400k: A Large-Scale CAD drawings Dataset
and New Baseline for Panoptic Symbol Spotting

Ruifeng Luo 2,1* , Zhengjie Liu1,5∗, Tianxiao Cheng2 , Jie Wang2 , Tongjie Wang2 , Xingguang
Wei3,6 , Haomin Wang3,7 , YanPeng Li2 , Fu Chai1,5 , Fei Cheng 1 , Shenglong Ye 3 , Wenhai
Wang3 , Yanting Zhang8 , Yu Qiao3 , Hongjie Zhang3† , Xianzhong Zhao1,4†
1

3

Tongji University, 2 Arcplus East China Architectural Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd.,
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 5 Shanghai Innovation Institute, 6 University of
Science and Technology of China, 7 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 8 Donghua University
https://github.com/ArchiAI-LAB/ArchCAD

Abstract
Recognizing symbols in architectural CAD drawings is critical for various advanced
engineering applications. In this paper, we propose a novel CAD data annotation
engine that leverages intrinsic attributes from systematically archived CAD drawings to automatically generate high-quality annotations, thus significantly reducing
manual labeling efforts. Utilizing this engine, we construct ArchCAD-400k, a
large-scale CAD dataset consisting of 413,062 chunks from 5538 standardized
drawings, making it over 26 times larger than the largest existing CAD dataset.
ArchCAD-400k boasts an extended drawing diversity and broader categories, offering line-grained annotations. Furthermore, we present a new baseline model
for panoptic symbol spotting, termed Dual-Pathway Symbol Spotter (DPSS). It
incorporates an adaptive fusion module to enhance primitive features with complementary image features, achieving state-of-the-art performance and enhanced
robustness. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of DPSS, demonstrating the value of ArchCAD-400k and its potential to drive innovation in architectural
design and construction.

1

Introduction

For a long time, CAD drawings have served as the universal language of architectural design,
enabling seamless communication among designers, engineers, and construction personnel through
standardized graphical primitives such as arcs, circles, and polylines. Accurate perception of these
primitives in 2D CAD drawings is essential for various downstream applications, including automated
drawing review and 3D building information modeling (BIM) [1, 2, 3, 4], as this ability enables
the optimization of CAD-based workflows while enhancing efficiency and precision in architectural
design and construction processes[5, 6].
Building upon earlier research in symbol spotting [7, 8, 9, 10], pioneering work formally defined the
task of panoptic symbol spotting [11] for floor plan CAD drawings and established the benchmark
dataset FloorPlanCAD [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However, the manual annotation of line-grained
labels is a highly time-consuming and labor-intensive process, severely limiting the dataset’s scale
and diversity. This bottleneck restricts the ability to train models that can generalize across diverse
∗
†

Equal contribution;
Corresponding Authors: nju.zhanghongjie@gmail.com; x.zhao@tongji.edu.cn.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

