LookWhere? Efficient Visual Recognition by Learning
Where to Look and What to See from Self-Supervision

• Anthony Fuller1,3 • Yousef Yassin1
Junfeng Wen1 Daniel G. Kyrollos1 Tarek Ibrahim1
⋆ James R. Green1 ⋆ Evan Shelhamer1,2,3
Carleton University1 University of British Columbia2 Vector Institute3
• Co-first author ⋆ Co-advising author

Abstract
Vision transformers are ever larger, more accurate, and more expensive to compute.
The expense is even more extreme at high resolution as the number of tokens
grows quadratically with the image size. We turn to adaptive computation to cope
with this cost by learning to predict where to compute. Our LookWhere method
divides the computation between a low-resolution selector and a high-resolution
extractor without ever processing the full high-resolution input. We jointly pretrain
the selector and extractor without task supervision by distillation from a selfsupervised teacher, in effect, learning where and what to compute simultaneously.
Unlike prior token reduction methods, which pay to save by pruning alreadycomputed tokens, and prior token selection methods, which require complex and
expensive per-task optimization, LookWhere economically and accurately selects
and extracts transferrable representations of images. We show that LookWhere
excels at sparse recognition on high-resolution inputs (Traffic Signs), maintaining
accuracy while reducing FLOPs by up to 34× and time by 6×. It also excels
at standard recognition tasks that are global (ImageNet classification) or local
(ADE20K segmentation), improving accuracy while reducing time by 1.36×. See
https://github.com/antofuller/lookwhere for the code and weights.

1

Introduction: A Look through Self-Supervised Eyes

Self-supervised computer vision models can identify informative inputs, as shown in Fig. 1, by
what DINOv2 [1] attends to and where, and without any knowledge of the task to be done. In short,
these methods solve their own learning problems: given one view of visual data, predict another (by
reconstructive [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] or contrastive learning [1, 7, 8, 9]). When learned at scale, they attend to
the visually interesting by identifying what is informative for their predictions; importantly, this input
may be sparser than the full input, especially at high resolution, offering an opportunity for efficiency.
In this work, we reduce the computation for recognition by predicting this visual interest without
fully processing the input. We rely on attention and representation in the eyes of the self-supervised
model to learn both where to look, with an efficient selector of locations, and what to see, with
an expressive extractor of representations. To do so, we propose LookWhere: a framework for
self-supervised adaptive computation that factorizes where and what, for learning and inference, with
paired selector-extractor models. Our selector and extractor together represent a high-res input given
1 a low-res version and 2 a sparse set of high-res patches selected from the high-res version. Our
novel selector-extractor architecture and what-where distillation training effectively approximate
deep self-supervised representations with efficient adaptive predictions.
LookWhere applies to imagery of any size, but can help most at high resolution. High resolution
(with pixel dimensions of >1000 on a side) is now common in photography [10], remote sensing
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

