Measuring and Guiding Monosemanticity

Ruben Härle1,2,3∗
Björn Deiseroth1,2,3,4

Felix Friedrich1,2,4∗

Manuel Brack4,8†

Patrick Schramowski1,2,4,5,6

Stephan Wäldchen3

Kristian Kersting1,2,4,5,7

1

4

Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt, 2 Lab1141, 3 Aleph Alpha Research,
Hessian.AI, 5 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), 6 CERTAIN,
7
Centre of Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, 8 Adobe Applied Research

Abstract
There is growing interest in leveraging mechanistic interpretability and controllability to better understand and influence the internal dynamics of large language
models (LLMs). However, current methods face fundamental challenges in reliably
localizing and manipulating feature representations. Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs)
have recently emerged as a promising direction for feature extraction at scale,
yet they, too, are limited by incomplete feature isolation and unreliable monosemanticity. To systematically quantify these limitations, we introduce Feature
Monosemanticity Score (FMS), a novel metric to quantify feature monosemanticity
in latent representation. Building on these insights, we propose Guided Sparse
Autoencoders (G-SAE), a method that conditions latent representations on labeled
concepts during training. We demonstrate that reliable localization and disentanglement of target concepts within the latent space improve interpretability, detection
of behavior, and control. Specifically, our evaluations on toxicity detection, writing
style identification, and privacy attribute recognition show that G-SAE not only
enhances monosemanticity but also enables more effective and fine-grained steering with less quality degradation. Our findings provide actionable guidelines for
measuring and advancing mechanistic interpretability and control of LLMs.1

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have become widely used due to their ability to generate coherent,
contextually relevant text [6, 52, 57]. Despite their abilities, deploying LLMs in real-world scenarios
presents distinct challenges [11, 28, 44]. In particular, LLMs operate as opaque systems, making it
difficult to interpret how they generate certain outputs. As a result, they can produce toxic, biased, or
otherwise undesired content, raising general concern. Anticipating and controlling such behaviors
remains an open problem, especially given the high stakes of deploying LLMs in sensitive domains.
Consequently, there has been growing interest in developing methods to interpret and control the
behavior of LLMs. Mechanistic interpretability aims to open the proverbial black box by studying
LLMs’ internal representations. This line of research has led to a variety of proposed approaches,
including probing techniques [17], attribution methods [48], and sparse representations [4]. One
current and prominent approach involves Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs), which are trained in an
unsupervised manner and aim to disentangle hidden representations into monosemantic, interpretable
features [12, 47]. Yet, recent research by Paulo & Belrose [38] shows that even under controlled
∗

Equal Contribution
Work done while at DFKI and TU Darmstadt
1
Code available at https://github.com/ml-research/measuring-and-guiding-monosemanticity

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

