Acceleration via silver stepsize on Riemannian
manifolds with applications to Wasserstein space

Jiyoung Park
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
wldyddl5510@tamu.edu

Abhishek Roy
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
abhishekroy@tamu.edu

Jonathan W. Siegel
Department of Mathematics
Texas A&M University
jwsiegel@tamu.edu

Anirban Bhattacharya
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
anirbanb@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
There is extensive literature on accelerating first-order optimization methods in
an Euclidean setting. Under which conditions such acceleration is feasible in
Riemannian optimization problems is an active area of research. Motivated by the
recent success of silver stepsize methods in the Euclidean setting, we undertake
a study of such algorithms in the Riemannian setting. We provide the new class
of algorithms determined by the choice of vector transport that allows the silver
stepsize acceleration on Riemannian manifolds for the function classes associated
with the corresponding vector transport. As a core application, we show that our
algorithm recovers the standard Wasserstein gradient descent on the 2-Wasserstein
space and, as a result, provides the first provable accelerated gradient method for
potential functional optimization problems in the Wasserstein space. In addition,
we validate the numerical strength of the algorithm for standard benchmark tasks
on the space of symmetric positive definite matrices.

1

Introduction

Consider the Riemannian optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈N

(1.1)

where N ⊆ M is a geodesically convex subset of a Riemannian manifold M , and f : N → R is a
continuously differentiable geodesically convex functional. A popular approach to solve (1.1) is via
Riemannian gradient descent (RGD) [ZS16] given by,
xn+1 = expxn (−ηn Grad f (xn )) ,

(1.2)

where expx (·) is the exponential map at x, ηn is the stepsize at iteration n, and Grad denotes the
Riemannian gradient. It is known that for geodesically convex and smooth functionals f , constant
stepsize RGD has an O(1/n) convergence rate as in Euclidean spaces [ZS16].
A natural follow-up question is whether one can find first-order algorithms that achieve an accelerated
convergence rate. This is motivated by the success of accelerated first-order methods in Euclidean
settings, most notably Nesterov’s method [Nes83], which uses momentum to achieve an O(1/n2 )
rate for convex and smooth objectives. Extensive efforts have been made to achieve the same
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

