Autoregressive Adversarial Post-Training
for Real-Time Interactive Video Generation
Shanchuan Lin∗ Ceyuan Yang Hao He† Jianwen Jiang‡
Yuxi Ren Xin Xia Yang Zhao Xuefeng Xiao Lu Jiang
ByteDance Seed
https://seaweed-apt.com/2

Abstract
Existing large-scale video generation models are computationally intensive, preventing adoption in real-time and interactive applications. In this work, we propose
autoregressive adversarial post-training (AAPT) to transform a pre-trained latent
video diffusion model into a real-time, interactive video generator. Our model
autoregressively generates a latent frame at a time using a single neural function
evaluation (1NFE). The model can stream the result to the user in real time and
receive interactive responses as controls to generate the next latent frame. Unlike existing approaches, our method explores adversarial training as an effective
paradigm for autoregressive generation. This not only allows us to design an
architecture that is more efficient for one-step generation while fully utilizing the
KV cache, but also enables training the model in a student-forcing manner that
proves to be effective in reducing error accumulation during long video generation.
Our experiments demonstrate that our 8B model achieves real-time, 24fps, streaming video generation at 736×416 resolution on a single H100, or 1280×720 on
8×H100 up to a minute long (1440 frames).
In recent years, the field of visual content creation has been transformed by the rise of foundation
models for video generation [4, 78, 69, 44, 95]. These models have enabled a wide range of powerful
applications, including text-to-video generation, image-to-video synthesis, and controllable video
creation conditioned on various multi-modal signals.
Building on this progress, researchers are beginning to explore more ambitious applications. One
exciting direction is using video generation models as interactive game engines and world simulators [93, 6, 67, 4]. Unlike offline video synthesis, interactive video generation requires the model to
respond to user inputs in real time and continuously generate coherent video as the world evolves.
While diffusion models produce high-quality videos, they are very expensive for real-time interactive
video generation. Early approaches applied diffusion models frame-by-frame [93, 111]. However,
these approaches incur high redundancy due to the need to reprocess the context frames at every
frame generation step. To address this, diffusion forcing [7, 108, 40, 23] introduced progressive noise
to parallelize denoising across frames. Recent work further reduced inference costs by incorporating
causal attention, KV caching, and step distillation [117, 75], with the current best model [117]
achieving four denoising steps.
Meanwhile, token-based autoregressive generation—popularized by large language models
(LLMs) [5, 1, 19]—offers an alternative. Models like VideoPoet [43] treat video generation as
a next-token prediction task, which can straightforwardly leverage KV caching to improve generation
∗

Shanchuan Lin: Corresponding author: peterlin@bytedance.com
Hao He: The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Internship at ByteDance Seed.
‡
Jianwen Jiang: ByteDance Intelligent Creation Lab.
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

