Multimodal Negative Learning

Baoquan Gong∗ Xiyuan Gao∗ Pengfei Zhu Qinghua Hu Bing Cao†
School of Artificial Intelligence, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Haihe Lab of ITAI
{gongbaoquan, gaoxiyuan, zhupengfei, huqinghua, caobing}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal learning systems often encounter challenges related to modality imbalance, where a dominant modality may overshadow others, thereby hindering the learning of weak modalities. Conventional approaches often force weak
modalities to align with dominant ones in "Learning to be (the same)" (Positive Learning), which risks suppressing the unique information inherent in the
weak modalities. To address this challenge, we offer a new learning paradigm:
"Learning Not to be" (Negative Learning). Instead of enhancing weak modalities’ target-class predictions, the dominant modalities dynamically guide the
weak modality to suppress non-target classes. This stabilizes the decision space
and preserves modality-specific information, allowing weak modalities to preserve unique information without being over-aligned. We proceed to reveal the
multimodal learning from a robustness perspective and theoretically derive the
Multimodal Negative Learning (MNL) framework, which introduces a dynamic
guidance mechanism tailored for negative learning. Our method provably tightens
the robustness lower bound of multimodal learning by increasing the Unimodal
Confidence Margin (UCoM) and reduces the empirical error of weak modalities, particularly under noisy and imbalanced scenarios. Extensive experiments
across multiple benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of
our approach against the competing methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/BaoquanGong/Multimodal-Negative-Learning.git.

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning has become a cornerstone in many real-world applications, such as autonomous
perception [1], medical diagnosis [2], and human-computer interaction [3]. By integrating information from multiple sources, such as vision, audio, and text, multimodal systems aim to improve
performance and generalization. However, multimodal data often exhibit a significant imbalance between modalities due to noise, lack of information, or sensor heterogeneity [4]. Unimodal prediction
accuracy is widely used to detect modality imbalance, which is a simple and effective metric [5, 6, 7],
but it is inherently sensitive to noise and perturbations [8]. This vulnerability often leads to fragile
performance in practice, limiting the reliability of such definitions in real-world deployments.
Extensive prior studies, especially those based on late fusion, also known as decision-level fusion
strategies, have attempted to alleviate modality imbalance. Common approaches include enhancing
the predictive performance of weak modalities through aggregating independently trained modalityspecific classifiers [9, 10], confidence-based weighting [5], adaptive ensembling [11], or knowledge
distillation [12, 13] from dominant modalities. While effective in certain scenarios, these methods
often implicitly aim to align weak modalities with dominant ones in terms of prediction accuracy. This
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

