Transformers Learn Faster with Semantic Focus
Parikshit Ram1 , Kenneth Clarkson1 , Tim Klinger1 , Shashanka Ubaru1 , Alexander Gray2,3
1
IBM Research, 2 Centaur AI Institute, 3 Purdue University
parikshit.ram@ibm.com, klclarks@us.ibm.com, tklinger@us.ibm.com,
shashanka.ubaru@ibm.com, alexander.gray@centaurinstitute.org

Abstract
Various forms of sparse attention have been explored to mitigate the quadratic
computational and memory cost of the attention mechanism in transformers. We
study sparse transformers not through a lens of efficiency but rather in terms of
learnability and generalization. Empirically studying a range of attention mechanisms, we find that input-dependent sparse attention models appear to converge
faster and generalize better than standard attention models, while input-agnostic
sparse attention models show no such benefits – a phenomenon that is robust across
architectural and optimization hyperparameter choices. This can be interpreted as
demonstrating that concentrating a model’s “semantic focus” with respect to the
tokens currently being considered (in the form of input-dependent sparse attention)
accelerates learning. We develop a theoretical characterization of the conditions
that explain this behavior. We establish a connection between the stability of
the standard softmax and the loss function’s Lipschitz properties, then show how
sparsity affects the stability of the softmax and the subsequent convergence and
generalization guarantees resulting from the attention mechanism. This allows us
to theoretically establish that input-agnostic sparse attention does not provide any
benefits. We also characterize conditions when semantic focus (input-dependent
sparse attention) can provide improved guarantees, and we validate that these
conditions are in fact met in our empirical evaluations.

1

Introduction

Transformers [1] are expressive set encoders, which when paired with positional encodings, can serve
as sequence encoders. The attention mechanism in a transformer block allows us to model the long and
short term dependencies in a sequence in an input-dependent manner instead of relying on handcrafted
dependency modeling as in recurrent (uni-directional and bi-directional) and convolutional models.
The single hidden layer multi-layered perceptron (or MLP) in the transformer block introduces nonlinearities enabling further expressivity. Transformers have been extremely successful in modeling
natural language, and are the core blocks of various large language models or LLMs. They have also
been successful in vision, tabular data, and time series among various other applications.
The expressivity of attention-based transformers [2] comes with a computational overhead where the
attention mechanism requires time and memory quadratic in the sequence length. To address this,
various efficient transformers have been developed [3], utilizing various techniques such as fixed
sparse attention patterns, low rank approximations of the attention matrix, and input-dependent sparse
attention patterns. In this work, we focus on sparse attention mechanisms, both input-dependent and
input-agnostic. Existing literature has studied sparse attention as a way to speed up the forward pass
(inference), which in turn can speed up each training step [4]. However, sparse attention has always
been viewed as an approximation of the gold standard full attention.
Contributions. One can view sparse attention as a form of sensory gating, and this is considered
an essential component of biological cognitive systems, allowing rapid learning [5, 6], and the
absence of it is often considered a marker for schizophrenia [7]. The gating is often achieved via
inhibitory signals. Related observations made by Bengio [8] suggest some motivations. He makes
a connection between a form of input-dependent sparse attention and the global workspace theory
of consciousness in cognitive science, as well as the properties of natural language sentences and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

