Inference of Whole Brain Electrophysiological
Networks Through Multimodal Integration of
Simultaneous Scalp and Intracranial EEG

Shihao Yang
Department of Systems Engineering
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ 07030
syang57@stevens.edu

Feng Liu∗
Department of Systems Engineering
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ 07030
fliu22@stevens.edu

Abstract
Brain imaging research has transitioned over the past decades from identifying
isolated regions of task-evoked activation to characterizing the spatiotemporal
dynamics of large-scale brain networks. Electrophysiological signals are the direct
manifestation of brain activity; thus, characterizing whole-brain electrophysiological networks (WBEN) can serve as a fundamental tool for neuroscience studies
and clinical applications. In this work, we introduce a framework for integrating
scalp EEG and intracranial EEG (iEEG) for WBEN estimation through a principled state-space modeling approach, where an Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithm is designed to infer the state va riables and brain connectivity simultaneously. We validated the proposed method on synthetic data, and the results revealed
improved performance compared to traditional two-step methods using scalp EEG
only, demonstrating the importance of including iEEG signals for WBEN estimation. For real data with simultaneous EEG and iEEG, we applied the developed
framework to understand the information flows during encoding and maintenance
phases of a working memory task. The information flows between subcortical and
cortical regions are delineated, highlighting more significant information flows
from cortical to subcortical regions during encoding than during maintenance.
The results are consistent with previous research findings, but from a whole-brain
perspective, which underscores the unique utility of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Brain networks represent the intricate and dynamic connectivity of neurons that facilitates communication across different brain regions. These networks are essential for supporting cognitive functions,
from basic sensory processing to complex decision-making [1, 2]. Existing studies have suggested
that accurately inferred brain connectivity patterns can help gain insights into the coordination and
interactions between different brain regions [3, 4], reveal the brain network underpinnings of cognitive
processes, and uncover the mechanisms and biomarkers of neuropsychiatric diseases [5, 6]. Over the
past decades, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) has been the most widely used brain
imaging modality for functional brain network modeling and analysis [7]. By analyzing fMRI data,
researchers can explore the connectomes of the human brain across different cognitive tasks [8, 9],
consciousness states [10], degenerative diseases [11], and mental disorders [12]. However, fMRI has
limitations, including non-portability and low temporal resolution, which restrict its use in applications that require characterization of instantaneous brain activity at sub-millisecond timescales [13].
∗

Corresponding author: Dr. Feng Liu, Email: fliu22@stevens.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

