GeoVideo: Introducing Geometric Regularization into
Video Generation Model
Yunpeng Bai1
1

Shaoheng Fang1

Chaohui Yu2,3

Fan Wang2

Qixing Huang1

The University of Texas at Austin, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, 3 Hupan Lab
https://geovideo.github.io/GeoVideo/

A brick building
surrounded by
mature trees.

GeoVideo

Figure 1: GeoVideo introduces a geometric consistency loss using predicted depths and camera poses
to enhance multi-view consistency of the output frames, leading a high-quality 3D reconstruction
from the output video frames.

Abstract
Recent advances in video generation have enabled the synthesis of high-quality and
visually realistic clips using diffusion transformer models. However, most existing
approaches operate purely in the 2D pixel space and lack explicit mechanisms
for modeling 3D structures, often resulting in temporally inconsistent geometries,
implausible motions, and structural artifacts. In this work, we introduce geometric
regularization losses into video generation by augmenting latent diffusion models
with per-frame depth prediction. We adopted depth as the geometric representation
because of the great progress in depth prediction and its compatibility with imagebased latent encoders. Specifically, to enforce structural consistency over time, we
propose a multi-view geometric loss that aligns the predicted depth maps across
frames within a shared 3D coordinate system. Our method bridges the gap between
appearance generation and 3D structure modeling, leading to improved spatiotemporal coherence, shape consistency, and physical plausibility. Experiments
across multiple datasets show that our approach produces significantly more stable
and geometrically consistent results than existing baselines.

1

Introduction

Video generation has recently made significant strides in creating visually impressive and high-quality
clips [4, 28, 69, 29, 53, 77]. Powered by diffusion transformer models [39] and large-scale training
datasets [2, 63, 8, 61], these systems are capable of synthesizing realistic videos conditioned on
various inputs, such as text prompts [26, 35, 26, 62] or images [12, 43, 57, 38]. Despite these
successes, current video generation models often fail to accurately capture the underlying geometry,
coherent motions, and physical consistency in dynamic scenes. As a result, the generated videos,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

