Lattice Boltzmann Model for Learning Real-World
Pixel Dynamicity
Guangze Zheng1 ,
1

HKU

Shijie Lin1 , Haobo Zuo1 , Si Si2 , Ming-Shan Wang2
Changhong Fu3 , Jia Pan1,4 ∗
2
3
Institute of Zoology, CAS
Tongji University 4 LimX Dynamics
guangze@connect.hku.hk, jpan@cs.hku.hk

Project page: https://george-zhuang.github.io/lbm

Figure 1: Real-world object dynamicity −
→ pixel dynamicity −
→ fluid dynamicity. The object dynamicity
in the open world manifests through deformation and self-occlusion, as exemplified by the bird in the figure.
From a visual perspective, such object dynamicity can be decomposed into pixel dynamicity. The pixels are
subsequently modeled as fluid lattices that simulate hydrodynamic streaming and collision processes, and the
pixel motion states are efficiently addressed with the proposed lattice Boltzmann model (LBM).

Abstract
This work proposes the Lattice Boltzmann Model (LBM) to learn real-world pixel
dynamicity for visual tracking. LBM decomposes visual representations into
dynamic pixel lattices and solves pixel motion states through collision-streaming
processes. Specifically, the high-dimensional distribution of the target pixels
is acquired through a multilayer predict-update network to estimate the pixel
positions and visibility. The predict stage formulates lattice collisions among
the spatial neighborhood of target pixels and develops lattice streaming within
the temporal visual context. The update stage rectifies the pixel distributions
with online visual representations. Comprehensive evaluations of real-world point
tracking benchmarks such as TAP-Vid and RoboTAP validate LBM’s efficiency. A
general evaluation of large-scale open-world object tracking benchmarks such as
TAO, BFT, and OVT-B further demonstrates LBM’s real-world practicality.

1

Introduction

Online and real-time pixel tracking is designed to achieve continuous localization of any specified
pixel for real-world applications, such as embodied manipulation Wen et al. (2024); Zhang et al.
(2024) and medical vision Schmidt et al. (2024). However, existing solutions are predominantly
∗

Corresponding author: jpan@cs.hku.hk

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

