Axial Neural Networks for Dimension-Free
Foundation Models
Hyunsu Kim† , Jonggeon Park† , Joan Bruna‡ , Hongseok Yang† , Juho Lee†
†
KAIST, ‡ New York University,
{kim.hyunsu,parkjonggeon,hongseok.yang,juholee}@kaist.ac.kr
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
The advent of foundation models in AI has significantly advanced general-purpose
learning, enabling remarkable capabilities in zero-shot inference and in-context
learning. However, training such models on physics data, including solutions to
partial differential equations (PDEs), poses a unique challenge due to varying dimensionalities across different systems. Traditional approaches either fix a maximum dimension or employ separate encoders for different dimensionalities, resulting in inefficiencies. To address this, we propose a dimension-agnostic neural
network architecture, the Axial Neural Network (XNN), inspired by parametersharing structures such as Deep Sets and Graph Neural Networks. XNN generalizes across varying tensor dimensions while maintaining computational efficiency.
We convert existing PDE foundation models into axial neural networks and evaluate their performance across three training scenarios: training from scratch, pretraining on multiple PDEs, and fine-tuning on a single PDE. Our experiments
show that XNNs perform competitively with original models and exhibit superior
generalization to unseen dimensions, highlighting the importance of multidimensional pretraining for foundation models.

1

Introduction

The growing scale of deep learning models has led to the emergence of general-purpose AI systems,
often called foundation models. Trained over a large amount of unlabeled data with self supervision, these models have shown impressive generalization performance, enabling effective zero-shot
inference and in-context learning on a wide range of tasks. In practice, these models are further finetuned or post-trained for particular target tasks, achieving performance superior to models trained
from scratch. A key requirement for developing highly-performing foundation models is the use of
vast and diverse training data. In fact, the relationship between a model’s performance and the scale
of data (and models) is known to follow a version of power law, called scaling law [22, 18, 4].
This paper is concerned with developing key techniques for building successful foundation models for physics data, such as climate time-series data and solutions of partial differential equations (PDEs). When training such a model, we often have to combine datasets from multiple systems or differential equations that operate on different dimensionalities. For instance, the Burgers
equation describing dissipative fluid flow is usually studied in one spatial dimension, whereas the
Navier–Stokes equations are studied in two or three dimensions. Since the solutions of these equations are typically represented as tensors whose elements are points in spatial and temporal grids,
different dimensionalities mean that those tensors storing solutions have different numbers of axes.
A straightforward way to address such mixed-dimensional scenarios is to fix a maximum dimension and either pad lower-dimensional inputs with zeros or build separate encoders for different
dimensions that share the same output space. However, both approaches are inefficient for low39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

