Spatially-aware Weights Tokenization
for NeRF-Language Models

Andrea Amaduzzi
andrea.amaduzzi4@unibo.it

Pierluigi Zama Ramirez
pierluigi.zama@unibo.it

Giuseppe Lisanti
giuseppe.lisanti@unibo.it

Samuele Salti
samuele.salti@unibo.it

Luigi Di Stefano
luigi.distefano@unibo.it
CVLab, University of Bologna
https://andreamaduzzi.github.io/spatial-llana

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) are neural networks – typically multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) – that represent the geometry and appearance of objects, with applications in vision, graphics, and robotics. Recent works propose understanding NeRFs
with natural language using Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) that
directly process the weights of a NeRF’s MLP. However, these approaches rely on
a global representation of the input object, making them unsuitable for spatial reasoning and fine-grained understanding. In contrast, we propose weights2space,
a self-supervised framework featuring a novel meta-encoder that can compute a
sequence of spatial tokens directly from the weights of a NeRF. Leveraging this
representation, we build Spatial LLaNA, a novel MLLM for NeRFs, capable of
understanding details and spatial relationships in objects represented as NeRFs.
We evaluate Spatial LLaNA on NeRF captioning and NeRF Q&A tasks, using
both existing benchmarks and our novel Spatial ObjaNeRF dataset consisting of
100 manually-curated language annotations for NeRFs. This dataset features 3D
models and descriptions that challenge the spatial reasoning capability of MLLMs.
Spatial LLaNA outperforms existing approaches across all tasks.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [45] can encode the 3D geometry and photorealistic appearance of
an object compactly within the weights of a neural network, typically implemented as a Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP). The ability of NeRFs to capture intricate visual details has led to widespread
adoption in vision, graphics, and robotics [21, 59].
With NeRFs emerging as an effective and popular modality to represent 3D objects, what if one could
effortlessly interact through words with an AI assistant capable of providing detailed information
about a complex object stored in a computer as a NeRF? For instance, one may ask the assistant
to describe specific parts of the object or to explain intricate spatial relationships precisely. Such
intuitive, language-based interaction with NeRF representations has recently been investigated by
LLaNA [6, 7]. LLaNA employs a meta-encoder [53] to extract a global embedding of an object
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

