A Closer Look to Positive-Unlabeled Learning from
Fine-grained Perspectives: An Empirical Study

Yuanchao Dai1,2 , Zhengzhang Hou1,2 , Changchun Li1,2 , Yuanbo Xu1 , En Wang1 , Ximing Li1,2,3∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering, Jilin University, China
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
{liximing86, yuanchaodai, changchunli93}@gmail.com

Abstract
Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning refers to a specific weakly-supervised learning
paradigm that induces a binary classifier with a few positive labeled instances and
massive unlabeled instances. To handle this task, the community has proposed
dozens of PU learning methods with various techniques, demonstrating strong
potential. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive study to investigate the
basic characteristics of current PU learning methods. We organize them into two
fundamental families of PU learning, including disambiguation-free empirical risks,
which approximate the expected risk of supervised learning, and pseudo-labeling
methods, which estimate pseudo-labels for unlabeled instances. First, we make
an empirical analysis on disambiguation-free empirical risks such as uPU, nnPU,
and DistPU, and suggest a novel risk-consistent set-aware empirical risk from
the perspective of aggregate supervision. Second, we make an empirical analysis
of pseudo-labeling methods to evaluate the potential of pseudo-label estimation
techniques and widely applied generic tricks in PU learning. Finally, based on those
empirical findings, we propose a general framework of PU learning by integrating
the set-aware empirical risk with pseudo-labeling. Compared with existing PU
learning methods, the proposed framework can be a practical benchmark in PU
learning.

1

Introduction

Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning refers to a specific weakly-supervised learning paradigm [1, 2, 3]
for binary classification, which trains a binary classifier with a few positive labeled instances and
massive unlabeled instances [4]. It arises in various practical scenarios such as automatic face tagging,
spam detection, and Inlier-based outlier detection [5]. Due to its wide applicability, PU learning has
increasingly attracted more attention from the machine learning community.
During the past decades, many emerging practical PU learning methods have been proposed with
various advanced techniques [6, 7]. Because in PU learning, negative labeled instances are unavailable,
how to deal with unlabeled instances becomes its key challenge; and from this taxonomic perspective,
we organize the existing PU learning methods into two fundamental families, namely disambiguationfree empirical risks [5, 8, 9, 10] and pseudo-labeling methods [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16].
The disambiguation-free empirical risks, as the name suggests, directly apply only positive labeled
instances and unlabeled instances to approximate the expected risk of supervised learning. Under
certain data generation assumptions, previous studies suggest unbiased empirical risk uPU [17, 5]
and several practical variants such as nnPU with non-negativity constraint [8], abs-PU with absolute∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

