Stochastically Dominant Peer Prediction

Yichi Zhang
DIMACS, Rutgers University
yz1636@dimacs.rutgers.edu

Shengwei Xu
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
shengwei@umich.edu

David Pennock
DIMACS, Rutgers University
dpennock@dimacs.rutgers.edu

Grant Schoenebeck
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
schoeneb@umich.edu

Abstract
Eliciting reliable human feedback is essential for many machine learning tasks,
such as learning from noisy labels and aligning AI systems with human preferences. Peer prediction mechanisms incentivize truthful reporting without ground
truth verification by scoring agents based on correlations with peers. Traditional
mechanisms, which ensure that truth-telling maximizes the expected scores in
equilibrium, can elicit honest information while assuming agents’ utilities are
linear functions of their scores. However, in practice, non-linear payment rules
are usually preferred, or agents’ utilities are inherently non-linear.
We propose stochastically dominant truthfulness (SD-truthfulness) as a stronger
guarantee: the score distribution of truth-telling stochastically dominates all other
strategies, incentivizing truthful reporting for a wide range of monotone utility functions. Our first observation is that no existing peer prediction mechanism naturally
satisfies this criterion without strong assumptions. A simple solution—rounding
scores into binary lotteries—can enforce SD-truthfulness, but often degrades sensitivity, a key property related to fairness and statistical efficiency. We demonstrate
how a more careful application of rounding can better preserve sensitivity. Furthermore, we introduce a new enforced agreement (EA) mechanism that is theoretically
guaranteed to be SD-truthful in binary-signal settings and, under mild assumptions, empirically achieves the highest sensitivity among all known SD-truthful
mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Information elicitation studies how to design mechanisms that incentivize honest and high-effort
human feedback. In this framework, a principal seeks reliable responses regarding a set of tasks
from strategic agents who are motivated by the designed rewards. For example, AI companies collect
human preferences to align language models via RLHF [Ouyang et al., 2022], and MOOCs use peer
grading to evaluate complex assignments at scale Piech et al. [2013]. A key challenge is designing
scoring mechanisms that accurately assess the informativeness of agents’ reports.
Peer prediction provides an elegant solution for settings where ground truth is unavailable or costly to
obtain, such as in subjective tasks [Miller et al., 2005]. Instead of relying on external validation, peer
prediction scores agents based on the correlation between their reports and those of their peers. The
scoring mechanism is designed to be truthful so that everyone reporting truthfully forms a Bayesian
Nash equilibrium, ensuring that truth-telling maximizes each agent’s expected score.
A key assumption underlying the effectiveness of existing peer prediction mechanisms is that agents’
utility is a linear function of their score. This assumption is reasonable in some cases, such as when
agents are solely motivated by monetary payments, which can be straightforwardly designed as a
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

