On Minimax Estimation of Parameters in
Softmax-Contaminated Mixture of Experts

Fanqi Yan⋆,1

Huy Nguyen⋆,2 Dung Le⋆,2 Pedram Akbarian3
Nhat Ho2 Alessandro Rinaldo2
1
Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences,
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
{fanqi.yan, huynm, quangdung0110, akbarian, minhnhat}@utexas.edu,
alessandro.rinaldo@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
The softmax-contaminated mixture of experts (MoE) model is deployed when a
large-scale pre-trained model, which plays the role of a fixed expert, is fine-tuned
for learning downstream tasks by including a new contamination part, or prompt,
functioning as a new, trainable expert. Despite its popularity and relevance, the
theoretical properties of the softmax-contaminated MoE have remained unexplored
in the literature. In the paper, we study the convergence rates of the maximum
likelihood estimator of gating and prompt parameters in order to gain insights
into the statistical properties and potential challenges of fine-tuning with a new
prompt. We find that the estimability of these parameters is compromised when the
prompt acquires overlapping knowledge with the pre-trained model, in the sense
that we make precise by formulating a novel analytic notion of distinguishability.
Under distinguishability of the pre-trained and prompt models, we derive minimax
optimal estimation rates for all the gating and prompt parameters. By contrast,
when the distinguishability condition is violated, these estimation rates become
significantly slower due to their dependence on the prompt convergence rate to
the pre-trained model. Finally, we empirically corroborate our theoretical findings
through several numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Mixture of experts (MoE) [14, 16] has emerged as a statistical machine learning model that aggregates
the power of multiple sub-models. This model consists of two primary components: expert function
(or, simply, expert) and a gating network. Experts can be, for example, a feed-forward network
(FFN) [33, 4], a classifier [2, 27], or a regression model [7, 17]. The gating network softly divides
the input space into multiple regions where the opinions of some experts are deemed to be more
trustworthy than others. This is done by dynamically allocating higher input-dependent weights
instead of constant weights to the various experts, making MoE more flexible and adaptive than
traditional mixture models [25]. As a consequence, MoE has been leveraged in a wide range of
fields, including natural language processing [5, 15, 10, 8, 21, 33], computer vision [32, 24], speech
recognition [36, 37], multimodal learning [11, 38, 28], continual learning [20, 22], and reinforcement
learning [1, 3].
Unlike these applications where all experts are trainable, parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods
such as prefix tuning [23, 19, 18] can be interpreted as a mixture of a frozen or pre-trained expert and
⋆

Co-first authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

