Don’t Just Chase “Highlighted Tokens” in MLLMs:
Revisiting Visual Holistic Context Retention

Xin Zou1,2 , Di Lu1,† , Yizhou Wang1 , Yibo Yan1,2 , Yuanhuiyi Lyu1,2 ,
Xu Zheng1,3 , Linfeng Zhang4 , Xuming Hu1,2∗
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
https://github.com/obananas/HoloV

Abstract
Despite their powerful capabilities, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
suffer from considerable computational overhead due to their reliance on massive
visual tokens. Recent studies have explored token pruning to alleviate this problem,
which typically uses text-vision cross-attention or [CLS] attention to assess and
discard redundant visual tokens. In this work, we identify a critical limitation of
such attention-first pruning approaches, i.e., they tend to preserve semantically
similar tokens, resulting in pronounced performance drops under high pruning
ratios. To this end, we propose HoloV, a simple yet effective, plug-and-play
visual token pruning framework for efficient inference. Distinct from previous
attention-first schemes, HoloV rethinks token retention from a holistic perspective.
By adaptively distributing the pruning budget across different spatial crops, HoloV
ensures that the retained tokens capture the global visual context rather than isolated
salient features. This strategy minimizes representational collapse and maintains
task-relevant information even under aggressive pruning. Experimental results
demonstrate that our HoloV achieves superior performance across various tasks,
MLLM architectures, and pruning ratios compared to SOTA methods. For instance,
LLaVA1.5 equipped with HoloV preserves 95.8% of the original performance after
pruning 88.9% of visual tokens, achieving superior efficiency-accuracy trade-offs.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated outstanding capabilities [82, 12]
in tasks such as image captioning [35, 61, 14], visual question answering [24, 99, 36], and video
understanding [34, 64, 79]. However, these models [43, 78, 38] typically require converting visual
inputs into long sequence representations (i.e., visual tokens), which increases the computational
complexity and cost of inference [97], especially for high-resolution images [41] and multi-frame
videos [57], where redundant visual information further exacerbates the computational overhead.
To address this challenge, researchers have introduced token pruning strategies [49, 13, 98, 87] that
aim to retain the highlighted visual tokens as well as prune others for accelerating MLLM’s inference.
These methods typically define importance criteria for tokens, such as attention scores [13, 19] or
gradient information [59, 58], to quantify the significance of visual tokens, and less important tokens
are pruned during the inference phase, which balances speed and performance, but with limitations.
∗

Corresponding author, †Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

