Bootstrapping Hierarchical Autoregressive Formal
Reasoner with Chain-of-Proxy-Autoformalization

Qi Liu, Xinhao Zheng, Renqiu Xia, Qinxiang Cao, Junchi Yan∗
School of Computer Science & School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Innovation Institute
{purewhite,void_zxh,xiarenqiu,caoqinxiang,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/Purewhite2019/har_copa_main

Abstract
Deductive formal problem-solving (D-FPS) enables process-verified, humanaligned problem-solving by implementing deductive solving processes within
formal theorem proving (FTP) environments. However, current methods fail to
address the misalignment between informal and formal reasoning granularity and
suffer from inefficiency due to backtracking and error propagation. Moreover, the
extreme scarcity of formal problem-solution pairs further hinders progress. For
the first gap, we propose HAR (Hierarchical Autoregressive Formal Reasoner), a
novel reasoning pipeline. HAR decouples informal-aligned drafting and detailed
proving, and formulates solution construction as autoregressive generation with
per-step feedback. Second, we propose CoPA (Chain-of-Proxy-Autoformalization),
a data generation pipeline that cascades statement autoformalization, proof drafting, and proof search as a proxy autoformalization path. Experiments demonstrate
significant improvements: trained on data bootstrapped by CoPA, HAR achieves superior performance on FormalMath500 (15.50% 7→ 44.09%) and MiniF2F-Solving
(21.87% 7→ 56.58%) with lower computational budget. Explorations reveal promising directions in formal solution pruning and informal dataset denoising.

1

Introduction

Contemporary large reasoning models (LRMs) demonstrate superhuman performance in mathematical
reasoning [1–3]. However, the lack of zero-false-positive process-level supervision limits their
inference scalability [4] and training effectiveness [5, 6]. Deductive formal problem-solving (DFPS) [7] addresses this by implementing problem-solving processes within formal theorem proving
(FTP) environments, decoupling solving and verification, and enforcing deductive reasoning.
The transition from FTP to D-FPS introduces two core challenges. 1) absence of an efficient and
effective reasoning method; 2) extreme scarcity of formal problem-solution data.
For the reasoning pipeline, we systematically analyze the design choices of existing FTP methods
and identify two key gaps. First, the
√ granularity between informal and formal reasoning is misaligned.
For instance, while substituting 4 with 2 is trivial in informal reasoning, it requires a three-line
formal proof. Conversely, computing the 100th Fibonacci number modulo 4 is easy in formal systems.
Second, existing FTP paradigms are inefficient for deductive reasoning. Search-based approaches
allocate enormous resources to backtracking. An agent can abandon the current path and return to a
previous node to avoid dead ends. However, this is less essential for D-FPS. Whole-proof generation
suffers from error propagation, where initial mistakes lead to cascading failures.
∗

Corresponding author. This work was in part supported by NSFC (92370201).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

