Taming generative video models
for zero-shot optical flow extraction

Seungwoo Kim∗ Khai Loong Aw∗ Klemen Kotar∗
Cristobal Eyzaguirre Wanhee Lee Yunong Liu Jared Watrous Stefan Stojanov
Juan Carlos Niebles Jiajun Wu Daniel L.K. Yamins
Stanford University

Figure 1: We introduce a zero-shot test-time inference procedure called KL-tracing, which
extracts robust optical flow and point tracking from a generative world model on challenging
in-the-wild videos. In every column, the green line links the query location in the first frame (top) to
the position predicted by our method in the second frame (bottom). All clips are real-world internet
videos and contain phenomena that classical, appearance-based optical flow methods find challenging:
(A) Newton’s cradle, where both frames have four balls in the middle, but the balls are different; the
example involves physical reasoning. (B) Globe has challenging in-place object rotation and the
query point is in the textureless ocean. (C) Dog weaving through occluding poles with large, rapid
motion, including depth changes and motion blur. (D) Soccer tackle with fast, diagonal motion with
motion blur and partial occlusion. (E) Windmill rotation where the repetitive blades and uniform sky
make local matching challenging. These examples highlight the benefits of leveraging a powerful
world model to extract optical flow for challenging real-world scene dynamics.

Abstract
Extracting optical flow from videos remains a core computer vision problem.
Motivated by the recent success of large general-purpose models, we ask whether
frozen self-supervised video models trained only to predict future frames can be
prompted, without fine-tuning, to output flow. Prior attempts to read out depth or
illumination from video generators required fine-tuning; that strategy is ill-suited
for flow, where labeled data is scarce and synthetic datasets suffer from a sim-toreal gap. Inspired by the Counterfactual World Model (CWM) paradigm, which
can obtain point-wise correspondences by injecting a small tracer perturbation
into a next-frame predictor and tracking its propagation, we extend this idea to
generative video models for zero-shot flow extraction. We explore several popular
architectures and find that successful zero-shot flow extraction in this manner is
∗

Equal contribution

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

