Unifying Attention Heads and Task Vectors via Hidden
State Geometry in In-Context Learning

Haolin Yang1

Hakaze Cho2
Yiqiao Zhong3
Naoya Inoue2,4
2 JAIST
3 University of Wisconsin - Madison
4 RIKEN
haolinyang2001@uchicago.edu, yfzhao@jaist.ac.jp
yiqiao.zhong@wisc.edu, naoya-i@jaist.ac.jp

1 University of Chicago

Abstract
The unusual properties of in-context learning (ICL) have prompted investigations
into the internal mechanisms of large language models. Prior work typically focuses
on either special attention heads or task vectors at specific layers, but lacks a unified
framework linking these components to the evolution of hidden states across layers
that ultimately produce the model’s output. In this paper, we propose such a
framework for ICL primarily in classification tasks by analyzing two geometric
factors that govern performance: the separability and alignment of query hidden
states. A fine-grained analysis of layer-wise dynamics reveals a striking two-stage
mechanism—separability emerges in early layers, while alignment develops in later
layers. Ablation studies further show that Previous Token Heads drive separability,
while Induction Heads and task vectors enhance alignment. Our findings thus
bridge the gap between attention heads and task vectors, offering a unified account
of ICL’s underlying mechanisms.1

1

Introduction

One of the most remarkable features of Large Language Models (LLMs) is their ability to respond to
novel queries in user-desired mannerisms on-the-fly solely by learning from demonstrations provided
in the input (as shown in Figure 1 (A))—without any additional training. This capability is known as
In-context Learning (ICL) [Brown et al., 2020, Radford et al., 2019]. ICL has revolutionized natural
language processing by reducing dependence on burdensome data collection and costly finetuning,
enabling swift and seamless adaptation of LLMs to a variety of downstream tasks [Dong et al., 2024].
Due to its stark departure from traditional gradient-based learning paradigms, ICL has attracted
significant academic interest. One line of research aims to develop a mechanistic understanding of ICL
by analyzing the internal behavior of LLMs in ICL settings [Reddy, 2024]. Some studies highlight
the importance of key structural components in LLMs, such as Induction Heads (IH) [Elhage et al.,
2021, Olsson et al., 2022, Cho et al., 2025a], which retrieve information from demonstrations and
perform copy-like operations within Transformer-based architectures. Other studies adopt a hiddenstate-centric view, interpreting ICL as a process in which LLMs construct vector representations of
the task from demonstrations (so-called task vectors [Hendel et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024]) using the
hidden states at an intermediate layer, and then use the vectors to steer hidden states and produce
better next-token predictions. Both lines of work support their claims primarily through ablation and
intervention experiments that assess the impact on model outputs.
However, treating model components and hidden states as separate entities in ICL analysis is
both unnecessary and misleading. The two are inherently intertwined—components like attention
heads transform hidden states layer by layer, and these intermediate updates ultimately determine the
1 Code implementation: https://github.com/HLYang2001/ICL_Hidden_Geometry.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

