Optimal Dynamic Regret by Transformers for
Non-Stationary Reinforcement Learning

Baiyuan Chen
The University of Tokyo
chenbaiyuan75@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Shinji Ito
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN AIP
shinji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Masaaki Imaizumi
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN AIP
imaizumi@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Transformers have demonstrated exceptional performance across a wide range
of domains. While their ability to perform reinforcement learning in-context
has been established both theoretically and empirically, their behavior in nonstationary environments remains less understood. In this study, we address this
gap by showing that transformers can achieve nearly optimal dynamic regret
bounds in non-stationary settings. We prove that transformers are capable of approximating strategies used to handle non-stationary environments and can learn
the approximator in the in-context learning setup. Our experiments further show
that transformers can match or even outperform existing expert algorithms in such
environments.

1

Introduction

Transformers have emerged as a powerful class of sequence models with remarkable expressive
capabilities. Originally popularized in the context of natural language processing, they leverage
self-attention mechanisms to in-context learn new tasks without any parameter updates (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Yun et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2018). In other
words, a large transformer model can be given a prompt consisting of example input-output pairs
for an unseen task and subsequently produce correct outputs for new queries of that task, purely by
processing the sequence of examples and queries (Lee et al., 2022; Laskin et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2023; Lin et al., 2024). This ability to dynamically adapt via context rather than gradient-based finetuning has spurred extensive interest in understanding the theoretical expressivity of transformers
and how they might learn algorithms internally during training.
Recent theoretical work has begun to analyze the various aspects of transformers. On the expressiveness front, transformers have been shown to be universal or near-universal function approximators under various conditions (Yun et al., 2020). Beyond mere approximation of static functions,
researchers have demonstrated that transformers can encode and execute entire computational procedures. For example, by carefully setting a transformer’s weights, one can make its forward pass
simulate iterative algorithms such as gradient descent and many others (Bai et al., 2023; Cheng et al.,
2024; Huang et al., 2025).
Studies have shown that transformers can approximate various reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. The question here is whether a transformer can be trained to act as an RL algorithm when
presented with an interaction history as context. Lin et al. (2024) shows that a sufficiently large
transformer model, after being pre-trained on offline interaction sequences, can approximate near39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

