Accelerating 3D Molecule Generative Models with
Trajectory Diagnosis

Zhilong Zhang1,2∗

Yuxuan Song1,3∗ Yichun Wang4∗ JingJing Gong1 Hanlin Wu1
Dongzhan Zhou5 Hao Zhou1,5 & Wei-Ying Ma1
1
Institute of AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
2
Qiuzhen College, Tsinghua University
3
Department of Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Industrial Engineering, Tsinghua University
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
Geometric molecule generative models have found expanding applications across
various scientific domains, but their generation inefficiency has become a critical
bottleneck. Through a systematic investigation of the generative trajectory, we
discover a unique challenge for molecule geometric graph generation: generative
models require determining the permutation order of atoms in the molecule before refining its atomic feature values. Based on this insight, we decompose the
generation process into permutation phase and adjustment phase, and propose a
geometric-informed prior and consistency parameter objective to accelerate each
phase. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves competitive
performance with approximately 10 sampling steps, 7.5 × faster than previous
state-of-the-art models and approximately 100 × faster than diffusion-based models, offering a significant step towards scalable molecular generation. Code is
available at https://github.com/GenSI-THUAIR/MolTD

1

Introduction

Geometric generative models have achieved notable progress in various important scientific tasks,
including protein folding [1], de novo drug design [2, 3], and crystal generation [4]. Previous progress
are largely driven by the adoption of advanced generative models, particularly diffusion models,
which could refine a cloud of atoms into precise molecular structures through iterative sampling.
A notable example is AlphaFold3, which employs a diffusion-based network to predict the joint
structures of molecular complexes [1].
However, the iterative sampling process of these advanced geometric generative models can lead to
inefficiencies in practice. For instance, the AlphaFold3-level structure prediction system requires
around 200 diffusion steps, which significantly contributes to the heavy inference pipeline and usually
5 sampling procedures are conducted with different seeds for a single structure prediction task to
obtain comparable performance [5]. As application scenarios expand, generation inefficiency has
become a critical bottleneck, especially given the growing demand for scalable inference to produce
large-scale synthetic data [6] and to integrate generative models into real-time scientific workflows
in drug discovery [7] and material design [4]. Therefore, enhancing the efficiency of geometric
generative models has emerged as a key research direction.
Recent efforts have adapted techniques from general domains such as image generation to improve
sampling efficiency in the molecular generation setting. However, even the most efficient methods
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to Hao Zhou(zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

