REArtGS: Reconstructing and Generating Articulated
Objects via 3D Gaussian Splatting with Geometric and
Motion Constraints
Di Wu1,2 , Liu Liu 3∗, Zhou Linli1 , Anran Huang3 , Liangtu Song1 , Qiaojun Yu4 ,
Qi Wu4,5†, Cewu Lu4
1 Hefei Institutes of Physical Science Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 University of Science and Technology of China
3 Hefei University of Technology
4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5 ByteDance
Email: wdcs@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liuliu@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Articulated objects, as prevalent entities in human life, their 3D representations play
crucial roles across various applications. However, achieving both high-fidelity
textured surface reconstruction and dynamic generation for articulated objects
remains challenging for existing methods. In this paper, we present REArtGS, a
novel framework that introduces additional geometric and motion constraints to
3D Gaussian primitives, enabling realistic surface reconstruction and generation
for articulated objects. Specifically, given multi-view RGB images of arbitrary
two states of articulated objects, we first introduce an unbiased Signed Distance
Field (SDF) guidance to regularize Gaussian opacity fields, enhancing geometry constraints and improving surface reconstruction quality. Then we establish
deformable fields for 3D Gaussians constrained by the kinematic structures of
articulated objects, achieving unsupervised generation of surface meshes in unseen states. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real datasets demonstrate our approach achieves high-quality textured surface reconstruction for given
states, and enables high-fidelity surface generation for unseen states. Project site:
https://sites.google.com/view/reartgs/home.

1

Introduction

Articulated objects are ubiquitous in our daily lives. Modeling articulated objects, i.e. mesh reconstruction and generation, holds significant importance in many fields including virtual and augmented
reality [16, 36], object manipulation [40, 31], robots [33, 17] and human-object interaction [37, 12].
Currently, the surface and shape reconstruction for articulated objects is a non-trivial task due to the
challenges: firstly, articulated objects exhibit complicated and diverse geometric structures with a
wide range of scales. Secondly, articulated objects possess varied kinematic structures, and the static
surface meshes generated from vanilla 3D reconstruction methods fail to meet practical interaction
requirements. Under this circumstance, PARIS [14] attempts to use multi-view images from two states
for articulated object dynamically reconstruction with neural implicit radiance fields. Nevertheless,
PARIS lacks geometric constraints, leading to shape-radiance ambiguity and additional errors for
motion analysis.
∗
†

Corresponding author
Project leader

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

