Empowering Decision Trees via Shape Function
Branching

Nakul Upadhya, Eldan Cohen
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
nakul.upadhya@mail.utoronto.ca, eldan.cohen@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Decision trees are prized for their interpretability and strong performance on
tabular data. Yet, their reliance on simple axis-aligned linear splits often forces
deep, complex structures to capture non-linear feature effects, undermining human
comprehension of the constructed tree. To address this limitation, we propose
a novel generalization of a decision tree, the Shape Generalized Tree (SGT), in
which each internal node applies a learnable axis-aligned shape function to a single
feature, enabling rich, non-linear partitioning in one split. As users can easily
visualize each node’s shape function, SGTs are inherently interpretable and provide
intuitive, visual explanations of the model’s decision mechanisms. To learn SGTs
from data, we propose ShapeCART, an efficient induction algorithm for SGTs.
We further extend the SGT framework to bivariate shape functions (S2 GT) and
multi-way trees (SGTK ), and present Shape2 CART and ShapeCARTK , extensions
to ShapeCART for learning S2 GTs and SGTK s, respectively. Experiments on
various datasets show that SGTs achieve superior performance with reduced model
size compared to traditional axis-aligned linear trees.

1

Introduction

Tabular datasets are collections of data organized into rows and columns, containing distinct features
that can be continuous, categorical, or ordinal and remain among the most widely used dataset
types in machine learning [1, 2]. Decisions trees are one of the most widely used approaches on
these tabular datasets [3], largely due to their inherent interpretability [4] and robust performance
[3]. These characteristics have established them as a favored choice in high-stakes domains such
as healthcare [5, 6], finance [7, 8], and manufacturing [9, 10], where the ability to understand the
model predictions is often just as important as high predictive accuracy. Structurally, decision trees
organize nodes hierarchically, with internal nodes responsible for routing data samples based on
defined criteria and terminal (leaf) nodes providing the final predictions. A common type of tree
is the binary axis-aligned linear tree, where each internal node routes data to a left or right child
node based on a simple threshold comparison involving only a single feature: xd ≤ θ (send to left if
feature d is less than or equal to threshold θ).
While axis-aligned linear trees are simple and interpretable, the impact of feature values on the target
is often non-linear, requiring repeated splits on the same features at different levels of the tree to
represent the feature-target relationship adequately (see Figure 1b). However, repeatedly employing
a single feature across multiple nodes in a decision path can hinder end-user comprehension of the
model’s learned relationship for that feature [11] and necessitate a larger tree with greater depth and
node count to attain sufficient performance. This increase in size directly impacts interpretability,
with empirical evidence confirming that tree comprehensibility is highly sensitive to the depth of
decision paths and the number of leaves [4]. Furthermore, deeper trees inherently generate larger,
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

