Data Mixing Can Induce Phase Transitions in
Knowledge Acquisition
Xinran Gu1,3∗ Kaifeng Lyu1∗† Jiazheng Li2,3 Jingzhao Zhang1,3‡
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
College of AI, Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Qizhi Institute
guxr24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, klyu@tsinghua.edu.cn
foreverlasting1202@outlook.com, jingzhaoz@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are typically trained on data mixtures: most data
come from web scrapes, while a small portion is curated from high-quality sources
with dense domain-specific knowledge. In this paper, we show that when training LLMs on such data mixtures, knowledge acquisition from knowledge-dense
datasets—unlike training exclusively on knowledge-dense data [Allen-Zhu and
Li, 2024a]—does not always follow a smooth scaling law but can exhibit phase
transitions with respect to the mixing ratio and model size. Through controlled
experiments on a synthetic biography dataset mixed with web-scraped data, we
demonstrate that: (1) as we increase the model size to a critical value, the model suddenly transitions from memorizing very few to most of the biographies; (2) below
a critical mixing ratio, the model memorizes almost nothing even with extensive
training, but beyond this threshold, it rapidly memorizes more biographies. We
attribute these phase transitions to a capacity allocation phenomenon: a model with
bounded capacity must act like a knapsack problem solver to minimize the overall
test loss, and the optimal allocation across datasets can change discontinuously as
the model size or mixing ratio varies. We formalize this intuition in an informationtheoretic framework and reveal that these phase transitions are predictable, with
the critical mixing ratio following a power-law relationship with the model size.
Our findings highlight a concrete case where a good mixing recipe for large models
may not be optimal for small models, and vice versa.

1

Introduction

The pre-training data of large language models (LLMs) can be categorized into two major types. The
first type consists of large-scale corpora scraped from the web [Raffel et al., 2020, Penedo et al., 2024,
Li et al., 2024], often spanning billions to trillions of tokens across diverse topics and styles. Due to
the scale, it is inherently hard to ensure the information density of the dataset and its relevance to
downstream tasks. Hence, a second type of data, smaller-scale datasets curated from high-quality
sources, is incorporated. This type of data usually contains very dense knowledge on tasks or domains
with significant practical value. For example, Wikipedia and Stack Exchange cover a wide range of
world knowledge. OpenWebMath [Paster et al., 2024] and StarCoder [Li et al., 2023, Kocetkov et al.,
2022] provide valuable data for improving model performance on mathematics and coding tasks.
The second type of data, which we refer to as knowledge-dense data, typically accounts for only
a small fraction of the entire corpus. In the pre-training data of a recently released model family,
∗

Equal contribution
Work done while at the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley.
‡
Corresponding author
†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

