LOPT: Learning Optimal Pigovian Tax in Sequential
Social Dilemmas
Yun Hua1∗, Shang Gao2∗, Wenhao Li3 , Haosheng Chen2 , Bo Jin3 ,
Xiangfeng Wang4,5,6†, Jun Luo1 , Hongyuan Zha7
1
Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
4
Key Laboratory of Mathematics and Engineering Applications (MoE)
5
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, East China Normal University
6
Shenzhen Loop Area Institute (SLAI)
7
School of Data Science, Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
{hyyh28,jluo_ms}@sjtu.edu.cn, {shanggao,hschen}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
{bjin,whli}@tongji.edu.cn, xfwang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has emerged as a powerful framework
for modeling autonomous agents that independently optimize their individual objectives. However, in mixed-motive MARL environments, rational self-interested
behaviors often lead to collectively suboptimal outcomes situations commonly
referred to as social dilemmas. A key challenge in addressing social dilemmas lies
in accurately quantifying and representing them in a numerical form that captures
how self-interested agent behaviors impact social welfare. To address this challenge, externalities in the economic concept is adopted and extended to denote the
unaccounted-for impact of one agent’s actions on others, as a means to rigorously
quantify social dilemmas. Based on this measurement, a novel method, Learning
Optimal Pigovian Tax (LOPT) is proposed. Inspired by Pigovian taxes, which are
designed to internalize externalities by imposing cost on negative societal impacts,
LOPT employs an auxiliary tax agent that learns an optimal Pigovian tax policy to
reshape individual rewards aligned with social welfare, thereby promoting agent
coordination and mitigating social dilemmas. We support LOPT with theoretical analysis and validate it on standard MARL benchmarks, including Escape
Room and Cleanup. Results show that by effectively internalizing externalities that
quantify social dilemmas, LOPT aligns individual objectives with collective goals,
significantly improving social welfare over state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning [42] achieved remarkable efficacy across diverse domains [32, 21, 18, 52] and
has been successfully extended to multi-agent settings, especially in fully-cooperative scenarios [46,
26, 49]. Nevertheless, prevalent centralized multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods
that utilize team rewards [13, 41, 38, 37, 7] are encumbered by inherent limitations in their scalability
to large agent populations and are fundamentally deemed unsuitable for self-interested agents in
mixed-motivation environments. While decentralized learning paradigms [43, 40, 2], wherein agents
independently optimize their individual rewards, provide a more natural modeling approach for selfinterested behavior. Yet, these methods frequently encounter difficulties in facilitating coordination
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding to: Xiangfeng Wang.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

