Private Set Union with Multiple Contributions

Travis Dick
Google Research

Haim Kaplan
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research

Ziteng Sun
Google Research

Alex Kulesza
Google Research

Uri Stemmer
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research

Ananda Theertha Suresh
Google Research

Abstract
In the private set union problem each user owns a bag of at most k items (from some
large universe of items), and we are interested in computing the union of the items
in the bags of all of the users. This is trivial without privacy, but a differentially
private algorithm must be careful about reporting items contained in only a small
number of bags. We consider differentially private algorithms that always report a
subset of the union, and define the utility of an algorithm to be the expected size of
the subset that it reports.
Because the achievable utility varies significantly with the dataset, we introduce
the utility ratio, which normalizes utility by a dataset-specific upper bound and
characterizes a mechanism by its lowest normalized utility across all datasets.
We then develop algorithms with guaranteed utility ratios and complement them
with bounds on the best possible utility ratio. Prior work has shown that a single
algorithm can be simultaneously optimal for all datasets when k = 1, but we
show that instance-optimal algorithms do not exist when k > 1, and characterize
how performance degrades as k grows. At the same time, we design a private
algorithm that achieves the maximum possible utility, regardless of k, when the
item histogram matches a prior prediction (for instance, from a previous data
release) and degrades gracefully with the ℓ∞ distance between the prediction and
the actual histogram when the prediction is imperfect.

1

Introduction

Consider a dataset where each entry is a set of items donated by a different user. The set union
problem is to output the union of all of the sets. This simple problem arises in many practical
scenarios, and when the items have the potential to be sensitive we may want privacy guarantees to
ensure that the result does not reveal personal data. For example, private set union can be used for
discovering n-grams in a corpus [Gopi et al., 2020], releasing keys in SQL queries [Wilson et al.,
2020], and in general for determining the domain of private aggregate statistics [Amin et al., 2022].
Since the number of conceivable items (e.g., all possible n-grams) can be very large, it is often
necessary for the algorithm to restrict its output to a subset of the true union [Gopi et al., 2020,
Desfontaines et al., 2022]. Motivated by this, Cohen et al. [2021], Desfontaines et al. [2022]
proposed an optimal (ε, δ)-differentially private algorithm when each user contributes exactly one
item. However, in many realistic settings users can contribute multiple items. This prompts a natural
question: can we design an optimal (ε, δ)-differentially private algorithm when each user contributes
up to k items?
We begin with the definition of differential privacy.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

