Shortcuts and Identifiability in Concept-based Models
from a Neuro-Symbolic Lens

Samuele Bortolotti∗
DISI, University of Trento
Italy
samuele.bortolotti@unitn.it

Emanuele Marconato∗
DISI, University of Trento
Italy
emanuele.marconato@unitn.it

Paolo Morettin
DISI, University of Trento
Italy
paolo.morettin@unitn.it

Andrea Passerini
DISI, University of Trento
Italy
andrea.passerini@unitn.it

Stefano Teso
CIMeC and DISI, University of Trento
Italy
stefano.teso@unitn.it

Abstract
Concept-based Models are neural networks that learn a concept extractor to map
inputs to high-level concepts and an inference layer to translate these into predictions. Ensuring these modules produce interpretable concepts and behave reliably
in out-of-distribution is crucial, yet the conditions for achieving this remain unclear.
We study this problem by establishing a novel connection between Concept-based
Models and reasoning shortcuts (RSs), a common issue where models achieve
high accuracy by learning low-quality concepts, even when the inference layer is
fixed and provided upfront. Specifically, we extend RSs to the more complex setting
of Concept-based Models and derive theoretical conditions for identifying both the
concepts and the inference layer. Our empirical results highlight the impact of RSs
and show that existing methods, even combined with multiple natural mitigation
strategies, often fail to meet these conditions in practice.

1

Introduction

Concept-based Models (CBMs) are a broad class of self-explainable classifiers [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
designed for high performance and ante-hoc interpretability. Learning a CBM involves solving
two conjoint problems: acquiring high-level concepts describing the input (e.g., an image) and an
inference layer that predicts a label from them. In many applications, it is essential that these two
elements are “high quality”, in the sense that: i) the concepts should be interpretable, as failure in
doing so compromises understanding [8, 9] and steerability [10, 11], both key selling points of CBMs;
and ii) the concepts and inference layer should behave well also out of distribution (OOD), e.g., they
should not pick up spurious correlations between the input, the concepts and the output [12, 13, 14].
This raises the question of when CBMs can acquire “high-quality” concepts and inference layers.
While existing studies focus on concept quality [15, 16, 17], they neglect the role of the inference
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to samuele.bortolotti@unitn.it

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

