MiCo: Multi-image Contrast for Reinforcement
Visual Reasoning

Xi Chen1

Mingkang Zhu3 Shaoteng Liu3 Xiaoyang Wu1
Yu Liu2 Xiang Bai4 Hengshuang Zhao1∗
1

HKU

2

Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group

3

CUHK

4

Xiaogang Xu3

HUST

Abstract
This work explores enabling Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning to link visual
cues across multiple images. A straightforward solution is to adapt rule-based
reinforcement learning for Vision-Language Models (VLMs). However, such
methods typically rely on manually curated question-answer pairs, which can
be particularly challenging when dealing with fine-grained visual details and
complex logic across images. Inspired by self-supervised visual representation
learning, we observe that images contain inherent constraints that can serve as
supervision. Based on this insight, we construct image triplets comprising two
augmented views of the same image and a third, similar but distinct image. During
training, the model is prompted to generate a reasoning process to compare these
images (i.e., determine same or different). Then we optimize the model with rulebased reinforcement learning. Due to the high visual similarity and the presence
of augmentations, the model must attend to subtle visual changes and perform
logical reasoning to succeed. Experiments show that, although trained solely on
visual comparison tasks, the learned reasoning ability generalizes effectively to a
wide range of questions. Without relying on any human-annotated question-answer
pairs, our method achieves significant improvements on multi-image reasoning
benchmarks and shows strong performance on general vision tasks.

1

Introduction

Making visual analysis with multiple images is crucial in many real-world applications. For example,
we understand actions through sequential images or videos, gain 3D awareness by recognizing
multiview images, and analyze events by observing differences between states, etc. Although Vision
Language Models (VLMs) [2, 8, 19, 15, 1] demonstrate promising capabilities in understanding
single images, we find them struggle to link visual cues across multiple images.
Multi-image understanding requires not only identifying fine-grained visual cues but also performing
logical reasoning to uncover correspondences and differences among images. Recently, reasoning
in language models [12, 16, 31, 27] has been significantly improved through the use of Chain-ofThought (CoT) prompting, especially when combined with rule-based reinforcement learning [28].
Therefore, a straightforward idea to improve multi-image understanding is to extend this reinforcement
learning paradigm to the visual domain. However, GRPO [28] requires constructing question-answer
pairs with standard answers to compute rewards, which is particularly challenging for tasks involving
fine-grained visual details and complex logic across images.
Instead of focusing on constructing QA pairs, we explore how to incentivize VLMs to perform
multi-image reasoning with minimal data preparation cost. Modern VLMs already possess strong
perceptual and multimodal capabilities. Meanwhile, recent advances in RL-based single image
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

