Tensor-Parallelism with
Partially Synchronized Activations

Itay Lamprecht†‡ Asaf Karnieli† Yair Hanani† Niv Giladi◦∗ Daniel Soudry‡
†
Intel, Israel
‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering - Technion, Haifa, Israel
◦
AWS AI Labs
{itay.lamprecht, yair.hanani}@intel.com
{ngiladi}@amazon.com
{asafkarnieli, daniel.soudry}@gmail.com

Abstract
Training and inference of Large Language Models (LLMs) with tensor-parallelism
requires substantial communication to synchronize activations. Our findings suggest that with a few minor adjustments to current practices, LLMs can be trained
without fully synchronizing activations, reducing bandwidth demands. We name
this “Communication-Aware Architecture for Tensor-parallelism” (CAAT-Net).
We train a 7B parameter CAAT-Net model and show that tensor-parallel communication can be reduced by up to 50% with no significant drop in pretraining accuracy
across nearly all evaluated benchmarks. We also experiment with smaller 130M
and 1.1B models to show the robustness and scalability of our method. We find that,
in some scenarios, validation loss can even improve when reducing communication.
Finally, we demonstrate how CAAT-Net accelerates both training and inference
workloads across various settings and model sizes.

1

Introduction

As Large Language Model (LLM) training continues to scale, often requiring the use of hundreds
or even thousands of devices, the need for efficient distributed training and inference techniques
is constantly growing. Tensor-parallelism [1] is a critical component in the training of many wellknown LLMs, such as GPT-3 [2], Llama [3, 4], and BLOOM [5], enabling the efficient utilization of
hardware resources to support models with billions of parameters. By partitioning weight tensors
across multiple devices, tensor-parallelism allows each device to store only a fraction of the model’s
weights during computation. This significantly reduces the memory footprint per device, making it
feasible to train extremely large models on hardware with limited memory capacity. The efficiency of
tensor-parallelism in reducing training memory has made it a cornerstone technique for distributed
training. During inference, where the LLM response time is critical, distributing the computation
over multiple devices using tensor-parallelism can significantly reduce latency.
Much of the total time spent training or using LLMs is consumed by the communication overhead
inherent in tensor-parallelism, which arises from the need to synchronize activation or gradient
tensors. Specifically, synchronization is done by all-reduce operations, where tensors from all devices
are summed into a single tensor, which is copied to all devices. This operation occurs multiple times
in each forward and backward pass and constitutes a substantial fraction of the total workload time.
A recent approach to addressing this issue is pipelining communication and computation [6] in such a
way that the communication is overlapped with the computation and the footprint of communication
is reduced. However, this approach is limited: when tensor-parallelism is expanded to use more
∗

This work was done while the author was at Intel.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

