Temperature is All You Need for Generalization
in Langevin Dynamics and other Markov Processes

Itamar Harel∗
Technion

Yonathan Wolanowsky
Technion

Gal Vardi
Weizmann Institute of Science

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Daniel Soudry
Technion

Abstract
We analyze the generalization gap (gap between the training and test errors) when
training a potentially over-parametrized model using a Markovian stochastic training algorithm, initialized from some distribution θ 0 ∼ p0 . We focus on Langevin
dynamics with a positive temperature β −1 , i.e. gradient descent on a training loss
L with infinitesimal step size, perturbed with β −1 -variances Gaussian noise, and
lightly regularized orp
bounded. There, we bound the generalization gap, at any time
during training, by (βEL(θ 0 ) + ln(1/δ))/N with probability 1 − δ over the
dataset, where N is the sample size, and EL(θ 0 ) = O(1) with standard initialization scaling. In contrast to previous guarantees, we have no dependence on either
training time or reliance on mixing, nor a dependence on dimensionality, gradient
norms, or any other properties of the loss or model. This guarantee follows from
a general analysis of any Markov process-based training that has a Gibbs-style
stationary distribution. The proof is surprisingly simple, once we observe that the
marginal distribution divergence from initialization remains bounded, as implied
by a generalized second law of thermodynamics.

1

Introduction

One main goal of contemporary machine learning theory is to predict a model’s behavior before
training occurs. A commonly desired metric is the generalization of overparameterized models, such
as neural networks (NN). For these models, such a predictive theory of generalization is still lacking,
despite great empirical success [71, 23]. In particular, a significant line of work aimed to explain the
role of optimization in generalization (e.g. [23, 64, 40, 66]), and specifically the effect of stochasticity
(e.g. [59, 49, 10, 8]).
Data-dependent Markov processes are a common optimization approach. These include stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), as well as other stochastic gradient methods either studied theoretically
[30, 59], or used in practice such as SGD with momentum [52], ADAM [34], and many more. Of
particular interest are continuous Langevin dynamics (CLD) and discrete analogues of it, which have
been studied extensively as models for SGD (see Section 4.1).
In Section 2 we develop, for the first time, a generalization bound applicable to any data-dependent
Markov process with a Gibbs-type stationary distribution (i.e. whose finite density exists and is
nonzero w.r.t. some data-independent base measure). An important feature of our analysis is that
it is entirely independent of the training time t, both in that we do not rely on training for only a
∗

Corresponding author: itamarharel01@gmail.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

