Program Synthesis via Test-Time Transduction

Kang-il Lee1 Jahyun Koo2 Seunghyun Yoon3 Minbeom Kim2
Hyukhun Koh2 Dongryeol Lee1 Kyomin Jung1,2∗
1
Dept. of ECE, Seoul National University 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
3
Adobe Research
{4bkang,kjung}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We introduce transductive program synthesis, a new formulation of the program
synthesis task that explicitly leverages test inputs during synthesis. While prior
approaches to program synthesis—whether based on natural language descriptions
or input-output examples—typically aim to generalize from training examples,
they often struggle with robustness, especially in real-world settings where training examples are limited and test inputs involve various edge cases. To address
this, we propose a novel framework that improves robustness by treating synthesis as an active learning over a finite hypothesis class defined by programs’
outputs. We use an LLM to predict outputs for selected test inputs and eliminate inconsistent hypotheses, where the inputs are chosen via a greedy maximin
algorithm to minimize the number of LLM queries required. We evaluate our
approach on four benchmarks: Playgol, MBPP+, 1D-ARC, and programmatic
world modeling on MiniGrid. We demonstrate that our method significantly improves program synthesis in both accuracy and efficiency. We release our code at
https://github.com/klee972/SYNTRA.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis is the task of generating programs from a given specification, where the format
of the specification can vary widely depending on the problem setting. Recent approaches to
program synthesis using large language models [47, 30] rely on a natural language description,
usually accompanied by a few test cases, to produce a program. In inductive program synthesis, the
model operates without a natural language description, using only a set of input-output examples
[48, 38, 19]. A common strategy in both lines of work involves sampling or enumerating multiple
candidate programs and selecting those that satisfy the specification by executing them on the
provided training examples. However, relatively little attention has been paid to settings where test
inputs are available at synthesis time, i.e., the transductive learning scenario.
Vapnik famously advocated for transductive inference [45] with the principle: “When solving a
problem of interest, do not solve a more general problem as an intermediate step.” In the context of
program synthesis, this suggests that full generalization through induction may not be necessary if
the goal is to predict outputs for a fixed set of test inputs. Such transductive scenarios are common in
real-world applications such as spreadsheet automation or data transformation, where the goal is to
synthesize a one-off program that correctly completes a given set of test inputs (Figure 1). In these
settings, the number of training examples is often limited, as they are typically filled manually by
users. As a result, programs synthesized from few examples may lack robustness when applied to
the test inputs, especially if those inputs include edge cases (i.e., inputs that are atypical compared
to the training examples or expose corner-case bugs in program logic). This limitation arises from
∗

Corresponding authors.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

