BrainFlow: A Holistic Pathway of Dynamic Neural
System on Manifold

Zhixuan Zhou
Tingting Dan
Guorong Wu∗
Departments of Computer Science and Psychiatry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
{Tingting_Dan,grwu}@med.unc.edu;zzhixuan@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in cognitive neuroscience is understanding how cognition
emerges from the interplay between structural connectivity (SC) and functional
connectivity (FC). Current machine learning approaches typically seek to establish
direct mappings from SC to FC associated with specific cognitive states. However,
these methods often treat SC and FC as distinct endpoints, failing to capture the
coupling relationship throughout the progressive transformation between them.
To address this limitation, we propose BrainFlow, a reversible generative model
designed to parametrize flows between the distribution of SC and the mixed distribution of FCs from different cognitive tasks. Our method explicitly models the SC-FC
coupling by training on interpolated states along the symmetric positive-definite
(SPD) manifold. We further prove the equivalence between flow matching on the
SPD manifold and on the computationally efficient Cholesky manifold, enhancing
numerical stability. To mitigate cumulative errors during reverse-flow simulation,
we introduce a consensus control mechanism that utilizes complementary information across multiple FC-to-SC pathways, yielding a biologically meaningful
reconstruction of the underlying structural scaffold. Together, BrainFlow achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both synthetic data and large-scale neuroimaging
datasets from the UK Biobank and Human Connectome Project.

1

Introduction

A central goal in cognitive neuroscience is understanding how cognition arises from the complex interplay between (static) brain structure and (dynamic) functional fluctuations. Structural connectivity
(SC), representing the anatomical pathways that physically connect distinct brain regions, provides
the structural scaffold that supports the spontaneous synchronization of functional fluctuations across
multiple brain regions, shaping the network topology of functional connectivity (FC). This interplay
underpins the brain’s ability to perform complex cognitive, sensory, and motor functions, highlighting
the necessity of understanding how anatomical structure constrains and shapes brain function, and
vice versa [1, 2, 3].
Machine learning techniques have been widely employed to characterize the uni-directional relationship between SC and FC. One streamlined approach is to simply predict one type of connectome
from another in a supervised learning scenario[4, 5, 6].
Despite promising prediction accuracy, these computational approaches have several significant
issues, from problem formulation to model explainability. (1) Over-simplified problem formulation.
Most current methods only focus on the one-way mapping function, i.e., either predicting FC from
∗

Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

