Knowledge Insulating Vision-Language-Action
Models: Train Fast, Run Fast, Generalize Better

Danny Driess
Jost Tobias Springenberg Brian Ichter Lili Yu
Adrian Li-Bell
Karl Pertsch Allen Z. Ren Homer Walke
Quan Vuong Lucy Xiaoyang Shi Sergey Levine
Physical Intelligence

Abstract
Vision-language-action (VLA) models provide a powerful approach to training
control policies for physical systems, such as robots, by combining end-to-end
learning with transfer of semantic knowledge from web-scale vision-language
model (VLM) training. However, the constraints of real-time control are often at
odds with the design of VLMs: the most powerful VLMs have tens or hundreds of
billions of parameters, presenting an obstacle to real-time inference, and operate
on discrete tokens rather than the continuous-valued outputs that are required
for controlling robots. To address this challenge, recent VLA models have used
specialized modules for efficient continuous control, such as action experts or
continuous output heads, which typically require adding new untrained parameters
to the pretrained VLM backbone. While these modules improve real-time and
control capabilities, it remains an open question whether they preserve or degrade
the semantic knowledge contained in the pretrained VLM, and what effect they
have on the VLA training dynamics. In this paper, we study this question in the
context of VLAs that include a continuous diffusion or flow matching action expert,
showing that naively including such experts significantly harms both training speed
and knowledge transfer. We provide an extensive analysis of various design choices,
their impact on performance and knowledge transfer, and propose a technique for
insulating the VLM backbone during VLA training that mitigates this issue. Videos
are available at https://pi.website/research/knowledge_insulation and open-source
model weights are available at https://github.com/Physical-Intelligence/openpi.

1

Introduction

The success of large language models (LLMs) can be attributed to the availability of large-scale
datasets combined with powerful model architectures such as transformers that are trained with a
next-token prediction objective on trillions of tokens. LLMs can be prompted to solve all sorts of
tasks, from writing poems and code to solving competition-level math problems, and can further be
adapted to solve visual reasoning problems when extended with multi-modal encoders to produce
vision-language models (VLMs). A natural next step to bring the power of LLMs to the physical world
is to further extend them to take physical actions, resulting in vision-language action (VLA) models
that can control robots to follow language commands, combining the power of end-to-end robotic
learning with the semantic knowledge distilled from web-scale vision-language pretraining [62, 24, 7].
However, adapting LLMs and VLMs to real-world control requires addressing a number of new
challenges. Most physical systems (e.g., robots) require continuous and precise commands, such as
joint angles or target poses, that must be produced in real time at a high frequency. Autoregressive
decoding of discrete tokens is poorly suited to this kind of high-frequency continuous control, both
because of the limited resolution of discretized actions and because of the computational cost of
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

