Thumb on the Scale: Optimal Loss Weighting
in Last Layer Retraining

Nathan Stromberg
Arizona State University
nstrombe@asu.edu

Christos Thrampoulidis
University of British Columbia
cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Lalitha Sankar
Arizona State University
lsankar@asu.edu

Abstract
While machine learning models become more capable in discriminative tasks at
scale, their ability to overcome biases introduced by training data has come under
increasing scrutiny. Previous results suggest that there are two extremes of parameterization with very different behaviors: the population (underparameterized) setting where loss weighting is optimal and the separable overparameterized setting
where loss weighting is ineffective at ensuring equal performance across classes.
This work explores the regime of last layer retraining (LLR) in which the unseen
limited (retraining) data is frequently inseparable and the model proportionately
sized, falling between the two aforementioned extremes. We show, in theory and
practice, that loss weighting is still effective in this regime, but that these weights
must take into account the relative overparameterization of the model.

1

Introduction

While discriminative machine learning has produced exceptional predictive power in many settings,
even the most expressive models have struggled to balance the accuracy of common (majority)
classes and rare (minority) classes. This comes as the most critical tasks, such as disease prediction, fraud detection, and rare event monitoring are fundamentally extremely imbalanced. It has,
therefore, become critical to correct the existing majority bias even in the age of highly expressive,
overparameterized models.
Substantial research has gone into studying methods for correcting models for their majority bias,
and the most successful lines of research have been driven by the idea of last layer retraining
(LLR) [1, 2] By updating only the final linear layer of a large model, the number of parameters
to train is greatly reduced while still providing the flexibility to balance the accuracy for minority classes. In this setting, a variety of cost-sensitive methods have been investigated, including
weighted empirical risk minimization (wERM) sometimes called importance weighting [3], downsampling [4, 3], and other corrected losses [5–10]. Each of these methods has shown compelling
empirical success in the LLR setting, improving the accuracy of minority classes or groups to match
that of majority groups. Despite this, theoretical and empirical evidence has shown that, for overparameterized models, wERM has no effect on the learned model whatsoever [11, 12]. How do we
reconcile this seeming contradiction when we are correcting large models?
Last layer retraining is often characterized by two quantities, the latent data dimension d (input to the last layer) and the number of retraining samples n. The overparameterization ratio
δ ≜ d/n ∈ (0, ∞) has been used to breakdown the performance of the above-mentioned methods into two critical regimes: the populations setting (δ → 0) and the overparameterized setting
(δ > 1). For example, in the population setting, the methods described above for LLR have demonstrated both empirical and theoretical success in the population regime [3]. On the other hand, only
downsampling and CS-SVM have been successful in improving minority class accuracy when the
model is highly overparameterized, i.e., δ > 1, and can separate the data [4, 9, 10]. In this work, we
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

