Extrapolation by Association: Length Generalization
Transfer in Transformers
Ziyang Cai∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Avi Schwarzschild
Carnegie Mellon University

Nayoung Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Samet Oymak
University of Michigan

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Transformer language models have demonstrated impressive generalization capabilities in natural language domains, yet we lack a fine-grained understanding of
how such generalization arises. In this paper, we investigate length generalization—the ability to extrapolate from shorter to longer inputs—through the lens
of task association. We find that length generalization can be transferred across
related tasks. That is, training a model with a longer and related auxiliary task can
lead it to generalize to unseen and longer inputs from some other target task. We
demonstrate this length generalization transfer across diverse algorithmic tasks,
including arithmetic operations, string transformations, and maze navigation. Our
results show that transformer models can inherit generalization capabilities from
similar tasks when trained jointly. Moreover, we observe similar transfer effects
in pretrained language models, suggesting that pretraining equips models with
reusable computational scaffolding that facilitates extrapolation in downstream
settings. Finally, we provide initial mechanistic evidence that length generalization
transfer correlates with the re-use of the same attention heads between the tasks.
Together, our findings deepen our understanding of how transformers generalize
to out-of-distribution inputs and highlight the compositional reuse of inductive
structure across tasks.

1

Introduction

A central theme of transformer language models is their ability to generalize. By scaling up data and
model size, large language models develop emergent abilities that exceed expectations [Wei et al.,
2022]. They can also transfer knowledge across domains and tasks [OpenAI, 2024, Brown et al.,
2020, Sanh et al., 2022]. While it is widely believed that language models are not simply parroting or
memorizing their training data, we still lack a fine-grained understanding of how language models
apply skills learned during training to potentially unseen problems.
The out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization capabilities of language models have garnered much
attention in the literature [Anil et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2024, Yang et al., 2024]. In this work,
we study a canonical example of OOD generalization, length generalization, which is the ability to
generalize from shorter to longer inputs [Zhou et al., 2023]. There is a long line of work focusing on
improving length generalization of arithmetic tasks in transformers, which has spurred innovations in
positional encoding schemes and transformer architecture [Cho et al., 2024, McLeish et al., 2024].
Closely related is the concept of compositional generalization, where the model combines previously
learned skills to solve new problems [Yang et al., 2024, Xu et al., 2024].
∗

Corresponding author. zcai75@wisc.edu

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

