Why Playing Against Diverse and Challenging
Opponents Speeds Up Coevolution:
A Theoretical Analysis on Combinatorial Games

Alistair Benford
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
a.s.benford@bham.ac.uk

Per Kristian Lehre
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
p.k.lehre@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Competitive coevolutionary algorithms (CoEAs) have a natural application to problems that are adversarial or feature strategic interaction. However, there is currently
limited theoretical insight into how to avoid pathological behaviour associated
with CoEAs. In this paper we use impartial combinatorial games as a challenging
domain for CoEAs and provide a corresponding runtime analysis. By analysing
how individuals capitalise on the mistakes of their opponents, we prove that the
Univariate Marginal Distribution Algorithm finds (with high probability) an optimal strategy for a game called Reciprocal LeadingOnes within O(n2 log3 n) game
evaluations, a significant improvement over the best known bound of O(n5 log2 n).
Critical to the analysis is the introduction of a novel stabilising operator, the impact
of which we study both theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

Many of the most popular machine learning methods for multi-agent systems rely on self-play. Indeed,
recent breakthroughs on games including Go, Chess, and Poker [43, 5, 34] have used self-play to
produce superhuman performance without prior training data. However, despite their popularity
self-play algorithms are not provably efficient in general, and a robust theory of which self-play
algorithms are efficient and how performance scales with problem size is an important open question.
A recurring observation is that while self-play agents perform well against similar play styles, they
often perform poorly against new agents exhibiting radically different strategies to those trained
against [32, 48, 44]. Accordingly, there is a need to ensure strategic diversity is present during
learning. A possible source for this strategic diversity is to utilise population-based approaches such
as competitive coevolutionary algorithms (CoEAs) [40]. CoEAs iteratively evaluate individuals of
a population based on interactions with competitors, selecting the strongest as parents for the next
generation’s population, which is instantiated using mutation and crossover.
The successful application of CoEAs is not straightforward in general, due to the possibility of
pathological behavior such as cycling, forgetting, and loss of fitness signal [12]. These issues are
often caused by a failure to accurately ascertain the quality of individuals, which in turn relies on
ensuring opponents are both diverse and challenging. For example, a lack of population diversity on
highly intransitive games can lead to cycle-chasing; if a certain genotypic feature is needed to defeat
a particular type of opponent, that feature may be forgotten if such opponents are not also retained
in the population; and evaluations against significantly stronger or weaker opponents provide little
useful information for progression, which incurs a loss of fitness signal.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

