Beyond Greedy Exits: Improved Early Exit Decisions
for Risk Control and Reliability

Divya Jyoti Bajpai & Manjesh Kumar Hanawal
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Powai, Maharashtra, India
{divyajyoti.bajpai, mhanawal}@iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Early-Exit Deep Neural Networks enable adaptive inference by allowing prediction
at intermediary layers, significantly reducing computational costs and latency. Most
of the early exit strategies greedily exit a sample at an intermediary layer if the
confidence in class prediction exceeds a predefined threshold that is set using a
static validation set. This is problematic as the model might be overconfident
in a wrong class. Also, they are not robust to distribution shifts encountered in
deployment, which can undermine model trustworthiness and accuracy. To address
these challenges, we propose UAT that adapts the threshold for exit decisions using
a Multi-Armed Bandit framework, enabling online, unsupervised adjustment of
exit decisions. UAT makes decisions based on a new reward function that assesses
predictive certainty and its reliability to balance computational efficiency and
prediction quality while penalizing unnecessary late exits. We provide guarantees
on risk achieved by UAT and validate its performance on diverse tasks spanning
vision-language understanding, text generation, and classification. Our framework
demonstrates consistent improvements in speedup (1.70 − 2.10×) with a minimal
performance drop (< 2%) as compared to full model performance. Our source
code is available at https://github.com/Div290/UAT.

1

Introduction

As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) continue to scale in size and complexity, the cost of inference has
become a major bottleneck—manifesting as increased latency, higher energy consumption, and a
growing carbon footprint [37, 39]. These challenges highlight the need for efficient and sustainable
deployment strategies for large models. Moreover, real-world environments often impose dynamic
computational constraints, driven by resource scarcity or energy availability [40]. To remain practical
and responsive, modern DNNs must adapt computational load in real time and consume resources as
much as necessary, as per the complexity of the samples.
Early-Exit DNNs (EEDNNs) [47] offer a compelling solution for adaptive inference under dynamic
computational constraints. EEDNNs can produce intermediate predictions at various depths of the
DNN, allowing the network to ‘exit’ the sample early without passing it through all the layers.
This mechanism enables dynamic resource utilization and significantly reduces computation and
inference latency. This makes EEDNNs well-suited for deployment under resource constraints across
diverse domains, including computer vision [47, 4, 29], natural language processing [12, 9], and
vision-language systems [46]. However, this flexibility comes at a cost: initial layers are more prone
to making riskier predictions, which degrade the trust in the model [36]. Consequently, EEDNNs
face a fundamental trade-off—balancing efficiency gains against potential degradation in predictive
accuracy [30]. This trade-off is governed by the exit decisions that are crucial in EEDNNs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

