MANGO: Multimodal Attention-based Normalizing
Flow Approach to Fusion Learning

Thanh-Dat Truong1 , Christophe Bobda2 , Nitin Agarwal3,4 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas, USA 2 University of Florida, USA
3
COSMOS Research Center, University of Arkansas, Little Rock, USA
4
ICSI, University of California, Berkeley, USA
{tt032, khoaluu}@uark.edu cbobda@ece.ufl.edu, nxagarwal@ualr.edu

https://uark-cviu.github.io/projects/MANGO

Abstract
Multimodal learning has gained much success in recent years. However, current
multimodal fusion methods adopt the attention mechanism of Transformers to
implicitly learn the underlying correlation of multimodal features. As a result, the
multimodal model cannot capture the essential features of each modality, making it
difficult to comprehend complex structures and correlations of multimodal inputs.
This paper introduces a novel Multimodal Attention-based Normalizing Flow
(MANGO) approach to developing explicit, interpretable, and tractable multimodal
fusion learning. In particular, we propose a new Invertible Cross-Attention (ICA)
layer to develop the Normalizing Flow-based Model for multimodal data. To
efficiently capture the complex, underlying correlations in multimodal data in our
proposed invertible cross-attention layer, we propose three new cross-attention
mechanisms: Modality-to-Modality Cross-Attention (MMCA), Inter-Modality
Cross-Attention (IMCA), and Learnable Inter-Modality Cross-Attention (LICA).
Finally, we introduce a new Multimodal Attention-based Normalizing Flow to
enable the scalability of our proposed method to high-dimensional multimodal
data. Our experimental results on three different multimodal learning tasks, i.e.,
semantic segmentation, image-to-image translation, and movie genre classification,
have illustrated the state-of-the-art (SoTA) performance of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Human perceptions interpret the surrounding
world in a multimodal way via multiple input
channels, such as vision, text, or audio. The
deep learning-based multimodal fusion methods
have majorly improved the performance of various problems, e.g., classification [20, 38, 37,
58], action recognition [12, 54, 57], semantic
segmentation [65, 56, 59, 61, 60], object detection [72]. The recent large multimodal models, e.g., ChatGPT [1], Gemini [52], Chaemelon
[51], LLaMMA [53], etc, introduced for generalassistant purposes have also shown impressive
Figure 1: Our Cross-Modality Fusion Approach
performance on these applications.
Via Multimodal Normalizing Flows with Invertible
The critical success of multimodal fusion methCross-Attention.
ods relies on the interaction and correlation mod39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

