Effective Policy Learning for Multi-Agent Online
Coordination Beyond Submodular Objectives

Qixin Zhang1∗ Yan Sun2∗ Can Jin4
Yao Shu3 Puning Zhao5 Li Shen5

Xikun Zhang1
Dacheng Tao1†

1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
The University of Sydney 3 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology(Guangzhou)
4
Rutgers University 5 Sun Yat-sen University
{qixin.zhang, xikun.zhang, dacheng.tao}@ntu.edu.sg; sun9899@uni.sydney.edu.au
yaoshu@hkust-gz.edu.cn; {zhaopn,shenli6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In this paper, we present two effective policy learning algorithms for multi-agent
online coordination(MA-OC) problem. The first one, MA-SPL, not only can achieve
the optimal (1 − ec )-approximation guarantee for the MA-OC problem with submodular objectives but also can handle the unexplored α-weakly DR-submodular
and (γ, β)-weakly submodular scenarios, where c is the curvature of the investigated submodular functions, α denotes the diminishing-return(DR) ratio and the
tuple (γ, β) represents the submodularity ratios. Subsequently, in order to reduce
the reliance on the unknown parameters α, γ, β inherent in the MA-SPL algorithm,
we further introduce the second online algorithm named MA-MPL. This MA-MPL
algorithm is entirely parameter-free and simultaneously can maintain the same
approximation ratio as the first MA-SPL algorithm. The core of our MA-SPL and
MA-MPL algorithms is a novel continuous-relaxation technique termed as policybased continuous extension. Compared with the well-established multi-linear
extension, a notable advantage of this new policy-based continuous extension is its
ability to provide a lossless rounding scheme for any set function, thereby enabling
us to tackle the challenging weakly submodular objectives. Finally, extensive
simulations are conducted to validate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

Coordinating multiple autonomous agents to cooperatively complete complex tasks in time-varying
environments is a significant challenge with extensive applications in machine learning, robotics
and control, including target tracking [27, 129, 130, 132], area monitoring [55, 73, 97], multi-path
planning [100, 101, 102], mobile sensor placement [65, 67, 95], environmental mapping [6, 75]
and task assignment [92, 5]. Critically, with the rapid advancement of self-supervised learning and
the development of large Transformers with billions of parameters, large language models (LLMs)
are now capable of generating factual and coherent responses to human queries [11, 25, 107, 51].
However, the mixed quality of training data can lead to the generation of undesired responses,
presenting a significant challenge. Therefore, how to select a limited number of high-quality inputoutput examples from multi-source and massive datasets for fine-tuning LLMs remains a critical
challenge—a problem that can be formulated as multi-agent collaborative data selection [69, 70, 80,
93]. Moreover, the emergence of foundation models further highlights the necessity of effective
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Dacheng Tao.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

