Sample-Adaptivity Tradeoff in On-Demand Sampling

Nika Haghtalab
University of California, Berkeley
nika@berkeley.edu

Omar Montasser
Yale University
omar.montasser@yale.edu

Mingda Qiao
University of Massachusetts Amherst
mqiao@umass.edu

Abstract
We study the tradeoff between sample complexity and round complexity in ondemand sampling, where the learning algorithm adaptively samples from k distributions over a limited number of rounds. In the realizable setting of MultiDistribution Learning (MDL), we show that the optimal sample complexity of an
r-round algorithm scales approximately as dk Θ(1/r) /ε. For the general agnostic
case, we present an algorithm
√ that achieves near-optimal sample complexity of
e
e k) rounds. Of independent interest, we introduce a
O((d
+ k)/ε2 ) within O(
new framework, Optimization via On-Demand Sampling (OODS), which abstracts
the sample-adaptivity tradeoff and captures most existing MDL algorithms. We
establish nearly tight bounds on the
√round complexity in the OODS setting. The
O( k)-round algorithm for agnostic MDL, while
upper bounds directly yield the e
the lower bounds imply that achieving sub-polynomial round complexity would
require fundamentally new techniques that bypass the inherent hardness of OODS.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning pipelines increasingly treat the training set as a mutable resource—adapting
the data collection process in response to intermediate learning signals in order to focus effort where
it matters most. This adaptivity arises in a range of settings. In multi-distribution learning (see
e.g. [BHPQ17, HJZ22]), the on-demand sampling framework allows algorithms to adaptively select
domains from which to sample to minimize the worst-case loss. Similarly in multi-armed bandit
problems, adaptively selecting which arm to pull next is an important aspect of algorithm design. In
practice, pipelines for training models adaptively decide how to reweigh or augment their datasets
to improve downstream accuracy [XPD+ 23, SRC24]. While these paradigms demonstrate—both
theoretically and empirically—that adaptive data collection can significantly improve performance
and sample efficiency, adaptivity is often an undesirable feature. It requires the ML practitioner to
collect data sequentially, slowing down the end-to-end training process and limiting opportunities for
parallelism and scalability. This tension raises a central question:
to what extent is adaptive sample collection necessary to achieve the observed
gains in learning performance? And what are the quantitative tradeoffs between
the number of adaptive rounds and sample complexity?
We study this question in the context of on-demand sampling within the framework of multidistribution learning [HJZ22]. Multi-distribution learning extends the classical agnostic learning
setting by giving the learner sampling access to k distributions D1 , . . . , Dk , with the goal of learning
a single predictor that minimizes the worst-case error across all distributions. This framework has
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

