MS-GS: Multi-Appearance Sparse-View 3D Gaussian
Splatting in the Wild

Deming Li
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
dli90@jhu.edu
Yutao Tang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
ytang67@jhu.edu

Kaiwen Jiang
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
k1jiang@ucsd.edu

Ravi Ramamoorthi
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
ravir@ucsd.edu

Rama Chellappa
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
rchella4@jhu.edu

Cheng Peng
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
cpeng26@jhu.edu

Abstract
In-the-wild photo collections often contain limited volumes of imagery and exhibit
multiple appearances, e.g., taken at different times of day or seasons, posing
significant challenges to scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis. Although
recent adaptations of Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) have improved in these areas, they tend to oversmooth and are prone to
overfitting. In this paper, we present MS-GS, a novel framework designed with
Multi-appearance capabilities in Sparse-view scenarios using 3DGS. To address the
lack of support due to sparse initializations, our approach is built on the geometric
priors elicited from monocular depth estimations. The key lies in extracting
and utilizing local semantic regions with a Structure-from-Motion (SfM) points
anchored algorithm for reliable alignment and geometry cues. Then, to introduce
multi-view constraints, we propose a series of geometry-guided supervision steps
at virtual views in pixel and feature levels to encourage 3D consistency and reduce
overfitting. We also introduce a dataset and an in-the-wild experiment setting to set
up more realistic benchmarks. We demonstrate that MS-GS achieves photorealistic
renderings under various challenging sparse-view and multi-appearance conditions,
and outperforms existing approaches significantly across different datasets.

1

Introduction

High-quality scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis from images is a long-standing research
problem with wide-ranging applications in AR/VR, 3D site modeling, autonomous driving, robotics,
etc. Remarkably, neural radiance field (NeRF) [1] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [2] achieve
photorealistic novel view synthesis with differentiable rendering pipelines and different scene parameterizations. Both approaches build on the fundamental constraint that a voxel in space projects
to similar photometric values across views, a constraint that requires a dense scene coverage and
multi-view consistency. In practice, such coverage and consistency are often not guaranteed, largely
affecting their performance in unconstrained settings.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

