Composing Global Solutions to Reasoning Tasks via
Algebraic Objects in Neural Nets

Yuandong Tian
Meta Superintelligence Lab (FAIR)
yuandong@meta.com

Abstract
We prove rich algebraic structures of the solution space for 2-layer neural networks
with quadratic activation and L2 loss, trained on reasoning tasks in Abelian group
(e.g., modular addition). Such a rich structure enables analytical construction of
global optimal solutions from partial solutions that only satisfy part of the loss,
despite its high nonlinearity. We coin the framework as CoGS (Composing Global
Solutions). Specifically, we show that the weight space over different numbers of
hidden nodes of the 2-layer network is equipped with a semi-ring algebraic structure,
and the loss function to be optimized consists of sum potentials, which are ring
homomorphisms, allowing partial solutions to be composed into global ones by ring
addition and multiplication. Our experiments show that around 95% of the solutions
obtained by gradient descent match exactly our theoretical constructions. Although
the global solutions constructed only required a small number of hidden nodes,
our analysis on gradient dynamics shows that overparameterization asymptotically
decouples training dynamics and is beneficial. We further show that training
dynamics favors simpler solutions under weight decay, and thus high-order global
solutions such as perfect memorization are unfavorable. The code is open sourced1 .

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive results in various disciplines (OpenAI, 2024;
Anthropic; Team, 2024b,a; Dubey et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023), while they also make surprising
mistakes in basic reasoning tasks (Nezhurina et al., 2024; Berglund et al., 2023). Therefore, it remains
an open problem whether it can truly do reasoning tasks. On one hand, existing works demonstrate
that the models can learn efficient algorithms (e.g., dynamic programming (Ye et al., 2024) for
language structure modeling, etc) and good representations (Jin & Rinard, 2024; Wijmans et al.,
2023). Some reports emergent behaviors (Wei et al., 2022) when scaling up with data and model size.
On the other hand, many works also show that LLMs cannot self-correct (Huang et al., 2023), and
cannot generalize very well beyond the training set for simple tasks (Dziri et al., 2023; Yehudai et al.,
2024; Ouellette et al., 2023), let alone complicated planning tasks (Kambhampati et al., 2024; Xie
et al., 2024).
To understand how the model performs reasoning and further improve its reasoning power, people
have been studying simple arithmetic reasoning problems in depth. Modular addition (Nanda et al.,
2023; Zhong et al., 2024), i.e., predicting a + b mod d given a and b, is a popular one due to its
simple and intuitive structure yet surprising behaviors in learning dynamics (e.g., grokking (Power
et al., 2022)) and learned representations (e.g., Fourier bases (Zhou et al., 2024)). Most works
focus on various metrics to measure the behaviors and extracting interpretable circuits from trained
models (Nanda et al., 2023; Varma et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024). Analytic solutions can be
constructed and/or reverse-engineered (Gromov, 2023; Zhong et al., 2024; Nanda et al., 2023) but it
is not clear how to construct a systematic framework to explain and generalize the results.
1

https://github.com/facebookresearch/luckmatters/tree/yuandong3/ssl/real-dataset

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

