Distribution Learning Meets Graph Structure
Sampling

Arnab Bhattacharyya
University of Warwick
arnab.bhattacharyya@warwick.ac.uk

Sutanu Gayen
IIT Kanpur
sutanugayen@gmail.com

Philips George John
CNRS@CREATE & Dept of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
philips.george.john@u.nus.edu

Sayantan Sen
Centre for Quantum Technologies
National University of Singapore
sayantan789@gmail.com

N. V. Vinodchandran
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
vinod@cse.unl.edu

Abstract
This work establishes a novel link between the problem of PAC-learning highdimensional graphical models and the task of (efficient) counting and sampling of
graph structures, using an online learning framework. The problem of efficiently
counting and sampling graphical structures, such as spanning trees and acyclic
orientations, has been a vibrant area of research in algorithms. We show that
this rich algorithmic foundation can be leveraged to develop new algorithms for
learning high-dimensional graphical models.
We present the first efficient algorithm for (both realizable and agnostic) learning
of Bayes nets with a chordal skeleton. In particular, we present an algorithm
that, given integers k, d > 0, error parameter ε > 0, an undirected chordal graph
G on n vertices, and sample access to a distribution P ∗ on [k]n ; (1) returns a
Bayes net Pb with skeleton G and indegree d, whose KL-divergence from P ∗ is
at most ε more than the optimal KL-divergence between P ∗ and any Bayes net
O(n3 k d+1 /ε2 ) samples from P ∗ and
with skeleton G and indegree d, (2) uses e
−1
runs in time poly(n, k, ε ) for constant d. Prior results in this spirit were for
only for trees (d = 1, tree skeleton) via Chow-Liu, and in the realizable setting for
polytrees (arbitrary d but tree skeleton). Thus, our result significantly extends the
state-of-the-art in learning Bayes net distributions. We also establish new results
for learning tree and polytree distributions.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional distributions are pivotal in contemporary machine learning, with widespread
applications across various domains such as gene regulation networks [46, 16, 17, 40], protein
signaling networks [39, 72, 75], brain connectivity networks [53, 78], and psychiatric symptom
networks [13, 67, 82]. Probabilistic graphical models provide succinct representations of highdimensional distributions over an exponentially large sample space such as Rn or {0, 1}n . These
models leverage the limited dependence between component variables, encoded by a dependency
graph, to describe joint probability distributions over a large set of variables in a succinct and
interpretable manner. Probabilistic graphical models such as Bayesian networks, Ising models, and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

