QBasicVSR: Temporal Awareness Adaptation
Quantization for Video Super-Resolution
Zhenwei Zhang1 , Fanhua Shang1∗, Hongying Liu2, 3∗, Liang Wan2, 4 ,
Wei Feng1 , Yanming Hui1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University 2 Medical School, Tianjin University
3
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen 4 School of Computer Software, Tianjin University
{microsoftzzw, fhshang, hyliu2009, lwan, wfeng, ymhui}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
While model quantization has become pivotal for deploying super-resolution (SR)
networks on mobile devices, existing works focus on quantization methods only
for image super-resolution. Different from image SR quantization, the temporal
error propagation, shared temporal parameterization, and temporal metric mismatch significantly degrade the quantization performance of a video SR model.
To address these issues, we propose the first quantization method, QBasicVSR,
for video super-resolution. A novel temporal awareness adaptation post-training
quantization (PTQ) framework for video super-resolution with the flow-gradient
video bit adaptation and temporal shared layer bit adaptation is presented. Moreover, we put forward a novel fine-tuning method for VSR with the supervision of
the full-precision model. Our method achieves extraordinary performance with
state-of-the-art efficient VSR approaches, delivering up to ×200 faster processing speed while utilizing only 1/8 of the GPU resources. Additionally, extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms existing PTQ algorithms on various datasets. For instance, it attains a 2.53 dB increase on the UDM10 benchmark when quantizing BasicVSR to 4-bit with 100
unlabeled video clips. The code and models will be released on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Super-resolution (SR) is a classic low-level computer vision task focused on reconstructing highresolution image (s) from their low-resolution (LR) counterparts. In video scenarios, it extends
to aggregating spatiotemporal information from multiple misaligned frames within a sequence, requiring motion compensation and frame alignment to achieve coherent detail enhancement across
the temporal domain. Despite demonstrating impressive performance, state-of-the-art video superresolution (VSR) networks [3, 4, 28, 29] face deployment challenges on resource-constrained edge
devices due to their high computational and memory demands. Furthermore, the growing industry
demand for real-time large-scale VSR (e.g., 4K video streaming) introduces quadratically increasing
computational complexity. To enhance computational efficiency in VSR, researchers have explored
various efficient methods, such as reparameterization [21] and network pruning [25, 42, 46], which
aim to reduce model size or simplify network structures. In parallel, model quantization has proven
to be another powerful efficiency-driven technique [14, 26, 37, 38, 47], by leveraging low-precision
arithmetic to reduce latency, memory footprint, and consumption cost on AI accelerators [6, 41].
However, despite its advantages, quantization has not yet been explored in the domain of VSR.
∗

Corresponding authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

