Layer as Puzzle Pieces: Compressing Large Language
Models through Layer Concatenation

Fei Wang1,2 , Li Shen3,6 , Liang Ding4 , Chao Xue2 , Ye Liu1 , Changxing Ding1,5,∗
1
South China University of Technology 2 JD Explore Academy
3
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 4 University of Sydney 5 Pazhou Lab
6
Center for AI Theoretical Foundation and Systems, Shenzhen Loop Area Institute
ft_feiw@mail.scut.edu.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Models excel at natural language processing tasks, but their massive size leads to high computational and storage demands. Recent works have
sought to reduce their model size through layer-wise structured pruning. However,
they tend to ignore retaining the capabilities in the pruned part. In this work, we
re-examine structured pruning paradigms and uncover several key limitations: 1)
notable performance degradation due to direct layer removal, 2) incompetent linear
weight layer aggregation, and 3) the lack of effective post-training recovery mechanisms. To address these limitations, we propose CoMe, including a progressive
layer pruning framework with a Concatenation-based Merging technology and a
hierarchical distillation post-training process. Specifically, we introduce a channel
sensitivity metric that utilizes activation intensity and weight norms for fine-grained
channel selection. Subsequently, we employ a concatenation-based layer merging
method to fuse the most critical channels across adjacent layers, enabling progressive model size reduction. Finally, we propose a hierarchical distillation protocol
that leverages the correspondences between the original and pruned model layers
established during pruning, thereby enabling efficient knowledge transfer. Experiments on seven benchmarks show that CoMe achieves state-of-the-art performance;
when pruning 30% of LLaMA-2-7b’s parameters, the pruned model retains 83% of
its original average accuracy.2

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 3, 41, 37, 9] have become the cornerstone of modern natural
language processing, enabling start-of-the-art performance in tasks such as text generation [20, 12,
21, 32], machine translation [45], question answering [35, 13], and a variety of other challenging
tasks [29, 30, 38]. Their success is primarily attributed to scaling up model parameters, which
enhances their representational capacity [15]. However, the rapid growth of model size comes at a
cost: LLMs’ computational and storage demands have become a significant obstacle for practical
deployment, especially in resource-constrained environments.
Recent works resort to model compression [46, 39] to reduce the resource footprint of LLMs, with
mainstream approaches encompassing model pruning [24, 34, 27, 16] and knowledge distillation [31,
10, 5]. Among these, structured layer pruning is desirable for its hardware efficiency, as it removes
entire modules and reduces computational complexity [24, 34, 27, 16]. While direct layer pruning
reduces model size, it often leads to performance degradation. To mitigate this, several studies have
proposed merging adjacent layers through linear aggregation of their weights [27, 42, 22]. These
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Our code is available at https://github.com/MPI-Lab/CoMe.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

