Bridging Scales: Spectral Theory Reveals How Local
Connectivity Rules Sculpt Global Neural Dynamics in
Spatially Extended Networks

Yuhan Huang1,2

Keren Gao1 Dongping Yang3 Sen Song4 Guozhang Chen1∗
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Japan
3
Zhejiang Lab, China
4
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
guozhang.chen@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The brain’s diverse spatiotemporal activity patterns are fundamental to cognition
and consciousness, yet how these macroscopic dynamics emerge from microscopic
neural circuitry remains a critical challenge. We take a step in this direction by
developing a spatially extended neural network model integrated with a spectral theory of its connectivity matrix. Our theory quantitatively demonstrates
how local structural parameters, such as E/I neuron projection ranges, connection strengths, and density determine distinct features of the eigenvalue spectrum,
specifically outlier eigenvalues and a bulk disk. These spectral signatures, in
turn, precisely predict the network’s emergent global dynamical regime, encompassing asynchronous states, synchronous states, oscillations, localized activity
bumps, traveling waves, and chaos. Motivated by observations of shifting cortical dynamics in mice across arousal states, our framework not only provides
a possible explanation for repertoire of behaviors but also offers a principled
starting point for inferring underlying effective connectivity changes from macroscopic brain activity. By mechanistically linking neural structure to dynamics,
this work advances a principled framework for dissecting how large-scale activity
patterns—central to cognition and open questions in consciousness research—arise
from, and constrain, local circuitry. The implementation code is available at
https://github.com/huang-yh20/spatial-linear-project.

1

Introduction

The brain’s activity is remarkably diverse, forming complex spatiotemporal patterns that vary with an
organism’s cognitive state and level of consciousness [1–4]. Propagating waves of neural activity,
for example, are observed across numerous brain regions and species, from insects to humans
[5, 6]. Recent high-resolution imaging in mice, as they transition from anesthesia to wakefulness,
has highlighted this complexity, revealing large-scale cortical waves during anesthesia and a shift
towards more localized, intricate spatiotemporal patterns upon awakening [4]. Such observations
emphasize that the spatial organization of neural activity is a fundamental aspect of brain function
[7–10]. Consequently, a key challenge is to understand how these macroscopic dynamical states,
which distinguish brain states, arise from the underlying microscopic neural architecture and effective
connectivity rules. Since many critical brain dynamics are inherently spatial, involving coordinated
∗

Corresponding author: guozhang.chen@pku.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

