Accelerating Model-Free Optimization
via Averaging of Cost Samples

Guido Carnevale
Department of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering
Alma Mater Studiorum - Universita‘ di Bologna
Bologna, Italy
guido.carnevale@unibo.it
Giuseppe Notarstefano
Department of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering
Alma Mater Studiorum - Universita‘ di Bologna
Bologna, Italy
giuseppe.notarstefano@unibo.it

Abstract
Model-free optimization methods typically rely on cost samples gathered by perturbing the current solution estimate along a finite and fixed set of directions.
However, at each iteration, only the current cost samples are used, while potentially informative, previously collected samples are discarded. In this work, we
challenge this conventional approach by introducing a simple yet effective memory
mechanism that maintains an auxiliary vector of iteratively updated cost samples.
By leveraging this stored information, our method estimates descent directions
through an averaging of all perturbing directions weighted by the auxiliary vector
components. This results in faster convergence without increasing the number
of function queries. By interpreting the resulting algorithm as a time-varying dynamical system, we are able to establish its convergence properties in the strongly
convex case. In particular, by using tools from system theory based on timescale
separation, we are able to guarantee a linear convergence rate toward an arbitrarily
small neighborhood of the optimal solution. Numerical simulations on regression problems demonstrate that the proposed approach significantly outperforms
existing model-free optimization methods.

1

Introduction

At the core of many machine learning and deep learning tasks lie complex optimization problems
that often cannot be solved analytically. In some cases, the objective function is not even known
in closed form, allowing function evaluations but not gradient computations Liu et al. [2020]. The
class of optimization methods that operate without analytical knowledge of the objective function
(and thus without using its gradient) is referred to as model-free (or black-box) optimization. This
branch of schemes Conn et al. [2009], Snoek et al. [2012], Larson et al. [2019] is receiving increasing
attention in learning-oriented and related domains, such as signal processing Turner and Rasmussen
[2012], reinforcement learning Malik et al. [2020], Qian and Yu [2021], IoT management Chen
and Giannakis [2018], and system theory Galarza-Jimenez et al. [2022], He et al. [2023]. The most
popular model-free optimization methods are the so-called zeroth-order methods Liu et al. [2020], in
which the function evaluations are typically used to approximate its gradient. A distinction within this
field involves the way in which the cost function is sampled, which can be done by using points that
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

