Transformer brain encoders explain human high-level
visual responses

Hossein Adeli
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute
Columbia University
ha2366@columbia.edu

Sun Minni
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute
Columbia University
ms5724@columbia.edu

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute
Columbia University
nk2765@columbia.edu

Abstract
A major goal of neuroscience is to understand brain computations during visual processing in naturalistic settings. A dominant approach is to use image-computable
deep neural networks trained with different task objectives as a basis for linear
encoding models. However, in addition to requiring estimation of a large number of
linear encoding parameters, this approach ignores the structure of the feature maps
both in the brain and the models. Recently proposed alternatives factor the linear
mapping into separate sets of spatial and feature weights, thus finding static receptive fields for units, which is appropriate only for early visual areas. In this work,
we employ the attention mechanism used in the transformer architecture to study
how retinotopic visual features can be dynamically routed to category-selective
areas in high-level visual processing. We show that this computational motif is
significantly more powerful than alternative methods in predicting brain activity
during natural scene viewing, across different feature basis models and modalities.
We also show that this approach is inherently more interpretable as the attentionrouting signals for different high-level categorical areas can be easily visualized for
any input image. Given its high performance at predicting brain responses to novel
images, the model deserves consideration as a candidate mechanistic model of how
visual information from retinotopic maps is routed in the human brain based on the
relevance of the input content to different category-selective regions. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Hosseinadeli/transformer_brain_encoder/.

1

Introduction

An influential approach to study plausible neural computations in the brain is to train Deep Neural
Network (DNN) models on different tasks [44, 28] and compare their learned representation to brain
activity [52, 23]. There has been a great deal of discussion and research on best ways to compare the
learned representations to the ones recorded from the brain (across models and across models and
brains). One main approach is to build encoding models— learn a mapping function from one feature
domain to another and measure the accuracy of the prediction in held-out sets [14, 36]. An alternative
approach is to characterize the geometry or topology of the representation in each model or in the
brain and then compare them (e.g. RSA; [29]). In this work, we focus on the learned encoding
functions, as we believe that it can give us further insight into the computations in the brain.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

