Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with
Communication-Constrained Priors
Guang Yang1

Tianpei Yang12∗ Jingwen Qiao2 Yanqing Wu2 Jing Huo1
Xingguo Chen4 Yang Gao123∗
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University
3
Accepted School of Network Security and Information Technology, YiLi Normal University
4
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{yangg,jingwenqiao,yanqingwu}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{tianpei.yang,huojing,gaoy}@nju.edu.cn
chenxg@njupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Communication is one of the effective means to improve the learning of cooperative policy in multi-agent systems. However, in most real-world scenarios, lossy
communication is a prevalent issue. Existing multi-agent reinforcement learning
with communication, due to their limited scalability and robustness, struggles to
apply to complex and dynamic real-world environments. To address these challenges, we propose a generalized communication-constrained model to uniformly
characterize communication conditions across different scenarios. Based on this,
we utilize it as a learning prior to distinguish between lossy and lossless messages
for specific scenarios. Additionally, we decouple the impact of lossy and lossless
messages on distributed decision-making, drawing on a dual mutual information
estimatior, and introduce a communication-constrained multi-agent reinforcement
learning framework, quantifying the impact of communication messages into the
global reward. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of our approach across several
communication-constrained benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) with partial observations, collaboration poses a
significant challenge [19]. Communication is one of the effective measures to improve the learning
of cooperative policy in MARL [31], widely applied in scenarios such as autonomous driving [4, 24]
and cooperative drones [3, 12]. However, real-world scenarios are far from ideal and communication
between agents often faces various constraints, specifically: (1) limited communication bandwidth,
meaning only a limited amount of message can be transmitted, and (2) lossy communication, where
transmitted message may be subject to interference, delay, loss, and other issues.
Much of the research on communication-constrained multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
focuses on the limited bandwidth issue [22, 14, 10, 30]. In this setting, it is assumed that the
communication channel is ideal, which means that transmission is real-time and lossless. Therefore,
these methods typically only need to focus on how to effectively allocate communication resources
(e.g., communication bandwidth, communication medium) to promote cooperation among agents.
For example, compressing the communication information to extract and transmit parts beneficial
to cooperation [16], and systematically allocating communication mediums to avoid competition,
among other problems [11].
∗

Corresponding Author: Tianpei Yang; Yang Gao

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

