Truth over Tricks: Measuring and Mitigating Shortcut
Learning in Misinformation Detection

Herun Wan1, 2 , Jiaying Wu3 , Minnan Luo1, 2, * , Zhi Zeng1, 4 , Zhixiong Su1, 4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Knowledge Engineering, China
wanherun@stu.xjtu.edu.cn minnluo@xjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/whr000001/TruthOverTricks
1

Abstract
Misinformation detectors often rely on superficial cues (i.e., shortcuts) that correlate with misinformation in training data but fail to generalize to the diverse
and evolving nature of real-world misinformation. This issue is exacerbated by
large language models (LLMs), which can easily generate convincing misinformation using simple prompts. We introduce T RUTH OVERT RICKS, a unified
evaluation paradigm for measuring shortcut learning in misinformation detection.
T RUTH OVERT RICKS categorizes shortcut behaviors into intrinsic shortcut induction and extrinsic shortcut injection, and evaluates seven representative detectors
across 14 popular benchmarks, along with two new factual misinformation datasets,
NQ-Misinfo and Streaming-Misinfo. Empirical results reveal that existing detectors
suffer severe performance degradation when exposed to both naturally occurring
and adversarially crafted shortcuts. To address this, we propose the Shortcut Mitigation Framework (SMF), an LLM-augmented data augmentation framework that
mitigates shortcut reliance through paraphrasing, factual summarization, and sentiment normalization. SMF consistently enhances robustness across 16 benchmarks,
forcing models to rely on deeper semantic understanding rather than shortcut cues.

1

Introduction

Real-world misinformation, such as
fake news [70] and rumors [36], appears in highly diverse forms. It varies
in sentiment, writing style, and topical focus, and often adapts quickly to
emerging events. The emergence of
large language models (LLMs) further
amplifies this diversity. With simple
prompts such as “Rewrite the news
article to make it more convincing”,
LLMs can generate persuasive misinformation that closely mimics credible content [5].

Training Set

Causal Graph

positive

News
Content

Authenticity

X

Y

S
Shortcuts

Spurious
Associations

#1
Real

negative

#2
Fake

politics entertainment

#3
Real

#4
Fake

Test Set

Shortcut

#6
Real

#7
Fake

#8
Real

Prediction Fake

Real

Fake

Label

#5
Real

Correct
Wrong

Figure 1: Illustration of shortcut learning in misinformation
detection. As depicted in the causal graph, misinformation
detectors often learn spurious associations between truthfulness and task-irrelevant features (i.e., shortcuts) during
training. For instance, features such as sentiment or domain
To ensure factual integrity in this dy- may lead detectors to infer that positive-toned or politicsnamic online landscape, misinforma- related content is more likely to be real. As a result, models
fail to generalize and produce incorrect predictions when
*
Corresponding author
presented with more realistic or diverse test instances.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

