Robust and Diverse Multi-Agent Learning via
Rational Policy Gradient

Niklas Lauffer1 Ameesh Shah1 Micah Carroll1
Sanjit A. Seshia1 Stuart Russell1 Michael Dennis2
1
UC Berkeley 2 Google Deepmind
nlauffer@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Adversarial optimization algorithms that explicitly search for flaws in agents’
policies have been successfully applied to finding robust and diverse policies in
multi-agent settings. However, the success of adversarial optimization has been
largely limited to zero-sum settings because its naive application in cooperative
settings leads to a critical failure mode: agents are irrationally incentivized to selfsabotage, blocking the completion of tasks and halting further learning. To address
this, we introduce Rationality-preserving Policy Optimization (RPO), a formalism
for adversarial optimization that avoids self-sabotage by ensuring agents remain
rational—that is, their policies are optimal with respect to some possible partner
policy. To solve RPO, we develop Rational Policy Gradient (RPG), which trains
agents to maximize their own reward in a modified version of the original game in
which we use opponent shaping techniques to optimize the adversarial objective.
RPG enables us to extend a variety of existing adversarial optimization algorithms
that, no longer subject to the limitations of self-sabotage, can find adversarial
examples, improve robustness and adaptability, and learn diverse policies. We
empirically validate that our approach achieves strong performance in several
popular cooperative and general-sum environments. Our project page can be found
at rational-policy-gradient.github.io1 .

1

Introduction

A longstanding challenge in the field of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is that of learning
robust behavior: individual agents should be able to adapt to a variety of different strategies that other
agents might exhibit. One way to achieve robustness is by training agents to iteratively find and fix
flaws in their policy. In zero-sum settings, this can be naturally achieved through self-play [Samuel,
1959, Silver et al., 2016], where agents train against copies of themselves. Due to the adversarial
nature of zero-sum self-play, agents will continually be encouraged to find new ways of attacking
their opponents which will naturally lead to iterative improvement and robustification. In general-sum
(especially cooperative) settings, however, self-play will explicitly avoid the weaknesses of other
players, as it is harmful to the shared reward, resulting in brittle agents [Carroll et al., 2019].
Inspired by its success in zero-sum settings, we leverage a form of adversarial optimization (i.e., we
incentivize minimizing other players’ rewards) to train agents to find and fix flaws in general-sum
settings. However, seeking to minimize others’ rewards in cooperative settings, where all agents aim
to maximize a shared reward, unsurprisingly leads to self-sabotaging behavior [Cui et al., 2023]. If
an agent is solely incentivized to minimize the rewards of another player, the adversary can simply
learn to refuse to collaborate with that teammate. Even worse, the adversary has an incentive to act
irrationally by actively sabotaging its teammate’s (and by extension, its own) reward, preventing
meaningful learning.
1

Code can be found at github.com/niklaslauffer/rational-policy-gradient.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

