Reparameterized LLM Training via Orthogonal
Equivalence Transformation

Zeju Qiu1 Simon Buchholz1 Tim Z. Xiao1 Maximilian Dax1 Bernhard Schölkopf1 Weiyang Liu1,2,*
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
While Large language models (LLMs) are driving the rapid advancement of artificial intelligence, effectively and reliably training these large models remains
one of the field’s most significant challenges. To address this challenge, we
propose POET, a novel reParameterized training algorithm that uses Orthogonal
Equivalence Transformation to optimize neurons. Specifically, POET reparameterizes each neuron with two learnable orthogonal matrices and a fixed random
weight matrix. Because of its provable preservation of spectral properties of weight
matrices, POET can stably optimize the objective function with improved generalization. We further develop efficient approximations that make POET flexible and
scalable for training large-scale neural networks. Extensive experiments validate
the effectiveness and scalability of POET in training LLMs.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the increasing popularity of large language models (LLMs) in various applications, such as mathematical reasoning [13] and program synthesis [3] and decision-making [77].
Current LLMs are typically pre-trained using enormous computational resources on massive datasets
containing trillions of tokens, with each training run that can take months to complete. Given such a
huge training cost, how to effectively and reliably train them poses significant challenges.
The de facto way for training LLMs is to directly optimize weight matrices with the Adam optimizer [37, 55]. While conceptually simple, this direct optimization can be computationally intensive
(due to the poor scaling with model size) and requires careful hyperparameter tuning to ensure stable
convergence. More importantly, its generalization can remain suboptimal even if the training loss is
perfectly minimized [36]. To stabilize training and enhance generalization, various weight regularization methods [4, 10, 12, 47, 49, 79] and weight normalization techniques [28, 38, 39, 50, 52, 54]
have been proposed. Most of these methods boil down to improving spectral properties of weight
matrices (i.e., singular values) either explicitly or implicitly. Intuitively, the spectral norm of a weight
matrix (i.e., the largest singular value) provides an upper bound on how much a matrix can amplify
the input vectors, which connects to the generalization properties. In general, smaller spectral norms
(i.e., better smoothness) are considered to be associated with stronger generalization, which inspires
explicit spectrum control [33, 59, 67, 79]. Theoretical results [6] also suggest that weight matrices
with bounded spectrum can provably guarantee generalization. Given the importance of the spectral
properties of weight matrices, what prevents us from controlling them during LLM training?
• Inefficacy of spectrum control: Existing spectrum control methods constrain only the largest
singular value, failing to effectively regularizing the full singular value spectrum. Moreover, there
is also no guarantee for spectral norm regularization to effectively control the largest singular value.
• Computational overhead: Both spectral norm regularization [79] and spectral normalization [59]
require computing the largest singular value of weight matrices. Even with power iteration, this still
adds a significant overhead to the training process, especially when training large neural networks.
Additionally, spectral regularization does not scale efficiently with increasing model size.
*

Project lead & Corresponding author

Project page: spherelab.ai/poet

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

