Minimax-Optimal Univariate Function Selection in
Sparse Additive Models: Rates, Adaptation, and the
Estimation-Selection Gap

Shixiang Liu
School of Statistics
Renmin University of China
liushixiang_stat@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
The sparse additive model (SpAM) offers a trade-off between interpretability and
flexibility, and hence is a powerful model for high-dimensional research. This paper
focuses on the variable selection, i.e., the univariate function selection problem in
SpAM. We establish the minimax separation rates from both the perspectives of
sparse multiple testing (FDR + FNR control) and support recovery (wrong recovery
probability control). We further study how adaptation to unknown smoothness
affects the minimax separation rate, and propose an adaptive selection procedure.
Finally, we discuss the difference between estimation and selection in SpAM:
Procedures achieving optimal function estimation may fail to achieve optimal
univariate function selection.

1

Introduction

The Sparse Additive Model (SpAM) is a pivotal topic of recent statistical research [Ravikumar et al.,
2009, Meier et al., 2009, Koltchinskii and Yuan, 2010, Raskutti et al., 2012, Dalalyan et al., 2014,
Yuan and Zhou, 2016, Tyagi et al., 2016, Tan and Zhang, 2019, Haris et al., 2022]. It extends the
generalized additive model [Hastie and Tibshirani, 1987], balancing interpretability and flexibility
while avoiding the curse of dimensionality and adapting to high-dimensional settings.
In this paper, we focus on the variable selection, i.e., univariate function selection problem of the
SpAM, which is a fundamental problem with broad implications in multi-channel detection [Ingster
and Lepski, 2003], multi-task learning [Wang et al., 2020], sparse neural network [Xu et al., 2023], and
so on. We consider a Gaussian white noise (GWN) model with p covariates x = (x1 , · · · , xp ) ∈ X p ,
which takes the form as
p
X
dYx = f (x)dx + σdBx =
fj (xj )dxj + σdBx ,
j=1

where X is the domain of each covariate xj , Bx is a standard Wiener process on X p , and σ > 0
measures the intensity of the white noise. We assume fj is the univariate function corresponding to
variable xj . Under the setting of sparsity, the
Presponse Yx is influenced by no more than s covariates,
and hence f can be expressed as f (x) = j∈Sf fj (xj ), where Sf ⊆ {1, · · · , p} is the index set
of these support covariates. In this continuous-time SpAM framework, our main goal is to recover
the index set Sf , i.e., to select which fj ̸= 0. This paper studies the univariate function selection
in SpAMs from two perspectives—namely, as a sparse multiple testing problem and as a support
recovery problem. We employ the truncated procedures and establish the non-asymptotic minimax
separation rates, delivering, to our knowledge, the first optimal finite-sample guarantees for univariate
function selection in SpAMs.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

