Iterative Foundation Model Fine-Tuning
on Multiple Rewards

Pouya M. Ghari
Biogen

Simone Sciabola
Biogen

Ye Wang∗
Biogen

Abstract
Fine-tuning foundation models has emerged as a powerful approach for generating
objects with specific desired properties. Reinforcement learning (RL) provides
an effective framework for this purpose, enabling models to generate outputs that
maximize a given reward function. However, in many applications such as text
generation and drug discovery, it can be suboptimal to optimize using a single reward signal, as multiple evaluation criteria are often necessary. This paper proposes
a novel reinforcement learning-based method for fine-tuning foundation models
using multiple reward signals. By employing an iterative fine-tuning strategy across
these rewards, our approach generalizes state-of-the-art RL-based methods. We
further provide a theoretical analysis that offers insights into the performance of
multi-reward RL fine-tuning. Experimental results across diverse domains including text, biological sequence, and small molecule generation, demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Foundation models have emerged as powerful tools capable of performing a wide range of tasks.
Trained on large-scale datasets, they acquire broad knowledge that enables their application across
diverse domains. To better align a foundation model with the specific preferences of a downstream
task, fine-tuning can be applied to improve both performance and task alignment. Given access to a
reward model or a preference dataset, reinforcement learning offers an effective framework for finetuning foundation models and large language models (LLMs) to better align with downstream tasks
[46, 41, 2]. Preference criteria used to evaluate the quality of responses generated by LLMs can vary,
and in some cases, it may not be possible to derive a single reward or preference. Furthermore, these
criteria can sometimes conflict with one another, making it difficult to summarize them into a single,
unified preference metric. For example, human preferences can be diverse and conflicting with one
another, such as the trade-off between harmlessness and helpfulness [3]. As another example, LLMs
can be used to generate novel small molecules for drug design [50, 22, 35]. In such applications,
candidate molecules are often evaluated based on multiple criteria [24, 44]. In such cases, fine-tuning
foundation models on multiple objectives becomes essential.
Multi-objective reinforcement learning can be employed to address diverse rewards and preferences.
Existing methods in the literature primarily follow two approaches. The first approach combines all
reward signals corresponding to different objectives into a single scalar reward [31], which is then
used to fine-tune the foundation model. The second approach involves fine-tuning the foundation
model separately and independently for each objective to obtain a set of expert policy networks,
each specialized for a specific objective. These expert policies are then merged to form a unified
policy [42], effectively acting as an ensemble with the aim of capturing knowledge from all experts.
However, combining reward signals into a single objective may prevent the model from learning
objective-specific skills. This can result in high performance variance across objectives, particularly
∗

Corresponding Author: ye.wang@biogen.com

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

