Tree Ensemble Explainability through the Hoeffding
Functional Decomposition and TreeHFD Algorithm

Clément Bénard
Thales cortAIx-Labs - SINCLAIR AI Lab
1 avenue Augustin Fresnel, 91120 Palaiseau, France
clement-l.benard@thalesgroup.com

Abstract
Tree ensembles have demonstrated state-of-the-art predictive performance across
a wide range of problems involving tabular data. Nevertheless, the black-box
nature of tree ensembles is a strong limitation, especially for applications with
critical decisions at stake. The Hoeffding or ANOVA functional decomposition is a
powerful explainability method, as it breaks down black-box models into a unique
sum of lower-dimensional functions, provided that input variables are independent.
In standard learning settings, input variables are often dependent, and the Hoeffding
decomposition is generalized through hierarchical orthogonality constraints. Such
generalization leads to unique and sparse decompositions with well-defined main
effects and interactions. However, the practical estimation of this decomposition
from a data sample is still an open problem. Therefore, we introduce the TreeHFD
algorithm to estimate the Hoeffding decomposition of a tree ensemble from a data
sample. We show the convergence of TreeHFD, along with the main properties
of orthogonality, sparsity, and causal variable selection. The high performance
of TreeHFD is demonstrated through experiments on both simulated and real
data, using our treehfd Python package (https://github.com/ThalesGroup/treehfd).
Besides, we empirically show that the widely used TreeSHAP method, based on
Shapley values, is strongly connected to the Hoeffding decomposition.

1

Introduction

Tree ensembles have demonstrated remarkable predictive performance to tackle supervised learning
problems with tabular data, over the past two decades. In particular, gradient boosted trees (Friedman,
2001; Chen and Guestrin, 2016) and random forests (Breiman, 2001) are probably the most successful
algorithms to build tree ensembles. Recently, the extensive benchmark of Grinsztajn et al. (2022) has
shown that tree ensembles still outperform deep neural networks on tabular data, and are therefore
state-of-the-art on a wide range of problems. However, tree ensembles suffer from a major limitation
with their lack of interpretability. Indeed, the prediction mechanism of a tree ensemble typically
computes thousands of operations for a single prediction, making impossible to grasp how inputs
are combined to generate predictions. Such black-box problem is shared by most machine learning
algorithms, and is a serious obstacle when critical decisions are at stake, which is the case for
industrial or healthcare applications, for example. The field of eXplainable AI, often called XAI,
develops methods to explain predictions of learning algorithms, and has raised a strong interest in the
community over the past few years (Guidotti et al., 2018; Speith, 2022; Amoukou, 2023). The two
main approaches to obtain explainable algorithms are transparent models and post-hoc explanations.
In the first case, the model structure is constrained to have a limited complexity, in order to keep
a clear relation between the inputs and the output of the algorithm. However, transparent models
usually have a limited accuracy, because of the strong constraints on their structure. The second
type of methods provides explanations through post-treatments of the initial black-box model. A
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

