Revising and Falsifying Sparse Autoencoder Feature
Explanations

George Ma1∗ Samuel Pfrommer1∗ Somayeh Sojoudi1
1
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Mechanistic interpretability research seeks to reverse-engineer large language
models (LLMs) by uncovering the internal representations of concepts within
their activations. Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) have emerged as a valuable tool
for disentangling polysemantic neurons into more monosemantic, interpretable
features. However, recent work on automatic explanation generation for these
features has faced challenges: explanations tend to be overly broad and fail to take
polysemanticity into consideration. This work addresses these limitations by introducing a similarity-based strategy for sourcing close negative sentences that more
effectively falsify generated explanations. Additionally, we propose a structured,
component-based format for feature explanations and a tree-based, iterative explanation method that refines explanations. We demonstrate that our structured format
and tree-based explainer improve explanation quality, while our similarity-based
evaluation strategy exposes biases in existing interpretability methods. We also
analyze the evolution of feature complexity and polysemanticity across LLM layers, offering new insights into information content within LLMs’ residual streams.
Code is available at https://github.com/GeorgeMLP/feature-interp.

1

Introduction

The recent rise of highly capable large language models (LLMs) has inspired a surge of mechanistic
interpretability research. One major concern of this area has involved decomposing LLM activations
into a human-interpretable form [11, 26]. This is complicated by LLM’s hypothesized use of
superposition to encode a vast range of concepts into a constrained number of multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) block neurons [3]. Namely, instead of MLP block neurons each corresponding to a clean
concept, they become polysemantic, and activate for a range of unrelated inputs [6, 3].
Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) have enjoyed widespread use as a more refined analysis tool that
partially disentangles the polysemanticity of individual neurons [35, 3, 5, 16]. Inspired by the
linear representation hypothesis [27], SAEs consist of an autoencoder which maps activations into a
higher-dimensional latent space while minimizing both reconstruction loss and a sparsity penalty
[5]. In contrast to individual neurons, features in the latent space of an SAE are generally more
monosemantic and interpretable [5].
One area of LLM autointerpretability research attempts to explain language model features, such as
neurons and SAE latent vector indices, using external LLMs to summarize patterns in top-activating
sentences [1]. These generated explanations are often oversimplified and too broad [1, 28]. Consider
for example the “not all” neuron L13N1352 discussed in Bills et al. [1]. This neuron activates on the
token all only when immediately following not. However, a more broad explanation that the neuron
always activates on the word not scores well on high-activation sentences which do not contain a
falsifying counterexample of not in a different context. Various partial remedies to this problem
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: George Ma (george_ma@berkeley.edu).

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

