Video-R1: Reinforcing Video Reasoning in MLLMs

Kaituo Feng1 , Kaixiong Gong1 , Bohao Li2 , Zonghao Guo3∗, Yibing Wang4 ,
Tianshuo Peng1 , Junfei Wu4 , Xiaoying Zhang5 , Benyou Wang2 , Xiangyu Yue1∗
1

CUHK MMLab, 2 CUHK (SZ), 3 Tsinghua University, 4 UCAS, 5 CUHK HCCL
https://github.com/tulerfeng/Video-R1

Abstract
Inspired by DeepSeek-R1’s success in eliciting reasoning abilities through rulebased reinforcement learning (RL), we introduce Video-R1 as the first attempt to
systematically explore the R1 paradigm for incentivizing video reasoning within
multimodal large language models (MLLMs). However, directly applying RL training with the GRPO algorithm to video reasoning presents two primary challenges:
(i) a lack of temporal modeling for video reasoning, and (ii) the scarcity of highquality video-reasoning data. To address these issues, we first propose the T-GRPO
algorithm, which encourages models to utilize temporal information in videos for
reasoning. Additionally, instead of relying solely on video data, we incorporate
high-quality image-reasoning data into the training process. We have constructed
two datasets: Video-R1-CoT-165k for SFT cold start and Video-R1-260k for RL
training, both comprising image and video data. Experimental results demonstrate
that Video-R1 achieves significant improvements on video reasoning benchmarks
such as VideoMMMU and VSI-Bench, as well as on general video benchmarks
including MVBench and TempCompass, etc. Notably, Video-R1-7B attains a
37.1% accuracy on video spatial reasoning benchmark VSI-bench, surpassing the
commercial proprietary model GPT-4o. All code, models, and data are released in
https://github.com/tulerfeng/Video-R1.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in rule-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) [17] have significantly enhanced
the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) [16, 11]. In particular, DeepSeek-R1
[11] has demonstrated that carefully designed RL pipelines can lead to emergent and robust reasoning
abilities with long chain-of-thoughts (CoT) in text-based domains. Motivated by this success, several
recent efforts have explored extending RL training to Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
[33, 14, 39]. Notable examples include Kimi k1.5 [33] and Skywork R1V [39], which apply RL to
improve reasoning over image-text pairs. However, despite these early explorations, the domain of
video reasoning in MLLMs remains underexplored.
To bridge this gap, we present Video-R1 model, as the first attempt to systematically investigate
eliciting strong video reasoning based on the R1 paradigm . However, directly applying RL training
with the Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) algorithm [30] to video reasoning introduces
two fundamental challenges: First, original GRPO lacks explicit reward signals for encouraging
temporal reasoning in a video. Without explicit temporal awareness, the model may take shortcuts for
reasoning, focusing on a single frame or snapshot rather than reasoning over time (see Figure 1 for
example; Video-UTR [40] also identifies a similar issue). The underexploitation for temporal cues
can cause the learned reasoning strategies to "shortcut" the process—relying on superficial visual
patterns, rather than engaging in deeper and temporally grounded reasoning. This could ultimately
hindering generalization to more complex or diverse video reasoning tasks.
∗

Corresponding Authors

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

