Functional Virtual Adversarial Training for
Semi-Supervised Time Series Classification

Qingyi Pan
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
pqy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yicheng Li∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
liyc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world time series analysis, such as healthcare, autonomous driving, and
solar energy, faces unique challenges arising from the scarcity of labeled data,
highlighting the need for effective semi-supervised learning methods. While the
Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT) method has shown promising performance in
leveraging unlabeled data for smoother predictive distributions, straightforward
extensions of VAT often fall short on time series tasks as they neglect the temporal
structure of the data in the adversarial perturbation. In this paper, we propose the
framework of functional Virtual Adversarial Training (f-VAT) that can incorporate
the functional structure of the data into perturbations. By theoretically establishing
a duality between the perturbation norm and the functional model sensitivity,
we propose to use an appropriate Sobolev (H −s ) norm to generate structured
functional adversarial perturbations for semi-supervised time series classification.
Our proposed f-VAT method outperforms recent methods and achieves superior
performance in extensive semi-supervised time series classification tasks (e.g., up
to ≈ 9% performance improvement). We also provide additional visualization
studies to offer further insights into the superiority of f-VAT.

1

Introduction

Time series analysis has attracted considerable attention from both academia and industry, due to its
relevance to critical domains such as electrocardiogram (ECG) interpretation in medical diagnosis [14]
and photovoltaic module power calibration in solar energy systems [35]. However, capturing intrinsic
temporal structural properties of time series data, such as noisy fluctuations, long-term trends, and
periodic patterns, is still challenging [22], particularly with scarce labeled data [41]. Because manual
annotation is labor-intensive and costly with massive unlabeled data, semi-supervised time series
classification methods have become a promising research direction.
In this regard, existing methods attempt to leverage massive unlabeled data and limited labeled
data to alleviate overfitting. Some studies generate high-confidence pseudo-labels for unlabeled
samples and then train a deep model on the expanded dataset [6, 36]. Although such methods can
iteratively improve predictive performance, they require careful selection of confidence thresholds and
remain susceptible to “confirmation bias”: earlier errors in pseudo-labels are likely to be reinforced
during training, making it difficult for deep models to correct early biases or capture global trend
information [10, 2]. Some recent studies enhance pseudo-labeling with strong data augmentation and
self-supervised representation learning to better utilize unlabeled data. For instance, TS-TCC [18]
generates the pseudo-label on a weakly augmented view, while encouraging consistent representations
∗

Corresponding Author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

