The Remarkable Robustness of LLMs:
Stages of Inference?

Vedang Lad∗
MIT
Stanford University
vedanglad@stanford.edu

Jin Hwa Lee
University College London
jin.lee.22@ucl.ac.uk

Wes Gurnee
MIT
wesg@mit.edu

Max Tegmark
MIT
tegmark@mit.edu

Abstract
We investigate the robustness of Large Language Models (LLMs) to structural
interventions by deleting and swapping adjacent layers during inference. Surprisingly, models retain 72–95% of their original top-1 prediction accuracy without any
fine-tuning. We find that performance degradation is not uniform across layers: interventions to the early and final layers cause the most degradation, while the model
is remarkably robust to dropping middle layers. This pattern of localized sensitivity
motivates our hypothesis of four stages of inference, observed across diverse model
families and sizes: (1) detokenization, where local context is integrated to lift raw
token embeddings into higher-level representations; (2) feature engineering, where
task- and entity-specific features are iteratively refined; (3) prediction ensembling,
where hidden states are aggregated into plausible next-token predictions; and (4)
residual calibration, where irrelevant features are suppressed to finalize the top-1
output distribution. Synthesizing behavioral and mechanistic evidence, we provide
a hypothesis for interpreting depth-dependent computations in LLMs.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable reasoning
capabilities, often attributed to increased scale [1]. Understanding these capabilities and mitigating
associated risks [2–4] have motivated extensive research into their underlying mechanisms.
A bottom-up approach to interpretability, known as mechanistic interpretability, has explored the
iterative inference hypothesis [5, 6], which posits that each transformer layer incrementally updates a
token’s hidden state toward minimizing loss by progressively shaping the next-token distribution [7].
This is supported by self-repair [6], where later layers correct or mitigate errors introduced by earlier
layers, and redundancy [8, 9], where multiple layers perform similar or overlapping computations to
refine predictions.
It remains unclear how this iterative view of inference fits with the “circuit” hypothesis, which
argues for clearly delineated, specialized roles for certain model components. This is supported
by induction heads [10], successor heads [11], copy suppression mechanisms [12], and knowledge
neurons [13], among other “universal” neurons [14, 15]. Whereas iterative inference suggests gradual
refinement through overlapping computations, the strong circuit hypothesis implies distinct, modular
computational pathways.
∗

Corresponding author. Work started at MIT, completed at Stanford University

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

