Learning Juntas under Markov Random Fields

Gautam Chandrasekaran
gautamc@cs.utexas.edu
UT Austin

Adam R. Klivans
klivans@utexas.edu
UT Austin

Abstract
We give an algorithm for learning O(log n) juntas in polynomial-time with respect
to Markov Random Fields (MRFs) in a smoothed analysis framework where only
the external field has been randomly perturbed. This is a broad generalization1 of
the work of Kalai and Teng, who gave an algorithm that succeeded with respect
to smoothed product distributions (i.e., MRFs whose dependency graph has no
edges). Our algorithm has two phases: (1) an unsupervised structure learning
phase and (2) a greedy supervised learning algorithm. This is the first example
where algorithms for learning the structure of undirected graphical models have
downstream applications to supervised learning.

1

Introduction

A function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} is a k-junta if it depends only on k of the n input coordinates. The
junta learning problem, introduced by Blum and Langley [Blu94, BL97] in 1994, is as follows: given
random samples labeled by an unknown k-junta, output a classifier that closely approximates the
k-junta. The problem of learning k-juntas is one of the most well-studied problems in computational
learning theory over the last three decades. It is considered a notoriously difficult challenge to learn
juntas with runtime and sample complexity no(k) and has important applications in pseudorandomness
and cryptography (e.g., [ABW10])
The problem of learning juntas highlights the difficulty of designing learning algorithms that can
succeed in the presence of a large number of irrelevant features (i.e., the n − k irrelevant coordinates).
Most prior work has focused on learning juntas when the marginal distribution is uniform over the

hypercube. Observe that a brute force search over all subsets of k variables is possible in time O( nk ).
In the search for faster algorithms, [MOS04, Val12] gave algorithms that run in time approximately
n0.7k , n0.6k respectively when given uniform random examples. There
 is evidence to suggest that
a runtime of nΩ(k) is unavoidable, as there is a lower bound of nk in the statistical query (SQ)
framework of Kearns [Kea93] and also cryptographic lower bounds [ABW10]. It is a major open
problem to find an algorithm for this problem with run time and sample complexity no(k) .
1.1

Beyond the Worst Case: Smooth Product Distributions

To bypass the above hardness results, learning juntas has been studied in the smoothed analysis
framework of Spielman and Teng [ST04]. In particular, Kalai and Teng [KT08] introduced the notion
of a (c, σ)-smooth product distribution, which is a product distribution with mean vector of the
form µ = µ̄ + ∆ where µ̄ ∈ [−c, c]n is adversarially chosen and ∆ is randomly sampled from the
uniform distribution on [−σ, σ]n . Under these smoothed distributions (with high probability over the
smoothing), they showed that it is possible to learn depth k decision trees in time poly(2k , n)2 .
1

the generalization is in the distributional assumption, Kalai and Teng’s result also gives a polynomial time
learning algorithm for log-depth decision trees.
2
A similar statement for juntas was also observed in [MOS04], see Fact 15
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

