Zeroth-Order Optimization Finds Flat Minima

Liang Zhang
ETH Zurich & Max Planck Institute
liang.zhang@inf.ethz.ch

Bingcong Li
ETH Zurich
bingcong.li@inf.ethz.ch

Kiran Koshy Thekumparampil
Amazon
kkt@amazon.com

Sewoong Oh
University of Washington
sewoong@cs.washington.edu

Michael Muehlebach
Max Planck Institute
michaelm@tuebingen.mpg.de

Niao He
ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Zeroth-order methods are extensively used in machine learning applications where
gradients are infeasible or expensive to compute, such as black-box attacks, reinforcement learning, and language model fine-tuning. Existing optimization theory
focuses on convergence to an arbitrary stationary point, but less is known on the
implicit regularization that provides a fine-grained characterization on which particular solutions are finally reached. We show that zeroth-order optimization with the
standard two-point estimator favors solutions with small trace of Hessian, which
is widely used in previous work to distinguish between sharp and flat minima.
We further provide convergence rates of zeroth-order optimization to approximate
flat minima for convex and sufficiently smooth functions, where flat minima are
defined as the minimizers that achieve the smallest trace of Hessian among all
optimal solutions. Experiments on binary classification tasks with convex losses
and language model fine-tuning support our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

There are many emerging machine learning problems where gradients are not accessible or expensive
to compute, hindering the application of gradient-based optimization algorithms. For example,
fine-tuning large language models (LLMs), particularly at the scale of billions of parameters, faces
significant memory bottlenecks, primarily because of the memory-intensive nature of backpropagation.
Zeroth-order optimization offers a compelling alternative as it permits gradient estimation via finite
differences of loss values. Malladi et al. [69] reported that zeroth-order methods are capable of
fine-tuning a 30-billion-parameter model using a single A100 GPU with 80 GiB memory, whereas
gradient-based methods require 8 A100s. In addition to recent advances in fine-tuning LLMs,
zeroth-order methods have also found numerous applications in black-box settings [17, 18, 6] and
nonsmooth optimization [74, 57, 47] where gradient computation is often infeasible. They have
further proven effective in reinforcement learning [80, 68, 39] and distributed learning [31, 93, 77] to
reduce computation and communication costs.
To be more specific, for the optimization problem minx∈Rd f (x) with parameters x ∈ Rd and a loss
function f : Rd → R, zeroth-order optimization with the standard two-point gradient estimator [74]
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

