EvaLearn: Quantifying the Learning Capability and
Efficiency of LLMs via Sequential Problem Solving

Shihan Dou1∗, Ming Zhang1∗ , Chenhao Huang1 , Jiayi Chen1 , Feng Chen2,3 ,
Shichun Liu1 , Yan Liu2 , Chenxiao Liu2 , Cheng Zhong2 , Zongzhang Zhang3 , Tao Gui1,4†,
Chao Xin2 , Chengzhi Wei2 , Lin Yan2 , Qi Zhang1,5† , Xuanjing Huang1,5†
1
Fudan University 2 ByteDance Seed 3 Nanjing University 4 Shanghai Innovation Institute
5
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
{shdou24, mingzhang23}@m.fudan.edu.cn
{tgui, qz, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce EvaLearn, a pioneering benchmark designed to evaluate large language models (LLMs) on their learning capability and efficiency in challenging
tasks, a critical, yet underexplored aspect of model potential. EvaLearn contains
648 challenging problems across six task types, grouped into 182 sequences, each
sequence dedicated to one task type. Diverging from most existing benchmarks that
evaluate models in parallel, EvaLearn requires models to solve problems sequentially, allowing them to leverage the experience gained from previous solutions.
EvaLearn provides five comprehensive automated metrics to evaluate models and
quantify their learning capability and efficiency. We extensively benchmark nine
frontier models and observe varied performance profiles: some models, such as
Claude-3.7-sonnet, start with moderate initial performance but exhibit strong learning ability, while some models struggle to benefit from experience and may even
show negative transfer. Moreover, we investigate model performance under two
learning settings and find that instance-level rubrics and teacher-model feedback
further facilitate model learning. Importantly, we observe that current LLMs with
stronger static abilities do not show a clear advantage in learning capability across
all tasks, highlighting that EvaLearn evaluates a new dimension of model performance. We hope EvaLearn provides a novel evaluation perspective for assessing
LLM potential and understanding the gap between models and human capabilities,
promoting the development of deeper and more dynamic evaluation approaches.
All datasets, the automatic evaluation framework, and the results studied in this
paper are available at https://github.com/ByteDance-Seed/EvaLearn.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have advanced rapidly in recent years, driving remarkable progress
in a wide range of applications [90; 9; 65; 26; 57; 4]. Rigorous evaluation of these models is essential
for understanding their current capabilities, identifying areas for improvement, and guiding the
development of more advanced LLMs [10; 39; 27; 25; 102].
Although numerous benchmarks have been proposed to assess various aspects of model performance,
the overwhelming majority rely on a parallel evaluation paradigm [93; 71; 43; 7; 47; 40; 33; 85].
In this setting, models are tested on independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples, and
their overall performance is reported as aggregate metrics. However, such benchmarks primarily
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

