Learning to Think: Information-Theoretic
Reinforcement Fine-Tuning for LLMs

1

Jingyao Wang1,2∗, Wenwen Qiang1,2∗†, Zeen Song1,2∗, Changwen Zheng1,2 , Hui Xiong3,4
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{wangjingyao2023, qiangwenwen, songzeen}@iscas.ac.cn, xionghui@ust.hk

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) excel at complex tasks thanks to advances in their
reasoning abilities. However, existing methods overlook the trade-off between
reasoning effectiveness and efficiency, often encouraging unnecessarily long reasoning chains and wasting tokens. To address this, we propose Learning to Think
(L2T) 3 , an information-theoretic reinforcement fine-tuning framework for LLMs
to make the models achieve optimal reasoning with fewer tokens. Specifically, L2T
treats each query-response interaction as a hierarchical session of multiple episodes
and proposes a universal dense process reward, i.e., quantifies the episode-wise
information gain in parameters, requiring no extra annotations or task-specific
evaluators. We propose a method to quickly estimate this reward based on PACBayes bounds and the Fisher information matrix. Theoretical analyses show that
it significantly reduces computational complexity with high estimation accuracy.
By immediately rewarding each episode’s contribution and penalizing excessive
updates, L2T optimizes the model via reinforcement learning to maximize the
use of each episode and achieve effective updates. Empirical results on various
reasoning benchmarks and base models demonstrate the advantage of L2T across
different tasks, boosting both reasoning effectiveness and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have progressed from handling basic natural language processing
tasks to tackling complex problems, such as writing and maintaining code bases [23, 67, 38, 48],
navigating the web and controling devices [66, 54, 17, 4], and acting as personal assistants [21, 30,
22, 7], thanks to the advances in their reasoning abilities. Recent results [24, 19, 56, 43] in LLM
reasoning show that scaling test-time compute can substantially improve reasoning capabilities, e.g.,
[35, 5] demonstrated that generating more tokens during inference yields logarithmic-linear gains.
Based on this, a new class of reasoning models [43, 53, 9, 49] has coupled test-time compute scaling
with reinforcement learning (RL), achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) results on various challenging
benchmarks [15, 61, 16]. These models employ chain-of-thought (CoT) tokens to guide multi-step
reasoning and maintain logical consistency throughout the solution process [50, 52, 58]; by extending
and optimizing CoT paths to produce trajectories longer than typical correct solutions, they more
thoroughly explore the solution space and thereby boost final answer accuracy [43, 35, 20].
Despite existing methods having demonstrated great performance, they still struggle to balance
reasoning effectiveness and efficiency. Specifically, existing approaches typically rely on final
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
3
Project page: https://wangjingyao07.github.io/L2T.github.io/

†

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

