Accelerating Feature Conformal Prediction
via Taylor Approximation

Zihao Tang⋆
⋆
⋄

Boyuan Wang⋄

Chuan Wen◦

Jiaye Teng⋆†

Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Southern University of Science and Technology
◦
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Conformal prediction is widely adopted in uncertainty quantification, due to its posthoc, distribution-free, and model-agnostic properties. In the realm of modern deep
learning, researchers have proposed Feature Conformal Prediction (FCP), which deploys conformal prediction in a feature space, yielding reduced band lengths. However, the practical utility of FCP is limited due to the time-consuming non-linear operations required to transform confidence bands from feature space to output space.
In this paper, we present Fast Feature Conformal Prediction (FFCP), a method that
accelerates FCP by leveraging a first-order Taylor expansion to approximate these
non-linear operations. The proposed FFCP introduces a novel non-conformity
score that is both effective and efficient for real-world applications. Empirical
validations showcase that FFCP performs comparably with FCP (both outperforming the Split CP version) while achieving a significant reduction in computational
time by approximately 50x in both regression and classification tasks. The code is
available at https://github.com/ElvisWang1111/FastFeatureCP.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has been successfully applied in numerous fields such as computer vision, natural
language processing, and gaming [Jordan and Mitchell, 2015, Silver et al., 2017]. However, machine
learning models usually suffer from overconfidence issues [Wei et al., 2022] and even hallucinations
in large language models (LLMs) [Ji et al., 2023], which makes them unreliable and unable to be
deployed in fields like finance and medicines [Gelijns et al., 2001, Thirumurthy et al., 2019, Morduch
and Schneider, 2017]. Therefore, it is essential to develop techniques for uncertainty quantification
and calibrate the original machine learning models Abdar et al. [2021], Guo et al. [2017], Chen et al.
[2021], Gawlikowski et al. [2021].
Among the uncertainty quantification techniques, Conformal Prediction (Split CP, or split conformal
prediction, Vovk et al. [2005]; Shafer and Vovk [2008b]; Burnaev and Vovk [2014]) stands out,
because it is distribution-free, does not require retraining, and can be directly applied to various
models. Conformal prediction deploys a calibration step to calibrate a base model and then construct
the confidence band. The goal of conformal prediction is to return a band C1−α (X ′ ) such that
P(Y ′ ∈ C1−α (X ′ )) ≥ 1 − α,

(1)

where (X ′ , Y ′ ) denotes a test point and 1 − α represents the confidence level.
In deep learning regimes, researchers try to utilize feature information in Split CP, since the feature
space usually contains meaningful semantic information in neural networks [Shen et al., 2014]. This
leads to Feature Conformal Prediction (FCP, Teng et al. [2022]).
†

Correspondence to tengjiaye@sufe.edu.cn

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

