Breaking the Gradient Barrier: Unveiling Large
Language Models for Strategic Classification

Xinpeng Lv1 , Yunxin Mao1 , Haoxuan Li2 , Ke Liang1 , Jinxuan Yang3 ,
Wanrong Huang1 , Haoang Chi1 , Huan Chen1 , Long Lan1 , Yuanlong Chen4 ,
Wenjing Yang1 , Haotian Wang1∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Faculty of Engineering, the University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
4
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{lvxinpeng, maoyunxin, wenjing.yang, wanghaotian13}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Strategic classification (SC) explores how individuals or entities modify their features strategically to achieve favorable classification outcomes. However, existing
SC methods, which are largely based on linear models or shallow neural networks,
face significant limitations in terms of scalability and capacity when applied to realworld datasets with significantly increasing scale, especially in financial services
and the internet sector. In this paper, we investigate how to leverage large language
models to design a more scalable and efficient SC framework, especially in the
case of growing individuals engaged with decision-making processes. Specifically,
we introduce GLIM, a gradient-free SC method grounded in in-context learning.
During the feed-forward process of self-attention, GLIM implicitly simulates the
typical bi-level optimization process of SC, including both the feature manipulation
and decision rule optimization. Without fine-tuning the LLMs, our proposed GLIM
enjoys the advantage of cost-effective adaptation in dynamic strategic environments. Theoretically, we prove GLIM can support pre-trained LLMs to adapt
to a broad range of strategic manipulations. We validate our approach through
experiments with a collection of pre-trained LLMs on real-world and synthetic
datasets in financial and internet domains, demonstrating that our GLIM exhibits
both robustness and efficiency, and offering an effective solution for large-scale SC
tasks.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly applied in high-stakes decision-making
domains such as hiring, lending, and college admissions, the need for rapid and accurate adaptation to
dynamic inputs has become crucial. When individuals are provided with information about decision
rules, they may strategically manipulate their features to achieve favorable outcomes. Such strategic
manipulation undermines the performance of ML models and diminishes their reliability. This
phenomenon aligns with Goodhart’s Law, which states, “Once a measure becomes a target, it ceases
to be a good measure” [64]. When decision rules are made public, individuals may adjust their
features in ways that exploit the evaluation criteria.
In response to this issue, strategic classification (SC)[30] has emerged as a growing area of research.
SC aims to develop algorithms that improve the accuracy of decision models in environments where
∗

Corresponding author

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

