Motion Matters: Compact Gaussian Streaming for
Free-Viewpoint Video Reconstruction

Jiacong Chen1,2

Qingyu Mao3 Youneng Bao4 Xiandong Meng5 Fanyang Meng5
Ronggang Wang5,6 Yongsheng Liang1,2B
1
College of Applied Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
College of Big Data and Internet, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
5
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
6
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China

3DGStream
PSNR: 33.01dB
Storage: 7.8MB/frame

32
31.8

PSNR (dB)

159× smaller,
improved
fidelity

QUEEN-l

32.2

Ours
PSNR: 33.61dB
Storage: 0.049MB/frame

31.6

ComGS-l (Ours)
ComGS-s (Ours)
4D-GS

QUEEN-s

3DGStream

NeRFPlayer
K-Plane
K-Plane
31.4
Offline
HyperReel
Better
4D-GS
31.2
StreamRF
31
HyperReel
3DGStream
QUEEN-s
Online
StreamRF
30.8
QUEEN-l
ComGS-s
30.6
NeRFPlayer
(c) o
CmualComGS-l uired Storage
30.4
0.04

0.4

4

Storage per frame (MB)

40

Figure 1: Left: Experimental results on N3DV dataset [1] showcase the effectiveness of our method,
which reduces the storage requirement of 3DGStream [2] by 159 ×, with enhanced visual quality.
Right: Comparison with existing methods in storage and reconstruction fidelity. Hollow circles
denote offline methods, while solid circles represent online methods.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has emerged as a high-fidelity and efficient
paradigm for online free-viewpoint video (FVV) reconstruction, offering viewers
rapid responsiveness and immersive experiences. However, existing online methods face challenge in prohibitive storage requirements primarily due to point-wise
modeling that fails to exploit the motion properties. To address this limitation, we
propose a novel Compact Gaussian Streaming (ComGS) framework, leveraging the
locality and consistency of motion in dynamic scene, that models object-consistent
Gaussian point motion through keypoint-driven motion representation. By transmitting only the keypoint attributes, this framework provides a more storage-efficient
solution. Specifically, we first identify a sparse set of motion-sensitive keypoints
localized within motion regions using a viewspace gradient difference strategy.
Equipped with these keypoints, we propose an adaptive motion-driven mechanism that predicts a spatial influence field for propagating keypoint motion to
neighboring Gaussian points with similar motion. Moreover, ComGS adopts an
error-aware correction strategy for key frame reconstruction that selectively refines erroneous regions and mitigates error accumulation without unnecessary
overhead. Overall, ComGS achieves a remarkable storage reduction of over 159
× compared to 3DGStream and 14 × compared to the SOTA method QUEEN,
while maintaining competitive visual fidelity and rendering speed. Project page:
https://chenjiacong-1005.github.io/ComGS/.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

