GoRA: Gradient-driven Adaptive Low Rank
Adaptation
Haonan He1,2,3∗, Peng Ye3,4,5∗, Yuchen Ren3,6 , Yuan Yuan2 ,
Luyang Zhou7 , Shucun Ju7 , Lei Chen2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Intelligent Machines, HFIPS, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Fudan University
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 6 University of Sydney
7
Anhui Disaster Warning & Agrometeorological Information Center
hehn@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is a crucial method for efficiently fine-tuning large
language models (LLMs), with its effectiveness influenced by two key factors:
rank selection and weight initialization. While numerous LoRA variants have
been proposed to improve performance by addressing one of these aspects, they
often compromise usability or computational efficiency. In this paper, we analyze and identify the core limitations of existing approaches and propose a novel
framework—GoRA (Gradient-driven Adaptive Low Rank Adaptation)—that simultaneously adapts both the rank and initialization strategy within a unified
framework. GoRA leverages gradient information during training to dynamically
assign optimal ranks and initialize low-rank adapter weights in an adaptive manner. To our knowledge, GoRA is the first method that not only addresses the
limitations of prior approaches—which often focus on either rank selection or
initialization in isolation—but also unifies both aspects within a single framework,
enabling more effective and efficient adaptation. Extensive experiments across
various architectures and modalities show that GoRA consistently outperforms
existing LoRA-based methods while preserving the efficiency of vanilla LoRA.
For example, when fine-tuning Llama3.1-8B-Base for mathematical reasoning,
GoRA achieves a 5.13-point improvement over standard LoRA and even outperforms full fine-tuning by 2.05 points under high-rank settings. Code is available at:
https://github.com/hhnqqq/MyTransformers.

1

Introduction

Open-source pre-trained large language models (LLMs) such as the Llama series [1, 2] have demonstrated exceptional capabilities. Through supervised fine-tuning, these models can be adapted
to various downstream tasks such as code generation [3] and mathematical problem solving [4].
However, when the model has a parameter size ϕ and uses FP16/BF16 mixed-precision training
strategy [5, 6] with the Adam optimizer [7], the parameters and gradients require 4ϕ bytes of memory, while the optimizer states require 12ϕ bytes. Thus, the minimum memory usage, excluding
activations, reaches 16ϕ bytes. Such high memory demands limit the training of large language
models under constrained resources. To reduce memory usage, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [8]
decomposes the weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n into W = W0 + ∆W = W0 + sAB, where s is a
scaling factor, and A ∈ Rm×r , B ∈ Rr×n , r ≪ min(m, n), as shown in Figure 1(a). LoRA only
updates the low-rank weights A and B, keeping the pre-trained weight W0 unchanged, thereby
significantly reducing the memory footprint of optimizer states. Although LoRA performs well on
simple tasks, when applied to pre-trained large language models, its performance on more challenging
tasks, such as mathematical reasoning and code generation, still lags behind full fine-tuning [9, 10].
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: chenlei@iim.ac.cn.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
†

