Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Representation Learning of Knowledge Graphs with Entity Descriptions
Ruobing Xie1,2 , Zhiyuan Liu1,2,3 , Jia Jia1∗ , Huanbo Luan1,2 , Maosong Sun1,2,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology,
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability,
Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou 221009 China
2

knowledge acquisition and inference (Bordes et al. 2013;
Yang et al. 2014; Neelakantan, Roth, and McCallum 2015).
Most existing RL methods solely learn from fact triples of
KGs (Bordes et al. 2013). In fact, in most KGs there are also
concise descriptions for entities, with rich semantic information about these entities. For example, in Fig. 1 we show
the descriptions of two entities in a fact triple sampled from
Freebase, a large-scale KG maintained by Google.

Abstract
Representation learning (RL) of knowledge graphs aims to
project both entities and relations into a continuous lowdimensional space. Most methods concentrate on learning
representations with knowledge triples indicating relations
between entities. In fact, in most knowledge graphs there are
usually concise descriptions for entities, which cannot be well
utilized by existing methods. In this paper, we propose a novel
RL method for knowledge graphs taking advantages of entity descriptions. More speciﬁcally, we explore two encoders,
including continuous bag-of-words and deep convolutional
neural models to encode semantics of entity descriptions. We
further learn knowledge representations with both triples and
descriptions. We evaluate our method on two tasks, including
knowledge graph completion and entity classiﬁcation. Experimental results on real-world datasets show that, our method
outperforms other baselines on the two tasks, especially under the zero-shot setting, which indicates that our method is
capable of building representations for novel entities according to their descriptions. The source code of this paper can be
obtained from https://github.com/xrb92/DKRL.

( William Shakespeare, book/author/works_written, Romeo and Juliet )

William Shakespeare was an
English poet, playwright, and
actor, ...

Romeo and Juliet is a tragedy
written by William Shakespeare
early in his career ...

Figure 1: Example of entity descriptions in Freebase.
It is non-trivial for existing RL methods of KGs to utilize entity descriptions. To address this problem, we propose
a novel RL method for KGs, which is able to take advantages of both fact triples and entity description. We name
the method as Description-Embodied Knowledge Representation Learning (DKRL). In the DKRL model, the embedding of an entity is responsible for both modeling the corresponding fact triples and modeling its description.
For fact triples, we follow a typical RL method TransE
(Bordes et al. 2013) and regard the relation in each triple as
a translation from head entity to tail entity. In this way, the
entity and relation embeddings are learned to maximize the
likelihood of these translations.
Meanwhile, given an entity we will also learn to maximize the likelihood of predicting its description. For this,
we explore two encoders to represent semantics of entity
descriptions, including continuous bag-of-words (CBOW)
model and deep convolutional neural model. As compared
with CBOW ignoring word orders in text, the convolutional
model takes word orders, i.e., complicated local interactions
of words in text, into consideration.
We evaluate the effectiveness of the DKRL model on
two tasks, including knowledge graph completion and entity type classiﬁcation. Experimental results on real-world
datasets show that, the DKRL model consistently outper-

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KG) provide effective structured information and have been crucial resources for several intelligent applications including Web search (Szumlanski and
Gomez 2010) and question answering. A typical KG usually describes knowledge as multi-relational data and represent as triple facts (head entity, relation, tail entity),
also denoted as (h, r, t), indicating the relation between two
entities.
Based on the symbolic representation of KGs with triples,
people have to design various graph-based methods for KG
applications. As KG size increases, these methods are becoming infeasible on large-scale KGs due to computation
inefﬁciency and data sparsity. To address the challenge, representation learning (RL) for KGs has been proposed to embed KGs including both entities and relations into a continuous low-dimensional vector space (Dong et al. 2014)
(embeddings). As a supplement to symbolic representation,
the embeddings in latent space can signiﬁcantly promote
∗

Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@tsinghua.edu.cn).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2659

