Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Closing the Gap Between Short and Long XORs for Model Counting
Shengjia Zhao

Sorathan Chaturapruek

Ashish Sabharwal

Stefano Ermon

Computer Science Dept.
Tsinghua University
zhaosj12@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Computer Science Dept.
Stanford University
sorathan@cs.stanford.edu

Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, WA
ashishs@allenai.org

Computer Science Dept.
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

searches on a randomly projected version of the original formula, obtained by augmenting it with randomly generated
parity or XOR constraints. This approach allows one to
leverage decades of research and engineering in combinatorial reasoning technology, such as fast satisﬁability (SAT)
and SMT solvers (Biere et al. 2009).
While modern solvers have witnessed tremendous
progress over the past 25 years, model counting techniques
based on hashing tend to produce instances that are difﬁcult to solve. In order to achieve strong (probabilistic) accuracy guarantees, existing techniques require each randomly
generated parity constraint to be relatively long, involving
roughly half of the variables in the original problem. Such
constraints, while easily solved in isolation using Gaussian Elimination, are notoriously difﬁcult to handle when
conjoined with the original formula (Gomes et al. 2007;
Ermon et al. 2014; Ivrii et al. 2015; Achlioptas and Jiang
2015). Shorter parity constraints, i.e., those involving a relative few variables, are friendlier to SAT solvers, but their
statistical properties are not well understood.
Ermon et al. (2014) showed that long parity constraints
are not strictly necessary, and that one can obtain the same
accuracy guarantees using shorter XORs, which are computationally much more friendly. They provided a closed
form expression, allowing an easy computation of an XOR
length that sufﬁces, given various parameters such as the
number of problem variables, the number of constraints being added, and the size of the solution space under consideration. It is, however, currently now known how tight their
sufﬁciency condition is, how it scales with various parameters, or whether it is in fact a necessary condition.
We resolve these open questions by providing an analysis of the optimal asymptotic constraint length required
for obtaining high-conﬁdence approximations to the model
count. Surprisingly, for formulas with n variables, we ﬁnd
that when Θ(n) constraints are added, a constraint length
of Θ(log n) is both necessary and sufﬁcient. This is a signiﬁcant improvement over standard long XORs, which have
length Θ(n). Constraints of logarithmic length can, for instance, be encoded efﬁciently with a polynomial number of
clauses. We also study how the sufﬁcient constraint length
evolves from O(log n) to O(nγ log2 n) to n/2 across various regimes of the number of parity constraints.
As a byproduct of our analysis, we obtain a new fam-

Abstract
Many recent algorithms for approximate model counting are
based on a reduction to combinatorial searches over random
subsets of the space deﬁned by parity or XOR constraints.
Long parity constraints (involving many variables) provide
strong theoretical guarantees but are computationally difﬁcult. Short parity constraints are easier to solve but have
weaker statistical properties. It is currently not known how
long these parity constraints need to be. We close the gap
by providing matching necessary and sufﬁcient conditions on
the required asymptotic length of the parity constraints. Further, we provide a new family of lower bounds and the ﬁrst
non-trivial upper bounds on the model count that are valid for
arbitrarily short XORs. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of these bounds on model counting benchmarks
and in a Satisﬁability Modulo Theory (SMT) application motivated by the analysis of contingency tables in statistics.

Introduction
Model counting is the problem of computing the number of
distinct solutions of a given Boolean formula. It is a classical problem that has received considerable attention from a
theoretical point of view (Valiant 1979b; Stockmeyer 1985),
as well as from a practical perspective (Sang et al. 2004;
Gogate and Dechter 2007). Numerous probabilistic inference and decision making tasks, in fact, can be directly
translated to (weighted) model counting problems (Richardson and Domingos 2006; Gogate and Domingos 2011). As a
generalization of satisﬁability testing, the problem is clearly
intractable in the worst case. Nevertheless, there has been
considerable success in both exact and approximate model
counting algorithms, motivated by a number of applications (Sang, Beame, and Kautz 2005).
Recently, approximate model counting techniques based
on randomized hashing have emerged as one of the leading approaches (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2006;
Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2013a; Ermon et al. 2014;
Ivrii et al. 2015; Achlioptas and Jiang 2015; Belle, Van den
Broeck, and Passerini 2015). While approximate, these
techniques provide strong guarantees on the accuracy of the
results in a probabilistic sense. Further, these methods all
reduce model counting to a small number of combinatorial
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3322

