Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Capturing Semantic Correlation for Item Recommendation in Tagging Systems
Chaochao Chen, Xiaolin Zheng

Yan Wang

Fuxing Hong, Deren Chen

College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University
{zjuccc,xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn

Department of Computing
Macquarie University
yan.wang@mq.edu.au

College of Computer Science
Zhejiang University
{cstur4,drc}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

algorithm

u1

The popularity of tagging systems provides a great opportunity to improve the performance of item recommendation.
Although existing approaches use topic modeling to mine
the semantic information of items by grouping the tags labelled for items, they overlook an important property that tags
link users and items as a bridge. Thus these methods cannot deal with the data sparsity without commonly rated items
(DS-WO-CRI) problem, limiting their recommendation performance. Towards solving this challenging problem, we propose a novel tag and rating based collaborative ﬁltering (CF)
model for item recommendation, which ﬁrst uses topic modeling to mine the semantic information of tags for each user
and for each item respectively, and then incorporates the semantic information into matrix factorization to factorize rating information and to capture the bridging feature of tags
and ratings between users and items. As a result, our model
captures the semantic correlation between users and items,
and is able to greatly improve recommendation performance,
especially in DS-WO-CRI situations. Experiments conducted
on two popular real-world datasets demonstrate that our proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms the conventional CF
approach, the state-of-the-art social relation based CF approach, and the state-of-the-art topic modeling based CF approaches in terms of both precision and recall, and it is an
effective approach to the DS-WO-CRI problem.

journal

u2

research

u3

NBA
Kobe

users

tags

v1
v2
v3
v4
items

Figure 1: An example of tagging system. There is a rating
behind each tagging behavior, and we omit the ratings for
conciseness.
2015), which aims to recommend appropriate tags for items,
and tag-based item recommendation (Zhou et al., 2009; Xu
et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2010), which focuses on recommending similar users or items to the target user based on
tag and other information (e.g., rating).
Currently, a trend in the literature is the use of topic modeling in CF to handle tag information (Agarwal and Chen,
2010; Wang and Blei, 2011; Purushotham, Liu, and Kuo,
2012; Wang, Chen, and Li, 2013; Chen et al., 2014). For
example, Wang and Blei (2011) proposed a collaborative
topic regression (CTR) model that can be used for tag-based
item recommendation. Chen et al. (2014) proposed another
item recommendation method that combined CTR with social matrix factorization (Ma et al., 2011) to make a better
prediction. However, the existing approaches just associate
tags with users or items, and overlook an important property
of tags that tags link users and items as a bridge, as what
ratings do. But tags can reﬂect the semantic correlation between users and items, which ratings cannot do.
When a user has tagged some items, these tags clearly
represent the user’s preference for the items. The more frequently a tag has been used by a user, the more likely this
user is interested in the group of items that can be labeled
by this tag (Zheng and Li, 2011). Similarly, the more frequently a tag has been given to an item by users, the more
likely this item matches the tag. Thus, tags contain the semantic information of both users and items, not just one of
them.

Introduction
In recent years, tagging systems, such as Delicious (social
bookmarking), Last.fm (social music), Flickr (photo sharing), and YouTube (video sharing), provide effective ways
for users to organize, manage, share, and search various
kinds of items (resources). For example, one may tag Lady
Gaga with “pop” and “female vocalist” when he listens to
her music on Last.fm. These valuable tags, which appear
along with the tagging and rating behaviors, strongly suggest the need to use such information to provide personalized recommendation services (Zheng and Li, 2011).
The increasing popularity of tagging systems has promoted the development of recommender systems, especially
collaborative ﬁltering (CF) approaches, in tagging systems.
So far, two main types of CF on tagging systems exist: tag
recommendation (Wang, Chen, and Li, 2013; Fang et al.,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

A motivating example. Figure 1 depicts an example of a

108

