Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

From Tweets to Wellness: Wellness Event Detection from Twitter Streams
a

Mohammad Akbari a,b , Xia Huc , Nie Liqiangb , Tat-Seng Chua a,b
NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
b
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
c
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, USA
akbari@u.nus.edu, hu@cse.tamu.edu, nieliqiang@gmail.com, chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg

towards accomplishing this end, we propose to automatically
extract wellness events from users’ published social contents.
Extraction of personal wellness events (PWEs) will provide signiﬁcant insights about individual’s wellness and community lifestyle behaviours. At the individual level, it can
summarize the past wellness events of individuals which
signiﬁcantly facilitate lifestyle management through coarse
and ﬁne-grained browsing. PWE summary can be useful for
downstream applications such as user health proﬁling, personalized lifestyle assistant, and targeted online advertising.
Take diet as an example; if one diabetic person consumes a
lot of carbohydrates, the system can offer diet suggestion. At
the community level, accumulating the wellness information
of a large set of individuals makes it feasible to analyze and
understand the lifestyle patterns and wellness of social groups
in a scale that was impossible with traditional methods in
terms of both time and cost.
Despite its value and signiﬁcance, extracting PWEs from
social media services has not been fully investigated due to
the following challenges. First, the language used in social
media is highly varied, informal, and full of slang words. Second, PWEs are relatively rare in social media posts as users
tend to post their personal signiﬁcant events together with
lots of trivialities and other public events (Li et al. 2014). As
a result, wellness events are buried among other contents produced by the users and their social connections. Identifying
wellness events from a huge volume of other non-wellness
events poses a big challenge. As a result, even a large annotated dataset might contain just a few examples of PWE
categories. Third, the structure of wellness events exhibits a
hierarchical taxonomy as shown in Table 1. Indeed, events
under the same category are closely related. For instance,
clinical tests are much more related to treatment, than running. These events may share some features such as entities,
attributes and relations, which makes the problem arduous.
How to mathematically model such relations and integrate
them into a learning framework remains a challenge.
In health sciences, it has been intensively studied and
well-established that physical activities, diet planning and
taking prescribed medications are the key therapeutic treatments of many diseases (Pastors et al. 2002; Hu 2011). Further, unhealthy lifestyle behaviours such as unhealthy dietary habits, sedentary lifestyle, and the harmful consumption of alcohol are mainly related to the risk factors of non-

Abstract
Social media platforms have become the most popular means for users to share what is happening around
them. The abundance and growing usage of social media
has resulted in a large repository of users’ social posts,
which provides a stethoscope for inferring individuals’
lifestyle and wellness. As users’ social accounts implicitly reﬂect their habits, preferences, and feelings, it is
feasible for us to monitor and understand the wellness of
users by harvesting social media data towards a healthier
lifestyle. As a ﬁrst step towards accomplishing this goal,
we propose to automatically extract wellness events from
users’ published social contents. Existing approaches for
event extraction are not applicable to personal wellness
events due to its domain nature characterized by plenty
of noise and variety in data, insufﬁcient samples, and
inter-relation among events. To tackle these problems,
we propose an optimization learning framework that utilizes the content information of microblogging messages
as well as the relations between event categories. By
imposing a sparse constraint on the learning model, we
also tackle the problems arising from noise and variation in microblogging texts. Experimental results on a
real-world dataset from Twitter have demonstrated the
superior performance of our framework.

Recent years have witnessed the revolutionary changes
brought by the development of social media services through
which individuals extensively share information, express
ideas, and construct social communities. These changes can
advance many disciplines and industries, and health is no
exception (Nie et al. 2015; Lee et al. 2014). In such a context,
many users are keen to share their wellness information on
social platforms such as Twitter and Facebook (Hawn 2009;
Yang et al. 2014; Dos Reis and Culotta 2015; Paul et al. 2015).
Take diabetes as an example; diabetic patients not only share
about events happening around them but also frequently post
about their current health conditions, medication, and the
outcomes of medications. For instance, they frequently post
the latest values of their blood glucose, diet, and exercises
using “#diabetes” and “#BGnow” hashtags on Twitter. This
provides new opportunities to understand individuals’ wellness that can be used to assist them in managing their health
in a scope that previously was impossible. As a ﬁrst step
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

87

