Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

From Duels to Battleﬁelds:
Computing Equilibria of Blotto and Other Games∗
AmirMahdi Ahmadinejad,∗ Sina Dehghani,† MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi,†
Brendan Lucier,‡ Hamid Mahini,† , Saeed Seddighin†

∗Stanford University †Univeristy of Maryland, ‡Microsoft Research
amirmahdi.ahmadi@gmail.com, brlucier@microsoft.com, {dehghani, hajiagha, hmahini, sseddigh}@umd.edu

ily obvious how to ﬁnd an equilibrium. Indeed, the conclusions to date have been largely negative: computing a Nash
equilibrium of a normal-form game is known to be PPADcomplete (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009;
Goldberg and Papadimitriou 2006), even for two-player
games (Chen and Deng 2006). In fact, it is PPAD-complete
1
approximation to a Nash equilibrium (Chen,
to ﬁnd an nO(1)
Deng, and Teng 2006). These results call into question the
predictiveness of Nash equilibrium as a solution concept.
This motivates the study of classes of games for which
equilibria can be computed efﬁciently. It has been found that
many natural and important classes of games have structure that can be exploited to admit computational results
(Dantzig 1963; Garg, Jiang, and Mehta 2011; Kontogiannis and Spirakis 2010; Lipton, Markakis, and Mehta 2003;
Alon et al. 2013; Demaine et al. 2007; 2009; Ahmadinejad et
al. 2015). Perhaps the most well-known example is the class
of zero-sum two-player games1 , where player 2’s payoff is
the negation of player 1’s payoff. The normal-form representation of a zero-sum game is a matrix A, which speciﬁes
the game payoffs for player 1. This is a very natural class
of games, as it models perfect competition between two parties. Given the payoff matrix for a zero-sum game as input,
a Nash equilibrium can be computed in polynomial time,
and hence time polynomial in the number of pure strategies
available to each player (Dantzig 1963). Yet even for zerosum games, this algorithmic result is often unsatisfactory.
The issue is that for many games the most natural representation is more succinct than simply listing a payoff matrix,
so that the number of strategies is actually exponential in the
most natural input size. In this case the algorithm described
above fails to guarantee efﬁcient computation of equilibria,
and alternative approaches are required.

Abstract
We study the problem of computing Nash equilibria of zerosum games. Many natural zero-sum games have exponentially many strategies, but highly structured payoffs. For example, in the well-studied Colonel Blotto game (introduced
by Borel in 1921), players must divide a pool of troops among
a set of battleﬁelds with the goal of winning (i.e., having more
troops in) a majority. The Colonel Blotto game is commonly
used for analyzing a wide range of applications from the U.S
presidential election, to innovative technology competitions,
to advertisement, to sports. However, because of the size of
the strategy space, standard methods for computing equilibria of zero-sum games fail to be computationally feasible. Indeed, despite its importance, only few solutions for special
variants of the problem are known.
In this paper we show how to compute equilibria of Colonel
Blotto games. Moreover, our approach takes the form of a
general reduction: to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium of a zero-sum
game, it sufﬁces to design a separation oracle for the strategy polytope of any bilinear game that is payoff-equivalent.
We then apply this technique to obtain the ﬁrst polytime algorithms for a variety of games. In addition to Colonel Blotto,
we also show how to compute equilibria in an inﬁnite-strategy
variant called the General Lotto game; this involves showing
how to prune the strategy space to a ﬁnite subset before applying our reduction. We also consider the class of dueling
games, ﬁrst introduced by Immorlica et al. (2011). We show
that our approach provably extends the class of dueling games
for which equilibria can be computed: we introduce a new dueling game, the matching duel, on which prior methods fail to
be computationally feasible but upon which our reduction can
be applied.

Introduction
Computing a Nash equilibrium of a given game is a central problem in algorithmic game theory. It is known that
every ﬁnite game admits a Nash equilibrium (that is, a proﬁle of strategies from which no player can beneﬁt from a
unilateral deviation) (Nash 1951). But it is not necessar-

The Colonel Blotto Game A classical and important example illustrating these issues is the Colonel Blotto game,
ﬁrst introduced by Borel in 1921 (Borel 1921; 1953; Fréchet
1953a; 1953b; von Neumann 1953). In the Colonel Blotto
game, two colonels each have a pool of troops and must ﬁght
against each other over a set of battleﬁelds. The colonels
simultaneously divide their troops between the battleﬁelds.
A colonel wins a battleﬁeld if the number of his troops

∗
Supported in part by NSF CAREER award 1053605,
NSF grant CCF-1161626, ONR YIP award N000141110662,
DARPA/AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0423, and a Google faculty
research award.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

369

Or, equivalently, constant-sum games.

