Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Domain Active Learning for Recommendation
Zihan Zhang† , Xiaoming Jin† , Lianghao Li‡ , Guiguang Ding† and Qiang Yang‡
†

Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
‡
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{zhangzihan.zac, luckycatcs}@gmail.com, {xmjin, dinggg}@tsinghua.edu.cn, qyang@cse.ust.hk

(e.g. Movie and Book domains) for model training could
hurt the recommendation quality. On the other hand, as some
user preferences are shared by different domains (e.g. youth
prefer sci-ﬁ stories in both Movie and Book domains), training models for different domains separately could lead to
a sub-optimal model. How to select the most informative
products to generate new ratings poses a new challenge to
active learning in multi-domain recommendation.
In this paper, we propose an active learning strategy for
recommendation in the multi-domain scenario. The proposed strategy aims to select ratings by simultaneously considering both the domain-speciﬁc and domain-independent
knowledge derived from multiple domains. Whether a useritem pair is informative enough to generate new rating is
measured by the generalization error (Rubens, Kaplan, and
Sugiyama 2011). By decomposing multiple rating matrices
into several speciﬁc and independent factors, the generalization error of the model can be divided into a domainspeciﬁc part and a domain-independent part correspondingly. The generalization error of the domain-speciﬁc part is
measured by the expected entropy, which is the existing active learning strategy used in the single domain recommendation scenario (Harpale and Yang 2008). For the domainindependent part, we propose to utilize variance to measure
its generalization error. By splitting the optimization goal
into two parts, our proposed active learning strategy can consider both the domain-independent and the domain-speciﬁc
knowledge simultaneously, and therefore reduce the redundant rating efforts.
Note that the problem of multi-domain recommendation (Li, Yang, and Xue 2009b; Zhang, Cao, and Yeung
2012) is different from that of cross-domain recommendation (Pan and Yang 2013; Zhao et al. 2013). The goal of
cross-domain recommendation is to utilize the knowledge
derived from the source domain with sufﬁcient ratings to alleviate the data sparsity in the target domain. However, in
multi-domain recommendation, all domains suffer from the
problem of data sparsity. The goal of multi-domain recommendation is to utilize the shared knowledge across multiple
domains to alleviate the data sparsity in all domains. The key
issue in active learning for multi-domain recommendation is
to acquire ratings from one domain, which can contribute not
only to the current domain but also other ones.
The main contributions of our work include: We propose

Abstract
Recently, active learning has been applied to recommendation to deal with data sparsity on a single domain. In this paper, we propose an active learning strategy for recommendation to alleviate the data sparsity in
a multi-domain scenario. Speciﬁcally, our proposed active learning strategy simultaneously consider both speciﬁc and independent knowledge over all domains. We
use the expected entropy to measure the generalization
error of the domain-speciﬁc knowledge and propose a
variance-based strategy to measure the generalization
error of the domain-independent knowledge. The proposed active learning strategy use a uniﬁed function
to effectively combine these two measurements. We
compare our strategy with ﬁve state-of-the-art baselines
on ﬁve different multi-domain recommendation tasks,
which are constituted by three real-world data sets. The
experimental results show that our strategy performs
signiﬁcantly better than all the baselines and reduces
human labeling efforts by at least 5.6%, 8.3%, 11.8%,
12.5% and 15.4% on the ﬁve tasks, respectively.

Introduction
Recommendation techniques are widely used in many realworld applications, such as product recommendation in online shopping (Linden, Smith, and York 2003), friendship
suggestion in social networks (Ding et al. 2013) or news
recommendation in web portals (Lu et al. 2015). The performance of recommendation methods suffers from the data
sparsity problem due to the expensive cost of acquiring ratings from users (Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009). Active learning techniques were proposed to alleviate the problem of
data sparsity in recommendation systems (Boutilier, Zemel,
and Marlin 2002; Elahi, Ricci, and Rubens 2014). Existing
active learning strategies for recommendation mainly focus
on querying ratings on a single domain (Harpale and Yang
2008; Houlsby, Hernández-Lobato, and Ghahramani 2014).
However, we have many real-world recommendation problems that involve more than one domain. For example, most
online shopping websites (e.g. Amazon) have more than
one product domain, such as Book, Beauty, Movie, and etc.
As ratings in different domains have different data distributions, simply merging all ratings from different domains
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2358

