Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Increasing the Action Gap:
New Operators for Reinforcement Learning
Marc G. Bellemare and Georg Ostrovski and Arthur Guez
Philip S. Thomas∗ and Rémi Munos
Google DeepMind
{bellemare,ostrovski,aguez,munos}@google.com; philipt@cs.cmu.edu

timal in state x, Bellman’s equation for Q∗ (x, a) describes
the value of a nonstationary policy: upon returning to x, this
policy selects π ∗ (x) rather than a. While preserving global
consistency appears impractical, we propose a simple modiﬁcation to the Bellman operator which provides us a with
a ﬁrst-order solution to the inconsistency problem. Accordingly, we call our new operator the consistent Bellman operator.
We show that the consistent Bellman operator generally
devalues suboptimal actions but preserves the set of optimal policies. As a result, the action gap – the value difference between optimal and second best actions – increases.
This increasing of the action gap is advantageous in the
presence of approximation or estimation error, and may be
crucial for systems operating at a ﬁne time scale such as
video games (Togelius et al. 2009; Bellemare et al. 2013),
real-time markets (Jiang and Powell 2015), and robotic platforms (Riedmiller et al. 2009; Hoburg and Tedrake 2009;
Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011; Sutton et al. 2011). In fact,
the idea of devaluating suboptimal actions underpins Baird’s
advantage learning (Baird 1999), designed for continuous
time control, and occurs naturally when considering the discretized solution of continuous time and space MDPs (e.g.
Munos and Moore 1998; 2002), whose limit is the HamiltonJacobi-Bellman equation (Kushner and Dupuis 2001). Our
empirical results on the bicycle domain (Randlov and Alstrom 1998) show a marked increase in performance from
using the consistent Bellman operator.
In the second half of this paper we derive novel sufﬁcient
conditions for an operator to preserve optimality. The relative weakness of these new conditions reveal that it is possible to deviate signiﬁcantly from the Bellman operator without sacriﬁcing optimality: an optimality-preserving operator
needs not be contractive, nor even guarantee convergence of
the Q-values for suboptimal actions. While numerous alternatives to the Bellman operator have been put forward (e.g.
recently Azar et al. 2011; Bertsekas and Yu 2012), we believe our work to be the ﬁrst to propose such a major departure from the canonical ﬁxed-point condition required from
an optimality-preserving operator. As proof of the richness
of this new operator family we describe a few practical instantiations with unique properties.
We use our operators to obtain state-of-the-art empirical
results on the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et

Abstract
This paper introduces new optimality-preserving operators on Q-functions. We ﬁrst describe an operator for
tabular representations, the consistent Bellman operator, which incorporates a notion of local policy consistency. We show that this local consistency leads to
an increase in the action gap at each state; increasing
this gap, we argue, mitigates the undesirable effects
of approximation and estimation errors on the induced
greedy policies. This operator can also be applied to
discretized continuous space and time problems, and
we provide empirical results evidencing superior performance in this context. Extending the idea of a locally
consistent operator, we then derive sufﬁcient conditions
for an operator to preserve optimality, leading to a family of operators which includes our consistent Bellman
operator. As corollaries we provide a proof of optimality for Baird’s advantage learning algorithm and derive
other gap-increasing operators with interesting properties. We conclude with an empirical study on 60 Atari
2600 games illustrating the strong potential of these new
operators.

Value-based reinforcement learning is an attractive solution to planning problems in environments with unknown,
unstructured dynamics. In its canonical form, value-based
reinforcement learning produces successive reﬁnements of
an initial value function through repeated application of a
convergent operator. In particular, value iteration (Bellman
1957) directly computes the value function through the iterated evaluation of Bellman’s equation, either exactly or from
samples (e.g. Q-Learning, Watkins 1989).
In its simplest form, value iteration begins with an initial
value function V0 and successively computes Vk+1 := T Vk ,
where T is the Bellman operator. When the environment dynamics are unknown, Vk is typically replaced by Qk , the
state-action value function, and T is approximated by an
empirical Bellman operator. The ﬁxed point of the Bellman
operator, Q∗ , is the optimal state-action value function or
optimal Q-function, from which an optimal policy π ∗ can be
recovered.
In this paper we argue that the optimal Q-function is inconsistent, in the sense that for any action a which is subop∗

Now at Carnegie Mellon University.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1476

