Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Interaction Point Processes via Inﬁnite Branching Model
§

†

Peng Lin§† , Bang Zhang§ , Ting Guo§ , Yang Wang§ , Fang Chen§

NICTA, Australian Technology Park, 13 Garden Street, Eveleigh NSW 2015, Australia
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Australia
{peng.lin, bang.zhang, ting.guo, yang.wang, fang.chen}@nicta.com.au

triggering or repelling mechanism of events. It provides informative hints for dissemination control and inﬂuence manipulation. (3) Branching structure1 estimation, in which the
relationship between events is inferred. It helps to determine
the connection of events, understand the underlying causal
structure and support event grouping. These three tasks tangle with one another, making the overall problem complex.
As a result, most existing approaches only consider one or
two of these tasks.
Stochastic point process (Vere-Jones 1988) provides us a
generic yet adaptable tool for modeling series of events occurring at random locations and times. It considers a random
collection of points falling in some space. When modeling
purely temporal events, each point represents the time of an
event and the space in which the points fall is simply a portion of the real line. A variety of point processes has been
developed with distinct modeling purposes. In this paper,
we mainly focus on interaction point processes (IPPs) (Diggle et al. 1994; Ripley 1977) that model not only the generation of points but also their interactions. Speciﬁcally, a
Bayesian statistical model, which can generalize and extend
some popular IPPs, e.g., Hawkes process (Hawkes 1971;
Hawkes and Oakes 1974), is proposed with the consideration of the aforementioned three tasks.
Many statistical methods exist for modeling events in spatial and temporal space, and most of them make an exchangeability assumption on a certain component of the
overall model (Orbanz and Roy 2013). For instance, random walk models (Bacallado et al. 2013) and the inﬁnite hidden Markov model (Beal, Ghahramani, and Rasmussen 2001), which are widely used for discrete time series, assume Markov exchangeability (Diaconis and Freedman 1980; Zabell 1995) implying that the joint probability
only depends on the initial state and the number of transitions. Lévy process, the continuous time analog of random walk and the foundation of many other widely used
continuous time models, assumes exchangeability over increments. Another popular example is dependent Dirichlet
process (DDP) (MacEachern 1999) which is marginally exchangeable (Orbanz and Roy 2013). It means that DDP is a
random measurable mapping whose output is an exchange-

Abstract
Many natural and social phenomena can be modeled by interaction point processes (IPPs) (Diggle et al. 1994), stochastic
point processes considering the interaction between points. In
this paper, we propose the inﬁnite branching model (IBM),
a Bayesian statistical model that can generalize and extend
some popular IPPs, e.g., Hawkes process (Hawkes 1971;
Hawkes and Oakes 1974). It treats IPP as a mixture of basis point processes with the aid of a distance dependent prior
over branching structure that describes the relationship between points. The IBM can estimate point event intensity, interaction mechanism and branching structure simultaneously.
A generic Metropolis-within-Gibbs sampling method is also
developed for model parameter inference. The experiments
on synthetic and real-world data demonstrate the superiority
of the IBM.

Introduction
The evolving of our world can be regarded as a series of
events, many of which are generally nonindependent. One
event may cause or repel the occurrences of others. Examples can be readily found in various of areas. For instance, many biological phenomena compete for local resources, hence demonstrate spatial over-dispersion property. Strong clustering patterns are often observed by seismologists (Marsan and Lengliné 2008) and epidemiologists (Yang and Zha 2013), as earthquakes and epidemics are
well known diffusible events. Buy and sell trades in ﬁnancial
markets also arrive in clusters (Hewlett 2006). Information
prorogation in social network shows contagious and clustering trait (Yu, Xie, and Sanner 2015). All these events exhibit
strong interactive property. Understanding their characteristics can help us categorize, predict and manipulate these
events, thereby making positive impacts in our physical and
social world.
Despite the high diversity of the aforementioned areas,
there are three common tasks for understanding these interactive events: (1) Event intensity estimation, which aims at
predicting the number of events for a speciﬁc time period. It
helps to gain insight into the temporal trends in events. (2)
Interaction mechanism estimation, which tries to reveal the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The formal deﬁnition of branching structure will be given later.
It can be understood as relationship between events for now.

1853

