Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Submodular Optimization with Routing Constraints
Haifeng Zhang and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN
{haifeng.zhang, yevgeniy.vorobeychik}@vanderbilt.edu

c(S) is the optimal cost of covering a set S (for example,
by a walk through a graph that passes all nodes in S). We
propose a generalized cost-beneﬁt greedy algorithm, which
adds elements in order of marginal beneﬁt per unit marginal
cost. A key challenge is that computing (marginal) cost of
adding an element (such as computing the increased cost
of a walk when another node is added to a set) is often itself a hard problem. We therefore relax the algorithm to use
a polynomial-time approximation algorithm for computing
marginal cost. We then show that when the cost function is
approximately submodular, we can achieve a bi-criterion approximation guarantee using this modiﬁed algorithm, which
runs in polynomial time. To our knowledge, this offers the
most generally applicable theoretical guarantee in our domain known to date.
Our experiments consider two applications: mobile
robotic sensors and door-to-door marketing. In the former,
we use sensor data on air quality in Beijing, China collected
from 36 air quality monitoring stations, with a hypothetical
tree-structured routing network among them. The objective
in this case is to minimize conditional entropy of unobserved
locations, given a Gaussian Process model of joint sensor
measurements. In the door-to-door marketing domain, we
use rooftop solar adoptions from San Diego county as an
example, considering geographic proximity as a social inﬂuence network and the actual road network as the routing network. In both these domains, we show that the proposed algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforms competition, both
in terms of achieved utility, and, often, in terms of running
time. Remarkably, this is true even in cases where the assumptions in our theoretical guarantees do not meaningfully
hold.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:

Abstract
Submodular optimization, particularly under cardinality or cost constraints, has received considerable attention, stemming from its breadth of application, ranging
from sensor placement to targeted marketing. However,
the constraints faced in many real domains are more
complex. We investigate an important and very general
class of problems of maximizing a submodular function subject to general cost constraints, especially focusing on costs coming from route planning. Canonical problems that motivate our framework include mobile robotic sensing, and door-to-door marketing. We
propose a generalized cost-beneﬁt (GCB) greedy algorithm for our problem, and prove bi-criterion approximation guarantees under signiﬁcantly weaker assumptions than those in related literature. Experimental
evaluation on realistic mobile sensing and door-to-door
marketing problems, as well as using simulated networks, show that our algorithm achieves signiﬁcantly
higher utility than state-of-the-art alternatives, and has
either lower or competitive running time.

Introduction
There has been much work on submoduar maximization
with cardinality constraints (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher
1978) and additive/modular constraints (Khuller, Moss, and
Naor 1999; Sviridenko 2004; Krause and Guestrin 2005;
Leskovec et al. 2007). In many applications, however, cost
constraints are signiﬁcantly more complex. For example, in
mobile robotic sensing domains, the robot must not only
choose where to take measurements, but to plan a route
among measurement locations, where costs can reﬂect battery life. As another example, door-to-door marketing campaigns involve not only the decision about which households
to target, but the best route among them, and the constraint
reﬂects the total time the entire effort takes (coming from
work schedule constraints). Unlike the typical additive cost
constraints, such route planning constraints are themselves
NP-Hard to evaluate, necessitating approximation in practice.
We tackle the problem of maximizing a submodular function subject to a general cost constraint, c(S) ≤ B, where

1. a formulation of submodular maximization under general
cost constraints (routing constraints are of particular interest);
2. a novel polynomial-time generalized cost-beneﬁt algorithm with provable approximation guarantees;
3. an application of our algorithm to two motiving realworld optimization problems, mobile robotic sensing and
door-to-door marketing, illustrating that our algorithm
signiﬁcantly outperforms state of the art.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

819

