Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Improving Predictive State Representations via Gradient Descent
Nan Jiang and Alex Kulesza and Satinder Singh
nanjiang@umich.edu, kulesza@gmail.com, baveja@umich.edu
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan

It is this last challenge that we address in this paper: We
use gradient descent with contrastive divergence (Hinton
2002) to take a spectrally-learned low-rank PSR and iteratively adapt its parameters to maximize data likelihood. This
allows us to combine the speed of spectral learning, used
to obtain an initial model, with the reliable improvements
in test performance obtained by hill-climbing on likelihood.
We present experiments showing that this combination can
yield signiﬁcantly better results than spectral learning alone,
while requiring only a small amount of additional computation. We also show that spectral initialization allows the gradient phase to ﬁnd a better solution with signiﬁcantly less
computation compared to a naive initialization.

Abstract
Predictive state representations (PSRs) model dynamical systems using appropriately chosen predictions about future observations as a representation of the current state. In contrast
to the hidden states posited by HMMs or RNNs, PSR states
are directly observable in the training data; this gives rise to a
moment-matching spectral algorithm for learning PSRs that
is computationally efﬁcient and statistically consistent when
the model complexity matches that of the true system generating the data. In practice, however, model mismatch is inevitable and while spectral learning remains appealingly fast
and simple it may fail to ﬁnd optimal models. To address this
problem, we investigate the use of gradient methods for improving spectrally-learned PSRs. We show that only a small
amount of additional gradient optimization can lead to significant performance gains, and moreover that initializing gradient methods with the spectral learning solution yields better
models in signiﬁcantly less time than starting from scratch.

Background: Predictive State Representations
Our goal is to model dynamical systems producing observations from a ﬁnite set O at discrete time steps. For any
observation sequence x ∈ O∗ , Pr(x) denotes the probability that the system produces x in the ﬁrst |x| time steps after starting from a reference condition.1 Note that the function Pr(·) completely speciﬁes the system. A test or history
is an observation sequence in O∗ that has been selected to
capture information about the future or past, respectively.
Given a set of tests T and a set of histories H, PT ,H is
the |T | × |H| matrix indexed by elements in T and H with
[PT ,H ]t,h = Pr(ht), where ht is the concatenation of h and
t. Sets T and H are called core if the rank of PT ,H is maximal over all such sets. In general, core T and H may not
exist, but in many cases of interest they do and can even be
explicitly identiﬁed (Singh, James, and Rudary 2004).
Instead of the ﬁnite histories, latent variables, or recurrent network states used by the approaches described in the
previous section, a PSR represents state as a vector of predictions about observable futures. More precisely, a PSR of
rank k represents state using vectors in Rk , and is parameterized by a triple B = (b∗ , {Bo }, b∞ ), where b∗ ∈ Rk is
a reference condition state vector, Bo ∈ Rk×k is an update
matrix for each o ∈ O, and b∞ ∈ Rk is a normalization

Introduction
Many approaches have been developed for learning models
of discrete-time, ﬁnite-observation dynamical systems from
data, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. For
example, ﬁxed-history approaches (e.g., ARMA; Box, Jenkins, and Reinsel 2011) are efﬁcient in sample complexity
and have statistically consistent learning algorithms, but are
severely limited in scope. Latent-variable approaches (e.g.,
HMMs and other graphical models) are powerful in scope
but require slow, iterative optimization algorithms subject
to local minima (Wu 1983). Recurrent neural networks are
powerful in scope but their learning algorithms (though already useful (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)) need further theoretical analysis and development (this is the subject of much current effort). And recently developed spectral learning approaches for predictive state representations
(PSRs) are powerful in scope as well as statistically consistent (Boots, Siddiqi, and Gordon 2010), but, although
they are well-understood in idealized settings where model
complexity precisely matches the data, in the more realistic model mismatch (low rank) setting their behavior can be
unpredictable (Kulesza, Rao, and Singh 2014).

1

We assume the system has a reference condition from which
we can sample observation sequences. This could be the reset state
(in applications with the ability to reset the system), or the longterm stationary distribution of the system, in which case samples
can be approximately drawn from a single long trajectory.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1709

