Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Dynamic Controllability of Disjunctive Temporal Networks:
Validation and Synthesis of Executable Strategies
Alessandro Cimatti

Andrea Micheli

Marco Roveri

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, 38123, Italy
tcimatti@fbk.eu

FBK and University of Trento
Trento, 38123, Italy
amicheli@fbk.eu

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, 38123, Italy
roveri@fbk.eu

deals with DC in the restricted setting of Simple Temporal Networks with Uncertainty (STNU-DC). Second, the focus is on the decision problem (Morris 2006), and not on
the explicit generation of an executable strategy. This requires the execution, at run-time, of complex scheduling
algorithms (Hunsberger 2014). Unfortunately, this is unacceptable in many applications. For example, the deployment
of a scheduling algorithm directly on-board of the controlled
system may be subject, in a safety-critical setting, to computational or certiﬁcation constraints.
In this paper we tackle the DC problem for TNUs lifting these restrictions. We consider the expressive class of
Disjunctive Temporal Networks with Uncertainty (DTNU),
where disjunctions are allowed in both the problem requirements (called free constraints) and in the assumptions on
the environment behavior (called contingent links). The key
idea is to approach the problem by focusing on the executable strategies from the start. We make the following
contributions. First, we deﬁne a language to express easily
executable, dynamic strategies that are sufﬁcient for every
DTNU-DC problem. Second, we present the ﬁrst algorithm
for validating a given strategy: the strategy is checked for
being dynamic and for always yielding a valid schedule of
the controllable time points. Third, we propose an algorithm
to decide DTNU-DC. If the problem admits a solution, the
algorithm has the unique property of synthesizing a correctby-construction, dynamic executable strategy. The proposed
techniques are derived from a fast Timed Game Automata
(TGA) solving algorithm (Cassez et al. 2005), augmented
with a pruning procedure based on Satisﬁability Modulo
Theory (SMT) (Barrett et al. 2009). We implemented several variants of the validation and synthesis algorithms, and
we carried out an extensive experimental evaluation. The
synthesis procedure exhibits practical applicability, solving problems of signiﬁcant size, and demonstrating ordersof-magnitude improvements with respect to (Cimatti et al.
2014a), that is the only other approach to decide DTNU-DC.
Related Work. The DTNU formalism with the relative
controllability problems was originally proposed in (Venable and Yorke-Smith 2005), it has been used in several
works (Peintner, Venable, and Yorke-Smith 2007; Venable
et al. 2010), but no general solution for DTNU-DC is
presented. The only approach for solving DTNU-DC is
in (Cimatti et al. 2014a). It generalizes the STNU-DC en-

Abstract
The Temporal Network with Uncertainty (TNU) modeling
framework is used to represent temporal knowledge in presence of qualitative temporal uncertainty. Dynamic Controllability (DC) is the problem of deciding the existence of a strategy for scheduling the controllable time points of the network
observing past happenings only.
In this paper, we address the DC problem for a very general
class of TNU, namely Disjunctive Temporal Network with
Uncertainty. We make the following contributions. First, we
deﬁne strategies in the form of an executable language; second, we propose the ﬁrst decision procedure to check whether
a given strategy is a solution for the DC problem; third we
present an efﬁcient algorithm for strategy synthesis based
on techniques derived from Timed Games and Satisﬁability
Modulo Theory. The experimental evaluation shows that the
approach is superior to the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Temporal Networks (TN) are a common formalism to represent and reason about temporal constraints over a set of
time points (e.g. start/end of activities in a scheduling problem). Since the introduction of Simple Temporal Network
(STN) (Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991), several extensions
have been introduced (Tsamardinos and Pollack 2003). Vidal and Fargier (Vidal and Fargier 1999) introduced TN with
uncertainty (TNU), where some of the time points are not
under the control of the scheduler, but can only be observed.
In this setting, the problem is to ﬁnd assignments to the controllable time points so that the constraints can be solved
for all the choices of the uncontrollable time points. Several variants are deﬁned, e.g. strong controllability (SC) and
weak controllability (WC). Here we focus on Dynamic Controllability (DC): a TNU is DC if there exists a strategy to
schedule the controllable time points such that all the constraints are satisﬁed, and such that it can observe the uncontrollable time points once they happened. DC is arguably
the most widely applicable problem in TNU, with applications ranging from planning and scheduling of space satellites (Frank et al. 2001) to robotics (Efﬁnger et al. 2009).
DC is a very hard problem. The vast majority of the
literature is subject to two limiting assumptions. First, it
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3116

