Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Comparison of Supervised Learning Algorithms
for Telerobotic Control Using Electromyography Signals
Tyler M. Frasca∗†

Antonio G. Sestito∗

Craig Versek‡

tyfrasc15@gmail.com

sestitoa11@gmail.com

c.versek@neu.edu

Douglas E. Dow∗

Barry C. Husowitz∗

Nate Derbinsky∗

dowd@wit.edu

husowitzb@wit.edu

derbinskyn@wit.edu

Abstract

PC

Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is central for many
applications, including hazardous environment inspection and telemedicine. Whereas traditional methods of
HCI for teleoperating electromechanical systems include joysticks, levers, or buttons, our research focuses
on using electromyography (EMG) signals to improve
intuition and response time. An important challenge is
to accurately and efﬁciently extract and map EMG signals to known position for real-time control. In this preliminary work, we compare the accuracy and real-time
performance of several machine-learning techniques for
recognizing speciﬁc arm positions. We present results
from ofﬂine analysis, as well as end-to-end operation
using a robotic arm.

Amplier
Board

Microcontroller

EMG
Electrodes

Robotic
Arm

Figure 1: System overview

as a neural network (Hiraiwa, Shimohara, and Tokunaga
1989) or via dimensionality reduction (Fukuda et al. 2003).
By contrast, our study compares several algorithms, including naı̈ve Bayes, decision trees, instance-based search, support vector machines (SVM), and logistic regression.
Position sensors have been utilized to determine position
and direction of movement (Artemiadis and Kyriakopoulos
2007). Our study attempted to classify static positions as a
method for determining position and potentially direction of
dynamic movements; if this approach is shown to be feasible for active motion, then less subject-mounted hardware
would be required.

Introduction
In certain applications of telemedicine or telerobotic control,
the speed of communication between human and computer
controller is vital to the function of the system. Intuitive controllers that map human actions to control signals can improve real-time performance, as well as decrease requisite
training. Our research focuses on exploiting electromyography (EMG) signals for telerobotics.
An important challenge is to map EMG inputs to control
signals. While our goal is human-controlled, ﬂuid motion
across a variety of telerobotic applications, this preliminary
work focuses on how to recognize static arm positions accurately and efﬁciently for real-time control. We made use
of EMG surface electrodes for the bicep, tricep, anterior
deltoid, and posterior deltoid muscles, and these EMG signals are analyzed to determine the position of the elbow and
shoulder, each about their axis of rotation. Given these continuous positions, we evaluated a suite of supervised learning approaches for classifying arm state, comparing each algorithm’s accuracy and efﬁciency. We also demonstrate endto-end operation using a robotic arm.
Prior work was either entirely in simulation (Al-Faiz, Ali,
and Miry 2010), or just tested a single learning model, such

System Design
Refer to Figure 1 for a visual overview of our system.
A NeuroFieldz (Boston, MA) prototype board acquires
and ampliﬁes action potentials from EMG electrodes and
sends the data to a PC (T440p Lenovo 4, Core i7-4700MQ
2.4GHz, 8GB RAM), which preprocesses the data and applies the learning model to output control signals via a microcontroller. A PhantomX Reactor Research Robot Arm
Kit was used to evaluate end-to-end behavior.

Data Collection
EMG signals were measured at three positions for one subject (the mean absolute voltage of each data point was taken
over twenty seconds, 1000 samples per second): (1) the right
elbow at a 90◦ angle, so the wrist was perpendicular to the
body; (2) the right elbow at a 150◦ angle, so the wrist was
perpendicular to the body; (3) the right elbow at a 100110◦ angle, so the wrist was perpendicular to the body.
The positional feedback capability of the Dynamixel AX12A robotic actuators was used to provide training outputs

∗

Wentworth Institute of Technology
Accelerate Innovative Fellow
‡
NeuroFieldz/Northeastern
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4208

