Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Joint Word Segmentation, POS-Tagging and Syntactic Chunking∗
1

Chen Lyu1 , Yue Zhang2 and Donghong Ji1†
Computer School, WuHan University, WuHan 430072, China
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{lvchen1989, dhji}@whu.edu.cn, yue zhang@sutd.edu.sg

2

Most previous work assumes that gold standard segmentation and POS-tagging have been given before chunking.
The performance of typical chunking systems can reach
around 91% on the gold input (Chen, Zhang, and Isahara
2006; Zhou, Qu, and Zhang 2012). Our experiments on the
standard test corpus, with automatically assigned word segmentation and POS-tags, show that the performance of the
chunking system is only around 70%. The contrast demonstrates that there is still a large gap for improvement in realistic settings.
Given a Chinese sentence, word segmentation errors can
propagate to later processing stages, namely POS tagging
and chunking. On the other hand, chunking information,
which consist of chunk boundaries and corresponding chunk
types, can also be used to improve the word segmentation
and POS-tagging. As a result, the three tasks can be jointly
performed to bring potential accuracy improvements on all
tasks. Similar ideas have been exploited for joint segmentation and POS-tagging (Zhang and Clark 2010), joint named
entity recognition and parsing (Finkel and Manning 2009),
and joint segmentation, POS-tagging, and parsing (Hatori et
al. 2012; Li and Zhou 2012; Zhang et al. 2013).
In this paper, we make an investigation of characterlevel Chinese chunking based on a joint segmentation and
POS-tagging framework of Zhang and Clark (2010). The
character-level chunking system performs word segmentation, part-of-speech (POS) tagging and chunking jointly.
Compared to a pipeline system, the advantages of a joint
system include reduction of error propagation, and the integration of segmentation, POS tagging and chunk-level features. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to develop a
system that jointly performs the above three tasks.
Word features, especially chunk-level features, which are
used in the transition-based chunking systems, are relatively
sparse. The state-of-the-art models (Chen, Zhang, and Isahara 2006; Zhou, Qu, and Zhang 2012) are usually trained
on corpora automatically extracted from the Penn Chinese
Treebank (CTB) (Nianwen et al. 2000), which consists of
tens of thousands of sentences. Given such a limited set of
training data (e.g. tens of thousands sentences), the chance
of a sparse feature occurring in the training data but not in
the test data can be high. As a result, full chunk features
are not useful in our experiments. To address this issue, we
present a semi-supervised approach that extracts chunk clus-

Abstract
Chinese chunking has traditionally been solved by assuming gold standard word segmentation. We ﬁnd that
the accuracies drop drastically when automatic segmentation is used. Inspired by the fact that chunking
knowledge can potentially improve segmentation, we
explore a joint model that performs segmentation, POStagging and chunking simultaneously. In addition, to
address the sparsity of full chunk features, we employ
a semi-supervised method to derive chunk cluster features from large-scale automatically-chunked data. Results show the effectiveness of the joint model with
semi-supervised features.

1

Introduction

Chunking is a standard task in natural language processing, with applications to a variety of common tasks, such
as syntactic analysis (Zhou, Qu, and Zhang 2012), named
entity recognition (Wang, Che, and Manning 2013) and
ﬁne-grained sentiment (Yang and Cardie 2013). A challenge unique to character-based languages such as Chinese,
Japanese and Thai is that word segmentation is a necessary
pre-processing step. Chunking is typically performed on
segmentation and POS-tagging outputs, which suffer from
error propagation. In this paper, we take syntactic chunking
as the task and explore joint models to address the issue.
The main reason for our choice is the availability of widelyused benchmark data, and the method can be applied to all
chunking tasks, such as name entity and opinion expression
chunks.
Syntactic Chunking is also called shallow parsing. The
task is to divide a text into syntactically correlated nonoverlapping chunks (Abney 1991). Chinese chunking is
a difﬁcult task, which was conventionally deﬁned over
words, requiring word segmentation and POS-tagging as
pre-processing steps (Chen, Zhang, and Isahara 2006; Li,
Webster, and Yao 2003; Tan et al. 2004; Tan, Yao, and Chen
2005; Wu et al. 2005; Zhao et al. 2000; Zhou, Qu, and Zhang
2012).
∗

Work done while the ﬁrst author was visiting SUTD.
Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3007

