Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Structured Output Prediction for Semantic Perception in Autonomous Vehicles
Rein Houthooft, Cedric De Boom, Stijn Verstichel, Femke Ongenae, Filip De Turck
Department of Information Technology (INTEC)
Ghent University - iMinds, Gaston Crommenlaan 8 box 201, B-9050 Ghent, Belgium
{rein.houthooft, cedric.deboom, stijn.verstichel, femke.ongenae, ﬁlip.deturck}@ugent.be

2011). Segmentation models are not hindered by irregular
shapes as they label each individual image pixel. Because
outdoor scenes consist largely of irregular shapes, the segmentation approach ﬁts best for autonomous vehicles.
Many segmentation techniques are based on a graphical model that embodies interactions between neighboring over-segmentation regions, i.e., coherent pixel clusters,
conditionally-dependent on the input image (see (Nowozin
and Lampert 2011) for an overview). We propose a structured prediction model that takes into account contextual relations between both ﬁrst- and second-degree region neighbors by means of distinct interaction functions. This model
is optimized according to an ontological loss function via
max-margin learning. Towards our goal of autonomous vehicle perception, a dataset is constructed in which recorded
dashboard camera images are labeled in a ﬁne-grained manner. Effective and efﬁcient inference is possible by means
of the α-expansion (Boykov, Veksler, and Zabih 2001) algorithm, yielding accurate semantic image segmentations.

Abstract
A key challenge in the realization of autonomous vehicles is the machine’s ability to perceive its surrounding environment. This task is tackled through a model
that partitions vehicle camera input into distinct semantic classes, by taking into account visual contextual cues. The use of structured machine learning models is investigated, which not only allow for complex
input, but also arbitrarily structured output. Towards
this goal, an outdoor road scene dataset is constructed
with accompanying ﬁne-grained image labelings. For
coherent segmentation, a structured predictor is modeled to encode label distributions conditioned on the input images. After optimizing this model through maxmargin learning, based on an ontological loss function,
efﬁcient classiﬁcation is realized via graph cuts inference using α-expansion. Both quantitative and qualitative analyses demonstrate that by taking into account
contextual relations between pixel segmentation regions
within a second-degree neighborhood, spurious label
assignments are ﬁltered out, leading to highly accurate
semantic segmentations for outdoor scenes.

1

2

Related work

This section explores literature related to perception in outdoor autonomous vehicles and outdoor scene understanding,
and how our work differs from previous approaches.
Byun et al. (Byun et al. 2015) used a Markov random ﬁeld
for predicting road regions and obstacles that fall out of the
perception sensor range. Their approach relies on manually engineered unary and pairwise potential functions. In
contrast, our work makes use of structured learning through
structural support vector machines (SSVMs) to simultaneously tune all graphical model potentials, allowing the
model to adapt to previously recorded data. Bosch et al.
(Bosch, Muoz, and Freixenet 2007) investigated the use of
segmentation in outdoor environments by means of a probabilistic pixel map and fuzzy classiﬁers. In contrast, we discard probabilities and focus on the model’s discriminative
aspect by using an energy-based formulation of our model.
Armbrust et al. (Armbrust et al. 2009) built an off-road autonomous vehicle with the goal of operating in highly vegetated terrain. Their system integrates multiple manuallyengineered sensor processing systems, and is responsible for
traversable region and object detection, omitting any form
of semantics. Kelly et al. (Kelly et al. 2006) and Leonard et
al. (Leonard et al. 2008) similarly focused on an integration

Introduction

Outdoor settings present many challenges to autonomous
vehicle operation due to the lack of structured elements in
the environment, such as walls or doors (Reina, Milella, and
Underwood 2012). Beyond the identiﬁcation of traversable
areas and object detection (Sivaraman and Trivedi 2013;
Bernini et al. 2014), environmental sensing can be approached by determining a semantic class for each point
of the environment, enabling further high-level processing
such as automatic vehicle steering based on road segments.
In this paper, we present a semantic perception model for
autonomous vehicles based on image segmentation.
In computer vision, two main trends can be discerned,
namely segmentation models and bounding box models.
The latter attempt at identifying objects by drawing bounding rectangles. Although this approach performs very well
at recognizing objects with a regular shape, its performance
drops signiﬁcantly when irregular regions, such as vegetation or sky, have to be identiﬁed (Nowozin and Lampert
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3509

