Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting ICU Mortality Risk by Grouping Temporal Trends from a
Multivariate Panel of Physiologic Measurements
Yuan Luo

Yu Xin and Rohit Joshi

Leo Celi

Peter Szolovits

Northwestern University
yuan.luo@northwestern.edu

MIT
{yuxin,rjoshi}@mit.edu

Harvard Medical School
lceli@bidmc.harvard.edu

MIT
psz@mit.edu



ment plans, and ultimately improve patient outcome.
In the ICU, monitor sensitivity is often favored over
specificity, thus alerts based on whether the value of a single parameter crosses a threshold may result in a prevalence of false alarms (McIntosh 2002). Better trade-off
between sensitivity and specificity can be achieved by considering multiple variables comprehensively (Zong et al.
2004). The assumption is that more volatile patients display concerted abnormalities in multiple variables, which
are associated with a high risk of mortality. Calibrated clinical models can be built by mining archived ICU physiologic time series.
Despite methodological advances in machine learning,
clinicians often regard learnt models as black boxes. This
flaw lies partially in the difficulty of translating complex
clinical events to model features. For example, vital measurements and laboratory test values fluctuate as time progresses (e.g., glucose level may increase from 158 mg/dL
to 189 mg/dL after 53 minutes, then fall to 172 mg/dL after
another 62 minutes). We refer to these events as temporal
trends. In contrast, the standalone numerical measurements
(e.g., 158 mg/dL glucose level) are single time point snapshots. Snapshot measurements have been widely used due
to their simple extraction and robust statistical properties.
However, they are less informative and interpretable than
temporal trends. Temporal trends are more expressive and
informative, but their extraction is often cumbersome. For
better modeling, temporal trends often need to be considered in groups because the underlying pathophysiologic
evolution of a patient (e.g. kidney failure) usually manifests itself through multiple physiologic variables (e.g.,
abnormalities in glomerular filtration rate, creatinine, etc.).

Abstract
ICU mortality risk prediction may help clinicians take effective interventions to improve patient outcome. Existing machine learning approaches often face challenges in integrating a comprehensive panel of physiologic variables and presenting to clinicians interpretable models. We aim to improve both accuracy and interpretability of prediction models by introducing Subgraph Augmented Non-negative Matrix Factorization (SANMF) on ICU physiologic time series.
SANMF converts time series into a graph representation
and applies frequent subgraph mining to automatically extract temporal trends. We then apply non-negative matrix
factorization to group trends in a way that approximates patient pathophysiologic states. Trend groups are then used as
features in training a logistic regression model for mortality
risk prediction, and are also ranked according to their contribution to mortality risk. We evaluated SANMF against
four empirical models on the task of predicting mortality or
survival 30 days after discharge from ICU using the observed physiologic measurements between 12 and 24 hours
after admission. SANMF outperforms all comparison models, and in particular, demonstrates an improvement in AUC
(0.848 vs. 0.827, p<0.002) compared to a state-of-the-art
machine learning method that uses manual feature engineering. Feature analysis was performed to illuminate insights
and benefits of subgraph groups in mortality risk prediction.

1. Introduction
Mortality risk prediction and early recognition of clinical
trends can identify actionable items for improving patient
survival (Buist et al. 2002; McNeill; Bryden 2013; Chan et
al. 2010). This problem has particular importance in the
Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Modern ICUs generate multivariate time series data for a patient using an increasing
number of monitoring devices and laboratory tests. The
close attention required from critical care providers exposes ICU patients to human errors known to be common in
hospital admissions (Levinson; General 2010). Thus automated tools are needed to help clinicians interpret such
data in a timely fashion, quickly assemble effective treat-

2. Related Work
Previous work in predicting mortality risk based on ICU
patients’ physiological status generally falls into two categories. Score-based methods (e.g., SAPSII (Le Gall et al.
1993) and APACHE (Knaus et al. 1991)) assume a re-

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

42

