Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Preventing Illegal Logging: Simultaneous
Optimization of Resource Teams and Tactics for Security
Sara Mc Carthy, Milind Tambe

Christopher Kiekintveld

Meredith L. Gore, Alex Killion

University of Southern California

University of Texas at El Paso

Michigan State University

paradigm for security resource allocation (Tambe 2011;
Korzhyk, Conitzer, and Parr 2010). The sub-area of security
games relevant to this paper is at the intersection of green
security (i.e., protection of forests, ﬁsh and wildlife) (Fang,
Stone, and Tambe 2015; Johnson et al. 2012; Nguyen et al.
2015), and network security games (NSG) (i.e., interdiction
of adversaries on transportation networks) (Jain et al. 2011).
However, previous work in these areas suffer from two limitations relevant to our problem. First, they only consider
the tactical allocation of a given team of resources, without
considering the more strategic question of how to choose
the right team. Indeed, the fact that the tactical question
is already computationally challenging emphasizes the difﬁculty of our problem, which requires evaluating the effectiveness of many teams to select the right one. Second,
previous work has mostly failed to consider heterogeneous
teams, with varying individual and joint effectiveness.
To address these challenges we make the following key
contributions. First, we introduce Simultaneous Optimization of Resource Teams and Tactics (SORT) as a new fundamental research problem in security games that combines
strategic and tactical decision making and provide a formal model of a SORT problem in an NSG. Second, at the
strategic level, we introduce FORTIFY (Forming Optimal
Response Teams for Forest safetY), a scalable algorithm
for solving this problem. FORTIFY uses a hierarchical approach to abstract NSGs at varying levels of detail, providing bounds on the value of different teams of resources
to speed up the search for the optimal team. Third, at the
tactical level, we generalize previous methods for optimizing tactical resource allocation in network security games
to account for heterogenous teams with varying capabilities.
Lastly, we present experimental results on synthetic problems, as well as problem instances obtained from joint work
with NGOs engaged in forest protection in Madagascar.

Abstract
Green security – protection of forests, ﬁsh and wildlife – is
a critical problem in environmental sustainability. We focus
on the problem of optimizing the defense of forests against
illegal logging, where often we are faced with the challenge
of teaming up many different groups, from national police to
forest guards to NGOs, each with differing capabilities and
costs. This paper introduces a new, yet fundamental problem:
Simultaneous Optimization of Resource Teams and Tactics
(SORT). SORT contrasts with most previous game-theoretic
research for green security – in particular based on security
games – that has solely focused on optimizing patrolling tactics, without consideration of team formation or coordination. We develop new models and scalable algorithms to apply SORT towards illegal logging in large forest areas. We
evaluate our methods on a variety of synthetic examples, as
well as a real-world case study using data from our on-going
collaboration in Madagascar.

Illegal logging is a major problem for many developing
countries. The economic and environmental impacts are severe, costing up to USD $30 billion annually and threatening ancient forests and critical habitats for wildlife (WWF
2015). As a result, improving the protection of forests is of
great concern for many countries (Dhital, Vololomboahangy,
and Khasa 2015; Thomas F. Allnutt 2013).
Unfortunately in developing countries, budgets for protecting forests are often very limited, making it crucial to
allocate these resources efﬁciently. We focus on deploying
resources to interdict the traversal of illegal loggers on the
network of roads and rivers around the forest area. However, we must ﬁrst choose the right security team for interdiction; there are many different organizations that may be
involved — from local volunteers, to police, to NGO personnel — each differing in their interdiction effectiveness
(individual or jointly with others), and with varying costs of
deployment. This results in a very large number of resource
teams and allocation strategies per team with varying effectiveness that could be deployed within a given budget. Our
challenge is to simultaneously select the best team of security resources and the best allocation of these resources.
Over the past decade, game-theoretic approaches, in particular security games, have become a major computational

Motivating Domain and Game Model
Forests in Madagascar are under great threat, with valuable hardwood trees such as rosewood and ebony being illegally harvested at an alarming rate. There is broad interest
in improving forest protection via patrolling from different
groups, e.g., NGOs, the Madagascar National Parks, local
police and community volunteers. However, there is very
limited coordination among these groups. As a result there

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3880

