Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Inductive Logic Programming: Challenges
Katsumi Inoue

Hayato Ohwada

Akihiro Yamamoto

National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan
inoue@nii.ac.jp

Tokyo University of Science
Noda, Japan
ohwada@rs.tus.ac.jp

Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
akihiro@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

ILP: Aims and Scopes

Meta-Level Learning
Stephen Muggleton gave the invited talk “Meta-Interpretive
Learning: achievements and challenges”. Meta-Interpretive
Learning (MIL) is an ILP technique aimed at supporting
learning of recursive deﬁnitions, by automatically introducing sub-deﬁnitions that allow decomposition into a hierarchy of reusable parts (Muggleton et al. 2014; 2015).
MIL is based on an adapted version of a Prolog metainterpreter, which derives a proof by repeatedly fetching
(or abducing) ﬁrst-order clauses whose heads unify with
a given goal. MIL additionally fetches higher-order metarules whose heads unify with the goal and saves the resulting meta-substitutions to form a program. MIL can be
a powerful method of inductive programming (Gulwani et
al. 2015), which automatically synthesizes a variety of complex computer programs from background knowledge and
only a few positive examples. Applications of MIL include
learning regular and context-free grammars, learning from
visual representations with repeated patterns, learning string
transformations for spreadsheet applications, learning and
optimizing recursive robot strategies (Cropper and Muggleton 2015) and learning tactics for proving correctness of
programs. These applications of MIL were also presented
as technical papers of ILP 2015 (Farquhar et al. 2015;
Cropper et al. 2015; Dai et al. 2015).
Other approaches of meta-level learning have been proposed in ILP. For example, meta-level abduction (Inoue et
al. 2013) has been applied to completion of FSHR-induced
signaling networks (Rougny et al. 2015).

Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) is a research area
formed at the intersection of Machine Learning and logicbased knowledge representation. ILP has originally used
logic programming as a uniform representation language
for examples, background knowledge and hypotheses for
learning, and then has provided excellent means for multirelational learning and data mining from (non-trivially)
structured data. ILP has also explored several connections
with statistical learning and other probabilistic approaches,
expanding research horizons signiﬁcantly. A recent survey
of ILP can be seen in (Muggleton et al. 2012).
The ILP conference series have been the premier international forum on ILP. Papers in ILP conferences address topics in theories, algorithms, representations and languages,
systems and applications of ILP, and cover all areas of learning in logic, relational learning, relational data mining, statistical relational learning, multi-relational data mining, relational reinforcement learning, graph mining, and connections with other learning paradigms, among others.

ILP 2015: What’s Hot
ILP 2015 is the twenty-ﬁfth edition in the series of the ILP
international conferences, and took place in Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, from 20th to 22nd of August, 2015. There
were 10 technical sessions in ILP 2015, whose topics are:
Nonmonotonic Semantics, Logic and Learning, Complexity,
Action Learning, Distribution Semantics, Implementation,
Kernel Programming, Data and Knowledge Modeling, and
Cognitive Modeling. All papers and slides presented in technical sessions have been made open at the website.1 Two
post-conference proceedings will be published in a volume
of Springer Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence series
for selected papers and in an electronic volume of CEURWS.org for late-breaking papers. Moreover, there will be a
special issue on ILP in Machine Learning Journal.
Three invited talks were given at ILP 2015, which represent three most important aspects of recent ILP: meta-level
learning, probabilistic ILP and challenging applications.

Probabilistic ILP
The distribution semantics for probabilistic logic programming (PLP) was ﬁrstly published by Taisuke Sato (1995).
The semantics was proposed for probabilistic abduction, but
has much more inﬂuenced to the ﬁeld of probabilistic ILP
and then a fertile ground for the general AI based on the
combination of symbolic and statistical reasoning. ILP 2015
celebrated the 20th anniversary of the distribution semantics in the form of Sato’s monumental talk “Distribution
semantics and cyclic relational modeling”. Since 1995, a
lot of PLP languages with the distribution semantics have
been developed including PRISM, ICL, LPADs, ProbLog,
P-log, CP-logic and PITA to name a few. In his talk, Sato
ﬁrst reviewed Fenstat’s representation theorem that mathe-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.ilp2015.jp/

4330

