Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Proximal Alternating Direction Method
for Semi-Deﬁnite Rank Minimization
Ganzhao Yuan and Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
yuanganzhao@gmail.com, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

no prior information on κ is known, one can set it to a sufﬁciently large value in practice. We remark that another equally
popular optimization model is to formulate Eq (1) into a rankconstrianted/ﬁxed-rank optimization problem. However, in
real applications, the true rank is usually unknown or, for
the constrained problem the low-rank solution may not even
exist. In this sense, Eq (1) is more appealing.
The optimization problem in Eq(1) describes many applications of interest to both the signal processing and machine
learning communities, including sensor network localization (Biswas et al. 2006b), near-isometric embedding (Chinmay Hegde 2015), low-dimensional Euclidean embedding
(Dattorro 2011; Recht, Fazel, and Parrilo 2010), non-metric
multidimensional scaling (Agarwal et al. 2007), low-rank
metric learning (Law, Thome, and Cord 2014; Liu et al. 2015;
Cong et al. 2013), low-rank kernel learning (Meka et al.
2008), optimal beamforming (Huang and Palomar 2010),
ellipsoid ﬁtting (Saunderson et al. 2012), optimal power ﬂow
(Louca, Seiler, and Bitar 2013), and cognitive radio networks
(Yu and Lau 2011), to name a few.
We mainly focus on positive semi-deﬁnite (PSD) optimization. However, there are many applications (Candès and
Recht 2009; Zhang et al. 2013; 2012) such as matrix completion and image classiﬁcation, where the solutions are not
necessarily PSD. Fortunately, one can resolve this issue by
embedding any general matrix with a larger PSD hull (refer
to Semi-deﬁnite Embedding Lemma in the supplementary
material). Moreover, many SDP optimization problems are
inherently low-rank. For example, for standard semi-deﬁnite
programming it has been proven
√ that the rank of the solution is upper-bounded by  12 ( 8m + 1 − 1) , where m is
the number of equality constraints (Moscato, Norman, and
Pataki 1998). For metric learning (Roweis and Saul 2000)
and sensor network localization problems (Biswas and Ye
2004), the data distance metric often lives in a much lower
dimensional space.
In this paper, we give speciﬁc attention to solving the popular sensor network localization problem (Biswas et al. 2006b;
Zhang et al. 2010; Ji et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2008;
Krislock and Wolkowicz 2010), which falls into the lowrank semi-deﬁnite optimization framework of Eq (1). The
problem of ﬁnding the positions of all the nodes given a few
anchor nodes and the relative distance information between
the nodes is called sensor network localization. It is an im-

Abstract
Semi-deﬁnite rank minimization problems model a wide range
of applications in both signal processing and machine learning
ﬁelds. This class of problem is NP-hard in general. In this
paper, we propose a proximal Alternating Direction Method
(ADM) for the well-known semi-deﬁnite rank regularized
minimization problem. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst reformulate this
NP-hard problem as an equivalent biconvex MPEC (Mathematical Program with Equilibrium Constraints), and then solve
it using proximal ADM, which involves solving a sequence
of structured convex semi-deﬁnite subproblems to ﬁnd a desirable solution to the original rank regularized optimization
problem. Moreover, based on the Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz inequality, we prove that the proposed method always converges
to a KKT stationary point under mild conditions. We apply
the proposed method to the widely studied and popular sensor network localization problem. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms stateof-the-art low-rank semi-deﬁnite minimization algorithms in
terms of solution quality.
Keywords: Semideﬁnite Rank Minimization, MPEC, Sensor
Network Localization, Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz Inequality, Proximal ADM, Convergence Analysis

1

Introduction

In this paper, we mainly focus on the following composite
rank regularized semi-deﬁnite optimization problem:
min

0XκI

g (A(X) − b) + λ rank(X),

(1)

where λ and κ are strictly positive scalars, X ∈ Rn×n ,
b ∈ Rm , the linear map A(·) : Rn×n → Rm is deﬁned as A(X) = [A(1) , X, ..., A(m) , X]T , and the matrices A(i) ∈ Rn×n , i = 1, ..., m are given. Moreover,
g(·) is a simple proper lower semi-continuous convex function such that its Moreau proximal operator proxg (c) 
minz g(z) + 12 z − c22 can be efﬁciently computed.
Note that we constrain X with a ball of radius κ to ensure the boundedness of the solution. This is to guarantee
convergence; however, it interestingly does not increase the
computational complexity of our proposed solver much. If
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2300

