Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Intelligent Advice Provisioning for Repeated Interaction
Priel Levy

David Sarne

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
levypri1@cs.biu.ac.il

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
sarned@cs.biu.ac.il

Alas to date, most designs following the above paradigm
have been focused in one-shot decision situations. As such
they are completely stateless and static in the sense that they
always provide the same advice at a given decision situation. Nevertheless, for many collaborative agents supporting people through advice provisioning the interaction with
the user is inherently repeated, and consequently their effectiveness is measured over the long term. Examples include
route planning (e.g., googlemaps.com), investments advising (e.g., betterment.com) and recommending the timing for
buying a ﬂight ticket (e.g., in kayak.com). As discussed in
detail in the following section, the repeated interaction dictates designs that consider alongside the likelihood that the
user will accept a given advice also the inﬂuence of that advice (and the possible different outcomes if followed) over
the user’s willingness to accept future advices from the advisor. For that reason, methods designed for providing suboptimal advice in non-repeated settings perform poorly once
switching to repeated settings—in our experiments the performance of such method was even worse than the performance of an advisor providing the theoretic-optimal advice,
reversing the dominance relationship between the two that
was demonstrated in the non-repeated version of the setting
used (Elmalech et al. 2015).
This paper studies two new methods for adviceprovisioning exclusively aimed at repeated interaction settings. Both methods are designed to implicitly improve the
value the user sees in the advices provided to her over time.
Yet, despite this similar underlying design principle, each
method attempts to maximize a different measure. The ﬁrst
method is aimed at maximizing the user’s actual proﬁt when
provided with the advisor, through a gradual convergence
to the optimal (non-intuitive) advice. The second method
aims at maximizing the user’s satisfaction from the advisor
through considering a regret-like index. As our experimental results show, there is only a small correlation between
proﬁt maximization and user satisfaction in repeated advice
settings, hence the importance of having the two methods.
The methods were tested using extensive experimentation with 500 human participants overall, using a wellestablished testbed that enabled a common ground for comparing the performance of our methods with others and for
partial validation of the experimental design, as discussed
in detail in later sections. The analysis of the results ob-

Abstract
This paper studies two suboptimal advice provisioning methods (“advisors”) as an alternative to providing optimal advice in repeated advising settings. Providing users with suboptimal advice has been reported to be highly advantageous
whenever the optimal advice is non-intuitive, hence might
not be accepted by the user. Alas, prior methods that rely
on suboptimal advice generation were designed primarily for
a single-shot advice provisioning setting, hence their performance in repeated settings is questionable. Our methods, on
the other hand, are tailored to the repeated interaction case.
Comprehensive evaluation of the proposed methods, involving hundreds of human participants, reveals that both methods meet their primary design goal (either an increased user
proﬁt or an increased user satisfaction from the advisor),
while performing at least as good with the alternative goal,
compared to having people perform with: (a) no advisor at
all; (b) an advisor providing the theoretic-optimal advice; and
(c) an effective suboptimal-advice-based advisor designed for
the non-repeated variant of our experimental framework.

Introduction
One important role of collaborative interfaces and AI-based
systems is supporting people in decision situations by providing them beneﬁcial advices or suggesting a preferred
course of action (Azaria, Kraus, and Richardson 2013;
Rosenfeld et al. 2015; Ricci et al. 2011). Most research
to date in the area of advice provisioning focused on
providing the optimal (e.g., beneﬁt-maximizing or utilitymaximizing) advice, making the assumption that the advice
provided would deﬁnitely be accepted by the user (Bharati
and Chaudhury 2004). Yet, there is much evidence that people often fail to see the beneﬁt in and often ignore utilitymaximizing advices and hints, especially when those are
associated with non-intuitive choices or courses of action
(Carroll, Bazerman, and Maury 1988). Therefore, an effective advice is not necessarily the one encapsulating the
greatest beneﬁt to the user if accepted, but rather one that
maximizes the expected beneﬁt when taking into consideration its likelihood to be adopted by the user and its effect over the user’s choice otherwise (Elmalech et al. 2015;
Azaria et al. 2014).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

842

