Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Decentralized Approximate Bayesian
Inference for Distributed Sensor Network
Behnam Gholami, Sejong Yoon and Vladimir Pavlovic
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
110 Frelinghuysen Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019
{bb510, sjyoon, vladimir}@cs.rutgers.edu
Russell 1993) processing often desired in large sensing systems (Giannakis et al. 2015).
Distributed sensor networks provide an application setting
in which distributed optimization tasks (including machine
learning) that deal with some of the aforementioned challenges are frequently addressed (Radke 2010; Boyd et al.
2010). However, they are traditionally considered in a nonBayesian (often deterministic) fashion. Moreover, the data is
often assumed to be complete (not missing) across the network and in individual nodes. As a consequence, these approaches usually obtain parameter point estimates by minimizing a loss function based on the complete data and dividing the computation into subset-speciﬁc optimization problems.
A more challenging yet critical problem is to provide full
posterior distributions for the parameters estimated in the
aforementioned distributed settings. Such posteriors have
the major advantage of characterizing the uncertainty in parameter learning and predictions, absent from traditional distributed optimization approaches. Another drawback of such
approaches is that they traditionally rely on batch processing within individual nodes, unable to seamlessly deal with
streaming data frequently present in sensing networks. However, both the sequential inference and the data completion
would be naturally handled via the Bayesian analysis (Broderick et al. 2013), if one could obtain full posterior parameter
estimates in this distributed setting. We also want our distributed Bayesian framemwork to work not only on discrete
variables (Paskin and Guestrin 2004) but also in continuous
cases.
In a recent work, Yoon and Pavlovic (2012) proposed a
new method that estimates parametric probabilistic models
with latent variables in a distributed network setting. The
performance of this model was demonstrated to be on par
with the centralized model, while it could efﬁciently deal
with the distributed missing data. Nevertheless, the approach
has several drawbacks.
First, its use of the Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimation
increases the risk of overﬁtting, which is particularly pronounced in the distributed setting where each node works
with a subset of the full data. Second, the approach cannot
provide a measure of uncertainty around the estimated parameters that may be crucial in many applications, e.g., in
online learning for streaming data or in assessing conﬁdence

Abstract
Bayesian models provide a framework for probabilistic
modelling of complex datasets. Many such models are
computationally demanding, especially in the presence of
large datasets. In sensor network applications, statistical
(Bayesian) parameter estimation usually relies on decentralized algorithms, in which both data and computation are distributed across the nodes of the network. In this paper we
propose a framework for decentralized Bayesian learning using Bregman Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (BADMM). We demonstrate the utility of our framework, with
Mean Field Variational Bayes (MFVB) as the primitive for
distributed afﬁne structure from motion (SfM).

Introduction
The traditional setting for many machine learning algorithms is the one where the model (e.g., a classiﬁer or a regressor, typically parametric in some sense) is constructed
from a body of data by processing this body in either batch
or online fashion. The model itself is centralized and the
algorithm has access to all model parameters and all data
points. However, in many application scenarios today it is
not reasonable to assume access to all data points because
they could be distributed over a network of sensors or processing nodes. In those settings collecting and processing
data in a centralized fashion is not always feasible because
of several critical challenges.
First, in applications such as networks of cameras
mounted on vehicles, the networks are constrained by severe capacity and energy constraints, considerably limiting the node communications (Radke 2010; Tron and Vidal
2011). Second, in many distributed sensor network applications such as health care, ecological monitoring, or smart
homes, collecting all data at a single location may not be
feasible because of its sheer volume as well as potential privacy concerns. Lastly, many sensor network tasks need to be
performed in real time. Hence, processing data after collecting all information from different nodes prohibits performing the tasks in real time. The size of the centralized data
would incur an insurmountable computational burden on the
algorithm, preventing real-time or anytime (Zilberstein and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1582

