Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Discrete Image Hashing Using
Large Weakly Annotated Photo Collections
Hanwang Zhang† , Na Zhao† , Xindi Shang† , Huanbo Luan‡ , Tat-seng Chua†
†

National University of Singapore
‡
Tsinghua University
†
hanwang,zhaona,shangxin,chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg, ‡ luanhuanbo@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of image hashing by learning binary codes from large and weakly supervised
photo collections. Due to the explosive growth of usergenerated media on the Web, this problem is becoming critical for large-scale visual applications like image
retrieval. While most existing hashing methods fail to
address this challenge well, our method shows promising improvement due to the following two key advantages. First, we formulate a novel hashing objective
that can effectively mine implicit weak supervision by
collaborative ﬁltering. Second, we propose a discrete
hashing algorithm, offered with efﬁcient optimization,
to overcome the inferior optimizations in obtaining binary codes from real-valued solutions. In this way, our
method can be considered as a weakly-supervised discrete hashing framework which jointly learns image semantics and their corresponding binary codes. Through
training on one million weakly annotated images, our
experimental results demonstrate that image retrieval
using the proposed hashing method outperforms the
other state-of-the-art ones on image and video benchmarks.

Out walking home early
in the morning, i see
this. A Macintosh Plus
in a tree.. Briljant!

2 pretty girl and the old
school bus in
Thammasart U.

Reagan in pink striped
dress in front yard - 82

some colorful fish by
the dock

(a) Examples of Weakly-Annotated Photos

l1

l2

l3

l1

x1

x1

x2

x2
Traditional Supervision



l2



l3



Collaborative Supervision

(b) Traditional vs. Collaborative Supervision

Figure 1: (a) User-generated annotations for images are usually noisy and incomplete. These examples are from SBU
1M dataset (Ordonez, Kulkarni, and Berg 2011), which is
used as the training data in this paper. (b) The key difference
between traditional and collaborative supervision is that the
latter does not consider unobserved labels as negative. This
is crucial for training on weakly-labeled dataset.

Introduction
By encoding data into short binary codes, hashing supports
efﬁcient storage of huge amount of data in memory and
make fast similarity search possible. For example, similarity calculation of a query in the database will be reduced
to efﬁcient bit operations, and subsequent ranking in Hamming space can be performed in (sub-) linear (by Hamming
ranking) or even constant time (by lookup table). Therefore, hashing technique is not only indispensable in processing today’s multimedia content on the Web, where people
usually require to ﬁnd results from billions of images and
videos within one second (Jegou, Douze, and Schmid 2011;
Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012), but also in fundamental
machine learning scenarios where fast and scalable kernel or
nearest neighbor constructions are needed (Kulis and Grauman 2009; Liu et al. 2012).
Existing hashing methods fall into unsupervised and
(semi-) supervised categories according to whether labeled

data are required. Unsupervised hashing seeks hash functions that preserve data similarity in the original feature
space. For example, Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) designs random projections that map features to binary codes
so that similar data will have same codes with high probability (Gionis et al. 1999; Kulis and Grauman 2009); while
Spectral Hashing (SH) learns hash functions that preserves
the graph structure of the original feature space (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2009; Kong and Li 2012; Liu et al. 2011).
However, unsupervised hashing does not guarantee the semantic similarity between data, especially for visual data.
This is due to the well-known semantic gap where the highlevel semantics of visual content often differs from low-level
visual features (Smeulders et al. 2000). Therefore, (semi) supervised hashing that exploits semantic label information is shown to be effective. Popular methods are Min-Loss
Hashing (Norouzi and Blei 2011), CCA-Hashing (Gong et
al. 2013) and Semi-Supervised Hashing (Wang, Kumar, and
Chang 2012). They generally learn hash functions that mini-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3669

