Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting Gaming Related Properties from Twitter Accounts
Maria Ivanova Gorinova

Yoad Lewenberg

Yoram Bachrach

University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Alfredo Kalaitzis

Michael Fagan

Dean Carignan

Nitin Gautam

Microsoft
London, UK

Microsoft
London, UK

Microsoft
Redmond, US

Microsoft
Redmond, US

the gaming community: tech-savviness, degree of knowledge on computer games, and gaming skill in various genres.
We also examine variables such as their life-stage, degree of
originality, and level of inﬂuence on their peers.
Given a Twitter handle, our system predicts the user’s
traits. These predictions are the result of applying machine
learning classiﬁers, which examine the textual tweets made
by the target user.

Abstract
We demonstrate a system for predicting gaming related
properties from Twitter accounts. Our system predicts
various traits of users based on the tweets publicly available in their proﬁles. Such inferred traits include degrees of tech-savviness and knowledge on computer
games, actual gaming performance, preferred platform,
degree of originality, humor and inﬂuence on others.
Our system is based on machine learning models trained
on crowd-sourced data. It allows people to select Twitter accounts of their fellow gamers, examine the trait
predictions made by our system, and the main drivers
of these predictions. We present empirical results on
the performance of our system based on its accuracy on
our crowd-sourced dataset.

Methodology
We build a model for each of the gaming-related traits
mentioned above and train it on a dataset of 2,000 Twitter
accounts, annotated by workers on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk. Each worker was asked to examine several of those
Twitter accounts and form an opinion regarding the traits
of the account owners. Each Twitter proﬁle was annotated
multiple times, on average by 3 raters. Further, we examine
the amount of time that these target users have spent playing
Xbox games, and their actual achievement scores.
The textual data of the users in the training dataset is preprocessed by reducing all words to their root form, using a
Porter Stemmer. The stemmed text is then used to extract
a vocabulary, which consists of those words and hashtag
words (those preﬁxed by ‘#’) that are present in at least 3
user proﬁles and at most 80% of all user proﬁles.
We combine lexical and stylistic features to train the models and classify new users. The lexical part of a feature vector is obtained by applying TF-IDF weighting to the users’
tweets, with respect to the extracted vocabulary. The stylistic features include occurrences of elongated words, fully
capitalized words, consecutive punctuation marks, hashtags,
as well as the percentage of the tweets that were retweets or
replies, and the number of URLs that the user shared.

Introduction
Social media plays an important role in our lives, and services such as Twitter, Facebook and Google+ are used regularly by over a billion users. Recent research has uncovered many ways in which online information, including social network data, can be used to predict personal traits of
users (Golbeck et al. 2011; Bachrach et al. 2012; Kosinski et al. 2012; 2014; Kosinski, Stillwell, and Graepel 2013;
Schwartz et al. 2013; Bachrach 2015),
Such information can be used to gain insight regarding
users (Bachrach et al. 2014c; Lewenberg, Bachrach, and
Volkova 2015), or for commercial applications such personalized search (Ustinovsky and Serdyukov 2013), targeted
advertising (Yang et al. 2006) or improving the quality of
collaborative ﬁltering based recommender systems.1
Such earlier work focuses on the general population,
whereas our focus is on the speciﬁc target group of people playing computer games. Gamers are predominantly
active in social media, and use distinct online communication styles and language. We focus on the following perceived traits of gamers, assumed to affect their standing in

Feature extraction and classiﬁcation

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Standard recommender systems only use information on consumed items and rely on ﬁngerprinting or dimensionality reduction
techniques (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Bachrach et al. 2014b;
Bachrach and Porat 2015), but can be adapted to incorporate
more detailed user proﬁling (Clements et al. 2011; Bachrach et al.
2014a).

We use linear regression for quantitative traits and logistic
regression for classiﬁcation.
Our system inputs a Twitter username, scrapes the recent
tweets of the user via the Twitter API and automatically
translates them through the Microsoft Translator API where
appropriate.

4357

