Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reduction Techniques for Graph-Based Convex Clustering
1

2

Lei Han1 and Yu Zhang2∗

Department of Statistics, Rutgers University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
1
lhan@stat.rutgers.edu, leihan.cs@gmail.com; 2 yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com

Recently, the GCC method (Hocking et al. 2011; Chen et
al. 2014) has attracted increasing attentions since it can determine the number of clusters based on the globally optimal
solution of its convex objective function. The GCC model
organizes the data points as an undirected graph and adopts a
fused regularizer as the sum of a set of pairwise fusion terms
each of which corresponds to an edge in the graph. Then, the
GCC method obtains a clusterpath by optimizing the objective functions according to a sequence of regularization parameters. The generated clusterpath provides a meaningfully
geometric interpretation for the clustering structure hidden
in the data. For the clustering performance, the GCC method
is comparable to the state-of-the-art clustering methods such
as the spectral clustering. However, solving the GCC model
is very computationally expensive due to the complex fused
regularizer.

Abstract
The Graph-based Convex Clustering (GCC) method has
gained increasing attention recently. The GCC method adopts
a fused regularizer to learn the cluster centers and obtains a
geometric clusterpath by varying the regularization parameter. One major limitation is that solving the GCC model is
computationally expensive. In this paper, we develop efﬁcient
graph reduction techniques for the GCC model to eliminate
edges, each of which corresponds to two data points from the
same cluster, without solving the optimization problem in the
GCC method, leading to improved computational efﬁciency.
Speciﬁcally, two reduction techniques are proposed according to tree-based and cyclic-graph-based convex clustering
methods separately. The proposed reduction techniques are
appealing since they only need to scan the data once with negligibly additional cost and they are independent of solvers for
the GCC method, making them capable of improving the efﬁciency of any existing solver. Experiments on both synthetic
and real-world datasets show that our methods can largely
improve the efﬁciency of the GCC model.

In this paper, we develop novel graph reduction techniques for the GCC model. Instead of seeking efﬁcient algorithms to solve the GCC model, the graph reduction techniques are developed to eliminate edges in the graph before
optimizing the objective function in the GCC model such
that the data points connected by the eliminated edges are
(almost) guaranteed to be grouped. In this way, we can reduce the number of variable to be optimized since the variables for the data points to be detected are from the same
cluster and will be merged as one variable, hence we can
improve the computational efﬁciency. Those reduction techniques are obtained from the analysis on the relations between the primal and dual forms of the GCC model. The
proposed reduction techniques have good match with the
clusterpath generated by the GCC method since the reduction techniques can identity the data points to be grouped
together when varying the value of the regularization parameter, which is just what the clusterpath needs. The proposed
reduction techniques are appealing since they only need to
scan the data once with negligibly additional cost and they
can improve the efﬁciency of any existing solver for the
GCC model since they are independent of solvers. Specifically, we consider two types of graphs in the GCC model,
i.e., the tree which is acyclic and the generally cyclic graph,
and correspondingly two reduction techniques are proposed
for the tree-based convex clustering (TCC) model and the
cyclic-graph-based convex clustering (CGCC) model, respectively. We evaluate the proposed reduction techniques

Introduction
Clustering, which partitions a data set into several subsets
with each one having similar data points, is an important
unsupervised task, and it has been extensively studied in the
literature. Many clustering algorithms have been proposed
such as the k-means method, density-based approaches (Ester et al. 1996), spectral clustering methods (Ng, Jordan, and
Weiss 2002), and minimum spanning tree (MST) algorithms
(Grygorash, Zhou, and Jorgensen 2006; Wang, Wang, and
Wilkes 2009). Different algorithms have their own favors to
capture certain types of cluster structure. For example, the
k-means algorithm can group data points with each cluster having a convex shape but the spectral clustering and
MST methods can deal with the non-convex shape and even
more complex one. All the aforementioned clustering methods have some limitations, e.g., some of them relying on the
initial setting of the cluster center since it is difﬁcult to attain
the global optimum and many of them failing to determine
the number of clusters.
∗

Both authors contributed equally.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1645

