Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

The Hidden Convexity of Spectral Clustering
James Voss

Mikhail Belkin

Luis Rademacher

Ohio State University
vossj@cse.ohio-state.edu

Ohio State University
mbelkin@cse.ohio-state.edu

Ohio State University
lrademac@cse.ohio-state.edu

use k-means or weighted k-means clustering in the spectral
space or related iterative procedures (Shi and Malik 2000;
Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002; Bach and Jordan 2006; Yu and
Shi 2003). Typical algorithms for multiway spectral clustering follow a two-step process:

Abstract
In recent years, spectral clustering has become a standard
method for data analysis used in a broad range of applications. In this paper we propose a new class of algorithms
for multiway spectral clustering based on optimization of a
certain “contrast function” over the unit sphere. These algorithms, partly inspired by certain Indepenent Component
Analysis techniques, are simple, easy to implement and efﬁcient.
Geometrically, the proposed algorithms can be interpreted as
hidden basis recovery by means of function optimization. We
give a complete characterization of the contrast functions admissible for provable basis recovery. We show how these conditions can be interpreted as a “hidden convexity” of our optimization problem on the sphere; interestingly, we use efﬁcient convex maximization rather than the more common
convex minimization. We also show encouraging experimental results on real and simulated data.

1

1. Spectral embedding: A similarity graph for the data is
constructed based on the data’s feature representation. If
one is looking for k clusters, one constructs the embedding using the bottom k eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian (normalized or unnormalized) corresponding to that
graph.
2. Clustering: In the second step, the embedded data
(sometimes rescaled) is clustered, typically using the
conventional/spherical k-means algorithms or their variations.
In the ﬁrst step, the spectral embedding given by the
eigenvectors of Laplacian matrices has a number of interpretations. The meaning can be explained by spectral graph theory as relaxations of multiway cut problems (Von Luxburg
2007). In the extreme case of a similarity graph having k
connected components, the embedded vectors reside in Rk ,
and vectors corresponding to the same connected component
are mapped to a single point. There are also connections to
other areas of machine learning and mathematics, in particular to the geometry of the underlying space from which the
data is sampled (Belkin and Niyogi 2003).
In our paper we propose a new class of algorithms for
the second step of multiway spectral clustering. The starting
point is that when k clusters are perfectly separate, the spectral embedding using the bottom k eigenvectors has a particularly simple geometric form. For the unnormalized (or
asymmetric normalized) Laplacian, it is simply a (weighted)
orthogonal basis in k-dimensional space, and recovering the
basis vectors is sufﬁcient for cluster identiﬁcation. This view
of spectral clustering as basis recovery is related to previous observations that the spectral embedding generates a
discrete weighted simplex (see (Weber, Rungsarityotin, and
Schliep 2004) and also (Kumar, Narasimhan, and Ravindran
2013) for some applications). For the symmetric normalized
Laplacian, the structure is slightly more complex, but is, as
it turns out, still suitable for our analysis, and, moreover the
algorithms can be used without modiﬁcation.
The proposed approach relies on an optimization problem

Introduction

Partitioning a dataset into classes based on a similarity between data points, known as cluster analysis, is one of the
most basic and practically important problems in data analysis and machine learning. It has a vast array of applications
from speech recognition to image analysis to bioinformatics
and to data compression. There is an extensive literature on
the subject, including a number of different methodologies
as well as their various practical and theoretical aspects (Jain
and Dubes 1988).
In recent years spectral clustering—a class of methods
based on the eigenvectors of a certain matrix, typically
the graph Laplacian constructed from data—has become a
widely used method for cluster analysis. This is due to the
simplicity of the algorithm, a number of desirable properties it exhibits and its amenability to theoretical analysis. In its simplest form, spectral bi-partitioning is an attractively straightforward algorithm based on thresholding
the second bottom eigenvector of the Laplacian matrix of
a graph. However, the more practically signiﬁcant problem
of multiway spectral clustering is considerably more complex. While hierarchical methods based on a sequence of binary splits have been used, the most common approaches
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2108

