Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Cross-Lingual Taxonomy Alignment with Bilingual Biterm Topic Model
1

Tianxing Wu1 , Guilin Qi1 , Haofen Wang2 , Kang Xu1 and Xuan Cui1
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration of State Education Ministry,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
{wutianxing, gqi, kxu, xcui}@seu.edu.cn
2
East China University of Science & Technology, China
whfcarter@ecust.edu.cn

onomy of another language. Cross-lingual taxonomy alignment not only contributes to globalize knowledge sharing,
but also beneﬁts many applications, such as cross-lingual
information retrieval (Potthast, Stein, and Anderka 2008;
Nguyen et al. 2009) and multilingual knowledge base construction (Lehmann et al. 2014; Mahdisoltani, Biega, and
Suchanek 2014).
The key step of aligning cross-lingual taxonomies is to
measure the relevance between one category in the source
taxonomy and another one in the target taxonomy. Once
all the relevance scores have been determined, we can obtain the most relevant category in the target taxonomy for
each category in the source taxonomy in an unsupervised
way. However, since categories are described in different
languages, traditional monolingual similarity metrics are not
suitable in cross-lingual scenarios.
In order to overcome this problem, several approaches
have been proposed. The work given in (Spohr, Hollink, and
Cimiano 2011) ﬁrst translates cross-lingual taxonomies into
monolingual taxonomies, and then captures the linguistic
features and structural features that rely on string similarities
to predict the relevance score between categories. However,
the translated label of a category in the source taxonomy may
be dissimilar to its matched category in the target taxonomy.
” in JD.com can be transFor example, category “
lated to “Outdoor/Sportswear” by Google Translate 1 , but the
translated string is totally different from that of its matched
category “Athletic Apparel” in eBay.com. Thus, the features
that rely on string similarities are insufﬁcient to decide the relevance score between two categories of different languages,
due to different language habits and improper translations.
Another work (Prytkova, Weikum, and Spaniol 2015) tries
to solve this problem by referring to Wikipedia. It strongly
relies on the domain-speciﬁc information (i.e. book intances)
to map original categories in book domain onto Wikipedia
categories. Categories of different languages can be directly
compared using interwiki links. However, this approach cannot be easily extended to the other kinds of taxonomies,
because instance information is often unavailable.
In this paper, we study the problem of cross-lingual taxonomy alignment. The problem is non-trivial and poses the
following challenges.

Abstract
As more and more multilingual knowledge becomes
available on the Web, knowledge sharing across languages has become an important task to beneﬁt many
applications. One of the most crucial kinds of knowledge
on the Web is taxonomy, which is used to organize and
classify the Web data. To facilitate knowledge sharing
across languages, we need to deal with the problem of
cross-lingual taxonomy alignment, which discovers the
most relevant category in the target taxonomy of one
language for each category in the source taxonomy of
another language. Current approaches for aligning crosslingual taxonomies strongly rely on domain-speciﬁc information and the features based on string similarities.
In this paper, we present a new approach to deal with the
problem of cross-lingual taxonomy alignment without
using any domain-speciﬁc information. We ﬁrst identify
the candidate matched categories in the target taxonomy
for each category in the source taxonomy using the crosslingual string similarity. We then propose a novel bilingual topic model, called Bilingual Biterm Topic Model
(BiBTM), to perform exact matching. BiBTM is trained
by the textual contexts extracted from the Web. We conduct experiments on two kinds of real world datasets.
The experimental results show that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the designed state-of-the-art comparison methods.

Introduction
Nowadays, as the advent of more and more multilingual resources, the Web has become a global information space.
Thus, sharing knowledge across languages has become an
important and challenging task. One of the most crucial kinds
of knowledge is taxonomy, which refers to a hierarchy of categories that entities are classiﬁed to (Prytkova, Weikum, and
Spaniol 2015). Different kinds of taxonomies are everywhere
on the Web, such as Web site directory (e.g. Yahoo Directory and Dmoz.org) and product catalogue (e.g. eBay.com
and Google Product Taxonomy). To facilitate knowledge
sharing across languages, we need to deal with the problem
of cross-lingual taxonomy alignment, which is the task of
discovering the most relevant category in the target taxonomy of one language for each category in the source taxc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

287

http://translate.google.com/

