Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Linearized Alternating Direction Method with Penalization
for Nonconvex and Nonsmooth Optimization
1

Yiyang Wang,1 Risheng Liu,2 Xiaoliang Song,1 and Zhixun Su1,3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China
School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China
3
National Engineering Research Center of Digital Life, Guangzhou 510006, China
{ywerica, ericsong507}@gmail.com, {rsliu, zxsu}@dlut.edu.cn

2

1. The fi ’s are proper, lower semi-continuous functions with
inf fi > −∞ for ∀i and inf Ψ > −∞.

Abstract
Being one of the most effective methods, Alternating
Direction Method (ADM) has been extensively studied
in numerical analysis for solving linearly constrained
convex program. However, there are few studies focusing on the convergence property of ADM under nonconvex framework though it has already achieved wellperformance on applying to various nonconvex tasks.
In this paper, a linearized algorithm with penalization is
proposed on the basis of ADM for solving nonconvex
and nonsmooth optimization. We start from analyzing
the convergence property for the classical constrained
problem with two variables and then establish a similar
result for multi-block case. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm, experiments with
synthetic and real-world data have been conducted on
speciﬁc applications in signal and image processing.

1

2. Ψ(X) is a coercive, Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz (KL) function1 ,
namely, limmin{xi :i=1,...,n}↑∞ Ψ(X) = +∞2 .
Based on different choices of Ψ(X), problem (1) covers a
variety of problems. Signal representation based on 0 sparse
model is used as a technique for decomposing a signal into
an optimal superposition of bases (Chen and Donoho 1994),
which can be seen as a one-block nonconvex problem of (1).
Being as a basic but vital task, image denoising can be modeled as sparse coding with 0 -regularization (Bao et al. 2014;
Gregor and LeCun 2010), which is a special two-block case
of (1) that the objective function is a combination of a convex function and a nonconvex one.
There have been extensive literatures in optimization and
numerical analysis on solving the problem (1) with the case
that all the fi ’s are convex functions. For solving the convex
constrained problem, efﬁcient algorithms like Alternating
Direction Method (ADM) (Lin, Liu, and Li 2013), Alternating Minimization Algorithm (Tseng 1991) and Accelerated
Proximal Gradient (Zuo and Lin 2011) have been widely
applied. A good summary of these methods can be found
in (Goldstein et al. 2014), but we in this paper only focus
on ADM since it has been extensively studied from smooth
and strongly convex function to nonsmooth convex function
(Boyd et al. 2011); from naive algorithm to its linearized version (Lin, Liu, and Su 2011); from two-block case to multiblock case (Chen et al. 2014) and have been proved to be
quite efﬁcient by many application-driven tasks.
Despite of the numerous methods for solving convex constrained problem, few studies are conducted on the nonconvex frameworks. Greedy methods, including Matching
Pursuit (MP) (Mallat and Zhang 1993), Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) (Tropp and Gilbert 2007), Weak Matching Pursuit (WMP) (Temlyakov 2011) are designed for the
0 sparse approximation task due to the hopelessness of
a straightforward approach. Another common strategy for
solving nonconvex linearly constrained problem is to reformulate it to an unconstrained optimization, e.g. penalizing

Introduction

Though plenty of problems in machine learning and image
processing can be modeled as convex optimization (Candès
and Wakin 2008; Wright et al. 2010; Yang et al. 2009;
Liu et al. 2014), many recent applications like distributed
clustering, tensor factorization, dictionary learning and gradient based minimization have shown the great success (Liavas and Sidiropoulos 2014; Bao et al. 2014; Xu et al. 2012;
Wang et al. 2014) and led to growing interest in nonconvex
and nonsmooth (NCNS) optimization.
Many of these problems, either convex or nonconvex can
be formulated/reformulated as a linearly constrained separable program with n blocks of variables:
min Ψ(X) =

xi ,...,xn

n

i=1

fi (xi ), s.t.

n


Ai (xi ) = c,

(1)

i=1

where in this paper, variables {xi }ni=1 , constant b can be
either vectors or matrices and we denote X = (x1 , . . . , xn )
for simplicity of discussion; {Ai }ni=1 are linear mappings
without additional restrictions; the objective function Ψ can
be either convex or nonconvex, smooth or nonsmooth which
satisﬁes the following two conditions:

1

We ignore the deﬁnition of KL inequality and KL function
(Bolte, Sabach, and Teboulle 2014) due to space limit.
2
 ·  denotes the 2 norm of vector and the Frobenius norm of
matrix in here and after.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

798

