Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Effectiveness of Linear Models
for One-Class Collaborative Filtering
Suvash Sedhain†∗ , Aditya Krishna Menon∗† , Scott Sanner‡† , Darius Braziunas§

{† Australian National University, ∗ NICTA}, Canberra, ACT, Australia
‡
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
§
Rakuten Kobo Inc., Toronto, Canada
{suvash.sedhain, aditya.menon}@nicta.com.au, scott.sanner@oregonstate.edu, dbraziunas@kobo.com
While there is a rich literature on OC-CF (discussed subsequently), to our knowledge, all existing methods lack one
or more desiderata. For example, methods that do not employ learning (such as neighbourhood approaches) cannot
ensure full exploitation of available data. On the other hand,
amongst methods that employ learning (such as matrix factorisation), it is common to employ learning objectives that
are non-convex, which limits the range of methods for efﬁcient global optimisation (if even possible); further, parallel
training of such models is challenging, due to strong coupling between parameters.
SLIM (Ning and Karypis 2011) is a state-of-the-art
method for OC-CF problems. Unlike neighbourhood and
matrix factorisation approaches, SLIM is has a convex learning objective. While SLIM has been shown to perform well
on OC-CF problems, we shall argue that the method is hindered by two limitations: ﬁrst, it does not produce userpersonalised predictions, which hampers its predictive performance; and second, it involves a constrained optimisation, which hampers fast training.
In this paper, we propose LRec, a variant of SLIM
that overcomes these limitations without sacriﬁcing any of
SLIM’s strengths: LRec produces user-personalised recommendations by training a convex, unconstrained, objective
which is embarrassingly parallelisable (i.e., without distributed communication) across users. Experimentation on a
range of real-world datasets reveals that LRec demonstrates
dramatically superior performance to SLIM, as well as other
more complicated approaches. At its core, LRec employs
linear logistic regression; thus, our results illustrate the (perhaps surprising) level of effectiveness of simple yet powerful
linear classiﬁcation models for OC-CF problems.

Abstract
In many personalised recommendation problems, there
are examples of items users prefer or like, but no examples of items they dislike. A state-of-the-art method
for such implicit feedback, or one-class collaborative
ﬁltering (OC-CF), problems is SLIM, which makes recommendations based on a learned item-item similarity matrix. While SLIM has been shown to perform
well on implicit feedback tasks, we argue that it is
hindered by two limitations: ﬁrst, it does not produce
user-personalised predictions, which hampers recommendation performance; second, it involves solving a
constrained optimisation problem, which impedes fast
training. In this paper, we propose LRec, a variant of
SLIM that overcomes these limitations without sacriﬁcing any of SLIM’s strengths. At its core, LRec employs
linear logistic regression; despite this simplicity, LRec
consistently and signiﬁcantly outperforms all existing
methods on a range of datasets. Our results thus illustrate that the OC-CF problem can be effectively tackled
via linear classiﬁcation models.

Introduction
Personalised recommendation systems are a core component of many modern e-commerce services. Collaborative
ﬁltering (CF) is the de facto approach to algorithmic recommendation, based on extracted information from a database
of preferences for a collection of users (Goldberg et al.
1992). Most work on CF has considered the explicit feedback setting, where users express positive and negative preferences for items in terms of ratings or likes/dislikes. By
contrast, in the implicit feedback setting, we do not have
explicit negative preference information. For example, consider recommending items to users of an e-commerce website, based on their purchase history. One can assume that a
purchase indicates a positive preference for an item. However, the lack of a purchase does not necessarily indicate
a negative preference; it may just be that the user is unaware of an item. Similar problems arise when modelling
users’ play counts of songs, viewing of videos, et cetera.
Implicit feedback scenarios are also referred to as one-class
collaborative ﬁltering (OC-CF) problems (Pan et al. 2008;
Pan and Scholz 2009); we use the terms interchangeably.

Background and Notation
Let U denote a set of users, and I a set of items, with
m = |U| and n = |I|. In one-class collaborative ﬁltering (OC-CF), we have a purchase1 matrix R ∈ {0, 1}m×n ,
where Rui indicates whether user u purchased item i or not.
We use R:i to denote the indicator vector of each users’ purchase of an item, and similarly Ru: to denote the vector of a
1

We use the word “purchase” simply for the purposes of exposition. The method described in this paper is equally applicable in
settings such as modelling users’ play counts of songs.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

229

