Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Frugal Bribery in Voting
Palash Dey

Neeldhara Misra

Y. Narahari

Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
palash@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Indian Institute of Technology
Gandhinagar, India
mail@neeldhara.com

Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
hari@csa.iisc.ernet.in

candidate that the agent would like to be the winner, a
budget constraint, a cost model for a change of vote, and
knowledge of the existing election. The formal computational problem that arises from these inputs is the following: is it possible to make a distinguished candidate win
the election in question by incurring a cost that is within
the budget? This question, with origins in (Faliszewski,
Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2006; 2009; Faliszewski
et al. 2009), has been subsequently studied intensely in
computational social choice literature (Faliszewski 2008;
Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2009; Baumeister et al. 2012;
Pini, Rossi, and Venable 2013; Dorn and Krüger 2015;
Mattei et al. 2012; 2013; Binkele-Raible et al. 2014; Erdelyi,
Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2014; Faliszewski et al.
2015; Xia 2012; Dorn and Schlotter 2012; Bredereck et al.
2014; Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2011;
Schlotter, Faliszewski, and Elkind 2011).

Abstract
Bribery in elections is an important problem in computational social choice theory. We introduce and study two important special cases of the bribery problem, namely, F RUGAL BRIBERY and F RUGAL -$ BRIBERY where the briber is frugal
in nature. By this, we mean that the briber is only able to
inﬂuence voters who beneﬁt from the suggestion of the briber.
More formally, a voter is vulnerable if the outcome of the
election improves according to her own preference when she
accepts the suggestion of the briber. In the F RUGAL - BRIBERY
problem, the goal is to make a certain candidate win the election by changing only the vulnerable votes. In the F RUGAL $BRIBERY problem, the vulnerable votes have prices and the
goal is to make a certain candidate win the election by changing only the vulnerable votes, subject to a budget constraint.
We show that both the F RUGAL - BRIBERY and the F RUGAL $BRIBERY problems are intractable for many commonly used
voting rules for weighted as well as unweighted elections.
These intractability results demonstrate that bribery is a hard
computational problem, in the sense that several special cases
of this problem continue to be computationally intractable.
This strengthens the view that bribery, although a possible attack on an election in principle, may be infeasible in practice.

Motivation
In this work, we propose an effective cost model for the
bribery problem. Even the most general cost models that
have been studied in the literature ﬁx absolute costs per
voter-candidate combination, with no speciﬁc consideration
to the voters’ opinions about the current winner and the distinguished candidate whom the briber wants to be the winner.
In our proposed model, a change of vote is relatively easier to
effect if the change causes an outcome that the voter would
ﬁnd desirable. Indeed, if the currently winning candidate is,
say, a, and a voter is (truthfully) promised that by changing
her vote from c  d  b  a to d  b  c  a, the winner
of the election would change from a to d, then this is a change
that the voter is likely to be happy to make. While the change
does not make her most favorite candidate win the election,
it does improve the result from her point of view. Thus, given
the circumstances (namely that of her least favorite candidate
winning the election), the altered vote serves the voter better
than the original one.
We believe this perspective of voter inﬂuence is an important one to study. The cost of a change of vote is dependent
on the nature of the outcome that the change promises — the
cost is low or nil if the change results in a better outcome
with respect to the voter’s original ranking, and high or inﬁnity otherwise. A frugal agent only approaches voters of
the former category, thus being able to effectively bribe with

Introduction
In a typical voting scenario, we have a set of candidates
and a set of voters reporting their votes which are complete
rankings over the candidates. A voting rule is a procedure
that, given a collection of votes, chooses one candidate as the
winner. A set of votes over a set of candidates along with a
voting rule is called an election.
Activities that try to inﬂuence voter opinions, in favor
of speciﬁc candidates, are very common during the time
that an election is in progress. For example, in a political
election, candidates often conduct elaborate campaigns to
promote themselves among a general or targeted audience.
An extreme illustration of this phenomenon is bribery —
here, the candidates may create ﬁnancial incentives to sway
the voters. Of course, the process of inﬂuencing voters may
involve costs even without the bribery aspect; for instance, a
typical political campaign entails considerable expenditure.
All situations involving any attempt to inﬂuence voters
usually have the following aspects: an external agent, a
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2466

