Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

How Important Is Weight Symmetry in Backpropagation?
Qianli Liao and Joel Z. Leibo and Tomaso Poggio
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, McGovern Institute
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA

For most of the past three decades since the invention
of BP, it was generally believed that it could not be implemented by the brain (Crick 1989; Mazzoni, Andersen,
and Jordan 1991; O’Reilly 1996; Chinta and Tweed 2012;
Bengio et al. 2015). BP seems to have three biologically implausible requirements: (1) feedback weights must be the
same as feedforward weights (2) forward and backward
passes require different computations, and (3) error gradients must somehow be stored separately from activations.
One biologically plausible way to satisfy requirements (2)
and (3) is to posit a distinct “error network” with the same
topology as the main (forward) network but used only for
backpropagation of error signals. The main problem with
such a model is that it makes requirement (1) implausible.
There is no known biological way for the error network to
know precisely the weights of the original network. This is
known as the “weight transport problem” (Grossberg 1987).
In this work we call it the “weight symmetry problem”. It is
arguably the crux of BP’s biological implausibility.
In this report, we systematically relax BP’s weight symmetry requirement by manipulating the feedback weights.
We ﬁnd that some natural and biologically plausible
schemes along these lines lead to exploding or vanishing
gradients and render learning impossible. However, useful
learning is restored if a simple and indeed more biologically plausible rule called Batch Manhattan (BM) is used
to compute the weight updates. Another technique, called
Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015), is also
shown effective. When combined together, these two techniques seem complementary and signiﬁcantly improve the
performance of our asymmetric version of backpropagation.
The results are somewhat surprising: if the aforementioned BM and/or BN operations are applied, the magnitudes
of feedback weights turn out not to be important. A muchrelaxed sign-concordance property is all that is needed to attain comparable performance to mini-batch SGD on a large
number of tasks.
Furthermore, we tried going beyond sign concordant
feedback. We systematically reduced the probability of feedforward and feedback weights having the same sign (the sign
concordance probability). We found that the effectiveness of
backpropagation is strongly dependent on high sign concordance probability. That said, completely random and ﬁxed
feedback still outperforms chance e.g., as in the recent work

Abstract
Gradient backpropagation (BP) requires symmetric feedforward and feedback connections—the same weights must be
used for forward and backward passes. This “weight transport problem” (Grossberg 1987) is thought to be one of the
main reasons to doubt BP’s biologically plausibility. Using
15 different classiﬁcation datasets, we systematically investigate to what extent BP really depends on weight symmetry.
In a study that turned out to be surprisingly similar in spirit to
Lillicrap et al.’s demonstration (Lillicrap et al. 2014) but orthogonal in its results, our experiments indicate that: (1) the
magnitudes of feedback weights do not matter to performance
(2) the signs of feedback weights do matter—the more concordant signs between feedforward and their corresponding
feedback connections, the better (3) with feedback weights
having random magnitudes and 100% concordant signs, we
were able to achieve the same or even better performance
than SGD. (4) some normalizations/stabilizations are indispensable for such asymmetric BP to work, namely Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015) and/or a “Batch
Manhattan” (BM) update rule.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
performance in many domains (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Abdel-Hamid et al. 2012; Hinton et al. 2012;
Mikolov et al. 2013; Taigman et al. 2014; Graves, Wayne,
and Danihelka 2014). The simple gradient backpropagation (BP) algorithm has been the essential “learning engine”
powering most of this work.
Deep neural networks are universal function approximators (Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White 1989). Thus it is not
surprising that solutions to real-world problems exist within
their conﬁguration space. Rather, the real surprise is that
such conﬁgurations can actually be discovered by gradient
backpropagation.
The human brain may also be some form of DNN. Since
BP is the most effective known method of adapting DNN
parameters to large datasets, it becomes a priority to answer:
could the brain somehow be implementing BP? Or some approximation to it?
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1837

