Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Implicit Discourse Relation Classiﬁcation via Multi-Task Neural Networks
Yang Liu1 , Sujian Li1,2 , Xiaodong Zhang1 and Zhifang Sui1,2

1

2

Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China
{cs-ly, lisujian, zxdcs, szf}@pku.edu.cn

pairs occurring in the sentence pairs are useful, since they
to some extent can represent semantic relationships between
two sentences (for example, word pairs appearing around
the contrast relation often tend to be antonyms). In earlier
studies, researchers ﬁnd that word pairs do help classifying
the discourse relations. However, it is strange that most of
these useful word pairs are composed of stopwords. Rutherford and Xue (2014) point out that this counter-intuitive
phenomenon is caused by the sparsity nature of these word
pairs. They employ Brown clusters as an alternative abstract
word representation, and as a result, they get more intuitive
cluster pairs and achieve a better performance.
Another problem in discourse parsing is the coexistence
of different discourse annotation frameworks, under which
different kinds of corpora and tasks are created. The wellknown discourse corpora include the Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) (Prasad et al. 2007) and the Rhetorical Structure Theory - Discourse Treebank (RST-DT) (Mann and
Thompson 1988). Due to the annotation complexity, the size
of each corpus is not large enough. Further, these corpora
under different annotation frameworks are usually used separately in discourse relation classiﬁcation, which is also the
main reason of sparsity in discourse relation classiﬁcation.
However, these different annotation frameworks have strong
internal connections. For example, both the Elaboration and
Joint relations in RST-DT have a similar sense as the Expansion relation in PDTB. Based on this, we consider to design
multiple discourse analysis tasks according to these frameworks and synthesize these tasks with the goal of classifying
the implicit discourse relations, ﬁnding more precise representations for the sentence pairs. The most inspired work to
us is done by (Lan, Xu, and Niu 2013) where they regard
implicit and explicit relation classiﬁcation in PDTB framework as two tasks and design a multi-task learning method
to obtain higher performance.
In this paper, we propose a more general multi-task learning system for implicit discourse relation classiﬁcation by
synthesizing the discourse analysis tasks within different
corpora. To represent the sentence pairs, we construct the
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to derive their vector
representations in a low dimensional latent space, replacing
the sparse lexical features. To combine different discourse
analysis tasks, we further embed the CNNs into a multi-task
neural network and learn both the unique and shared repre-

Abstract
Without discourse connectives, classifying implicit discourse relations is a challenging task and a bottleneck
for building a practical discourse parser. Previous research usually makes use of one kind of discourse
framework such as PDTB or RST to improve the classiﬁcation performance on discourse relations. Actually,
under different discourse annotation frameworks, there
exist multiple corpora which have internal connections.
To exploit the combination of different discourse corpora, we design related discourse classiﬁcation tasks
speciﬁc to a corpus, and propose a novel Convolutional
Neural Network embedded multi-task learning system
to synthesize these tasks by learning both unique and
shared representations for each task. The experimental
results on the PDTB implicit discourse relation classiﬁcation task demonstrate that our model achieves significant gains over baseline systems.

Introduction
Discourse relations (e.g., contrast and causality) support a
set of sentences to form a coherent text. Automatically identifying these discourse relations can help many downstream
NLP tasks such as question answering and automatic summarization.
Under certain circumstances, these relations are in the
form of explicit markers like “but” or “because”, which is
relatively easy to identify. Prior work (Pitler, Louis, and
Nenkova 2009) shows that where explicit markers exist, relation types can be disambiguated with F1 scores higher than
90%. However, without an explicit marker to rely on, classifying the implicit discourse relations is much more difﬁcult.
The fact that these implicit relations outnumber the explicit
ones in naturally occurring text makes the classiﬁcation of
their types a key challenge in discourse analysis.
The major line of research work approaches the implicit
relation classiﬁcation problem by extracting informed features from the corpus and designing machine learning algorithms (Pitler, Louis, and Nenkova 2009; Lin, Kan, and
Ng 2009; Louis et al. 2010). An obvious challenge for classifying discourse relations is which features are appropriate for representing the sentence pairs. Intuitively, the word
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2750

