Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

MIDCA: A Metacognitive, Integrated Dual-Cycle
Architecture for Self-Regulated Autonomy
Michael T. Cox, Zohreh Alavi, Dustin Dannenhauer,*
Vahid Eyorokon, Hector Munoz-Avila,* and Don Perlis§
Wright State University
Dayton, OH 45435
michael.cox@wright.edu

*Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
hem4@lehigh.edu

§

University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
perlis@cs.umd.edu

For each of the object and meta-level cycles, we use a
note-assess-guide procedure (Anderson, Oates, Chong and
Perlis 2006; Paisner, Maynord, Cox and Perlis 2013). The
note phase detects discrepancies, the assess phase hypothesizes causes for discrepancies, and the guide phase performs
a suitable response. This research will enable more robust
behavior in autonomous intelligent systems because the capabilities lead both to recovery in the face of surprise and to
more effective learning (i.e., by triggering opportunities to
fill gaps in the agent’s own knowledge).
Autonomy has been studied from many perspectives, and
the literature is replete with differing approaches to this
topic. The results of autonomy are often some mechanism
by which we automate system behavior and decision-making computationally. We claim that for a system to exhibit
self-regulated autonomy, however, it must have a model of
itself in addition to the usual model of the world. Like selfregulated learning (e.g., Bjork, Dunlosky and Kornell 2013),
whereby a learner manages the pace, resources, and goals of
learning, self-regulated autonomy involves a system that
similarly manages the parameters of problem-solving and
behavior by understanding itself and its actions in context of
its overall environment and the goals it is trying to achieve.
Here we introduce the MIDCA architecture within which
we examine issues of autonomy and reasoning about goals.
We provide a new formalism that places this work within
the formal context of AI planning research and goal reasoning. We then report empirical results from the MIDCA cognitive cycle and early results from the metacognitive cycle.
After a summary of related research, we conclude with brief
comments and a pointer to future research directions.

Abstract
We present a metacognitive, integrated, dual-cycle
architecture whose function is to provide agents with a
greater capacity for acting robustly in a dynamic environment
and managing unexpected events. We present MIDCA 1.3,
an implementation of this architecture which explores a novel
approach to goal generation, planning and execution given
surprising situations. We formally define the mechanism and
report empirical results from this goal generation algorithm.
Finally, we describe the similarity between its choices at the
cognitive level with those at the metacognitive.

Introduction
Research on cognitive architectures have made significant
contributions over the years including the ability to reason
with multiple knowledge modes (Laird 2012), to introspectively examine the rationale for a decision (Forbus, Klenk
and Hinrichs 2009), and the ability to learn knowledge of
varied levels of abstraction (Langley and Choi 2006). Comparatively less research efforts examine the metacognitive
contributions to effective decision-making and behavior.
We have worked to develop a comprehensive theory of cognition and metacognition by proposing a metacognitive, integrated dual-cycle architecture (MIDCA) and applying an
implementation of this architecture to various problem-solving domains. The dual-cycle architecture integrates a problem-solving and comprehension loop at the cognitive level
with a control and monitoring loop at the metacognitive
level. We use a standard planner for both problem-solving
and control functions, while we concentrate most of our
work on the comprehension and monitoring processes.
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3712

