Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Rules for Choosing Societal Tradeoffs
Vincent Conitzer, Rupert Freeman, Markus Brill, and Yuqian Li
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{conitzer,rupert,brill,yuqian}@cs.duke.edu

voter expresses for each pair of activities her ideal tradeoff
value between those two. For example, a voter may feel that
a gallon of gasoline corresponds to two bags of trash.
From a social-choice-theoretic viewpoint, when aggregating numbers, one submitted per voter, choosing the median
is particularly compelling. When preferences are singlepeaked, this results in choosing the Condorcet winner, and
the corresponding voting rule is group-strategyproof. However, Conitzer, Brill, and Freeman (2015) pointed out that
simply taking the median for each pair of activities can result
in the aggregate tradeoffs being inconsistent, in the sense
that the chosen tradeoff between a and c is not equal to the
product of the tradeoff between a and b and the tradeoff between b and c. See the example in Figure 1, where a voter’s
tradeoffs are represented by a graph with its edges labeled
with tradeoff values (e.g., voter 1 believes a gallon of gasoline is as bad as 2 bags of trash). This paradox is reminiscent
of judgment aggregation paradoxes where taking majority
on all individual issues results in a logically inconsistent aggregate judgment (Kornhauser and Sager 1993).
So what are we to do? We insist that the aggregate tradeoffs be consistent; if not, then it is not clear how to use them
to guide decisions involving three or more activities. That
means we must judiciously deviate from the median in some
cases, but presumably we want to deviate as little as possible. The topic of this paper is how to make this precise.
We introduce a class of rules for this context that we call
distance-based rules. We prove that these rules choose the
median when there are only two activities and can be interpreted as maximum likelihood estimators of the “truth.” We
also axiomatize this class of rules. We then focus our attention on a particularly natural rule within this class, namely
the logarithmic distance-based rule, and show it satisﬁes further nice properties, which allow us to also axiomatize it
speciﬁcally. We give a linear program formulation for computing its outcomes, as well as a simple hill-climbing algorithm that can get stuck in local optima but is surprisingly
effective in experiments. Generally, our positive results hold
even when agents submit inconsistent votes and our negative
results hold even when they submit consistent votes.

Abstract
We study the societal tradeoffs problem, where a set of voters each submit their ideal tradeoff value between each pair
of activities (e.g., “using a gallon of gasoline is as bad as creating 2 bags of landﬁll trash”), and these are then aggregated
into the societal tradeoff vector using a rule. We introduce the
family of distance-based rules and show that these can be justiﬁed as maximum likelihood estimators of the truth. Within
this family, we single out the logarithmic distance-based rule
as especially appealing based on a social-choice-theoretic axiomatization. We give an efﬁcient algorithm for executing this
rule as well as an approximate hill climbing algorithm, and
evaluate these experimentally.

Introduction
There are many actions that we take in life that are generally
agreed to have some negative effects on society. For example, consider actions with environmental downsides, such as
using gasoline, creating landﬁll trash, and clearing forest, to
name a few. Which of these is worse? To answer this, clearly
one would ﬁrst need to know how much gasoline is used,
etc. This then suggests the following type of question: how
many bags of trash are as bad as using one gallon of gasoline? Knowing the answer to this question could be useful
to policy makers as well as to socially minded individuals
or companies who are looking to reduce their environmental
footprint in the most efﬁcient way. However, since the environmental effects of these actions are different, it seems unlikely that an objective answer to this question exists. Rather,
we as a society need to collectively decide what these tradeoffs should be, based on our own subjective opinions.
This suggests a social-choice-theoretic approach, where
agents submit their preferences or opinions about what these
tradeoff values should be as a vote. This social choice problem was suggested by Conitzer, Brill, and Freeman (2015)
in an AAMAS 2015 Blue Sky paper. It has close conceptual ties to judgment aggregation (List and Pettit 2002;
Endriss 2015), where the assessments of multiple judges are
aggregated into a logically consistent social judgment. One
difference is that here the assessments are quantitative rather
than logical in nature. Speciﬁcally, we assume that each

Preliminaries
Let A be a ﬁnite set of activities and N = {1, . . . , n} a
ﬁnite set of voters. Let E be a set of ordered pairs such that

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

460

