Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Predictive and Evidence Based Architecture Design∗
Mehul Bhatt, Jakob Suchan, Carl Schultz, Vasiliki Kondyli, Saurabh Goyal
The DesignSpace Group., www.design-space.org/Next University of Bremen, Germany

The Architectural DesignSpace

inﬂuenced by environmental (e.g., presence of other people,
time of day, lighting) and personal factors (e.g., age, physical attributes).
The prediction of individual or group level visuolocomotive narrative experience (at the scale of everyday human perception and thinking) during preliminary design, or
its observed analysis in a real-world setting by experimental
means has been a dominant line of thought in our research.

Architects concerned with designing built environments
(e.g., hospital or an airport) need to “anitcipate” and “ensure” that people-centered design objectives are fulﬁlled,
e.g., people should (not) get lost, the environment should
fulﬁl universal design criteria for diverse user groups and
situations, e.g., disabilities, geriatric care, emergencies. Toward this, designers and architects need access to assistive technologies —people-centred design systems— that
manifest a basic understanding of human behaviour in
spatial environments, in particular, aspects pertaining to
“visuo-spatial perception and cognition”, and creative and
expertise-driven “visuo-spatial thinking”. Our research on
people-centered spatial design categorically addresses the
question:
We summarise basic research questions addressed,
methodology adopted, and deliverables produced in our research on the development of computational cognitive systems and assistive technologies aimed at architectural practice & pedagogy. Key highlights of our work from the viewpoint of the areas of artiﬁcial intelligence, visuo-spatial cognition, and human-computer interaction research are presented.

Predictive Analysis for Not-Yet-Built Designs
Our research has addressed the representation of space from
a formal modelling and computational viewpoint, i.e., space,
as it is interpreted within the disciplines of artiﬁcial intelligence and knowledge representation (KR) in general, and
logic-based geometric and qualitative spatial representation
and reasoning, applied ontology & formal semantics, and
spatial computing for design in particular. Our key research
methodology and deliverables have been along three dimensions (C1 – C3):
C1. Conception. how can the future evolution of (architectural) design computing bring notions of design semantics, structure, function, and people-centred design to the
fore at an ontological, representational and computational
level?
C2. Computing. What is the role of specialized visuospatial abstractions, and commonsense spatial reasoning
within the broader realm of design computing, spatial design assistance, and tools for design learning and education?
C3. Communication. What is the nature and form of
the analytical feedback that designers and planners expect
during the early design conception and iterative reﬁnement
phase? What are the implications of this from the viewpoint
of human-computer collaboration and interaction design aspects of design systems?
The applied perspectives offered by our “AI for design computing” agenda have resulted in the declarative
spatial reasoning paradigm within a KR context. Particularly, methods for commonsense spatial reasoning
with constraint logic programming (Bhatt et al.(2011)Bhatt,
Lee, and Schultz) and answer set programming (Walega
et al.(2015)Walega, Bhatt, and Schultz) have been developed.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Design:
Visuo-Spatial Cognition is Central
The basic proposition of our research on developing computational cognitive systems and assistive technology for
people-centered architecture design is that:
Next-generation design systems, frameworks, assistive
tools, educational discourse, and design practices need to
be explicitly founded on the cognitive modalities of human
perception, attention, action, dynamics, environmental affordance and user experience, and design conception & semantics.
We construe human visual perception and navigation —
for both predictive as well as observed / empirical analysis purposes— in built-up environments as: dynamic visuolocomotive narrative experience —i.e., involving movement and exploration— driven by situation-dependent goals,
guided by visual aids such as signage and landmarks, and
∗

Integrating Spatial Reasoning, Cognitive Vision, and EyeTracking for the Analysis of Embodied Visuo-Locomotive Experience in the Built Environment
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Evidence Based Post-Occupancy Analysis
The evidence-based analysis of people’s navigation and
wayﬁnding behaviour in large-scale built-up environments

4349

