Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unsupervised Feature Selection by Heuristic Search
with Provable Bounds on Suboptimality
Hiromasa Arai

Crystal Maung

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Texas (Dallas)
800 W Campbell Road
Richardson, TX 75080
Hiromasa.Arai@utdallas.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Texas (Dallas)
800 W Campbell Road
Richardson, TX 75080
Crystal.Maung@gmail.com

Ke Xu

Haim Schweitzer

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Texas (Dallas)
800 W Campbell Road
Richardson, TX 75080
ke.xu5@utdallas.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Texas (Dallas)
800 W Campbell Road
Richardson, TX 75080
hschweitzer@utdallas.edu
2015)). In unsupervised feature selection the standard criterion is to select k features that can be used to approximate all n features. There are two common approaches
for computing the unsupervised selection. The ﬁrst is to
partition the feature space into k clusters and then selects
a representative from each cluster (e.g., (Dy et al. 2003;
Li et al. 2012)). This assumes a feature to be redundant
if another feature similar to it has already been selected.
The second common approach assumes that a feature is
redundant if it can be approximated by a linear combination of other features that have already been selected (e.g.,
(Jimenez-Rodriguez, Arzuaga-Cruz, and Velez-Reyes 2007;
Wei and Billings 2007; Drineas, Lewis, and Paschou 2010;
Dasgupta et al. 2007; Wang et al. 2015)). Thus, if the goal
is to select features for a nearest neighbor algorithm the
ﬁrst approach seems most appropriate. But if the selected
features are to be used in a Gaussian classiﬁer, the second
approach seems more appropriate (Duda, Hart, and Stork
2001). In this paper we consider only the second approach,
which is formally described as follows.
Let X be an m × n data matrix of m items (rows), each
described in terms of n features (columns). We wish to approximate X by a linear combination of k of its columns:
X ≈ Sk A. The matrix Sk = (xs1 , . . . , xsk ) is formed by
the selected columns, and A is the coefﬁcients matrix. In
Frobenius norm the approximation error is:

Abstract
Identifying a small number of features that can represent the data is a known problem that comes up in areas
such as machine learning, knowledge representation,
data mining, and numerical linear algebra. Computing
an optimal solution is believed to be NP-hard, and there
is extensive work on approximation algorithms. Classic approaches exploit the algebraic structure of the underlying matrix, while more recent approaches use randomization. An entirely different approach that uses the
A* heuristic search algorithm to ﬁnd an optimal solution was recently proposed. Not surprisingly it is limited
to effectively selecting only a small number of features.
We propose a similar approach related to the Weighted
A* algorithm. This gives algorithms that are not guaranteed to ﬁnd an optimal solution but run much faster than
the A* approach, enabling effective selection of many
features from large datasets. We demonstrate experimentally that these new algorithms are more accurate
than the current state-of-the-art while still being practical. Furthermore, they come with an adjustable guarantee on how different their error may be from the smallest
possible (optimal) error. Their accuracy can always be
increased at the expense of a longer running time.

1

Introduction

Feature selection is a standard dimensionality reduction
technique. Given data items described in terms of n features, the goal is to select k<n features such that the reduced k dimensional vectors are useful for the task at hand.
In supervised feature selection the features are selected for
predicting values associated with each data item. These can
be classiﬁcation labels (e.g., (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003)),
or multi-valued regression (e.g., (Maung and Schweitzer

Err(Sk ) = min X − Sk A2F
A

(1)

Finding Sk that minimizes (1) is also known as the “Column Subset Selection Problem” (CSSP) in numerical linear algebra. Previous studies of the CSSP with the Frobenius norm error include (Wei and Billings 2007; Golub and
Van-Loan 1996; Boutsidis, Mahoney, and Drineas 2009;
Çivril and Magdon-Ismail 2012; Çivril 2014). Obtaining approximations in other norms, such as the spectral norm or
the l1 norm is considered to be harder (e.g., (Tropp 2004)).

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

666

