Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Metric Embedded Discriminative Vocabulary Learning
for High-Level Person Representation
Yang Yang, Zhen Lei, Shifeng Zhang, Hailin Shi, Stan Z. Li
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yang.yang, zlei, shifeng.zhang, hailin.shi, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Kiss metric (KISSME) (Kostinger et al. 2012), symmetrydriven accumulation of local features (SDALF) (M. Farenzena et al. 2010), Comb (Kviatkovsky, Adam, and
Rivlin 2013a), salient color names based color descriptor (SCNCD) (Yang et al. 2014b), mid-level ﬁlters
(MLF) (Rui Zhao and Wang 2014) and fusion of color models (FCMs) (Yang et al. 2014a), the extracted features are of
less discriminative power. It may inﬂuence the ﬁnal matching rate despite of the application of metric learning methods
in the stage of matching persons.
Recently, various coding methods, which are based on a
vocabulary learned by k-means, are used to encode local
features (e.g. SIFT descriptors) and then a pooling method
(e.g., max pooling or average pooling) is utilized to obtain
a holistic image feature with statistical meanings. Simple
though they are, surprising good results have been reported
in classiﬁcation tasks. Inspired by them, we can employ a
coding method to encode the image-level features to learn
high-level features. To make the coding coefﬁcient be more
discriminative, we can learn a ’good’ (e.g., with discriminative power) vocabulary based on the labeled training images
instead of simply using k-means.
In this paper, we propose a novel method named metric
embedded discriminative vocabulary learning (MED VL) to
learn a vocabulary with discriminative power. Because only
pairwise relationships (’same’ or ’different’) of training images are obtained for person re-identiﬁcation, we incorporate the equivalence constraints into the objective function
of MED VL to construct a discriminative vocabulary. It can
be considered as a supervised learning approach which aims
to make the same persons closer while different ones farther
in the metric space. Owing to the merits of metric learning method which learns the transitions among cameras, we
can measure the similarity of two persons in different cameras in a better manner. With the learned vocabulary, a linear coding method is employed to encode each image-level
feature and the ﬁnal high-level person representation is then
obtained. Based on the same metric learning approach in the
stage of matching persons, the ﬁnal high-level feature which
owns semantic information performs better than the original
image-level feature.
The main contributions of the paper are two-fold: (1) We
employ a linear coding method for feature coding. To our
best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to exploit coding meth-

Abstract
A variety of encoding methods for bag of word (BoW) model
have been proposed to encode the local features in image classiﬁcation. However, most of them are unsupervised and just
employ k-means to form the visual vocabulary, thus reducing
the discriminative power of the features. In this paper, we propose a metric embedded discriminative vocabulary learning
for high-level person representation with application to person re-identiﬁcation. A new and effective term is introduced
which aims at making the same persons closer while different ones farther in the metric space. With the learned vocabulary, we utilize a linear coding method to encode the imagelevel features (or holistic image features) for extracting highlevel person representation. Different from traditional unsupervised approaches, our method can explore the relationship
(same or not) among the persons. Since there is an analytic
solution to the linear coding, it is easy to obtain the ﬁnal
high-level features. The experimental results on person reidentiﬁcation demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
algorithm.

1

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) has recently attracted a
lot of attentions due to its many critical applications such
as long-term multicamera tracking (Bi Song and RoyChowdhury 2010), forensic search (Roberto Vezzani and
Cucchiara 2013) and crowd movements analysis in public
places (Martin Hirzer and Bischof 2012). The task of person Re-ID is to match persons from several disjoint cameras. To address it, a commonly used framework is (1) appearance based person representation and (2) metric learning for matching them. Owing to large viewpoint changes,
illumination, different poses, background clutter and occlusions, there are often large intra-class appearance variations,
which makes the descriptive representations of the same person unstable. To that end, metric learning methods are used
to reduce the intra-class variations in feature space. Such a
learned metric is able to describe the transitions among different cameras, and thus suitable for real world scenarios.
Since most existing methods of feature extraction are
based on descriptive methods such as features extracted in
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3648

