Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Modeling Human Understanding of Complex Intentional Action
with a Bayesian Nonparametric Subgoal Model
Ryo Nakahashi

Chris L. Baker and Joshua B. Tenenbaum

Computer Science and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
Sony Corporation, JAPAN
Ryo.Nakahashi@jp.sony.com

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
{clbaker,jbt}@mit.edu

segmenting novel sequences along statistical action boundaries (Baldwin et al. 2008). These abilities can be captured
with a nonparametric action segmentation model (Buchsbaum et al. 2015), which learns lists of actions that occur
in sequence, and potentially cause observable effects.
However, purely statistical learning from data leaves implicit the intrinsic efﬁciency of intentional actions. For adults
and infants, the assumption that others’ actions are rational
functions of their beliefs, desires, and goals is fundamental (Dennett 1987; Gergely et al. 1995). Rather than simply
memorizing repeated action sequences, people infer goals of
complexity sufﬁcient to rationalize these actions (Schachner
and Carey 2013). A simple formalization of people’s theory of rational, goal-directed action can be given in terms
of approximately rational planning in Markov decision processes (MDPs), and human goal inferences can be accurately
predicted using Bayesian inference over models of MDP
planning (or inverse planning) (Baker, Saxe, and Tenenbaum
2009). This approach is closely related to recent plan recognition algorithms developed in the AI literature (Ramı́rez
and Geffner 2010, e.g.).
In this paper, we integrate hierarchically structured actions into the inverse planning framework using hierarchical
MDPs (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999). We consider scenarios in which agents pursue sequences of subgoals enroute
to various destinations. Each destination can have multiple
subgoal sequences, generated by a nonparametric Bayesian
model. Together, a destination and subgoal sequence induce
a hierarchical MDP, and agents’ actions are assumed to be
generated by approximately rational planning in this MDP.
Representing agents’ subgoal-based plans allows segmentation of behavior into extended chunks, separated by sparse
subgoal boundaries, and can achieve greater generalization
than purely statistical models by naturally capturing the
context-sensitivity of rational action sequences, rather than
having to learn new sequences for each context. Further, the
model predicts deviations from rationality (with respect to
a single subgoal) at subgoal boundaries – a strong cue to
hierarchical structure. This inductive bias should enable efﬁcient learning of subgoal structure from small numbers of
examples.
We present two experiments to test our model. The ﬁrst
is a behavioral experiment, in which human participants inferred the subgoal structure underlying series of action se-

Abstract
Most human behaviors consist of multiple parts, steps, or subtasks. These structures guide our action planning and execution, but when we observe others, the latent structure of their
actions is typically unobservable, and must be inferred in order to learn new skills by demonstration, or to assist others
in completing their tasks. For example, an assistant who has
learned the subgoal structure of a colleague’s task can more
rapidly recognize and support their actions as they unfold.
Here we model how humans infer subgoals from observations
of complex action sequences using a nonparametric Bayesian
model, which assumes that observed actions are generated by
approximately rational planning over unknown subgoal sequences. We test this model with a behavioral experiment in
which humans observed different series of goal-directed actions, and inferred both the number and composition of the
subgoal sequences associated with each goal. The Bayesian
model predicts human subgoal inferences with high accuracy,
and signiﬁcantly better than several alternative models and
straightforward heuristics. Motivated by this result, we simulate how learning and inference of subgoals can improve performance in an artiﬁcial user assistance task. The Bayesian
model learns the correct subgoals from fewer observations,
and better assists users by more rapidly and accurately inferring the goal of their actions than alternative approaches.

Introduction
Human behavior is hierarchically structured. Even simple
actions – checking email, for example – consist of many
steps, which span levels of description and complexity: moving ﬁngers, arms, eyes; choosing whether to use the mouse
or keyboard; searching for the email app among the others
that are open, etc. Human behavior is also efﬁcient: we attempt to perform each part of each action as swiftly and successfully as we can, at the least possible cost.
Classical models of how humans understand the actions
of others (originating from the plan recognition literature
(Schank and Abelson 1977; Kautz and Allen 1986; Charniak
and Goldman 1993; Bui, Venkatesh, and West 2002) seek
to leverage this hierarchical structure by building in prior
knowledge of others’ high-level actions, tasks, and goals.
Behavioral evidence has shown that adults and even infants
can learn simple hierarchical action structures from data,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3754

