Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Agreement on Target-Bidirectional LSTMs
for Sequence-to-Sequence Learning
Lemao Liu, Andrew Finch, Masao Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT)
3-5 Hikari-dai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan
{lmliu,ﬁrst.last}@nict.go.jp

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks, particularly the long short-term
memory networks, are extremely appealing for sequence-tosequence learning tasks. Despite their great success, they typically suffer from a fundamental shortcoming: they are prone
to generate unbalanced targets with good preﬁxes but bad
sufﬁxes, and thus performance suffers when dealing with
long sequences. We propose a simple yet effective approach
to overcome this shortcoming. Our approach relies on the
agreement between a pair of target-directional LSTMs, which
generates more balanced targets. In addition, we develop
two efﬁcient approximate search methods for agreement that
are empirically shown to be almost optimal in terms of
sequence-level losses. Extensive experiments were performed
on two standard sequence-to-sequence transduction tasks:
machine transliteration and grapheme-to-phoneme transformation. The results show that the proposed approach achieves
consistent and substantial improvements, compared to six
state-of-the-art systems. In particular, our approach outperforms the best reported error rates by a margin (up to 9% relative gains) on the grapheme-to-phoneme task. Our toolkit is
publicly available on https://github.com/lemaoliu/Agtarbidir.

Figure 1: Illustraction of the fundamental shortcoming of an
LSTM in decoding.

gio 2015; Meng et al. 2015) or superior (Jean et al. 2015;
Luong et al. 2015).
Despite their sucesses on sequence-to-sequnce learning,
RNNs suffer from a fundamental and crucial shortcoming,
which has surprisingly been overlooked. When making predictions (in decoding), an LSTM needs to encode the previous local predictions as a part of the contextual information. If some of previous predictions are incorrect, the context for subsequent predictions might include some noises,
which undermine the quality of subsequent predicitons, as
shown in Figure 1.
In the ﬁgure, larger fonts indicate greater conﬁdence in
the predicted target character. The prediction at t = 7 uses a
context consisting of the input and all previous predictions.
Since at t = 5 the prediction is incorrect, i.e. it should be
‘R’ (the green character in the reference) instead of ‘L’, it
leads to an incorrect prediction at t = 7. In this way, an
LSTM is more likely to generate an unbalanced sequence
deteriorating in quality as the target sequence is generated.
A statistical analysis on the real prediction results from an
LSTM was performed in order to motivate the work reported
here. The analysis supports our hypothesis, and found that
on test examples longer than 10 characters, the precision of
predictions for the ﬁrst two characters was higher than 77%,

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Mikolov et al. 2010),
particularly Long Short-term Memory networks (LSTMs)1
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Graves 2013), provide
a universal and powerful solution for various tasks that have
traditionally required carefully designed, task-speciﬁc solutions. On classiﬁcation tasks (Graves and Schmidhuber
2008; Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015), they can readily
summarize an unbounded context which is difﬁcult for tranditional solutions, and this leads to more reliable prediciton.
They have advantages over traditional solutions on a more
general and challenging tasks such as sequence-to-sequence
learning (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), where a series of local but dependent predictions are required. RNNs
make use of the contextual information for the entire source
sequence and also critically are able to exploit the entire
sequence of previous predictions. On various sequence-tosequence transduction tasks, RNNs have been shown to be
comparable to the state-of-the-art (Bahdanau, Cho, and Benc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Throughout this paper, an LSTM network denote a particular
RNN with LSTM hidden units.

2630

