Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

MUST-CNN: A Multilayer Shift-and-Stitch Deep Convolutional
Architecture for Sequence-Based Protein Structure Prediction
Zeming Lin

Jack Lanchantin

Yanjun Qi

Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
zl4ry@virginia.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
jjl5sw@virginia.edu

Assistant Professor
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
yq2h@virginia.edu

To overcome the windowing issue, we propose to use a
convolutional neural network (CNN) which can label the
properties of each amino acid in the entire target sequence
all at once. CNNs have been used successfully in computer
vision (Pinheiro and Collobert 2013; Szegedy et al. 2014)
and natural language processing (Kim 2014; Collobert and
Weston 2008). In addition to parameter sharing and pooling,
which reduce computation, CNNs are also highly parallelizable. Thus, CNNs can achieve a much greater speedup compared to a windowed MLP approach. The issue when trying
to label each position in an input sequence with a CNN is
that pooling leads to a decreased output resolution. To handle this issue, we propose a new multilayer shift-and-stitch
method which allows us to efﬁciently label each target input
at full resolution in a computationally efﬁcient manner.
We show that a MUltilayer Shift-and-sTitch CNN
(MUST-CNN) trained end-to-end and per-position on protein property prediction beats the state-of-the-art without
other machinery. To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to train
convolutional networks end-to-end for per-position protein
property prediction. Both learning and inference are performed on entire arbitrarily sized sequences. Feedforward
computation and backpropagation is made possible by our
novel application of the shift-and-stitch technique on the entire sequence.
In summary we make the following contributions:
1. Beat the state-of-the-art performance on two large
datasets of protein property prediction tasks.
2. Propose a multilayer shift-and-stitch technique for deep
CNNs, which signiﬁcantly speeds up training and test
time and increases the size of the model we can train.
3. Propose a generic end-to-end system for per-position labeling on the sequence level. That is, for a sequence
{ak }nk=1 , we can generate labels {yk }nk=1 for each ak .

Abstract
Predicting protein properties such as solvent accessibility and secondary structure from its primary amino acid
sequence is an important task in bioinformatics. Recently, a few deep learning models have surpassed the
traditional window based multilayer perceptron. Taking inspiration from the image classiﬁcation domain we
propose a deep convolutional neural network architecture, MUST-CNN, to predict protein properties. This
architecture uses a novel multilayer shift-and-stitch
(MUST) technique to generate fully dense per-position
predictions on protein sequences. Our model is signiﬁcantly simpler than the state-of-the-art, yet achieves better results. By combining MUST and the efﬁcient convolution operation, we can consider far more parameters
while retaining very fast prediction speeds. We beat the
state-of-the-art performance on two large protein property prediction datasets.

Introduction
Proteins are vital to the function of living beings. It is easy
to determine the sequence of a protein, yet it is difﬁcult to
determine other properties, such as secondary structure and
solvent accessibility. These properties are hypothesized to
be almost uniquely determined by primary structure, but it
is still computationally difﬁcult to determine them on a large
scale.
Previous state-of-the-art methods for protein secondary
structure prediction use multilayer perceptron (MLP) networks (Qi et al. 2012; Drozdetskiy et al. 2015). In order to
predict a per-position label for each amino acid in the input
protein sequence, MLP networks must use a “windowing”
approach where a single label is predicted by feeding the
target amino acid and its surrounding amino acids through
the network. This is then repeated for each amino acid in the
sequence. These architectures generally has two major drawbacks due to the windowing approach: (1) they take a long
time to train, on the order of days or weeks and (2) they have
smaller window sizes, and thus cannot make longer range
connections. For instance, the PSIPRED algorithm handles
a window size of only 15 amino acids (Jones 1999).

Related Works
Two of the most used algorithms in bioinformatics literature for protein property prediction are PSIPRED (Jones
1999) and Jpred (Drozdetskiy et al. 2015). PSIPRED 3.2,
which uses a two layer MLP approach, claims a 3-class
per-position accuracy (Q3 ) score of 81.6%. The Jpred algorithm uses a very similar structure of a two layer MLP
network. However, Jpred considers more features and uses

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

27

