Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Strategy-Based Warm Starting for Regret Minimization in Games
Noam Brown

Tuomas Sandholm

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
noamb@cs.cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Texas Hold’em, which at 1015 nodes (after lossless abstraction (Gilpin and Sandholm 2007)) is the largest imperfectinformation game ever to be essentially solved (Bowling et
al. 2015).
One of the main constraints in solving such large games
is the time taken to arrive at a solution. For example, essentially solving Limit Texas Hold’em required running CFR
on 4,800 cores for 68 days (Tammelin et al. 2015). Even
though Limit Texas Hold’em is a popular human game with
many domain experts, and even though several near-Nash
equilibrium strategies had previously been computed for the
game (Johanson et al. 2011; 2012), there was no known way
to leverage that prior strategic knowledge to speed up CFR.
We introduce such a method, enabling user-provided strategies to warm start convergence toward a Nash equilibrium.
The effectiveness of warm starting in large games is magniﬁed by pruning, in which some parts of the game tree need
not be traversed during an iteration of CFR. This results in
faster iterations and therefore faster convergence to a Nash
equilibrium. The frequency of pruning opportunities generally increases as equilibrium ﬁnding progresses (Lanctot
et al. 2009). This may result in later iterations being completed multiple orders of magnitude faster than early iterations. This is especially true with the recently-introduced
regret-based pruning method, which drastically increases
the opportunities for pruning in a game (Brown and Sandholm 2015a). Our warm starting algorithm can “skip” these
early expensive iterations that might otherwise account for
the bulk of the time spent on equilibrium ﬁnding. This can
be accomplished by ﬁrst solving a coarse abstraction of the
game, which is relatively cheap, and using the equilibrium
strategies computed in the abstraction to warm start CFR in
the full game. Experiments presented later in this paper show
the effectiveness of this method.
Our warm start technique also opens up the possibility
of constructing and reﬁning abstractions during equilibrium
ﬁnding. Current abstraction techniques for large imperfectinformation games are domain speciﬁc and rely on human
expert knowledge because the abstraction must be set before
any strategic information is learned about the game (Brown,
Ganzfried, and Sandholm 2015; Ganzfried and Sandholm
2014; Johanson et al. 2013; Billings et al. 2003). There are
some exceptions to this, such as work that reﬁnes parts of
the game tree based on the computed strategy of a coarse

Abstract
Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) is a popular iterative algorithm for approximating Nash equilibria
in imperfect-information multi-step two-player zero-sum
games. We introduce the ﬁrst general, principled method for
warm starting CFR. Our approach requires only a strategy for
each player, and accomplishes the warm start at the cost of a
single traversal of the game tree. The method provably warm
starts CFR to as many iterations as it would have taken to
reach a strategy proﬁle of the same quality as the input strategies, and does not alter the convergence bounds of the algorithms. Unlike prior approaches to warm starting, ours can be
applied in all cases.
Our method is agnostic to the origins of the input strategies.
For example, they can be based on human domain knowledge, the observed strategy of a strong agent, the solution of a
coarser abstraction, or the output of some algorithm that converges rapidly at ﬁrst but slowly as it gets closer to an equilibrium. Experiments demonstrate that one can improve overall
convergence in a game by ﬁrst running CFR on a smaller,
coarser abstraction of the game and then using the strategy in
the abstract game to warm start CFR in the full game.

Introduction
Imperfect-information games model strategic interactions
between players that have access to private information. Domains such as negotiations, cybersecurity and physical security interactions, and recreational games such as poker can
all be modeled as imperfect-information games. Typically in
such games, one wishes to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium, where
no player can do better by switching to a different strategy. In this paper we focus speciﬁcally on two-player zerosum games. Over the last 10 years, tremendous progress has
been made in solving increasingly larger two-player zerosum imperfect-information games; for reviews, see (Sandholm 2010; 2015). Linear programs have been able to solve
games up to 107 or 108 nodes in the game tree (Gilpin and
Sandholm 2005). Larger games are solved using iterative
algorithms that converge over time to a Nash equilibrium.
The most popular iterative algorithm for this is Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al. 2007). A
variant of CFR was recently used to essentially solve Limit
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

432

