Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Optimizing Multivariate Performance
Measures from Multi-View Data
1

Jim Jing-Yan Wang1 , Ivor Wai-Hung Tsang2 , Xin Gao1 ∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC),
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division (CEMSE), Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
2
Center for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
jimjywang@gmail.com, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au, xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa
set, such as an F-score.
To solve this problem, recently, the problem of multivariate performance measure optimization was proposed to
learn a classiﬁer by directly optimizing a desired multivariate performance measure, instead of a common loss, over a
training set (Joachims 2005). Since then, a number of stateof-the-art methods were proposed. For example, Joachims
(2005) proposed a support vector machine (SVM)-based
method, SVMperf , to solve this problem, by training a multivariate SVM in polynomial time for multivariate performance measures by using a cutting-plane method (Kelley
1960). Zhang, Saha, and Vishwanathan (2012) proposed to
improve the convergence rate of the cutting-plane method,
and developed a novel smoothing strategy for the problem
of multivariate performance measure optimization, by using the Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method. Li, Tsang,
and Zhou (2013) proposed a two-step approach to optimize multivariate performance measures, by ﬁrst training
a classiﬁer with existing learning methods, and then adapting it to optimize a speciﬁc performance measure. Mao and
Tsang (2013) proposed a novel feature selection method to
optimize multivariate performance measures, by formulating the problem for high-dimensional data and employing
a two-layer cutting-plane algorithm to solve it. Yang et al.
(2015) proposed a novel multivariate performance optimization method based on sparse coding and hyper-predictor
learning, by presenting the tuple of data points to a tuple
of sparse codes and applying a linear function to compare
a sparse code against a given candidate class label. Parambath, Usunier, and Grandvalet (2014) proposed to reduce
the optimization of F-measure to a series of cost-sensitive
classiﬁcation problems. Koyejo et al. (2014) proposed to
learn optimal classiﬁers for a family of performance measures, as the sign of the thresholded conditional probability
of the positive class, using performance measure-dependent
thresholds. Narasimhan, Kar, and Jain (2015) proposed an
adaptive linearization approach for two families of performance measures which can be expressed as functions of true
positive/negative rates. Recently, Wang and Gao (2015) proposed to optimize multivariate performance measures from
partially labeled data tuple, by learning a classiﬁer and completing the label tuple simultaneously.
Up to now, all these multivariate performance measure
optimization methods are limited to learning from data with

Abstract
To date, many machine learning applications have multiple
views of features, and different applications require speciﬁc
multivariate performance measures, such as the F-score for
retrieval. However, existing multivariate performance measure optimization methods are limited to single-view data,
while traditional multi-view learning methods cannot optimize multivariate performance measures directly. To ﬁll this
gap, in this paper, we propose the problem of optimizing multivariate performance measures from multi-view data, and an
effective method to solve it. We propose to learn linear discriminant functions for different views, and combine them to
construct an overall multivariate mapping function for multiview data. To learn the parameters of the linear discriminant
functions of different views to optimize a given multivariate
performance measure, we formulate an optimization problem. In this problem, we propose to minimize the complexity
of the linear discriminant function of each view, promote the
consistency of the responses of different views over the same
data points, and minimize the upper boundary of the corresponding loss of a given multivariate performance measure.
To optimize this problem, we develop an iterative cuttingplane algorithm. Experiments on four benchmark data sets
show that it not only outperforms traditional single-view
based multivariate performance optimization methods, but
also achieves better results than ordinary multi-view learning
methods.

Introduction
In different machine learning applications, different multivariate performance measures are used for the purpose of
performance evaluation. For example, in problems of text
classiﬁcation, F1-score and precision/recall breakeven point
(PRBEP) are used to compare true class labels against predicted class labels of a given test text set. In image retrieval
problems, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) is used to evaluate the performance of a
retrieval system. However, a classiﬁer trained by optimizing
a common loss function over a training set, such as a hinge
loss or a logistic loss, cannot guarantee that an optimal multivariate performance measure can be obtained over a test
∗
All correspondence should be addressed to Xin Gao. E-mail:
xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa. Tel: +966-12-808-0323.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2152

