Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Instilling Social to Physical: Co-Regularized Heterogeneous Transfer Learning
Ying Wei§ , Yin Zhu§ , Cane Wing-ki Leung† , Yangqiu Song‡ , and Qiang Yang§
§

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
†
Wisers Research, Hong Kong
‡
West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA
§
{yweiad,qyang}@cse.ust.hk, § zhuyin.nju@gmail.com, † cane.leung@gmail.com, ‡ yangqiu.song@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Ubiquitous computing tasks, such as human activity
recognition (HAR), are enabling a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from healthcare to environment monitoring. The success of a ubiquitous computing task relies
on sufﬁcient physical sensor data with groundtruth labels,
which are always scarce due to the expensive annotating process. Meanwhile, social media platforms provide
a lot of social or semantic context information. People
share what they are doing and where they are frequently
in the messages they post. This rich set of socially shared
activities motivates us to transfer knowledge from social
media to address the sparsity issue of labelled physical
sensor data. In order to transfer the knowledge of social
and semantic context, we propose a Co-Regularized Heterogeneous Transfer Learning (CoHTL) model, which
builds a common semantic space derived from two heterogeneous domains. Our proposed method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on two ubiquitous computing
tasks, namely human activity recognition and region
function discovery.

Figure 1: A motivating example on instilling knowledge from
social media into sensors in the physical world.
label activities they performed post-hoc. This is also difﬁcult,
if not impossible, since sensor readings are hardly human
readable and understandable. Meanwhile, people nowadays
proactively share happenings about and around them, as well
as their whereabouts on social media platforms such as Twitter. Such platforms thus provide a huge and rich semantic
repository of activities that people are performing at different
time and locations.
Given that labelled sensor data are difﬁcult to obtain,
and that social media messages capture rich information
about physical activities and locations, an interesting question arises: can we transfer knowledge from social media
side to the physical world to solve ubiquitous computing
tasks? We show in this paper that the answer is yes. On one
hand, ubiquitous computing tasks have extensively exploited
different physical sensors, including wearable sensors (Lara
and Labrador 2013), GPS traces (Lin and Hsu 2014), WiFi (Wang et al. 2014), barometer, temperature, and humidity
sensors (Choudhury et al. 2008), etc. On the other hand,
some recent studies on extracting human activities (Song
et al. 2013) and events (Ritter et al. 2015) from social media have been reported. Yet, to the best of our knowledge,
no previous work has considered integrating social media
knowledge into physical sensor data. A seemingly related
strand of research that combines the social and physical is
Location Based Social Networks (LBSN). The studies in the
ﬁeld of LBSN either tackle link prediction or user proﬁling

Introduction
Recent years there have been extensive research efforts on
ubiquitous computing, as various physical sensors such as
GPS, accelerometers and Wi-Fi become widely and inexpensively available on smart devices. Ubiquitous computing
tasks, such as Human Activity Recognition (HAR), are enabling a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from healthcare (Stone and Skubic 2015) to environment monitoring
(Lane et al. 2010).
The success of a ubiquitous computing task relies on sufﬁcient annotated or groundtruth data as in many other machine
learning tasks. In general, obtaining the labelled data is expensive and tedious, while annotating raw sensor readings
is particular challenging. Take HAR as an example. One
possibility is to ask annotators to provide activity labels in
real time as soon as sensor readings are being generated,
which may be inconsiderate, and even impractical in many
situations (imagine an annotator has to perform labelling
while “jogging” or “driving”). Another possibility is to have
annotators scan through raw sensor readings and manually
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1338

