Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Statistical Scripts with LSTM Recurrent Neural Networks
Karl Pichotta and Raymond J. Mooney
{pichotta,mooney}@cs.utexas.edu
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA

of script learning for event inference do not easily admit.
We evaluate our proposed LSTM script system against a
number of baselines on the task of predicting held-out verbs
with coreference information about their arguments, showing a 22.6% relative improvement compared to the strongest
baseline. Second, we evaluate on the more difﬁcult task of
predicting held-out verbs with argument nouns, demonstrating a 64.9% relative improvement over the most competitive
baseline. We ﬁnd that coreference information is empirically
useful for predicting noun arguments, and, conversely, noun
information helps to predict argument coreference information. Third, we demonstrate that human annotators judge the
top inferences made by LSTM script models to be qualitatively superior to those from baseline systems. Finally, we
provide a qualitative analysis of the LSTM script model.

Abstract
Scripts encode knowledge of prototypical sequences of
events. We describe a Recurrent Neural Network model
for statistical script learning using Long Short-Term
Memory, an architecture which has been demonstrated
to work well on a range of Artiﬁcial Intelligence tasks.
We evaluate our system on two tasks, inferring held-out
events from text and inferring novel events from text,
substantially outperforming prior approaches on both
tasks.

Introduction
Text understanding requires commonsense inferences based
on world knowledge. Scripts, which model stereotypical sequences of events, encode one type of useful world knowledge. A script system can infer events from text: e.g., given
“After being laid off, Smith is looking for work,” we would
like to be able to predict that “Smith will have a job interview,” and perhaps “Smith will ﬁnd a job.” Inferences of this
type are required for robust question-answering systems.
The use of manually-written scripts dates back to the
seminal work of Schank and Abelson (1977). Mooney and
DeJong (1985) provide an early non-statistical method of
inducing scripts automatically from text. More recently, a
growing body of work has followed Chambers and Jurafsky
(2008) in describing methods of automatically learning statistical models of event sequences from large text corpora.
We describe a novel statistical script model which
uses a recurrent neural network with a Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) architecture. Recently, LSTMs have
yielded substantial performance gains in Machine Translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) Speech Recognition
(Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013) Language Modeling
(Sundermeyer, Schlüter, and Ney 2012) and captioning images and videos (Donahue et al. 2015; Venugopalan et al.
2015), among other tasks.
We are the ﬁrst to apply LSTMs to the task of script
learning, demonstrating superior performance over a number of competitive baselines, including the best published
method. Our method can directly incorporate noun information about event arguments, which most previous methods

Background
We brieﬂy review the ﬁeld of statistical script learning and
give a short description of Long Short-Term Memory.

Statistical Script Learning
Chambers and Jurafsky (2008; 2009) and Jans et al. (2012)
propose script models of (verb, dependency) pairs1 which
co-occur with the same entity, capable of encoding, for example, that the grammatical subject of kill will frequently
also occur as the direct object of arrest. These models are
evaluated quantitatively on the Narrative Cloze task (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008), in which an event is held out from
a document and a system is judged by its ability to infer this
held-out pair from the remainder of the document.
These pair-models are incapable of expressing interactions between entities. For example, the event “X orders
Y ” may strongly predict the event “X eats Y ,” but pairbased models have no straightforward way of representing
these multi-argument events or making such inferences. Motivated by these shortcomings, Pichotta and Mooney (2014)
propose a model which represents events as relational atoms,
like eat(X, Y ). They ﬁnd that modeling co-occurring multiargument events and predicting simpler pair events provides
superior performance to modeling co-occurring pair events

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
“Dependencies” here are grammatical structures output by a
syntactic parser, one of subject, direct object, or preposition.

2800

