Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

General Video Game AI:
Competition, Challenges, and Opportunities
Diego Perez-Liebana

Spyridon Samothrakis

Julian Togelius

University of Essex
Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK
email: dperez@essex.ac.uk

University of Essex
Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK
email: ssamot@essex.ac.uk

New York University, 2 Metrotech Center
Brooklyn, 11201 New York
email: julian@togelius.com

Simon M. Lucas

Tom Schaul

University of Essex
Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK
email: sml@essex.ac.uk

New York University
715 Broadway, 10003, New York
email: schaul@gmail.com
cannot play Pac-Man at all, raising the question how much
it advances the state of the art in AI.
Some attempts have been made to tackle this issue, such
as the General Game Playing (GGP) competition organized
by the Logic group of the Stanford University (Genesereth
and Love 2005). This contest promotes the creation of players that could play any board game, deﬁned in a Game
Description Language (GDL). During the competition, the
agents initially receive the description of the game and subsequently at least 1s of decision time for each move.
General Video Game Playing (GVGP), however, proposes
a framework for artiﬁcial general intelligence where the time
to decide a move is measured in milliseconds, and the game
rules are not given to the agents. In this respect, our approach
is similar to, but more open-ended than the Arcade Learning
Environment (ALE), developed by Bellamare et. al. (Bellemare et al. 2013) and used by e.g. Google DeepMind (Mnih
et al. 2015). ALE includes games from the Atari 2600 emulator, which are simple 2D arcade games with rudimentary
graphics. ALE controllers are given as input the raw screen
capture and a score counter, and they must be able to indicate
the set of buttons that determines the next action to make in
the game.

Abstract
The General Video Game AI framework and competition pose the problem of creating artiﬁcial intelligence
that can play a wide, and in principle unlimited, range of
games. Concretely, it tackles the problem of devising an
algorithm that is able to play any game it is given, even
if the game is not known a priori. This area of study
can be seen as an approximation of General Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, with very little room for game-dependent
heuristics. This short paper summarizes the motivation,
infrastructure, results and future plans of General Video
Game AI, stressing the ﬁndings and ﬁrst conclusions
drawn after two editions of our competition, and outlining our future plans.

Introduction
Games have long been popular benchmarks for Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Many researchers have studied algorithms and
techniques that try to approximate optimal play in computer
games as different as Chess, Go, Car Racing games, Ms.
PacMan, Real-Time Strategy (RTS) games and Super Mario
Bros. Sometimes these research themes are accompanied by
some sort of competition that puts different approaches to
a test in an uniﬁed benchmark. Research on games has enabled some interesting advances in algorithmic AI, such as
the use of parallelized Alpha-Beta pruning (in Chess), or the
progress seen in one of the most popular algorithms in Game
AI, Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), in the game of Go.
Though the contributions made by game-speciﬁc research
are truly important, game speciﬁc competitions have a
caveat because of their inherent structure: most of the solutions proposed tend to over-specialize to the domain they
are applied in. In other words, the nature of the challenge, or
even the struggle to win the contest, encourages the participants to provide the algorithm with highly tailored heuristics
that would work only in the game that is being used for the
challenge. For example, a world-champion StarCraft agent

The GVGAI Framework
While ALE works on a limited set of games (provided by the
Atari 2600 emulator) and uses screen capture recognition to
extract the game state, our framework provides this information in an object-oriented manner, and employs a Video
Game Description Language (VGDL; (Ebner et al. 2013;
Schaul 2013)) to deﬁne games in a more general way.
VGDL is inspired by GDL (Love et al. 2008), which is
used for the GGP competitions. However, while GDL describes games based on logical rules (or true facts), VGDL
deﬁnes the entities and interactions that can take place in
the game. The dynamics of each one of these components,
such as movements and behaviour, are programmed in the
framework. Albeit this requires that a given functionality is
implemented in the system when creating new games, it pro-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4335

