Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Instance Speciﬁc Metric Subspace Learning: A Bayesian Approach∗
Han-Jia Ye and De-Chuan Zhan and Yuan Jiang
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Nanjing, 210023, China
{yehj, zhandc, jiangy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

manually (Frome, Singer, and Malik 2007). Transductive approaches lack ﬂexibility on predicting unlabeled data, i.e.,
unlabeled data should be included during the training phase,
which is often violated in real cases. Manually designed distance functions make too much model assumptions which
increase the risk of instability. In particular, Shi, Bellet, and
Sha (2014) utilize ﬁxed bases to form metrics by linear combination, and obtain the combination coefﬁcients by optimizing a parametric model with arbitrary pre-deﬁned functions. Both manually chosen bases and pre-deﬁned functions
may result in unstable performance.
In this paper, we focus on representing the instance speciﬁc distance by a generative model, where all parameters
of instance speciﬁc distance can be learned/inferred automatically. We assume each instance x, either labeled or unlabeled, has its own instance speciﬁc metric Mx for calculating distance to others. Each Mx is constructed within a
subspace of metric space M, i.e., each metric for a particular instance is within its own subspace spanned by only
a portion of metric bases. In order to represent the instance
speciﬁc metric subspace, we need to learn global bases M =
{Mk }K
k=1 of metric space, and span the metric subspace in
a K-simplex for each instance. Therefore, we name the proposed model IS M ETS (Instance Speciﬁc METric Subspace
learning). In IS M ETS, we embed the bases of metric space
M into a generative process to learn the bases and metric
subspace simultaneously in a Bayesian manner. We introduce latent allocation variables combining the bases to form
the metric subspace. Besides, they can also bridge the latent
information with a linear classiﬁer, and therefore, incorporate the model with side information. The whole model is
trained by variational Bayes and the posterior of metric for
a speciﬁed instance can be inductively inferred in an effective and robust way. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the ﬁrst to learn the instance speciﬁc metric subspace with
Bayesian model. In summary, we claim our method has two
main advantages:

Abstract
Instead of using a uniform metric, instance speciﬁc distance
learning methods assign multiple metrics for different localities, which take data heterogeneity into consideration. Therefore, they may improve the performance of distance based
classiﬁers, e.g., kNN. Existing methods obtain multiple metrics of test data by either transductively assigning metrics for
unlabeled instances or designing distance functions manually,
which are with limited generalization ability. In this paper,
we propose IS M ETS (Instance Speciﬁc METric Subspace)
framework which can automatically span the whole metric
space in a generative manner and is able to inductively learn
a speciﬁc metric subspace for each instance via inferring the
expectation over the metric bases in a Bayesian manner. The
whole framework can be solved with Variational Bayes (VB).
Experiment on synthetic data shows that the learned results
are with good interpretability. Moreover, comprehensive results on real world datasets validate the effectiveness and robustness of IS M ETS.

Introduction
Many classiﬁers depend signiﬁcantly on distances between
examples, e.g., kNN and Gaussian kernel methods. Distance
metric learning approaches are typically investigated with
the purpose of learning a good Mahalanobis distance metric to pull similar instances together and push different ones
away. With the learned metric, classiﬁers can make better
predictions on test data. Most distance metric learning methods, such as LMNN (Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2006)
and ITML (Davis et al. 2007), focus on learning a uniform
metric to measure distance between all pairs of instances.
However, in some applications, data heterogeneity need to
be taken into consideration. Thus instead of learning a uniform distance metric for some concerned tasks, it is more
reasonable for each instance to claim its own instance speciﬁc distance so that it can measure the distance to others from its own perspective. Although some instance speciﬁc distance learning methods have achieved advantages,
they predict unlabeled instances transductively (Zhan et al.
2009), or model the instance speciﬁc distance for test data

• IS M ETS is a Bayesian generative model. It provides robust speciﬁc metric subspace for each instance by learning bases and combination coefﬁcients at the same time;

∗
This work was supported by NSFC (61273301, 61321491) and
CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund (RAGR20150117).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• IS M ETS can handle both labeled and unlabeled data, and
can inductively infer instance speciﬁc metric for unseen
test data as well.

2272

