Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient Average Reward Reinforcement Learning
Using Constant Shifting Values
Shangdong Yang† and Yang Gao† and Bo An§ and Hao Wang† and Xingguo Chen‡
†

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software
Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
§
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798 Singapore
‡
School of Computer Science and Technology, School of Software, Nanjing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, China
†
yangshangdong007@gmail.com, † {gaoy, wanghao}@nju.edu.cn, § boan@ntu.edu.sg, ‡ chenxg@njupt.edu.cn

estimating the environment model of an MDP. It often takes
a very long time to obtain an accurate model though, especially when the state-action space is large. The second
class is model-free algorithms which do not explicitly maintain MDP models, including R-learning (Schwartz 1993;
Singh 1994), SMART (Das et al. 1999), RVI Q-learning
(Abounadi, Bertsekas, and Borkar 2001; Li 2012), and GRlearning (Gosavi 2004), etc. They all use an adaptive shifting
value to approximate the optimal average reward to avoid
the unboundedness of Q-values. Their learning processes are
however typically sensitive to input parameters and may often result in long execution time or even non-convergence.
For example, R-learning can be easily perturbed by the
learning rates (Mahadevan 1996) and choosing a proper reference state for RVI Q-learning can be difﬁcult when the
state space is large (Abounadi, Bertsekas, and Borkar 2001).
To overcome the instability and improve scalability of average reward RL, this paper proposes a novel model-free
stochastic approximation algorithm which takes advantage
of constant shifting values (CSVs) when such values can
be inferred from prior knowledge. A main feature of our
method (named CSV-L EARNING), is that it encourages a
more precise and accurate exploration until a stable policy
is reached. As will be discussed later, a CSV usually leads
to unboundedness of Q-values during the learning process.
Nonetheless, we have derived a terminating condition to secure the convergence of policy, and proved that such a convergence could be towards the optimal policy if CSVs are
wisely chosen (i.e., with good prior knowledge).
Linear function approximation is also considered in this
paper to handle large scale tasks. We compare our method
with other existing algorithms using representative MDPs
and the popular game Tetris. Experiment results show that
CSV-L EARNING converges to the optimal policy signiﬁcantly faster than existing algorithms.

Abstract
There are two classes of average reward reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms: model-based ones that explicitly maintain MDP models and model-free ones that do not learn
such models. Though model-free algorithms are known to be
more efﬁcient, they often cannot converge to optimal policies due to the perturbation of parameters. In this paper, a
novel model-free algorithm is proposed, which makes use of
constant shifting values (CSVs) estimated from prior knowledge. To encourage exploration during the learning process,
the algorithm constantly subtracts the CSV from the rewards.
A terminating condition is proposed to handle the unboundedness of Q-values caused by such substraction. The convergence of the proposed algorithm is proved under very mild
assumptions. Furthermore, linear function approximation is
investigated to generalize our method to handle large-scale
tasks. Extensive experiments on representative MDPs and the
popular game Tetris show that the proposed algorithms signiﬁcantly outperform the state-of-the-art ones.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is an effective learning technique for solving sequential decision-making problems. An
RL agent tries to maximize its cumulative reward by interacting with the environment, which is usually modeled as a
Markov decision process (MDP) (Kaelbling, Littman, and
Moore 1996). Average reward MDPs are natural models of
many non-terminating tasks, such as the call admission control and routing problem (Marbach, Mihatsch, and Tsitsiklis 2000) and the automatic guided vehicle routing problem
(Ghavamzadeh and Mahadevan 2007). Average reward RL
has received much attention in the recent years (Ortner 2013;
Mahadevan 2014; Nguyen et al. 2014).
There are mainly two classes of average reward RL algorithms (Tadepalli 2010). The ﬁrst class is model-based algorithms such as UCRL (Ortner and Auer 2007), UCRL2
(Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010), and PSRL (Osband, Russo,
and van Roy 2013). They achieve efﬁcient exploration by

Preliminaries and Related Work
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the average reward MDP,
and then brieﬂy present some related work in this area.
An average reward MDP is a tuple S, A, R, P , where S

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2258

