Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

An Axiomatic Framework for Ex-Ante
Dynamic Pricing Mechanisms in Smart Grid
Sambaran Bandyopadhyay, Ramasuri Narayanam, Pratyush Kumar,
Sarvapali Ramchurn, Vijay Arya, Iskandarbin Petra
IBM Research, University of Southampton, Universiti Brunei Darussalam
{sambband, ramasurn, pratyush.kumar}@in.ibm.com, sdr1@soton.ac.uk,
iskandar.petra@ubd.edu.bn, vijay.arya@in.ibm.com
number of challenges (Strbac 2008) as follows. First, they
require heavy investment into ‘peaking’ power generation
that is used for only a few hours a day. This, in turn, results in higher costs for end-users. Second, given that power
plants need to ramp up during peak hours, they are typically
powered by fossil fuels and therefore end up generating high
volumes of greenhouse gases. Third, peak demand can cause
instabilities in electricity networks if the required supply capacity is not available at the times peaks occur and may result in cascading blackouts (Nedic et al. 2006). In real terms,
according to International Energy Agency 2003, the cost of
energy could have been reduced by approximately 50% by
lowering demand by 5% during the peak hours of the California electricity crisis in 2000/2001 (IEA 2003).
To alleviate such issues, a number of approaches have
been proposed by researchers in an attempt to diversify consumption (Strbac 2008) (i.e., getting consumers to consume
at different times such that the resulting aggregate actual
consumption proﬁle is ‘diversiﬁed’ or ‘ﬂattened’). Indeed,
back in the 1980s, Schweppe and colleagues (Schweppe
et al. 1988) proposed the idea of managing the demand
of energy through incentives that vary over time (i.e., dynamic pricing). Thus, by adjusting prices according to demand, they aimed to get demand to follow supply as opposed
to generation always ramping up when demand is higher.
This approach is typically termed demand-side management (DSM) or demand response (DR)3 . Thus, by applying
demand-side management techniques, utilities have sought
to encourage consumers to shift their consumption from
peak hours to off-peak hours (Palensky and Dietrich 2011;
Spees and Lave 2007). These pricing regimes tend to take
a number of forms ranging from time-of-use pricing (TOU)
whereby consumption at peak time is heavily penalised, to
real-time pricing (RTP) whereby energy is priced according to demand at every half-hour. However, while a number
of simulations have shown the pros and cons of such pricing regimes (Ramchurn et al. 2011), they have never been
rigorously analysed to determine the trade-offs they create
for utilities. Choosing the right pricing regime is crucial for
utilities because the price they charge to their consumers, in
anticipation of their demand in real-time, is a key determi-

Abstract
In electricity markets, the choice of the right pricing regime is
crucial for the utilities because the price they charge to their
consumers, in anticipation of their demand in real-time, is a
key determinant of their proﬁts and ultimately their survival
in competitive energy markets. Among the existing pricing
regimes, in this paper, we consider ex-ante dynamic pricing
schemes as (i) they help to address the peak demand problem (a crucial problem in smart grids), and (ii) they are transparent and fair to consumers as the cost of electricity can be
calculated before the actual consumption. In particular, we
propose an axiomatic framework that establishes the conceptual underpinnings of the class of ex-ante dynamic pricing
schemes. We ﬁrst propose ﬁve key axioms that reﬂect the criteria that are vital for energy utilities and their relationship
with consumers. We then prove an impossibility theorem to
show that there is no pricing regime that satisﬁes all the ﬁve
axioms simultaneously. We also study multiple cost functions
arising from various pricing regimes to examine the subset of
axioms that they satisfy. We believe that our proposed framework in this paper is ﬁrst of its kind to evaluate the class of
ex-ante dynamic pricing schemes in a manner that can be operationalised by energy utilities.

Introduction
Meeting the growing demand for energy while mitigating
the impact of fossil fuels on climate change is a major challenge for countries round the world. According to the U.S.
EIA, energy demand is predicted to increase by 56% by
2040.1 This challenge is exacerbated by the fact that demand for energy tends to peak at speciﬁc times of the day
depending on the needs of industrial, commercial, and domestic consumers.2 For example, domestic consumers tend
to use more energy in the morning and evening than during the day. Instead, industrial users tend to use more energy during the day (DECC-UK 2014). Such peaks pose a
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/.
2
The US Energy Information Administration estimates that the
peak to average ratio across the continental US is 1.7 and rising
(see Fig. 1). This implies that utilities must have an additional 70%
of their average generation capacity reserved for handling peak demand. This induces a huge stress on the stability and economic
viability of the grid.

3
Demand response is also speciﬁcally used in industry to describe the arbitrary curtailment of consumer demand.

3800

