Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Cross-Domain Neural Networks
for Sketch-Based 3D Shape Retrieval
Fan Zhu, Jin Xie and Yi Fang∗
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi
Abu Dhabi, UAE, PO Box 129188

simplify this process from the following two aspects: 1) statistical investigation (Gunn 1982) suggests that 80% of design work can beneﬁt from directly reusing or modifying
an existing design; 2) instead of manually transforming the
draft design into digital forms, a ﬁnal product prototype can
be obtained by directly reusing or modifying a desired 3D
shape selected from a pool of retrieved 3D shapes based on
the input draft.

Abstract
Sketch-based 3D shape retrieval, which returns a set of relevant 3D shapes based on users’ input sketch queries, has
been receiving increasing attentions in both graphics community and vision community. In this work, we address the
sketch-based 3D shape retrieval problem with a novel CrossDomain Neural Networks (CDNN) approach, which is further extended to Pyramid Cross-Domain Neural Networks
(PCDNN) by cooperating with a hierarchical structure. In order to alleviate the discrepancies between sketch features and
3D shape features, a neural network pair that forces identical
representations at the target layer for instances of the same
class is trained for sketches and 3D shapes respectively. By
constructing cross-domain neural networks at multiple pyramid levels, a many-to-one relationship is established between
a 3D shape feature and sketch features extracted from different scales. We evaluate the effectiveness of both CDNN and
PCDNN approach on the extended large-scale SHREC 2014
benchmark and compare with some other well established
methods. Experimental results suggest that both CDNN and
PCDNN can outperform state-of-the-art performance, where
PCDNN can further improve CDNN when employing a hierarchical structure.

In this work, we address a novel and challenging designercomputer interaction task, sketch-based 3D shape retrieval.
In order to alleviate the domain discrepancy between
sketches and 3D shapes, we construct pyramid cross-domain
neural networks (PCDNN), which map the mismatched
sketch and 3D shape low-level representations to a uniﬁed
feature space at multiple pyramid levels. The pyramid structure is deﬁned by a ﬁxed hierarchy of rectangular windows,
and computes local histogram features within each subdivided image regions. Within each pyramid level, a crossdomain neural network (CDNN) pair with identical target
layers for objects of the same category is learned. By extending a CDNN to the pyramid structure, multi-resolution
sketch histograms are mapped to corresponding 3D shapes,
so that the homogeneous information (i.e., shared commonness) between sketches and 3D shapes can be captured at
ﬁner levels when compared with a single-level structure
that performs on the concatenation of all pyramid levels of
sketch representations. When sketch queries pass through
the learned neural networks, multi-resolution histogram features are computed and fed into corresponding neural networks, followed by which hidden layers are extracted from
networks of all levels and concatenated as ﬁnal representations. The pipeline of the proposed framework is shown
in Figure 1. We evaluate the performance of CDNN and
its pyramid extension separately on the large-scale extended
SHREC 2014 sketch-based 3D shape retrieval benchmark.
We conclude the main contributions of this work are as follows:

Introduction
The human freehand sketch is a succinct, convenient and
efﬁcient way to visually record and present humans’ ideas.
Along with the recent developments of consumer electronic
devices (e.g., touch-pad mobile phones), freehand sketches
are becoming one of the mainstream human-computer interaction methods, and are expected to become the base of
many more applications. While sketches mainly convey abstract descriptions of objects, 3D shapes, on the other hand,
contain the majority information that are required for industrial productions. In the traditional fashion of design operation processes, design ideas and intents are progressively
and iteratively explored in the form of sketches at the initial
stage, after which ﬁnalized drafts are transformed to digital 3D shapes, where this process is normally conducted
manually and is very time consuming. As an improvement,
a sketch-based 3D shape retrieval system can signiﬁcantly

 We address the challenging sketch-based 3D shape retrieval problem with neural network-based approaches,
which can learn discriminative and domain-invariant representations for sketches and 3D shapes while does not
require strong restrictions (e.g., the correspondence infor-

∗

: Corresponding Author (Email: yfang@nyu.edu)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3683

