Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Inside Out: Two Jointly Predictive Models
for Word Representations and Phrase Representations
Fei Sun, Jiafeng Guo, Yanyan Lan, Jun Xu, and Xueqi Cheng
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China

meet its own difﬁculty in identifying ﬁne-grained linguistic
regularity. For example, there are some words that are very
difﬁcult to differentiate from external contexts, like “buy”
and “sell”. This may further make distributional semantic
models difﬁcult to answer the similarity question, such as
which word is more close to “buy”, “buys” or “sells”?
In fact, this question is not difﬁcult to answer if we
take the internal structures of words into account. This involves another important research ﬁeld in linguistics, Morphology. It studies how words are built from morphemes,
the smallest grammatical (or meaningful) unit in a language, such as root, preﬁx, and sufﬁx. In morphology, there
also exists an underlying distributional principle of semantics, which states that words contain the same morphemes
may convey similar meaning or function (Williams 1981;
Bybee 1985). Therefore, one can infer the meaning of word
“breakable” by its root “break” and sufﬁx “able”, and accomplish the analogy task “breakable to break as doable to
do” simply based on their word forms. However, the limitation of morphology is that it cannot infer the relationship
between two words that do not share any morphemes, like
“dog” and “husky”, even though they might be related.
In short, distributional hypothesis infers the word meaning from its external context, while morphology infers the
word meaning from its internal forms. Both have their own
advantages and limitations. It is natural to seek a way to integrate these two sources to obtain better word representations.
In this work, we propose two simple and general models
to integrate both external contexts and internal morphemes
to learn better word representations, called BEING and SEING. The proposed models are built on the basis of Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW) model and Skip-Gram (SG)
model (Mikolov et al. 2013a) due to the efﬁciency concern. In a nutshell, we view the two sources, i.e., internal morphemes and external contexts, equivalently in inferring word representations, and model them in a general predictive way. Comparing with the word representation models which rely on context information alone, e.g.,
word2vec and GloVe, our models can capture the relationships among morphologically related words, rather than
treating each word as an independent entity. As a result,
the proposed models can alleviate the sparsity problem and
learn the rare words much better. Comparing with those

Abstract
Distributional hypothesis lies in the root of most existing
word representation models by inferring word meaning from
its external contexts. However, distributional models cannot
handle rare and morphologically complex words very well
and fail to identify some ﬁne-grained linguistic regularity as
they are ignoring the word forms. On the contrary, morphology points out that words are built from some basic units, i.e.,
morphemes. Therefore, the meaning and function of such rare
words can be inferred from the words sharing the same morphemes, and many syntactic relations can be directly identiﬁed based on the word forms. However, the limitation of
morphology is that it cannot infer the relationship between
two words that do not share any morphemes. Considering
the advantages and limitations of both approaches, we propose two novel models to build better word representations
by modeling both external contexts and internal morphemes
in a jointly predictive way, called BEING and SEING. These
two models can also be extended to learn phrase representations according to the distributed morphology theory. We
evaluate the proposed models on similarity tasks and analogy
tasks. The results demonstrate that the proposed models can
outperform state-of-the-art models signiﬁcantly on both word
and phrase representation learning.

Introduction
Representing words as dense, real-valued vectors in a relatively low-dimensional space, called distributed word representations, has attracted a huge spike of interest in recent years. These vectors have been widely used in various natural language processing tasks, e.g., named entity recognition (Collobert et al. 2011), question answering (Zhou et al. 2015), and parsing (Socher et al. 2011).
Building such representations follows the well-known linguistic principle—Distributional Hypothesis (Harris 1954;
Firth 1957), which states that words occurring in similar
contexts tend to have similar meanings.
However, reliable distributional vectors can be learned
only for words that occur in plenty external contexts in
the corpus. Therefore, the rare words, e.g., morphologically
complex words or new words, are often poorly represented.
Even for the frequent words, distributional hypothesis may
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2821

