Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bounded Optimal Exploration in MDP
Kenji Kawaguchi
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, 02139
kawaguch@mit.edu

Preliminaries

Abstract

An MDP (Puterman 2004) can be represented as a tuple (S, A, R, P, γ), where S is a set of states, A is a set
of actions, P is the transition probability function, R is
a reward function, and γ is a discount factor. The value
of policy π at state s, V π (s), is the cumulative (discounted)
expected reward, which is given by: V π (s) =


Within the framework of probably approximately correct Markov decision processes (PAC-MDP), much theoretical work has focused on methods to attain near optimality after a relatively long period of learning and
exploration. However, practical concerns require the attainment of satisfactory behavior within a short period
of time. In this paper, we relax the PAC-MDP conditions to reconcile theoretically driven exploration methods and practical needs. We propose simple algorithms
for discrete and continuous state spaces, and illustrate
the beneﬁts of our proposed relaxation via theoretical
analyses and numerical examples. Our algorithms also
maintain anytime error bounds and average loss bounds.
Our approach accommodates both Bayesian and nonBayesian methods.

E

∞


γ i R (si , π(si ), si+1 ) | s0 = s, π , where the expecta-

i=0

tion is over the sequence of states si+1 ∼ P (S|si , π(si ))
for all i ≥ 0. Using Bellman’s equation, the value of the optimal policy or
the optimal value, V ∗ (s), can be written as
V ∗ (s) = maxa



∗ 
s P (s |s, a))[R(s, a, s ) + γV (s )].

In many situations, the transition function P and/or the
reward function R are initially unknown. Under such conditions, we often want a policy of an algorithm at time t, At ,
to yield a value V At (st ) that is close to the optimal value
V ∗ (st ) after some exploration. Here, st denotes the current
state at time t. More precisely, we may want the following:
for all  > 0 and for all δ = (0, 1), V At (st ) ≥ V ∗ (st ) − ,
with probability at least 1 − δ when t ≥ τ , where τ is the
exploration time. The algorithm with a policyAt is said to
be “probably approximately correct” for MDPs (PAC-MDP)
(Strehl 2007) if this condition holds with τ being at most
polynomial in the relevant quantities of MDPs. The notion of
PAC-MDP has a strong theoretical basis and is widely applicable, avoiding the need for additional assumptions, such as
reachability in state space (Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010),
access to a reset action (Fiechter 1994), and access to a parallel sampling oracle (Kearns and Singh 1999).
However, the PAC-MDP approach often results in an algorithm over-exploring the state space, causing a low reward
per unit time for a long period of time. Accordingly, past
studies that proposed PAC-MDP algorithms have rarely presented a corresponding experimental result, or have done so
by tuning the free parameters, which renders the relevant algorithm no longer PAC-MDP (Strehl, Li, and Littman 2006;
Kolter and Ng 2009; Sorg, Singh, and Lewis 2010). This
problem was noted in (Kolter and Ng 2009; Brunskill 2012;
Kawaguchi and Araya 2013). Furthermore, in many problems, it may not even be possible to guarantee V At close
to V ∗ within the agent’s lifetime. Li (2012) noted that, despite the strong theoretical basis of the PAC-MDP approach,
heuristic-based methods remain popular in practice. This

Introduction
The formulation of sequential decision making as a Markov
decision process (MDP) has been successfully applied to a
number of real-world problems. MDPs provide the ability to
design adaptable agents that can operate effectively in uncertain environments. In many situations, the environment
we wish to model has unknown aspects, and thus the agent
needs to learn an MDP by interacting with the environment.
In other words, the agent has to explore the unknown aspects
of the environment to learn the MDP. A considerable amount
of theoretical work on MDPs has focused on efﬁcient exploration, and a number of principled methods have been
derived with the aim of learning an MDP to obtain a nearoptimal policy. For example, Kearns and Singh (2002) and
Strehl and Littman (2008a) considered discrete state spaces,
whereas Bernstein and Shimkin (2010) and Pazis and Parr
(2013) examined continuous state spaces.
In practice, however, heuristics are still commonly used
(Li 2012). The focus of theoretical work (learning a nearoptimal policy within a polynomial yet long time) has apparently diverged from practical needs (learning a satisfactory
policy within a reasonable time). In this paper, we modify
the prevalent theoretical approach to develop theoretically
driven methods that come close to practical needs.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1758

