Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Minimally-Constrained Multilingual Embeddings
via Artiﬁcial Code-Switching
Michael Wick

Pallika Kanani

Adam Pocock

Oracle Labs
michael.wick@oracle.com

Oracle Labs
pallika.kanani@oracle.com

Oracle Labs
adam.pocock@oracle.com

deSouza, and Mercer 1992; Bengio et al. 2003; Mikolov et
al. 2013), and are advantageous for NLP because they help
cope with the sparsity problems associated with text. Using
embeddings learned from monolingual text as features improves the accuracy of existing NLP models (Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010).
The basis for learning such embeddings is the distributional hypothesis of language (Harris 1954; Firth 1957),
which stipulates that words are deﬁned by their usage.
Learning vector representations of words that are good at
predicting their context words over intruder words (Mikolov
et al. 2013) captures a remarkable amount of syntactic and
semantic structure. For example, vec(“king”) - vec(“man”)
+ vec(“woman”) ≈ vec(“queen”). Of course we expect these
results are not unique to English. A model trained on French
for example would likely yield similar structure: vec(“roi”) vec(“homme”) + vec(“femme”) ≈ vec(“reine”). A potential
problem with multilingual approaches that depend heavily
upon the distributional hypothesis, is that they assume that
words are deﬁned by their context in a large corpus of text.
While this may hold for words within a single language, it
is unlikely to hold across languages because usually all the
words in a context belong to the same language. Visualizing the word to context-word co-occurrence statistics as a
matrix would reveal large blocks of connectivity for each
language, with sparse scattering of non-zero cells elsewhere
(see Figure 1a). This block structure causes problems as
many word embedding techniques can be seen as performing matrix factorization on co-occurrence matrices (Levy
and Goldberg 2014; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014;
Deerwester et al. 1990).
However, note that some words are shared across languages: named entities such as “iPad” or “Obama,” lexical
borrowing of words from other languages (Tsvetkov, Ammar, and Dyer 2015) and code switching in which a multilingual speaker switches between languages during a dialogue
(Lipski 1978). These phenomena may allow for a jointly
trained embedding model to learn structure that generalizes
across languages. If we simply combine documents from
the different languages under a uniﬁed vocabulary and run
CBOW on multilingual data, it learns multilingual analogies such as vec(“roi”) - vec(“hombre”) + vec(“woman”) ≈
vec(“reina”). Thus, we could try to train embeddings on a
large enough corpus and see if these phenomena occur with

Abstract
We present a method that consumes a large corpus of multilingual text and produces a single, uniﬁed word embedding
in which the word vectors generalize across languages. In
contrast to current approaches that require language identiﬁcation, our method is agnostic about the languages with
which the documents in the corpus are expressed, and does
not rely on parallel corpora to constrain the spaces. Instead
we utilize a small set of human provided word translations—
which are often freely and readily available. We can encode
such word translations as hard constraints in the model’s objective functions; however, we ﬁnd that we can more naturally constrain the space by allowing words in one language
to borrow distributional statistics from context words in another language. We achieve this via a process we term artiﬁcial code-switching. As the name suggests, we induce codeswitching so that words across multiple languages appear in
contexts together. Not only do embedding models trained on
code-switched data learn common cross-lingual structure, the
common structure allows an NLP model trained in a source
language to generalize to multiple target languages (achieving up to 80% of the accuracy of models trained with targetlanguage data).

Introduction
An important practical problem in natural language processing (NLP) is to make NLP tools (e.g., named entity recognition, parsers, sentiment analysis) available in every language. Many of the resources available in a language such
as English are not available in languages with fewer speakers. One solution is to collect training data in every language
for every task for every domain, but such data collection is
expensive and time consuming. A second, more feasible solution, is to use large collections of unlabeled multilingual
data to ﬁnd a common representation in which structure is
shared across languages. Under such representations, we can
train an NLP model in a language with many resources and
generalize that model to work on lower resource languages.
Thus, such multilingual word embeddings have the potential
to substantially reduce the cost and effort required in developing cross-lingual NLP tools.
Word embeddings map word-types to dense, low dimensional (e.g., 300) vectors (Deerwester et al. 1990; Brown,
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2849

