Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Pragmatic Querying in Heterogeneous Knowledge Graphs
Amar Viswanathan
Tetherless World Constellation
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 Eighth Street, Troy, NY USA 12180

Summary

vant or errors (Pujara et al. 2013). This leads to inaccurate
results.

Knowledge Graphs with rich schemas can allow for
complex querying. My thesis focuses on providing accessible Knowledge using Gricean notions of Cooperative Answering as a motivation. More speciﬁcally, using
Query Reformulations, Data Awareness, and a Pragmatic Context, along with the results they can become
more responsive to user requirements and user context.

• Complex Querying: Querying data with SPARQL requires the user to build the exact triple patterns for his
requirement. However, such requirements aren’t always
mapped exactly, and there is a huge gap between the user
intent and what has been formulated as a query. Users are
very often able to provide only broad queries, whereas to
build a precise query they need more schema familiarity.
(Dolog et al. 2009).

Motivation

• Unadaptable to User needs: Current interfaces to the
Knowledge Graph are also very unadaptable to the user
and make no effort in augmenting the user knowledge. In
addition current interfaces also don’t provide mechanisms
to suggest various interpretations of the same query.

Given the rich schema deﬁnitions in Knowledge Graphs
(KG), user querying is becoming quite expressive. This
is also changing the search landscape. For example, user
queries such Movies directed by Martin Scorcese featuring
Jose Pesci and Robert De Niro or Michelin star rated restaurants in New York City are easily answered by resources like
DBpedia(Auer et al. 2007). Thus, KGs are able to handle
more expressive precise querying. This makes it more ideal
for a variety of search tasks. However, while the research
world is focused on adding increased expressiveness, an often overlooked part is the complexity of data access. With
an increase in schema deﬁnitions, the user ﬁnds it harder to
ﬁnd information suitable to his needs in the KG space. Concepts can interact in a myriad of different ways. This means
that even if the user has a precise need, translating that to a
speciﬁc query becomes difﬁcult with the increase in concept
size and concept interaction space. Also given the long association with databases, querying the data from a table point
of view is a strong impediment to utilize the richness of the
Knowledge Graph. We contribute the following as potential
reasons:

Targeted Research Contributions
In this thesis we would like to target the problem of making
Knowledge Graphs accessible for users by providing pragmatic and constrained reformulations along with results in
a faceted interface. Viewing at search as a continuous iterative conversation between a user and the search system, we
take the Gricean approach of cooperative answering(Grice
1970), where both the participants in the conversation contribute towards achieving mutual conversational ends. We
demonstrate this in our system, which takes as input a user
query and provides alternate possible ranked reformulations
which are aligned to both the schema and to the pragmatic
context. We have developed a data aware Pragmatic Query
Reformulation system , which provides a user with a set
of reformulated queries that takes into account data availability and a set of well-deﬁned RDFS entailment rules for
query reformulation. In brief, the contributions are: (a) Better data awareness in terms of context and data availability
(b) Query reformulations constrained by the pragmatic context (c) Faceted discourse oriented user interface to enable a
dialog, which utilizes the reformulations.
Our evaluation root queries would include star, chain and
complex query types.Due to the lack of benchmarks, we are
looking at evaluation on both synthetic -LUBM1 and nonsynthetic- ACE datasets.

• Ever Expanding Schema: Heterogeneous Knowledge
Graphs have all the required information, but their ever
expanding schema, which is not consolidated, leads to
mis-understanding of schema semantics and inhibits precise querying(Dolog et al. 2009).
• Incomplete and Inconsistent data: Even if the schema
is complete sometimes the data is not always complete. In
addition given the reliance on automatic extraction techniques, a lot of the extracted facts can be redundant, irrelec 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4317

http://swat.cse.lehigh.edu/projects/lubm/

