Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

One Size Does Not Fit All: A Game-Theoretic Approach for
Dynamically and Effectively Screening for Threats∗
Matthew Brown, Arunesh Sinha, Aaron Schlenker, Milind Tambe
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
{mattheab, aruneshs, aschlenk, tambe}@usc.edu

ﬂight. The screener utilizes different types of screening resources that have: (i) different levels of effectiveness for detecting different attack methods; and (ii) different capacities in terms of the number of screenees that can be processed within a given time window. Effective screening may
require assigning multiple screening resource types to inspect a screenee, but the screener may not be able to use
the most effective screening resource type combination for
every screenee. Hence, the screener may utilize available
information to categorize screenees to help determine the
appropriate level of scrutiny to apply during screening.
To address the challenge of how to optimally utilize limited screening resources so as to minimize the expected consequences of an attack, we introduce a formal threat screening game (TSG) model. TSGs are played between a screener
and an adversary, where the screener commits to a screening strategy, assigning a randomized combination of screening resource types to each screenee category. The adversary
is able to observe the screening strategy and best responds
by selecting an attack method and a screenee category to
pose as during screening. The objective of the screener is to
minimize the worst-case expected consequences of an attack
across all screenee categories and all attack methods.
The TSG model is inspired by research on security
games (Jain et al. 2010a; An et al. 2011; Korzhyk, Conitzer,
and Parr 2010; Pita et al. 2011; Shieh et al. 2014) and related
variants, e.g. audit games (Blocki et al. 2013; 2015), adversarial patrolling games (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009;
Vorobeychik et al. 2014). Research on security games has
provided models and algorithms for generating randomized
allocations of limited security resources to protect against an
adaptive adversary. However, there exist fundamental differences between threat screening domains and standard security game domains: (i) large numbers of non-adversarial
screenees that must be processed and thus affect the screening of the adversary, and (ii) multiple screening resource
types with varying efﬁcacies and efﬁciencies which can
combine to work in teams. The result is that such domains
not only require a new game model (TSG), but also fundamentally new algorithms to handle scalability for TSGs.
Our approach to handle scalability in TSGs involves compactly representing the game, in the process advancing the
state of the art in randomized allocation (Budish et al. 2013).
In particular, TSGs do not satisfy the conditions identiﬁed

Abstract
An effective way of preventing attacks in secure areas is to
screen for threats (people, objects) before entry, e.g., screening of airport passengers. However, screening every entity
at the same level may be both ineffective and undesirable.
The challenge then is to ﬁnd a dynamic approach for randomized screening, allowing for more effective use of limited screening resources, leading to improved security. We
address this challenge with the following contributions: (1) a
threat screening game (TSG) model for general screening domains; (2) an NP-hardness proof for computing the optimal
strategy of TSGs; (3) a scheme for decomposing TSGs into
subgames to improve scalability; (4) a novel algorithm that
exploits a compact game representation to efﬁciently solve
TSGs, providing the optimal solution under certain conditions; and (5) an empirical comparison of our proposed algorithm against the current state-of-the-art optimal approach
for large-scale game-theoretic resource allocation problems.

Introduction
Screening people before allowing entry into a secure area is
a standard practice throughout the world, e.g., screening resources are used to secure border crossings, sports stadiums,
government buildings, etc. Of course, a majority of people
will be familiar with airport passenger screening, where each
passenger must pass through physical screening consisting
of a combination of multiple types of resources (e.g. xray and walk-through metal detector) before boarding their
ﬂight. Given the signiﬁcant projected future growth in aviation, agencies such as the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) in the United States are developing dynamic,
risk-based screening approaches which optimize the use of
resources so as to maintain a high level of security while
handling increased passenger volume (AAAE 2014).
This paper considers domains where a screener inspects
a set of screenees with the goal of preventing a potential
adversary from taking an attack method through screening to attack within a secure area. For example, terrorists
with non-metallic explosives may attempt to pass through
airport screening undetected in order to attack a particular
∗
Matthew Brown and Arunesh Sinha are both ﬁrst authors of
this paper.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

425

