Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Towards Clause-Learning State Space Search:
Learning to Recognize Dead-Ends
Marcel Steinmetz and Jörg Hoffmann
Saarland University
Saarbrücken, Germany
{steinmetz,hoffmann}@cs.uni-saarland.de

properties (e. g. (Behrmann et al. 2002; Holzmann 2004;
Edelkamp, Lluch-Lafuente, and Leue 2004)), a dead-end is
any state from which the error property cannot be reached.
We introduce a state space search method that, at a high
level, shares many features with clause learning in SAT. Our
work is placed in classical planning, but in principle the approach applies to reachability checking in other transition
system models as well. It requires a state-variable based representation, with transition rule models suitable for criticalpath heuristics. We brieﬂy discuss this at the end of the paper.
The paper is aimed at being accessible to researchers not only
from planning, but also from related areas.
A dead-end in planning is a state from which the goal cannot be reached. Dead-end detection has been given some
attention in probabilistic and non-deterministic planning
(Kolobov, Mausam, and Weld 2012; Muise, McIlraith, and
Beck 2012), where computationally expensive methods (e. g.
using classical planning as a sub-procedure) may pay off.
But very little has been done about dead-end detection in
classical planning. Heuristic functions have been intensely
investigated, and most of them have the ability to recognize
dead-end states s, returning heuristic value h(s) = ∞ if s is
unsolvable even in the relaxation underlying h. But this has
been treated as a by-product of estimating goal distance.
Recent work (Bäckström, Jonsson, and Ståhlberg 2013;
Hoffmann, Kissmann, and Torralba 2014) has started to break
with this tradition, introducing the concept of unsolvability
heuristics, dedicated to dead-end detection. An unsolvability
heuristic returns either ∞ (“dead-end”) or 0 (“don’t know”),
and serves as an efﬁciently testable sufﬁcient criterion for
unsolvability. Concrete unsolvability heuristics have been
designed based on state-space abstractions, speciﬁcally projections (pattern databases (Edelkamp 2001)) and mergeand-shrink abstractions (Helmert et al. 2014). The empirical
results are impressive, especially for merge-and-shrink which
convincingly beats state-of-the-art BDD-based planning techniques (Torralba and Alcázar 2013) on a suite of unsolvable
benchmark tasks. Yet, comparing these techniques to conﬂict
detection methods in other areas, they are quite limited in
that they are completely disconnected from the actual search,
establishing the unsolvability heuristics once and for all in a
pre-process. Can we instead reﬁne the unsolvability heuristic
during search, learning from the dead-ends encountered?
Recent research on classical planning heuristics has laid

Abstract
We introduce a state space search method that identiﬁes deadend states, analyzes the reasons for failure, and learns to avoid
similar mistakes in the future. Our work is placed in classical
planning. The key technique are critical-path heuristics hC ,
relative to a set C of conjunctions. These recognize a dead-end
state s, returning hC (s) = ∞, if s has no solution even when
allowing to break up conjunctive subgoals into the elements
of C. Our key idea is to learn C during search. Starting from a
simple initial C, we augment search to identify unrecognized
dead-ends s, where hC (s) < ∞. We design methods analyzing the situation at such s, adding new conjunctions into C
to obtain hC (s) = ∞, thus learning to recognize s as well as
similar dead-ends search may encounter in the future. We furthermore learn clauses φ where s |= φ implies hC (s ) = ∞,
to avoid the prohibitive overhead of computing hC on every
search state. Arranging these techniques in a depth-ﬁrst search,
we obtain an algorithm approaching the elegance of clause
learning in SAT, learning to refute search subtrees. Our experiments show that this can be quite powerful. On problems
where dead-ends abound, the learning reliably reduces the
search space by several orders of magnitude.

Introduction
The ability to analyze conﬂicts, and to learn clauses that avoid
similar mistakes in the future, is a key ingredient to the success of SAT solvers (e. g. (Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1999;
Moskewicz et al. 2001; Eén and Sörensson 2003)). To
date, there has been no comparable framework for state
space search. Part of the reason of course is that conﬂicts,
quintessential in constraint reasoning, play a much less prevalent role in transition systems. Nevertheless, deﬁning a “conﬂict” to be a dead-end state – a state not part of any solution – conﬂicts are ubiquitous in many applications. For
example, bad decisions often lead to dead-ends in oversubscription planning (e. g. (Smith 2004; Gerevini et al. 2009;
Domshlak and Mirkis 2015)), in planning with limited resources (e. g. (Haslum and Geffner 2001; Nakhost, Hoffmann, and Müller 2012; Coles et al. 2013)), and in singleagent puzzles like Sokoban (e. g. (Junghanns and Schaeffer
1998)) or Solitaire card games (e. g. (Bjarnason, Tadepalli,
and Fern 2007)). In explicit-state model checking of safety
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

760

