Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Architectural Mechanisms for Situated Natural Language
Understanding in Uncertain and Open Worlds
Tom Williams
Human Robot Interaction Laboratory
Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA

Introduction

tion and is limited to operation in fully known environments
(Fasola and Matarić 2013). Chai et al. present a greedy
algorithm which uses a subset of the Givenness Hierarchy
to resolve a wide array of referential expressions, but this
approach operates under a closed-world assumption (Chai,
Prasov, and Qu 2006). Kollar, Tellex et al. present Generalized Grounding Graphs, which instantiate probabilistic
graphical models based on the structure of incoming NL utterances, and use those models to resolve references (Tellex
et al. 2011). However, this approach is limited to the domain
it is trained on, and like Matuszek et al., does not allow an
agent to discuss or reason about new entities without ﬁrst
experiencing them.
In (Williams et al. 2013), I presented an algorithm for resolving references to unknown locations by making world
model modiﬁcations based on utterance semantics, and
an algorithm for generating plans to unknown locations
based on their properties. These algorithms, however, were
domain-dependent, and did not handle uncertainty. To address these shortcomings, my Probabilistic, Open-World Entity Resolution algorithm POWER (Williams and Scheutz
2015) performs reference resolution in uncertain and open
worlds, and is not tied to a particular domain, instead interfacing with a domain-speciﬁc knowledge base (KB) through
a consultant capable of providing a list of resolution candidates, assessing the probabilities that certain properties hold
for certain entities, and making KB modiﬁcations. Recently,
I extended POWER in two signiﬁcant ways. First, I adapted
POWER to use multiple consultants associated with separate
knowledge bases (Williams and Scheutz 2016). This allows
POWER to perform resolution using multiple KBs that may
be located on different machines, may use different knowledge representation schemes, and may have different methods for accessing and modifying data. Second, I devised
what I believe to be the ﬁrst complete implementation of the
Givenness Hierarchy. My implementation substantially improves on the implementation presented by Chai et al. in
several ways, most signiﬁcantly by using POWER to handle
uncertain and open worlds (Williams et al. 2015b).

As natural language capable robots and other agents become
more commonplace, the ability for these agents to understand truly natural human speech is becoming increasingly
important. What is more, these agents must be able to understand truly natural human speech in realistic scenarios,
in which an agent may not have full certainty in its knowledge of its environment, and in which an agent may not have
full knowledge of the entities contained in its environment.
As such, I am interested in developing architectural mechanisms which will allow robots to understand natural language in uncertain and open-worlds. My work towards this
goal has primarily focused on two problems: (1) reference
resolution, and (2) pragmatic reasoning. In the following
sections, I will introduce and discuss the work of myself and
others on these problems.

Reference Resolution
Reference resolution is the problem of identifying the entities referenced in a natural language utterance. For example in the utterance “The medkit is in the room at the end
of the hall”, an agent must determine what entities are being referred to by “the medkit”, “the room”, and “the hall”.
There are two main drawbacks common to most previous
approaches to this problem. First, the majority of these approaches are domain-dependent: they are speciﬁcally targeted toward resolving one kind of reference, such as references to locations (i.e., spatial reference resolution). Second, the majority of these approaches operate in a closed
world: they assume that all entities which could be referenced are already known. Matuszek et al. use Statistical Machine Translation techniques to translate natural language
directions into routes through an open world. However, this
approach is limited to resolving spatial references, and because utterances are translated into actions rather than world
model modiﬁcations, their approach is unable to discuss or
reason about new locations without ﬁrst visiting them (Matuszek et al. 2012). Fasola and Mataric presented Semantic
Fields, an approach that represents spatial relations as probability density functions over locations in a known metric
map. This approach is restricted to spatial reference resolu-

Pragmatic Reasoning
Humans frequently use indirect utterances whose literal
meanings do not match their intended meanings. “Do you
know what time it is?” is likely not literally a question about

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4319

