Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

MicroScholar: Mining Scholarly Information from Chinese Microblogs
Yang Yu and Xiaojun Wan
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{yu.yang, wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
For many researchers, one of the biggest issues is the lack of
an efficient method to obtain latest academic progresses in
related research fields. We notice that many researchers
tend to share their research progresses or recommend scholarly information they have known on their microblogs. In
order to exploit microblogging to benefit scientific research,
we build a system called MicroScholar to automatically collecting and mining scholarly information from Chinese microblogs. In this paper, we briefly introduce the system
framework and focus on the component of scholarly microblog categorization. Several kinds of features have been
used in the component and experimental results demonstrate
their usefulness.

Figure 1. Framework of MicroScholar

organizations related to scientific research, currently limited in the computer science field), a scholarly microblog
categorization component that recognizes scholarly microblogs and categorizes them into four types (Conference/Event, Paper/Report, Tool/Resource and Other/Irrelevant), and a scholarly microblog ranking component to rank academic microblogs in each type according
to each microblog’s publishing time or popularity measured by the number of retweets and comments. Finally, the
ranked results in each type are shown to researchers. With
our system, a researcher can easily find the important
scholarly information he has interest in and he will be informed with new scholarly information. Due to page limit,
we focus on introducing the techniques and experiments
for the component of scholarly microblog categorization.

Introduction
In recent years, microblogging has become a popular
method for many researchers to publish their research progresses and thoughts or recommend new scholarly information they have known. For example, many prestigious
researchers and professors post scholarly messages on Sina
Weibo (the most popular Chinese microblogging system)
in their daily life. These scholarly messages may introduce
or recommend latest research papers, upcoming academic
conferences and events, useful research tools and datasets,
etc. We feel that it would be very meaningful for helping
researchers to automatically obtain such scholarly information from microblogs because scholarly information are
scattered across the vast amount of microblogs. We aim to
build a novel system called MicroScholar to automatically
collecting and mining scholarly information from Sina
Weibo, which is deemed to be a beneficial tool for scientific research activities.
As shown in Figure 1, our proposed MicroScholar system
consists of three parts: a real-time microblog crawling
component which crawls recent microblogs from a predefined list of users (including researchers, professors or

Scholarly Microblog Categorization
We treat the scholarly microblog recognition problem as a
multi-class classification task and aim to categorize each
microblog text into one of the following four types:
z Conference/Event: Includes microblogs introducing a
conference or an academic event being held or will
take place soon.
z Paper/Report: Includes microblogs introducing or sharing a research paper or report.
z Tool/Resource: Includes microblogs recommending an
academic tool or some academic resources, such as an

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4280

