Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

NLU Framework for Voice Enabling
Non-Native Applications on Smart Devices
Soujanya Lanka, Deepika Pathania, Pooja Kushalappa, Pradeep Varakantham
i.am+ LLC. 809 North Cahunga Blvd, Los Angeles - 90036
{soujanya, deepika.pathania, pooja, pradeep}@iamplus.com

capabilities of the device. Voice seems to be the best option to ensure a reliable user experience.
Voice assistants like Siri, Google Voice, Cortana are
already present in many smart phones and smart watches.
Unfortunately, these existing voice assistants limit the user
commands to a few native applications like e-mail, music,
messaging, calendar and clock/alarms and do not service
non-native applications. By non-native applications, we
refer to the ones that are developed by third party developers and are available on AppStores (like iTunes and
Google Play) for the users to download and install.
For example, a private cab-booking application, developed by a cab-services company, cannot be associated with
a voice command like ‘get me a cab’ as the application is
not a native application. We believe that this inability to
handle valid user commands related to third party installable applications is a major limitation in existing voice assistants.
To bridge this limitation with existing voice assistants,
we have prototyped an existing voice assistant, AneedA
(aneed A) with the additional capability of associating
voice commands to non-native applications. In the following section we elaborate on the framework architecture and
the workflow associated with this framework.

Abstract
Voice is a critical user interface on smart devices (wearables, phones, speakers, televisions) to access applications
(or services) available on them. Unfortunately, only a few
native applications (provided by the OS developer) are typically voice enabled in devices of today. Since, the utility of
a smart device is determined more by the strength of external applications developed for the device, voice enabling
non-native applications in a scalable, seamless manner within the device is a critical use case and is the focus of our
work.
We have developed a Natural Language Understanding
(NLU) framework that uses templates supported by the application (as determined by the application developer). This
framework can be employed in any mobile OS (Android,
iOS, Tizen, Android wear) for a wide range of devices. To
aid this demonstration, we have implemented the framework
as a service in Android OS. When the user issues a voice
command, the natural language query is obtained by this
service (using one of local, cloud based or hybrid speech
recognizers). The service then executes our NLU framework
to identify the relevant application and particular action details. In this demonstration, we will showcase this NLU
framework implemented as an Android service on a set of
applications that will be installed on the fly. Specifically, we
will show how the voice queries are understood and necessary services are launched on android smart wearables and
phones.

NLU Framework for Voice-Enabling Applications

Introduction

Our underlying idea is to bundle non-native applications
with a file that defines the grammar for the various natural
language command templates that the application can service. Upon installing such a grammar bundled application
from AppStore, the NLU framework checks presence of
grammar files and prepares ground to map the voice commands to the applications.

Smart devices, these days (wearables, speakers, televisions,
phones) are characterized by good processors and memory,
which enable multiple capabilities such as location awareness, activity awareness and multi-tasking (running multiple applications at once). Such powerful devices need an
engaging and hands free user experience, interface for the
user to perform various operations and to fully utilize the

Implementation details
We have developed the NLU framework as an Android
service that runs on the device. This NLU service works in
sync with i.am+ in-house developed voice assistant

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4359

