Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Viral Clustering: A Robust Method to Extract
Structures in Heterogeneous Datasets
Vahan Petrosyan and Alexandre Proutiere
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
{vahanp, alepro}@kth.se

of ﬁnding the true number of clusters, as well as identifying the clusters. The VC algorithm relies on two antagonist
and interacting components. In the ﬁrst component, Spread
Virus, the clusters spread as a virus in a network, which
favours the formation of large clusters, and in turn tends
to remove clusters of small sizes. The second component,
Suppress Virus, acts as k-mean algorithm, and tends to stop
the epidemic spreading of clusters of the ﬁrst component.
By design, the VC algorithm exhibits a very high robustness, and performs well in datasets with possibly many overlapping non-gaussian clusters with heterogeneous variances
and shapes. We present extensive numerical experiments illustrating the robustness of the VC algorithm, and its superiority compared to existing algorithms. VC accurately estimates the true number of clusters, and outputs clusters close
to the true clusters.

Abstract
Cluster validation constitutes one of the most challenging
problems in unsupervised cluster analysis. For example, identifying the true number of clusters present in a dataset has
been investigated for decades, and is still puzzling researchers
today. The difﬁculty stems from the high variety of the dataset
characteristics. Some datasets exhibit a strong structure with
a few well-separated and normally distributed clusters, but
most often real-world datasets contain possibly many overlapping non-gaussian clusters with heterogeneous variances
and shapes. This calls for the design of robust clustering algorithms that could adapt to the structure of the data and in
particular accurately guess the true number of clusters. They
have recently been interesting attempts to design such algorithms, e.g. based on involved non-parametric statistical inference techniques. In this paper, we develop Viral Clustering (VC), a simple algorithm that jointly estimates the number of clusters and outputs clusters. The VC algorithm relies on two antagonist and interacting components. The ﬁrst
component tends to regroup neighbouring samples together,
while the second component tends to spread samples in various clusters. This spreading component is performed using an
analogy with the way virus spread over networks. We present
extensive numerical experiments illustrating the robustness of
the VC algorithm, and its superiority compared to existing algorithms.

Related Work
There is a large number of algorithms estimating the true
number of clusters k ∗ . Most of them consist in running several instances of an arbitrary algorithm (usually k-means),
with various values of k. The output (i.e., the clusters) of
each instance is then processed and associated with a validation index that quantiﬁes the quality of the output. k ∗ is
ﬁnally obtained by maximizing/minimizing the index over
k. Some researchers have done extensive comparisons of the
various proposed validation indices. One of the earliest studies was carried out by Milligan and Cooper (1985) who provided an experimental summary of 30 different algorithms.
All experiments were done on artiﬁcial datasets and the results showed that the method based on the index proposed
in Calinski and Harabasz (1974) works best for determining
k∗ .
Bezdek et al. (1997) compared 23 different cluster validation indices. They used twelve datasets consisting of either
three or six Gaussian clusters. Summarising the outcomes by
counting the number of correct predictions of true k ∗ , they
found that Bozdogan’s (1993) AIC3 index performs the best.
Hardy (1996) tested seven indices using six algorithms and
six datasets with different structures. They discussed pros
and cons of each method and recommended to use a combination of several cluster analysis techniques and validation
indices for determining the true number of clusters.
More recently, Arbelaitz et al. (2013) compared 30 differ-

Introduction
Clustering is an important technique in data mining and has
many applications in machine learning, pattern recognition,
bioinformatics, etc. For a given dataset Xn×p = {xi }ni=1
consisting of n observations of p variables, the main task of
clustering is to divide the data into subgroups such that ‘similar’ observations appear in the same subgroup. In most clustering algorithms, the number of subgroups (clusters) should
be speciﬁed in advance. In many cases however, the true
number of clusters, denoted by k ∗ throughout the paper, has
to be guessed. In turn, determining k ∗ is important in cluster analysis, and therefore, has been investigated extensively
over the last few decades.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm, referred to
as VC (Viral Clustering), that jointly addresses the problem
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1986

