Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bayesian AutoEncoder:
Generation of Bayesian Networks with Hidden Nodes for Features
Kaneharu Nishino and Mary Inaba
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
{nishino.kaneharu, mary}@ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

part of a given datum from the rest. It obtains hidden variables as the features of given training data. The networks
constructed by BAE can behave as a Bayes Net, therefore
they can recognize features through belief propagations.
BAE ﬁrst constructs a two layer Bayes Net as a directed
complete bipartite graph that contains a visible layer of child
variable nodes and a hidden layer of parent variable nodes.
BAE adjusts its parameters and cuts some links so that the
network can predict input data. The variables are binary variables, which are either true (T) or false (F) (existent or non
existent respectively) of corresponding features. When the
network has been trained sufﬁciently, BAE stacks a new
hidden layer over the parent variables, and adjusts parameters between them in the same way. Thus BAE constructs a
multi-layer Bayes Net as a generative model, like Figure 2.
In this paper, we implemented BAE in order to construct the
Bayes Net with one parent layer and one child layer.
The parameters of the network are two types: Link
Strength (LS) and Conditional Probability (CP). LSs refer
to how each variable has links and how strongly each link
affects the inference. CPs represents conditional probabilities of child variables between parent variables. Updating
these parameters consists of two stages: updating LSs and
updating CPs. BAE carry out these stages alternately, based
on messages used in belief propagation. The LS between a
parent u and a child v is updated to the absolute value of the
correlation coefﬁcient between the message to v from u and
input value of v. p(v|u) the CPs between a parent u and a
child v are updated so that inference for v by messages only
from parents of v is correct.

Abstract
We propose Bayesian AutoEncoder (BAE) in order to construct a recognition system which uses feedback information.
BAE constructs a generative model of input data as a Bayes
Net. The network trained by BAE obtains its hidden variables
as the features of given data. It can execute inference for each
variable through belief propagation, using both feedforward
and feedback information. We conﬁrmed that BAE can construct small networks with one hidden layer and extract features as hidden variables from 3x3 and 5x5 pixel input data.

Introduction
In these days, Deep Learning has high performance in object
recognition tasks (Le 2013). It trains multi layer neural networks to extract patterns of given data. In trained networks,
nodes in the lower layers respond for simpler patterns (like
lines), and nodes in the higher layers respond for more complex patterns (like faces). This hierarchical architecture of
patterns is also found in our brains.
On the other hand, though the neural nets used in Deep
Learning generally have feedforward architectures, brains
have not only feedforward connection from the lower level
to the higher level but also feedback connections from the
higher to the lower. As the reason for these top-down connections, some studies propose that the information processing model of brains is based on a Bayesian Network (Bayes
Net) (Lee and Mumford 2002) (Shon and Rao 2005) (Rao
2005) (Kenji Doya and Rao 2007) (Matsumoto and Komatsu
2005) (Hosoya 2012). According to these studies, using predictions and attentions as top-down information, brains can
recognize objects along Bayes inference.
Based on these studies, we consider that multi layer Bayes
Net is necessary for making brainlike recognition system. In
this paper, we propose Bayesian AutoEncoder as a method
to construct multi layer Bayes Net as a recognition system.

/HDUQLQJ
3DUDPHWHUV
RI
/LQN6WUHQJWK
8

8

/HDUQLQJ
3DUDPHWHUVRI
&RQGLWLRQDO
3UREDELOLW\
7

8

9

9

9

7 9 )

YLVLEOH
ODWHQW

)

ODWHQW

Bayesian AutoEncoder
BAE is a method that constructs a generative model as a
Bayes Net. It decides the network structure and adjusts the
conditional probabilities so that the network can predict each

ODWHQW

7 9 )

YLVLEOH

Figure 2: An example of
Figure 1: Two stages of learning network construction by
BAE

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4244

