Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Building Earth Mover’s Distance on Bilingual
Word Embeddings for Machine Translation
Meng Zhang1 Yang Liu1,2 Huanbo Luan1 Maosong Sun1,2 Tatsuya Izuha3 Jie Hao4
1
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu, China
3
Toshiba Corporation Corporate Research & Development Center
4
Toshiba (China) R&D Center
zmlarry@foxmail.com, {liuyang.china, luanhuanbo}@gmail.com, sms@tsinghua.edu.cn
tatsuya.izuha@toshiba.co.jp, haojie@toshiba.com.cn

this goal and produced high quality bilingual word embeddings (Zou et al. 2013; Mikolov, Le, and Sutskever 2013;
Chandar A P et al. 2014; Hermann and Blunsom 2014;
Kočiský, Hermann, and Blunsom 2014; Gouws, Bengio, and
Corrado 2015; Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015; Vulić and
Moens 2015; Soyer, Stenetorp, and Aizawa 2015).
Despite these efforts, existing bilingual word embeddings
are still far from perfect due to the diversity and distinctiveness across natural languages. This is evidenced by the performance that leaves much to be desired on word translation,
one major task that has been explored to test the quality of
bilingual word embeddings.
However, the inadequate performance should also be attributed to the retrieval strategy for translation. Previously,
a source word is translated by simply searching the target vocabulary for the nearest neighbors of the word vector (Mikolov, Le, and Sutskever 2013; Gouws, Bengio, and
Corrado 2015; Vulić and Moens 2015). While this simple
strategy would be perfectly effective if the bilingual word
embeddings were ideal, it is not robust to variations in imperfect real settings due to its essentially local nature. As
an illustrative example, Figure 1(a) shows a case where
the nearest neighbor fails to translate both left-side words
correctly because a right-side word is too close to them.
To demonstrate the seriousness of this problem, we ﬁnd in
our English-Italian translation task that the nearest neighbor
makes nearly three quarters of source words (1693 out of
2266) share target proposals, and only 71 of them are validated by the lexicon. Moreover, the nearest neighbor exhibits a counterintuitive behavior when we reverse the translation direction: Retrieving the nearest neighbor for each
right-side word would result in correct translation in Figure
1(a). This asymmetry diverges from our general understanding of translation.
Conceptually, for the example in Figure 1, if we are able
to minimize the total distance incurred by the translation
paths subject to the one-to-one translation constraint, we
will successfully ﬁnd the correct translations, regardless of
translation direction. We capture this intuition by introducing the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD). It is a well-studied

Abstract
Following their monolingual counterparts, bilingual word
embeddings are also on the rise. As a major application task,
word translation has been relying on the nearest neighbor
to connect embeddings cross-lingually. However, the nearest
neighbor strategy suffers from its inherently local nature and
fails to cope with variations in realistic bilingual word embeddings. Furthermore, it lacks a mechanism to deal with manyto-many mappings that often show up across languages. We
introduce Earth Mover’s Distance to this task by providing a
natural formulation that translates words in a holistic fashion,
addressing the limitations of the nearest neighbor. We further
extend the formulation to a new task of identifying parallel
sentences, which is useful for statistical machine translation
systems, thereby expanding the application realm of bilingual word embeddings. We show encouraging performance
on both tasks.

Introduction
Over the past few years, distributed representations of
words, commonly referred to as word embeddings, have
shown promise for a range of natural language processing
tasks. They are welcomed by the community because they
represent words by continuous vectors and overcome many
limitations of the traditional discrete representations. Crucially, they allow capturing syntactic and semantic regularities of words by training neural networks on large-scale
corpora. For example, semantically similar words are close
to each other, and linear operations between word embeddings can capture interesting relationships between words
(Mikolov et al. 2013a; 2013b; Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig
2013).
With the increasing popularity of monolingual word embeddings, their bilingual counterparts are also gaining attention. Ideally, bilingual word embeddings should capture
cross-lingual regularities in addition to monolingual ones by,
for example, placing monolingual synonyms and their translations in a cluster. A number of recent works have pursued
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2870

