Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Stochastic Parallel Block Coordinate Descent
for Large-Scale Saddle Point Problems
Zhanxing Zhu and Amos J. Storkey
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
{zhanxing.zhu, a.storkey}@ed.ac.uk

strong-convexity parameter is often hard to determine. Additionally, it is currently unclear how to adapt the stepsize
for handling block separable problems.
In this work, we propose a novel stochastic and parallelizable approach for Sep-CCSP problem, which naturally handles convex cases that are not strongly convex and avoids
any notorious hyperparameter selection issues. This method
is also capable of dealing with block separable CCSP problem. In the following, we formally introduce the Sep-CSSP
problem and consider the two common machine learning instantiations of this problem.
The generic convex-concave saddle point problem is
written as

Abstract
We consider convex-concave saddle point problems
with a separable structure and non-strongly convex
functions. We propose an efﬁcient stochastic block coordinate descent method using adaptive primal-dual updates, which enables ﬂexible parallel optimization for
large-scale problems. Our method shares the efﬁciency
and ﬂexibility of block coordinate descent methods
with the simplicity of primal-dual methods and utilizing the structure of the separable convex-concave saddle point problem. It is capable of solving a wide range
of machine learning applications, including robust principal component analysis, Lasso, and feature selection
by group Lasso, etc. Theoretically and empirically, we
demonstrate signiﬁcantly better performance than stateof-the-art methods in all these applications.

1

min max {L(x, y) = f (x) + y, Ax − g ∗ (y)} ,

x∈Rn y∈Rm

(1)

where f (x) is a proper convex function, g ∗ is the convex conjugate of a convex function g, and A ∈ Rm×n .
Many machine learning tasks reduce to solving a problem
of this form. One important subclass of (1) is where f (x) or
g ∗ (y) exhibits an additive separable structure. We say f (x)
J
is separable when f (x) = j=1 fj (xj ), with xj ∈ Rnj ,
J
and j=1 nj = n. Separability for g ∗ (·) is deﬁned likewise. We can also partition matrix A into J column blocks
J
Aj ∈ Rm×nj , j = 1, . . . , J, and Ax = j=1 Aj xj , resulting in a problem of the form

Introduction

A large number of machine learning (ML) models can
be cast as convex-concave saddle point (CCSP) problems.
There are two common cases. First, convex optimization
problems with linear constraints can easily be reformulated as CCSP problems by introducing Lagrangian multipliers (Chen, Donoho, and Saunders 2001; Boyd et al. 2011;
Wainwright 2014). Second, empirical risk minimization
with regularization (ERM, (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2009)) can be reformulated as CCSP problem by conjugate dual transformation. In machine learning applications, these two groups of CCSP problems often exhibit a
separable additive structure. Developing efﬁcient optimization methods for seperable CCSP problems is especially
important for large-scale applications. Existing work, such
as (Zhang and Xiao 2015; Zhu and Storkey 2015a), assumes
the strong convexity of each of the separable functions, and
applies to ERM problems. Although the strong convexity assumption can be relaxed, there is no guide on how to select the extra regularization parameters. We also ﬁnd the
relaxation signiﬁcantly hinders convergence rates even for
post-hoc optimal choices of parameters. Furthermore, inappropriate parameter selection dramatically deteriorates the
practical performance. Even for strongly-convex systems the

minn maxm

x∈R y∈R

J


fj (xj ) +

j=1

J


y, Aj xj  − g ∗ (y).

(2)

j=1

We call problems of the form (2) Separable Convex Concave Saddle point (Sep-CCSP) problems. We develop an
efﬁcient optimization method for Sep-CCSP problems when
f (·) and/or g ∗ (·) are non-strongly convex; many ML methods result in a non-strongly convex Sep-CCSP form.
Example 1 Separable function minimization with linear
constraints takes the form
J
J


fi (xi ) s.t.
Ai xi = b,
(3)
min
x

i=1

i=1

leading to

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

min max L(x, y) =
x

2429

y

J

i=1

fi (xi )+y,

J

i=1

Ai xi −yT b (4)

