Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Optimal Aggregation of Uncertain Preferences
Ariel D. Procaccia

Nisarg Shah

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
nkshah@cs.cmu.edu

campaign strategy devised by Nicholas Biddle, the manager
of William Henry Harrison’s campaign for president of the
United States: “Let him say not one single word about his
principles, or his creed — let him say nothing — promise
nothing. Let no Committee, no convention — no town meeting ever extract from him a single word, about what he thinks
now, or what he will do hereafter. Let the use of pen and ink
be wholly forbidden as if he were a mad poet in Bedlam.”
Nevertheless, when voters actually vote in an election,
they are required to distill a deterministic vote. Aggregating
such votes ignores the underlying uncertainty. Sadly, even if
one had a way of taking uncertainty into account, political
election procedures are notoriously hard to change.
In contrast, the Internet has given rise to ﬂexible voting
platforms that draw on academic research; examples include
All Our Ideas (www.allourideas.org) — which has already
collected more than seven million votes, Pnyx (pnyx.dss.
in.tum.de), and Whale (http://whale3.noiraudes.net/whale3/
index.do). Much like political elections, these platforms currently ignore voters’ uncertainty regarding their own subjective preference. But uncertainty does exist. Even in smallscale settings such as a group of friends choosing a restaurant or a movie, uncertainty stems from lack of information,
knowledge, or deliberation time. This is also true in largescale settings. For example, All Our Ideas hosted a popular survey conducted by the New York City Mayor’s ofﬁce
to choose from various ideas to make NYC “greener and
greater”. But it is hard to accurately compare such ideas due
to their unpredictable overall impact on the city.
Motivated by the foregoing observations, the goal of this
paper is to study social consensus in the presence of voters’
uncertainty about their own subjective preferences, design
effective rules for eliciting and aggregating uncertain votes,
and quantify the beneﬁt of doing so.

Abstract
A paradigmatic problem in social choice theory deals with the
aggregation of subjective preferences of individuals — represented as rankings of alternatives — into a social ranking.
We are interested in settings where individuals are uncertain
about their own preferences, and represent their uncertainty
as distributions over rankings. Under the classic objective of
minimizing the (expected) sum of Kendall tau distances between the input rankings and the output ranking, we establish
that preference elicitation is surprisingly straightforward and
near-optimal solutions can be obtained in polynomial time.
We show, both in theory and using real data, that ignoring
uncertainty altogether can lead to suboptimal outcomes.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen a growing interest in the problem
of predicting the objective quality of alternatives based on
noisy votes over them (Conitzer and Sandholm 2005; Lu and
Boutilier 2011; Conitzer, Rognlie, and Xia 2009; Elkind,
Faliszewski, and Slinko 2010; Azari Souﬁani, Parkes, and
Xia 2012; Azari Souﬁani et al. 2013; Azari Souﬁani, Parkes,
and Xia 2014; Procaccia, Reddi, and Shah 2012; Jiang et al.
2014). Research on this problem is partly driven by applications to crowdsourcing (Procaccia, Reddi, and Shah 2012;
Caragiannis, Procaccia, and Shah 2013) and multiagent systems (Jiang et al. 2014) — domains where uncertainty stems
from the limited ability of voters to identify an objective
ground truth. In contrast, we study situations where voters
are uncertain about their own subjective preferences.
Taking a step back, we note that the rigorous study of social choice dates back to the late 18th Century, but, more
than two centuries later, its most prominent application —
political elections — is just as relevant. In an election, voters express their subjective preferences over the candidates,
and the goal is to reach social consensus among these possibly conﬂicting preferences. However, it is often difﬁcult
for voters to accurately determine their preferences due to
missing information. This issue is exacerbated as candidates
often try to hide their position on the sensitive issues that
voters care about. To illustrate this point, (Shepsle 1972)
gives the fascinating — albeit disturbing — example of the

Our approach. We use an expressive model of uncertainty:
We represent an uncertain vote as a distribution over rankings. On one end of the spectrum, a supremely conﬁdent
voter will report a distribution with singleton support. On the
other end of the spectrum, a clueless voter will report a uniform distribution. While in general this type of information
seems difﬁcult to elicit, we will show that, for our purposes,
it is sufﬁcient to ask queries of the form “how likely is it
that you prefer x to y?” Importantly, this is close in spirit to
pairwise comparison queries of the form “do you prefer x to

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

608

