Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

An Algorithmic Framework for Strategic Fair Division
Simina Brânzei

Ioannis Caragiannis

University of California Berkeley
simina.branzei@gmail.com

University of Patras
caragian@ceid.upatras.gr

David Kurokawa

Ariel D. Procaccia

Carnegie Mellon University
dkurokaw@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu
which stipulates that no agent would wish to swap its own
piece with that of another agent. At the heart of the cake cutting endeavor is the design of cake cutting protocols, which
specify an interaction between agents — typically via iterative steps of manipulating the cake — such that the ﬁnal
allocation is guaranteed to be proportional or envy-free.
The simplest cake cutting protocol is known as cut and
choose, and is designed for two agents. The ﬁrst agent cuts
the cake in two pieces that it values equally; the second agent
then chooses the piece that it prefers, leaving the ﬁrst agent
with the remaining piece. It is easy to see that this protocol
yields a proportional and envy-free allocation (in fact these
two notions coincide when there are only two agents and the
entire cake is allocated). However, taking a game-theoretic
point of view, it is immediately apparent that the agents can
often do better by disobeying the protocol when they know
each other’s valuations. For example, in the cut and choose
protocol, assume the ﬁrst agent only desires a speciﬁc small
piece of cake, whereas the second agent uniformly values
the cake. The ﬁrst agent can obtain its entire desired piece,
instead of just half of it, by carving that piece out.
So how would strategic agents behave when faced with
the cut and choose protocol? A standard way of answering
this question employs the notion of Nash equilibrium: each
agent would use a strategy that is a best response to the other
agent’s strategy. To set up a Nash equilibrium, suppose that
the ﬁrst agent cuts two pieces that the second agent values
equally; the second agent selects its more preferred piece,
and the one less preferred by the ﬁrst agent in case of a tie.
Clearly, the second agent cannot gain from deviating, as it is
selecting a piece that is at least as preferred as the other. As
for the ﬁrst agent, if it makes its preferred piece even bigger, the second agent would choose that piece, making the
ﬁrst agent worse off. Interestingly enough, in this equilibrium the tables are turned; now it is the second agent who
is getting exactly half of its value for the whole cake, while
the ﬁrst agent generally gets more. Crucially, the equilibrium
outcome is also proportional and envy-free. In other words,
even though the agents are strategizing rather than following the protocol, the outcome in equilibrium has the same
fairness properties as the “honest” outcome!
With this motivating example in mind, we would like to
make general statements regarding the equilibria of cake
cutting protocols. We wish to identify a general family of

Abstract
We study the paradigmatic fair division problem of fairly allocating a divisible good among agents with heterogeneous
preferences, commonly known as cake cutting. Classic cake
cutting protocols are susceptible to manipulation. Do their
strategic outcomes still guarantee fairness? To address this
question we adopt a novel algorithmic approach, proposing a
concrete computational model and reasoning about the gametheoretic properties of algorithms that operate in this model.
Speciﬁcally, we show that each protocol in the class of generalized cut and choose (GCC) protocols — which includes
the most important discrete cake cutting protocols — is guaranteed to have approximate subgame perfect Nash equilibria, or even exact equilibria if the protocol’s tie-breaking rule
is ﬂexible. We further observe that the (approximate) equilibria of proportional protocols — which guarantee each of
the n agents a 1/n-fraction of the cake — must be (approximately) proportional, thereby answering the above question
in the positive (at least for one common notion of fairness).

1

Introduction

A large body of literature deals with the so-called cake cutting problem — a misleadingly childish metaphor for the
challenging and important task of fairly dividing a heterogeneous divisible good among multiple agents (see the recent survey by Procaccia (2013) and the books by Brams
and Taylor (1996) and Robertson and Webb (1998)). In particular, there is a signiﬁcant amount of AI work on cake cutting (Procaccia 2009; Caragiannis, Lai, and Procaccia 2011;
Brams et al. 2012; Bei et al. 2012; Aumann, Dombb,
and Hassidim 2013; Kurokawa, Lai, and Procaccia 2013;
Brânzei, Procaccia, and Zhang 2013; Brânzei and Miltersen
2013; Chen et al. 2013; Balkanski et al. 2014; Brânzei
and Miltersen 2015; Segal-Halevi, Hassidim, and Aumann
2015), which is closely intertwined with emerging realworld applications of fair division more broadly (Goldman
and Procaccia 2014; Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Shah 2015).
Going back to the word “fairly”, two formal notions
of fairness have emerged as the most appealing and wellstudied in the context of cake cutting: proportionality, in
which each of the n agents receives at least a 1/n-fraction of
the entire cake according to its valuation; and envy-freeness,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

411

