Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Framework for Resolving Open-World Referential Expressions
in Distributed Heterogeneous Knowledge Bases
Tom Williams and Matthias Scheutz
Human-Robot Interaction Laboratory
Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
{williams,mscheutz}@cs.tufts.edu

Furthermore, accumulation of knowledge into a central,
homogeneous KB can create a bottleneck where computational resources become focused onto a single “stress point”
rather than balanced across the architecture’s components.
It may make more sense, for example, to keep information
about visual features such as pixels, textures, and edges localized to the vision component where they are actually processed and needed.
Finally, knowledge may be decentralized to facilitate
“lazy evaluation”. For example, consider a mapping component responsible for performing SLAM. On request, this
component may be able to determine whether one location is
“to the left down the hall” from another location, or whether
two locations are within a ﬁve-minute walk of each other.
However, it may not be necessary to make such decisions
until explicitly requested. If knowledge is centralized in a
single KB, then this information must be precomputed and
asserted into the knowledge base if it cannot otherwise be inferred – a potentially unnecessary expense if the information
is expensive to compute and unlikely to be requested.
The use of a distributed knowledge representation
scheme, however, also presents several challenges. For example, multiple aspects of an entity may be spread across
multiple KBs (e.g., visual aspects in the vision component,
action-based aspects in the manipulation component, linguistic aspects in the NLP component, etc.), and each such
KB may have its own form of representation (i.e., whatever
form is most natural for the internal operations of that component) and its own way of evaluating queries (especially
when “lazy evaluation” is employed).
Furthermore, it may be difﬁcult to determine which KB
should be queried in order to resolve a particular referential
expression. For example, if an interlocutor says “the ball
is in it”, it may not be clear whether candidate entities to
associate with “it” should be drawn from the set of objects
known to the vision component or from the set of locations
known to the mapping component.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. We ﬁrst discuss
previous approaches to reference resolution under different knowledge representation schemes. We then introduce
a framework that allows information from domain-speciﬁc
resolution techniques to be used together without the need
for a centralized KB. We then present an algorithm for performing reference resolution within that framework, analyze

Abstract
We present a domain-independent approach to reference resolution that allows a robotic or virtual agent to resolve references to entities (e.g., objects and locations) found in open
worlds when the information needed to resolve such references is distributed among multiple heterogeneous knowledge bases in its architecture. An agent using this approach
can combine information from multiple sources without the
computational bottleneck associated with centralized knowledge bases. The proposed approach also facilitates “lazy
constraint evaluation”, i.e., verifying properties of the referent through different modalities only when the information
is needed. After specifying the interfaces by which a reference resolution algorithm can request information from distributed knowledge bases, we present an algorithm for performing open-world reference resolution within that framework, analyze the algorithm’s performance, and demonstrate
its behavior on a simulated robot.

Introduction
For robotic or virtual situated agents to effectively engage
in natural language interactions with humans, they must be
able to identify the people, locations, and objects mentioned
by their human interlocutors. This ability, known as reference resolution (Garrod and Sanford 1994), is necessary in
order to discuss or carry out actions involving those people,
locations, and objects. In a robotic or virtual componentbased integrated agent architecture (e.g, DIARC, Scheutz et
al. 2013, or ROS, Quigley et al. 2009), knowledge may
be localized within different components instead of being
centralized in a single knowledge base (KB). This paper
presents an approach to solving several unique problems that
arise when knowledge is distributed in this manner.
Information in an integrated architecture may be decentralized for a variety of reasons. First and foremost, there
simply does not exist a single knowledge representation format that would allow a robot to efﬁciently deal with all representation and reasoning tasks it must perform. For example, information about entities recognized by a vision component will likely be stored in a substantially different manner than the map produced by a mapping component.
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3958

