Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Decidable Veriﬁcation of Golog Programs
over Non-Local Effect Actions
Benjamin Zarrieß

Jens Claßen

Theoretical Computer Science
TU Dresden, Germany
benjamin.zarriess@tu-dresden.de

Knowledge-Based Systems Group
RWTH Aachen University, Germany
classen@kbsg.rwth-aachen.de

guage’s high expressivity in terms of ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcation, range of action effects, and program constructs. For
this reason, there have recently been endeavours to identify
restricted, but non-trivial fragments of Golog where veriﬁcation (and hence other reasoning tasks such as projection)
becomes decidable, while a great deal of expressiveness is
retained.
So far, approaches to decidability (Claßen et al. 2014;
Zarrieß and Claßen 2014; De Giacomo, Lespérance, and Patrizi 2012) required action theories to be restricted such that
action effects are either context-free (not depend on the current state), local (only affect objects mentioned in the action’s parameters), or at least bounded (only affect a ﬁnite
number of objects). Examples that do not fall into either of
these categories are the classical briefcase domain (Pednault
1988) and exploding a bomb (Lin and Reiter 1997): When a
briefcase is moved, (unboundedly many, unmentioned) objects that are currently in it are being moved along, and if a
bomb explodes, everything in its vicinity is destroyed.
In this paper, we extend the results from (Zarrieß and
Claßen 2014) and present two new, more general classes of
action theories over the decidable FOL fragment C 2 that
also allow for context-sensitive, non-local, unbounded effects, i.e. actions that may affect an unbounded number of
possibly unnamed objects in a state-dependent fashion. In
our classes of action theories we do not impose any bound
on the number of affected objects, but restrict the dependencies between ﬂuents in the successor state axioms. This
allows for a much wider range of application domains, including the above mentioned briefcase and bomb examples.
In a transportation domain such as the briefcase example,
the action of moving a briefcase changes the location of objects represented by the ﬂuent predicate At. To describe the
actual set of objects affected one also has to refer to the ﬂuent predicate In relating the briefcase to its content. Thus,
the effect of the move action on At depends on In. The class
of acyclic theories is obtained by disallowing cyclic dependencies between ﬂuents, and another class we call ﬂat theories is obtained by resorting to quantiﬁer-free formulas for
deﬁning the set of affected objects. Both are syntactic restrictions and are decidable to check.
After proving that veriﬁcation of CTL∗ properties is generally undecidable for Golog, even when restricted to ground
actions and C 2 , we then show that for our new classes of

Abstract
The Golog action programming language is a powerful
means to express high-level behaviours in terms of programs over actions deﬁned in a Situation Calculus theory. In particular for physical systems, verifying that the
program satisﬁes certain desired temporal properties is
often crucial, but undecidable in general, the latter being due to the language’s high expressiveness in terms
of ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcation, range of action effects, and
program constructs. So far, approaches to achieve decidability involved restrictions where action effects either had to be context-free (i.e. not depend on the current
state), local (i.e. only affect objects mentioned in the action’s parameters), or at least bounded (i.e. only affect
a ﬁnite number of objects). In this paper, we introduce
two new, more general classes of action theories that allow for context-sensitive, non-local, unbounded effects,
i.e. actions that may affect an unbounded number of
possibly unnamed objects in a state-dependent fashion.
We contribute to the further exploration of the boundary between decidability and undecidability for Golog,
showing that for our new classes of action theories in the
two-variable fragment of ﬁrst-order logic, veriﬁcation
of CTL∗ properties of programs over ground actions is
decidable.

Introduction
When it comes to the design and programming of an autonomous agent, the Golog (Levesque et al. 1997) family of
action languages offers a powerful means to express highlevel behaviours in terms of complex programs whose basic building blocks are the primitive actions described in
a Situation Calculus (Reiter 2001) action theory. Golog’s
biggest advantage perhaps is the fact that a programmer
can freely combine imperative control structures with nondeterministic constructs, leaving it to the system to resolve
non-determinism in a suitable manner.
In particular when Golog is used to control physical
robots, it is often crucial to verify a program against some
speciﬁcation of desired behaviour, for example in order to
ensure liveness and safety properties, typically expressed by
means of temporal formulas. Unfortunately, the general veriﬁcation problem for Golog is undecidable due to the lanc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1109

