Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Improved Neural Machine Translation with SMT Features
Wei He, Zhongjun He,∗ Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang
Baidu Inc. No. 10, Shangdi 10th Street, Beijing, 100085, China
{hewei06, hezhongjun, wu hua, wanghaifeng}@baidu.com

2. The NMT decoder lacks a mechanism to guarantee that
all the source words are translated and usually favors
short translations. This sometimes results in an inadequate
translation that does not convey the complete meaning of
source sentence.
3. NMT models cannot make use of large amount of target
monolingual corpus. Therefore, it is difﬁcult for an NMT
system to beneﬁt from target language model trained on
target monolingual corpus, which is proven to be useful for improving translation quality in statistical machine
translation (SMT).
Luong et al. (2015) used a dictionary to translate the
OOV words in a post-processing step. Gulcehre et al. (2015)
proposed two ways to integrate a recurrent neural network
(RNN) based language model into the NMT model. However, these methods only focus on one of the above NMT
problems.
Intuitively, these problems could be alleviated with some
of the SMT components, such as the translation table, the
n-gram language model. Nevertheless, the current NMT
framework suffers from a fact that it is difﬁcult to add effective features into the model to further improve translation
quality.
In this paper, we propose to improve NMT by integrating SMT features with the NMT model under the log-linear
framework. We incorporate 3 SMT features, including the
translation model, the word reward feature and the n-gram
language model. The translation model is trained on wordaligned bilingual corpus with the conventional phrase-based
SMT approach (Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003), and employed to score word pairs and alleviate the OOV problem.
The word reward feature controls the length of the translation. And the n-gram language model aims to enhance the
local ﬂuency which is trained on target monolingual sentences.
Compared to previous methods, our method has the following advantages:
1. The log-linear framework makes an NMT system be easily extended. It can be integrated with effective features
used in conventional SMT models.
2. We integrate a word translation table into the log-linear
framework with the translation probabilities estimated
from the word-aligned bilingual corpus which is trained

Abstract
Neural machine translation (NMT) conducts end-to-end
translation with a source language encoder and a target language decoder, making promising translation performance.
However, as a newly emerged approach, the method has some
limitations. An NMT system usually has to apply a vocabulary of certain size to avoid the time-consuming training and
decoding, thus it causes a serious out-of-vocabulary problem.
Furthermore, the decoder lacks a mechanism to guarantee all
the source words to be translated and usually favors short
translations, resulting in ﬂuent but inadequate translations. In
order to solve the above problems, we incorporate statistical machine translation (SMT) features, such as a translation
model and an n-gram language model, with the NMT model
under the log-linear framework. Our experiments show that
the proposed method signiﬁcantly improves the translation
quality of the state-of-the-art NMT system on Chinese-toEnglish translation tasks. Our method produces a gain of up
to 2.33 BLEU score on NIST open test sets.

Introduction
Neural networks have recently been applied to machine
translation and begun to show promising results. Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le (2014) and Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio (2014) directly built neural networks to perform end-toend translation, named neural machine translation (NMT).
Typically, an NMT system contains two components, an encoder that converts a source sentence into a vector, and a
decoder that generates target translation based on the vector.
The strength of NMT lies in that the semantic and structural information can be learned by taking global context
into consideration. However, as a newly emerged approach,
the NMT method has some limitations that may jeopardize
its ability to generate better translation.
1. To reduce model complexity, an NMT system usually
uses the top-N frequent words in the training corpus
and regards other words as unseen ones, which causes
a serious out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem. When OOV
words occur in the sentences to be translated, the translation quality would be badly hurt.
∗

Corresponding author: Zhongjun He hezhongjun@baidu.com.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

151

