Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Logical Foundations of Privacy-Preserving
Publishing of Linked Data
Bernardo Cuenca Grau and Egor V. Kostylev
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK

of actual data; this is in contrast to the less stringent requirements of certain applications, where it sufﬁces to publish the
results of data analysis (e.g., statistics about groups of individuals, or association rules), instead of the data itself.
The most popular form of PPDP is anonymisation, where
explicit individual identiﬁers and/or the values of certain
sensitive attributes are obfuscated. Early approaches to
database anonymisation involved the removal of just the
identiﬁers of record owners. Sweeney (2002), however,
demonstrated the threats posed by information linkage when
they disclosed conﬁdential medical records by linking a
medical database where patient names and Social Security
Numbers had been anonymised with a public voter list containing postcode, gender, and age information. As a result,
PPDP has become an increasingly important problem in recent years and several anonymisation techniques have been
proposed in the context of relational databases.1
Our goal in this paper is to lay the theoretical foundations
for PPDP in the context of Linked Data, with a focus on
the semantic requirements that an anonymised RDF graph
should satisfy before being released to Web, as well as on
the computational complexity of checking whether such requirements are fulﬁlled. Clearly, these are fundamental steps
towards the development of optimised anonymisation algorithms suitable for applications.
In our privacy model, we assume that an anonymised RDF
graph G (or, more generally, a relational dataset with labelled null values) is obtained from the original graph G0
by replacing some occurrences of IRIs in triples with blank
nodes. The sensitive information in G0 that we aim to protect against disclosure is represented by a SPARQL query p,
which we refer to as a policy. An essential requirement in
this setting is that none of the sensitive answers to p hold
in G, in which case we say that G is policy-compliant. Although policy compliance ensures that the sensitive information is protected when G is considered in isolation, it
provides no guarantee against disclosure once G is released
to the Web and can be freely linked with arbitrary external
data. To address this limitation we formulate an additional
safety requirement, which ensures that G can be released
with provable protection guarantees against linkage attacks.

Abstract
The widespread adoption of Linked Data has been driven by
the increasing demand for information exchange between organisations, as well as by data publishing regulations in domains such as health care and governance. In this setting,
sensitive information is at risk of disclosure since published
data can be linked with arbitrary external data sources.
In this paper we lay the foundations of privacy-preserving
data publishing (PPDP) in the context of Linked Data. We
consider anonymisations of RDF graphs (and, more generally, relational datasets with labelled nulls) and deﬁne notions
of safe and optimal anonymisations. Safety ensures that the
anonymised data can be published with provable protection
guarantees against linking attacks, whereas optimality ensures that it preserves as much information from the original
data as possible, while satisfying the safety requirement. We
establish the complexity of the underpinning decision problems both under open-world semantics inherent to RDF and
a closed-world semantics, where we assume that an attacker
has complete knowledge over some part of the original data.

1

Introduction

A key advantage of the Linked Data paradigm (Bizer, Heath,
and Berners-Lee 2009) is the ability to seamlessly publish
and connect semi-structured data on the Web, thus facilitating information sharing and data analysis. Linked Data is
based on the RDF data model (Manola and Miller 2004),
which provides the means for establishing relationships between objects uniquely identiﬁed on the Web, and the RDF
query language SPARQL (Harris and Seaborne 2013).
The widespread adoption of Linked Data has been driven
by the increasing demand for information exchange between
organisations, as well as by regulations in domains such as
health care and governance that require certain data to be
made available. Data publishing, however, can lead to the
disclosure of sensitive information and hence to the violation
of individual privacy—a risk that is exacerbated whenever
published data can be linked with external data sources.
Privacy-preserving data publishing (PPDP) refers to the
problem of protecting individual privacy while at the same
time ensuring that published data remains practically useful
for analysis. In PPDP there is an emphasis in the publication
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For details, we refer the reader to the excellent survey in (Fung
et al. 2010) and our Related Techniques section.

943

