Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Behavioral Experiments in Email Filter Evasion
Liyiming Ke and Bo Li and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN

collecting many labeled instances of emails, where labels
correspond to bad (spam) and normal (non-spam, sometimes called ham) emails. Emails themselves are represented
quantitatively as feature vectors, with features often corresponding to presence or absence of speciﬁc indicator words
or phrases, and a classiﬁcation algorithm, such as Naive
Bayes or Support Vector Machine (Bishop 2007) is run on
the data to obtain a classiﬁer which, given an arbitrary email
instance (coded into features) outputs a decision whether
this instance is spam or ham. For a given labeled data set,
machine learning algorithms have come to be extremely
good at detecting spam. The problem is that spammers have
themselves become quite sophisticated in the techniques of
ﬁlter evasion, or manipulating the spam email templates
to bypass common ﬁltering techniques. A typical approach
in the ﬁeld is a cat-and-mouse game in which a classiﬁer
is re-trained on new data at regular intervals, and spammers routinely change behavior in response (Goodman, Cormack, and Heckerman 2007). Clearly, a more proactive approach is called for, and a literature emerged with a focus on
modeling and algorithmic assessment of the classiﬁer (ﬁlter) evasion problem as well as associated proactive learning algorithm design (Dalvi et al. 2004; Lowd and Meek
2005a; Vorobeychik and Li 2014; Li and Vorobeychik 2014;
2015) In these highly stylized models, a spammer is typically viewed as aiming to minimize the number of edits to
an “ideal” spam email template (for example, because modiﬁcations to the ideal instance adversely affect the associated response rate), subject to a hard constraint that the email
evades the ﬁlter. While much progress has been made in considering an explicit model of spammer evasion, the central
limitation of all of this literature is that the models are not
grounded in actual spammer behavior.

Abstract
Despite decades of effort to combat spam, unwanted and even
malicious emails, such as phish which aim to deceive recipients into disclosing sensitive information, still routinely ﬁnd
their way into one’s mailbox. To be sure, email ﬁlters manage to stop a large fraction of spam emails from ever reaching users, but spammers and phishers have mastered the art
of ﬁlter evasion, or manipulating the content of email messages to avoid being ﬁltered. We present a unique behavioral experiment designed to study email ﬁlter evasion. Our
experiment is framed in somewhat broader terms: given the
widespread use of machine learning methods for distinguishing spam and non-spam, we investigate how human subjects
manipulate a spam template to evade a classiﬁcation-based
ﬁlter. We ﬁnd that adding a small amount of noise to a ﬁlter
signiﬁcantly reduces the ability of subjects to evade it, observing that noise does not merely have a short-term impact,
but also degrades evasion performance in the longer term.
Moreover, we ﬁnd that greater coverage of an email template by the classiﬁer (ﬁlter) features signiﬁcantly increases
the difﬁculty of evading it. This observation suggests that
aggressive feature reduction—a common practice in applied
machine learning—can actually facilitate evasion. In addition
to the descriptive analysis of behavior, we develop a synthetic
model of human evasion behavior which closely matches observed behavior and effectively replicates experimental ﬁndings in simulation.

Introduction
Email has come to be a mainstay of our daily lives. According to a 2012 McKinsey report people spend on average 28%
of workday activities using email. Nie et al. have suggested
that an average email user loses 10 working days each year
dealing with such emails (Nie et al. 2005), and most estimates have placed worldwide cost of spam to over 10 billion
dollars (Zeller Jr 2005).
Decades of research have yielded numerous methods
for designing spam ﬁlters making use of knowledge engineering (Mason 2004) and machine (typically, classiﬁcation) learning (Sakkis et al. 2003; Carreras and Marquez 2001), with the latter having become the prominent
paradigm (Goodman, Cormack, and Heckerman 2007). In
simple terms, the machine learning approach works by

To address this limitation, we present the ﬁrst human subject study of adversarial evasion of a classiﬁcation-based
spam ﬁlter. In our experiments, 265 human subjects, recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk, each faced a task
of editing an initial spam or phishing email template in order
to achieve two objectives: ﬁrst, bypass a ﬁlter, and second,
remain close to the original. Our treatments were explicitly
designed to investigate two hypotheses. The ﬁrst hypothesis
was that adding a small amount of noise to ﬁltering decisions
signiﬁcantly reduces the subjects’ ability to evade it. While
prior work exists investigating the design of optimal ran-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

827

