Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Achieving Stable and Fair Proﬁt Allocation with
Minimum Subsidy in Collaborative Logistics
Lucas Agussurja and Hoong Chuin Lau and Shih-Fen Cheng
{lagussurja, hclau, sfcheng}@smu.edu.sg
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University

manager then generates plans for assigning demands to vehicles according to some mutually agreed operational rules.
Finally, the coalition manager also decides how revenue
should be split among coalition members (e.g., if one of A’s
customers is served by B’s vehicle, how should A and B
split the revenue). From the regulator’s point of view, this is
highly desirable as coalitions can lead to higher vehicle utilization, thus reducing road congestion and pollution. However, coalition is not always desirable for individual LSPs,
as they might be concerned about privacy, competitiveness,
and most importantly, the fairness of how beneﬁts are distributed among coalition members. In other words, for an
individual LSP, even when it could beneﬁt from a coalition,
if it perceives that other members receive more beneﬁts than
they deserve out of this coalition, it might decide to leave the
coalition.
Summarizing the above problem context, we can see that
there are two important decision criteria that we need to satisfy: 1) coalitions must bring sufﬁcient beneﬁts to prevent
agents from leaving; and 2) the distribution of beneﬁts has
to be perceived as fair by agents. An ideal theoretical framework that considers both decision making criteria is cooperative game theory, which studies interactions of players in
an environment where they can form coalitions to generate
surplus that can then be allocated back to their members.
Formally speaking, the solution of the game is a vector of
payment amounts for all agents, and the properties we are
seeking are stability and fairness. When a solution is said
to be stable, no subset of agents should have incentives to
break away and operate independently. Solutions satisfying
stability criterion are said to be in the core, which is a wellstudied solution concept. The fairness criterion, on the other
hand, is characterized by the notion of Shapley value (Shapley 1953), which is a unique vector of payments that reﬂects
the relative importance of individual agents. It essentially
ensures that the payment received by an agent reﬂects the
normalized value he brings to all potential coalitions.
The above idea of combining the core and the Shapley
value seems straightforward, however, its implementation
could potentially be very difﬁcult and challenging. In addressing these challenges, we make the following contributions. First, we show that under our model, stability can
always be achieved, i.e., the core is nonempty. The Shapley value, however, might not be in the core. To address

Abstract
With the advent of e-commerce, logistics providers are faced
with the challenge of handling ﬂuctuating and sparsely distributed demand, which raises their operational costs significantly. As a result, horizontal cooperation are gaining momentum around the world. One of the major impediments,
however, is the lack of stable and fair proﬁt sharing mechanism. In this paper, we address this problem using the framework of computational cooperative games. We ﬁrst present
cooperative vehicle routing game as a model for collaborative logistics operations. Using the axioms of Shapley value
as the conditions for fairness, we show that a stable, fair and
budget balanced allocation does not exist in many instances
of the game. By relaxing budget balance, we then propose an
allocation scheme based on the normalized Shapley value. We
show that this scheme maintains stability and fairness while
requiring minimum subsidy. Finally, using numerical experiments we demonstrate the feasibility of the scheme under
various settings.

Introduction
With the prevalence of e-commerce in almost all categories of retail industry, great pressure for changes has been
mounted for logistics service providers (LSPs). An obvious challenge is the increasingly unpredictable and ﬂuctuating demands. To adapt to this new trend, we are beginning to see various form of horizontal cooperations among
LSPs around the world. Such horizontal cooperations help
to reduce empty mileage, increase quality of service, enable
strategic inventory repositioning, and increase environmental sustainability. Despite these obvious beneﬁts, many LSPs
still choose not to join the collaboration, mainly due to the
lack of fair allocation mechanisms (Cruijssen, Cools, and
Dullaert 2007). In this work, we seek to address this problem using the framework of cooperative game theory.
To help readers understand the context of the problem
and our motivation, we ﬁrst explain how horizontal cooperation works in urban (sometimes known as last-mile) logistics. In our setting, there are multiple independent LSPs
owning vehicle ﬂeets and customer demands, and agree to
form coalitions by sharing their demands as well as ﬂeet
capacities to deliver such demands. A designated coalition
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3785

