Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

User-Centric Affective Computing of Image Emotion Perceptions
Sicheng Zhao, Hongxun Yao, Wenlong Xie, Xiaolei Jiang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.
zsc@hit.edu.cn; h.yao@hit.edu.cn; wlxie@hit.edu.cn; xljiang@hit.edu.cn
Appendix: https://sites.google.com/site/schzhao/

Abstract
We propose to predict the personalized emotion perceptions of images for each viewer. Different factors that
may inﬂuence emotion perceptions, including visual
content, social context, temporal evolution, and location inﬂuence are jointly investigated via the presented
rolling multi-task hypergraph learning. For evaluation,
we set up a large scale image emotion dataset from
Flickr, named Image-Emotion-Social-Net, with over 1
million images and about 8,000 users. Experiments conducted on this dataset demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed method, as compared to state-of-the-art.

(a) Original image

Title: Light in Darkness
Tags: london, stormy, dramatic weather, …
Description: …there was a break in the
clouds … while the sky behind remained
somewhat foreboding. I thought it made
for a pretty intense scene….

Expected emotion:
Emotion category: fear
Sentiment: negative
Valence: 4.1956
Arousal: 4.4989
Dominance: 4.8378

(b) Image metadata

(c) Expected emotion

Comments to this image from different viewers
Personalized emotion labels
Wow, that is fantastic...it looks so incredible, like a Emotion: awe, Sentiment: positive
painting...slightly unreal. That sky is amazing.
V: 7.121 A: 4.479 D: 6.635
Emotion: excitement, Sentiment: positive
Yup a fave for me as well. Exciting drama at its best.
V: 7.950 A: 6.950 D: 7.210
Hey, it really frightened me! My little daughter just Emotion: fear, Sentiment: negative
looked scared.
V: 2.625 A: 5.805 D: 3.625

(d) Personalized emotion labels

Figure 1: Illustration of personalized image emotion perceptions in social networks. Related emotions are obtained using the keywords in red.

Motivation
Images can convey rich semantics and evoke strong emotions in viewers. Most existing works on image emotion
analysis tried to ﬁnd features that can express emotions better to bridge the affective gap (Zhao et al. 2014). These
methods are mainly image centric, focusing on the dominated emotions for the majority of viewers.
However, the emotions that are evoked in viewers by an
image are highly subjective and different (Zhao et al. 2015),
as shown in Figure 1. Therefore, predicting the personalized
emotion perceptions for each viewer is more reasonable and
important. In such cases, the emotion prediction task becomes user centric. We build a large-scale dataset for this
task and classify personalized emotion perceptions.

Problem Deﬁnition
Formally, a user ui in social networks observes an image xit at time t, and her perceived emotion after viewing the image is yit . Before viewing xit , the user ui may
have seen many other images. Among them we select the
recent past ones, which are believed to inﬂuence the current emotion. These selected images comprise a set Si . The
emotional social network is formulized as a hybrid hypergraph G = {U, X , S}, E, W. Each vertex v in vertex set
V = {U , X , S} is a compound triple (u, x, S), where u represents user, x and S are the current image and the recent
past images, named as ‘Target Image’ and ‘History Image
Set’, respectively. Note that in this triple, both x and S are
viewed by user u. E ⊂ V × V is the hyperedge set. Each hyperedge e of E represents a link between two vertexes based
on one component of the triple and is assigned with a weight
w(e). W is the diagonal matrix of the edge weights.
Mathematically, the task of personalized emotion prediction is to ﬁnd the appropriate mapping for each user ui

The Image-Emotion-Social-Net Dataset
We set up the ﬁrst large-scale dataset on personalized image emotion perception, named Image-Emotion-Social-Net,
with over 1 million images downloaded from Flickr. To get
the personalized emotion labels, ﬁrstly we use traditional
lexicon-based methods to obtain the text segmentation results of the title, tags and descriptions from uploaders for expected emotions and the comments from viewers for actual
emotions. Then we compute the average value of valence,
arousal and dominance (VAD) of the segmentation results as
ground truth for dimensional emotion representation based
on the VAD norms of 13,915 English lemmas (Warriner, Kuperman, and Brysbaert 2013). See Appendix A1 for details.

f : (G, yi1 , ..., yi(t−1) ) → yit .

(1)

Rolling Multi-Task Hypergraph Learning
Rolling multi-task hypergraph learning (RMTHG) is presented to jointly combine the various factors that may inﬂuence emotion perception: visual content, social context,
temporal evolution, and location inﬂuence. The framework

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4284

