Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reinforcement Learning with Parameterized Actions
Warwick Masson and Pravesh Ranchod

George Konidaris

School of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
University of Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa
warwick.masson@students.wits.ac.za
pravesh.ranchod@wits.ac.za

Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, North Carolina 27708
gdk@cs.duke.edu

a direct policy search method. We show that with appropriate update rules Q-PAMDP converges to a local optimum.
These methods are compared empirically in the goal and
Platform domains. We found that Q-PAMDP out-performed
direct policy search and ﬁxed parameter SARSA.

Abstract
We introduce a model-free algorithm for learning in Markov
decision processes with parameterized actions—discrete actions with continuous parameters. At each step the agent must
select both which action to use and which parameters to use
with that action. We introduce the Q-PAMDP algorithm for
learning in these domains, show that it converges to a local
optimum, and compare it to direct policy search in the goalscoring and Platform domains.

1

2

Background

A Markov decision process (MDP) is a tuple S, A, P, R, γ,
where S is a set of states, A is a set of actions, P (s, a, s ) is
the probability of transitioning to state s from state s after
taking action a, R(s, a, r) is the probability of receiving reward r for taking action a in state s, and γ is a discount factor
(Sutton and Barto 1998). We wish to ﬁnd a policy, π(a|s),
which selects an action for each state so as to maximize the
expected sum of discounted rewards (the return).
The value function V π (s) is deﬁned as the expected discounted return achieved by policy π starting at state s
∞


γ t rt .
V π (s) = Eπ

Introduction

Reinforcement learning agents typically have either a discrete or a continuous action space (Sutton and Barto 1998).
With a discrete action space, the agent decides which distinct
action to perform from a ﬁnite action set. With a continuous
action space, actions are expressed as a single real-valued
vector. If we use a continuous action space, we lose the ability to consider differences in kind: all actions must be expressible as a single vector. If we use only discrete actions,
we lose the ability to ﬁnely tune action selection based on
the current state.
A parameterized action is a discrete action parameterized
by a real-valued vector. Modeling actions this way introduces structure into the action space by treating different
kinds of continuous actions as distinct. At each step an agent
must choose both which action to use and what parameters
to execute it with. For example, consider a soccer playing
robot which can kick, pass, or run. We can associate a continuous parameter vector to each of these actions: we can
kick the ball to a given target position with a given force,
pass to a speciﬁc position, and run with a given velocity.
Each of these actions is parameterized in its own way. Parameterized action Markov decision processes (PAMDPs)
model situations where we have distinct actions that require
parameters to adjust the action to different situations, or
where there are multiple mutually incompatible continuous
actions.
We focus on how to learn an action-selection policy
given pre-deﬁned parameterized actions. We introduce the
Q-PAMDP algorithm, which alternates learning actionselection and parameter-selection policies and compare it to

t=0

Similarly, the action-value function is given by
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [r0 + γV π (s )] ,
as the expected return obtained by taking action a in state
s, and then following policy π thereafter. While using the
value function in control requires a model, we would prefer
to do so without needing such a model. We can approach
this problem by learning Q, which allows us to directly select the action which maximizes Qπ (s, a). We can learn Q
for an optimal policy using a method such as Q-learning
(Watkins and Dayan 1992). In domains with a continuous
state space, we can represent Q(s, a) using parametric function approximation with a set of parameters ω and learn this
with algorithms such as gradient descent SARSA(λ) (Sutton
and Barto 1998).
For problems with a continuous action space (A ⊆ Rm ),
selecting the optimal action with respect to Q(s, a) is nontrivial, as it requires ﬁnding a global maximum for a function in a continuous space. We can avoid this problem using
a policy search algorithm, where a class of policies parameterized by a set of parameters θ is given, which transforms
the problem into one of direct optimization over θ for an
objective function J(θ). Several policy search approaches

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1934

