Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting Personal Traits from Facial Images Using Convolutional
Neural Networks Augmented with Facial Landmark Information
Yoad Lewenberg

Yoram Bachrach

Sukrit Shankar

Antonio Criminisi

The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Machine Intelligence Lab (MIL),
Cambridge University

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

not resistant to real-world variations in data such as multiple view-points (c) they use non-automatic pre-processing
methods such as hand-labeling of key facial regions.
Deep learning based procedures can automatically learn
a diverse set of low and high-level representations directly
from the image data, and thus overcome most problems
posed by approaches based on hand-designed features. Also,
deep nets have been proven to build large-scale applications (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). Given the
promise of deep learning and the nature of our problem
where we aim to predict attributes ranging from objective
to very subjective ones, from a diverse set of facial images,
we resort to CNN based models for designing our algorithm.

Abstract
We consider the task of predicting various traits of a person given an image of their face. We aim to estimate traits
such as gender, ethnicity and age, as well as more subjective
traits as the emotion a person expresses or whether they are
humorous or attractive. Due to the recent surge of research
on Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), we begin by using a CNN architecture, and corroborate that CNNs
are promising for facial attribute prediction. To further improve performance, we propose a novel approach that incorporates facial landmark information for input images as
an additional channel, helping the CNN learn face-speciﬁc
features so that the landmarks across various training images hold correspondence. We empirically analyze the performance of our proposed method, showing consistent improvement over the baselines across traits. We demonstrate our system on a sizeable Face Attributes Dataset (FAD), comprising
of roughly 200,000 labels, for 10 most sought-after traits, for
over 10,000 facial images.

Face Attributes Dataset (FAD) and Analysis
We present a sizeable Face Attributes Dataset (FAD) for
evaluation purposes. The dataset has been created using
crowd-sourcing from Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT),
with several redundant labels aggregated using majority
vote (Kosinski et al. 2012; Bachrach et al. 2012a). 1 Our
dataset consists of 10,000 facial images of celebrities (public ﬁgures), where each image is tagged with various traits
of the individual. We choose 10 most sought-after facial attributes on Google and Bing, as listed in Table 1. As our
target variables, we have considered the traits: ender, ethnicity, age, make-up and hair color, emotional expression,
attractiveness, humorousness and chubbiness. The dataset
contains roughly 200,000 attribute labels.
Methodology: We begin by applying one of the most famous CNN architectures (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) for our prediction task, widely known as AlexNet
(Fig 1). Since in our problem, an image can have multiple
traits (labels), training a CNN with sigmoid cross-entropy
loss function (Jia et al. 2014) comes as a natural choice.
However, we ﬁnd that for our prediction task where the facial attributes are very subtle to detect, training with a multilabel loss does not give good performance even after repeated manual tuning of the weight regularization parameter. We thus train one net for each given trait by applying a softmax loss function, since the classes for any given
trait cannot co-occur. This achieves better generalized per-

Introduction
Humans ﬁnd it very easy to determine various traits of other
people, simply by looking at them. Without almost any conscious effort, a glimpse at another person’s face is sufﬁcient
for us to ascertain their gender, age or ethnicity. We can also
easily decide whether they are attractive, look funny or are
approachable; and can even ﬁgure out the emotion they display, like whether they appear sad, happy or surprised. As
social creatures, making such inference is clearly important
to us. Imparting commensurate capabilities to machines is
bound to enable very interesting applications. However, in
contrast to the relative ease in which humans infer such personal traits of an individual from their facial image, training
a machine to do the same is a challenging task.

Related Work
Most prior methods for facial attribute analysis have been
based on hand-crafted features such as color histograms and
histogram of oriented gradients (Kumar et al. 2009). Despite their reasonable success, these solutions typically suffer from one or more of the following problems: (a) they
are speciﬁcally tailored to a single task at hand; (b) they are
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For simplicity, we avoided other aggregation methods (Welinder et al. 2010; Bachrach et al. 2012b; Venanzi et al. 2014).

4365

