Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deploying PAWS to Combat Poaching: Game-Theoretic
Patrolling in Areas with Complex Terrain (Demonstration)
Fei Fang,1 Thanh H. Nguyen,1 Rob Pickles,2 Wai Y. Lam,2,3
Gopalasamy R. Clements,2,3,6 Bo An4 , Amandeep Singh5 , Milind Tambe1
1

{feifang,thanhhng,tambe}@usc.edu, University of Southern California, USA
rpickles@panthera.org, Panthera, USA, 3 waiyeee@gmail.com, Rimba, Malaysia
4
boan@ntu.edu.sg, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 5 as4330@columbia.edu, Columbia University, USA
6
reuben@myrimba.org, Kenyir Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Terengganu, Malaysia
2

resources to combat poaching. PAWS was the ﬁrst proposed
application in the subarea of “green security games” (Fang,
Stone, and Tambe 2015; Kar et al. 2015). Speciﬁcally, PAWS
solves a repeated Stackelberg security game and calculates
the optimal patrol strategy while balancing the priorities of
different locations with different animal densities. Subsequent research has worked on the signiﬁcant evolution of
PAWS and several novel research advances are made, leading to its current regular use in Malaysia in collaboration
with two Non-Governmental Organizations: Panthera and
Rimba. One major advance in the deployed PAWS system is
that it considers topographic information, which is critically
important since high changes in elevation and the access
to water source may result in a big difference in the effort
needed for patrollers’ movement and poachers’ movement.
PAWS incorporates elevation information and land features
and uses a novel hierarchical modeling approach to build a
virtual “street map” of the conservation area. Building on
the street map, PAWS uses a novel algorithm which handles payoff uncertainty using the concept of minimax regret
(Nguyen et al. 2015), while simultaneously ensuring scalability via the cutting plane framework (Yang et al. 2013).

Abstract
The conservation of key wildlife species such as tigers and
elephants are threatened by poaching activities. In many conservation areas, foot patrols are conducted to prevent poaching but they may not be well-planned to make the best use of
the limited patrolling resources. While prior work has introduced PAWS (Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security) as
a game-theoretic decision aid to design effective foot patrol
strategies to protect wildlife, the patrol routes generated by
PAWS may be difﬁcult to follow in areas with complex terrain. Subsequent research has worked on the signiﬁcant evolution of PAWS, from an emerging application to a regularly
deployed software. A key advance of the deployed version of
PAWS is that it incorporates the complex terrain information
and generates a strategy consisting of easy-to-follow routes.
In this demonstration, we provide 1) a video introducing the
PAWS system; 2) an interactive visualization of the patrol
routes generated by PAWS in an example area with complex
terrain; and 3) a machine-human competition in designing patrol strategy given complex terrain and animal distribution.

Introduction
Poaching represents a serious threat to our ecosystems and
sustainable development, and the population of many key
species is declining at an alarming rate with poaching considered a major driver. For example, over 1400 tigers have
been poached in 2000–2012 according to the seizure of tiger
parts recorded (Stoner and Pervushina 2013). To combat
poaching, law enforcement agencies have been making efforts, with one commonly used approach being conducting
foot patrols. However, one main challenge is on improving
the efﬁciency of patrols given the limited patrol resources
and the vast areas in need of protection.
Game theory has become a well-established paradigm
for optimizing the use of limited security and patrol resources and a number of security-game based decision support systems have previously been successfully deployed in
the real-world to protect critical infrastructure such as airports, ﬂights, ports, and metro trains (Tambe 2011).
Inspired by this success, PAWS (Protection Assistant for
Wildlife Security) (Yang et al. 2014) has been introduced
as a game-theoretic solution for optimizing the use of patrol

Patrol Strategy Generation in PAWS
The input data of PAWS include elevation and other terrain
information, as well as previous patrol tracks and observations (animals and human activities) made during previous
patrols. Animal distribution and human activity distribution
are estimated from input data.
Based on this information, PAWS builds a repeated Stackelberg security game model where the patrollers (defender)
conduct randomized patrols against poachers (attackers)
who place snares in the conservation area. The conservation
area is discretized into 1km by 1km grid cells and each grid
cell is treated as a target. Each target is associated with payoff values indicating the reward and penalty for the patrollers
and the poachers. The values are decided by the animal distribution, which is difﬁcult to precisely estimate and may
have seasonal change, leading to uncertainty in the values.
In this game, the defender chooses a patrol strategy, which
is a probability distribution over feasible patrol routes and
the attackers will respond to the patrol strategy by choosing a target to place snares. A feasible patrol route should
satisfy constraints such as patrol time limit and starting and

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4355

