Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

DinTucker: Scaling Up Gaussian Process
Models on Large Multidimensional Arrays
Shandian Zhe,1 Yuan Qi,1 Youngja Park,2 Zenglin Xu,3 Ian Molloy,2 and Suresh Chari2
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
2
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
3
School of Comp. Sci. & Eng., Big Data Res. Center, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

function prior models (Lloyd et al. 2012), have been proposed. Theoretically justiﬁed by the generalization of de
Finetti’s theorem for RCE arrays (Aldous 1981; Lauritzen
2006), these models are able to capture the nonlinear relationship between array elements and often leads to a superior predictive performance. However, a critical bottleneck
of InfTucker and its generalization is that they mainly operate on data that can ﬁt in the memory of a singe computer and cannot employ the parallel computing power from
computer clusters or graphics processing units (GPUs). This
largely stems from a global Gaussian process (GP) assumption, which treats the vectorized whole array as one GP projection, and makes them infeasible for real-world large data.
To address this issue, we propose Distributed inﬁnite
Tucker (D IN T UCKER) decomposition, a new nonlinear tensor decomposition model based on local GP assumption. It
splits the whole array into multiple small subarrays, each of
which is sampled from a local tensor-variate GP. By conducting inﬁnite Tucker decomposition on the subarrays in
a distributed manner, D IN T UCKER is scalable to massive
multidimensional array data, while keeps the nonlinear modelling power. The major contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
1. Model and Algorithm. A new hierarchical Bayesian
model for tensor analysis is proposed, which enables distributed training of InfTucker on subarrays and information integration from all local training results. For fast
inference, a distributed variational inference algorithm
based on stochastic gradient descent is developed.
2. Scalability. The local training scheme enables D IN T UCKER scale to array data with more than 50 billion elements (as demonstrated in Table 1). Furthermore, D IN T UCKER enjoys almost linear scalability on the number
of computational nodes.
3. Analysis. We show a close connection between D IN T UCKER and InfTucker: Under certain conditions, the
model evidence of D IN T UCKER associates with an evidence lower bound of InfTucker. The conclusions can be
generalized to GP and local GP models.
4. Applications. D IN T UCKER has been applied to analyze
knowledge bases (Carlson et al. 2010) and user access log
from an Internet company. On both cases, D IN T UCKER
achieves signiﬁcantly higher prediction accuracy with less
training time compared with GigaTensor, the state-of-the-

Abstract
Tensor decomposition methods are effective tools for modelling multidimensional array data (i.e., tensors). Among
them, nonparametric Bayesian models, such as Inﬁnite
Tucker Decomposition (InfTucker), are more powerful than
multilinear factorization approaches, including Tucker and
PARAFAC, and usually achieve better predictive performance. However, they are difﬁcult to handle massive data due
to a prohibitively high training cost. To address this limitation, we propose Distributed inﬁnite Tucker (D IN T UCKER),
a new hierarchical Bayesian model that enables local learning
of InfTucker on subarrays and global information integration
from local results. We further develop a distributed stochastic gradient descent algorithm, coupled with variational inference for model estimation. In addition, the connection between D IN T UCKER and InfTucker is revealed in terms of
model evidence. Experiments demonstrate that D IN T UCKER
maintains the predictive accuracy of InfTucker and is scalable
on massive data: On multidimensional arrays with billions
of elements from two real-world applications, D IN T UCKER
achieves signiﬁcantly higher prediction accuracy with less
training time, compared with the state-of-the-art large-scale
tensor decomposition method, GigaTensor.

Introduction
Real-world datasets with multiple aspects are usually described by multidimensional arrays, i.e., tensors. For example, a ﬁle access log can be depicted by a three-mode array (user, ﬁle, action) and patient-medicine responses by a
four mode array (person, medicine, biomarker, time). Given
tensor-valued data, tensor analysis aims to capture complex
interactions embedded in data and to predict missing entries
(e.g., unknown medicine responses in patient-medicine responses data).
Despite the success of traditional tensor analysis methods,
such as Tucker (Tucker 1966), CANDECOMP/PARAFAC
(CP) (Harshman 1970) and their generalizations (Chu and
Ghahramani 2009), they are mostly multilinear methods and
are difﬁcult to handle complex interactions among tensor
modes. Therefore, nonlinear tensor decomposition methods
based on nonparametric Bayesian, such as InfTucker (Xu,
Yan, and Qi 2012; 2015) and its generalization, random
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2386

