Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Finding One’s Best Crowd:
Online Learning by Exploiting Source Similarity
Yang Liu and Mingyan Liu
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
1301 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
{youngliu,mingyan}@umich.edu

for wind power prediction using both temporal and spatial information. The idea of increasing sample spaces by
exploiting similarity proves to be helpful especially when
the data arrives slowly, e.g., weather reports generated a
few times per day. This idea naturally arises when different
data sources are physically correlated, e.g., wind turbines
on the same farm, or environmental monitoring sensors located within close proximity. However, it also ﬁts well in the
emerging context of crowdsourcing, where different sources
(e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turks) contribute to a common
data collection objective (e.g., labeling a set of images), and
exploiting multiple data sources can improve the quality of
crowdsourced data. For instance the idea of aggregating selectively data from a crowd to make prediction more accurate is empirically demonstrated and referred to as ﬁnding a
“smaller but smarter crowd” in (Galesic and Barkoczi 2014;
Goldstein, McAfee, and Suri 2014).

Abstract
We consider an online learning problem (classiﬁcation or prediction) involving disparate sources of sequentially arriving
data, whereby a user over time learns the best set of data
sources to use in constructing the classiﬁer by exploiting their
similarity. We ﬁrst show that, when (1) the similarity information among data sources is known, and (2) data from different
sources can be acquired without cost, then a judicious selection of data from different sources can effectively enlarge the
training sample size compared to using a single data source,
thereby improving the rate and performance of learning; this
is achieved by bounding the classiﬁcation error of the resulting classiﬁer. We then relax assumption (1) and characterize
the loss in learning performance when the similarity information must also be acquired through repeated sampling. We
further relax both (1) and (2) and present a cost-efﬁcient algorithm that identiﬁes a best crowd from a potentially large
set of data sources in terms of both classiﬁer performance and
data acquisition cost. This problem has various applications,
including online prediction systems with time series data of
various forms, such as ﬁnancial markets, advertisement and
network measurement.

In this paper we seek to make the notion of a “smarter”
crowd quantitatively precise and develop methods to systematically identify and utilize this crowd. Speciﬁcally, we
consider a problem involving K (potentially-)disparate data
sources, each of which may be associated with a user. A
given user can use its own data to achieve a certain learning
(prediction, classiﬁcation) objective but is interested in improving its performance by tapping into other data sources,
and can request data from other sources at a cost. Accordingly, decisions need to be made judiciously on which
sources of data should be used so as to optimize its learning accuracy. This implies two challenges: (1) we need to be
able to measure the similarity/disparity between two sources
in order to differentiate which sources are more useful toward the learning objective, and (2) we need to be able to determine the best set of sources given the measured similarity.
Prior work most relevant to the present study is (Crammer,
Kearns, and Wortman 2008), where the problem of combining static IID data sources is analyzed. There are however a number of key differences: 1) in (Crammer, Kearns,
and Wortman 2008) the similarity information is assumed
known a priori and the cost of obtaining data is not considered. 2) The results in (Crammer, Kearns, and Wortman
2008) are established pre-collected IID data, while we focus
on an online learning setting with Markovian data sources.
In addition, the methodology we employ in this paper is
quite different from (Crammer, Kearns, and Wortman 2008)

Introduction
The ability to learn (classify or predict) accurately with sequentially arriving data has many applications. Examples
include predicting future values on a prediction market,
weather forecasting, TV ratings, and ad placement by observing user behavior. The subject of learning in such contexts has been extensively studied. Past literature is heavily focused on learning by treating each source or object’s
historical data separately, see e.g., (Lai and Robbins 1985;
Lu, Pl, and Pal 2010; Langford and Zhang 2007) for single
source multi-armed bandit problems for learning the best
options of returned rewards, (Kim 2003) for a support vector machine based forecasting for ﬁnancial time series data,
(Hao et al. 2009) for a model predicting spammers using a
network’s past statistics, and (Hyup Roh 2007) for forecasting stock price index, among other.
More recent development has increasingly been focusing
on improving learning through integrating data from multiple sources with similar statistics, see e.g., (He et al. )
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1895

