Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Algorithms for Differentially Private Multi-Armed Bandits
Aristide C. Y. Tossou and Christos Dimitrakakis
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden
{aristide, chrdimi}@chalmers.se

recommender systems such as Amazon by (Calandrino et al.
2011) and for user-targeted advertising such as Facebook by
(Korolova 2010). In both cases, with a moderate amount of
side information and by tracking changes in the output of
the system, it was possible to learn private information of
any targeted user.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork 2006) provides an answer to this privacy issue by making the output of an algorithm almost insensitive to any single user information. That
is, no matter what side information is available to an outside
observer, he can not have more information about a user than
he already had by observing the outputs released by the algorithm. This goal is achieved by formally bounding the loss
in privacy through the use of two parameters (, δ) as shown
in Deﬁnition 2.1.
For bandit problems, differential privacy implies that the
actions taken by the bandit algorithm do not reveal information about the sequence of rewards obtained. In the context of clinical trials and diagnostic tests, it guarantees that
even an adversary with arbitrary side information, such as
the identity of each patient, cannot learn anything from the
output of the learning algorithm about patient history, condition, or test results.

Abstract
We present differentially private algorithms for the stochastic
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem. This is a problem for
applications such as adaptive clinical trials, experiment design, and user-targeted advertising where private information
is connected to individual rewards. Our major contribution
is to show that there exist (, δ) differentially private variants of Upper Conﬁdence Bound algorithms which have optimal regret, O(−1 + log T ). This is a signiﬁcant improvement over previous results, which only achieve poly-log regret O(−1 log3 T ), because of our use of a novel intervalbased mechanism. We also substantially improve the bounds
of previous family of algorithms which use a continual release mechanism. Experiments clearly validate our theoretical bounds.

1

Introduction

The well-known stochastic K-armed bandit problem (Thompson 1933; Robbins and others 1952) involves
an agent sequentially choosing among a set of arms
A = {1, . . . , K}, and obtaining a sequence of scalar
rewards {rt }, such that, if the agent’s action at time t
is at = i, then it obtains reward rt drawn from some
distribution Pi with expectation μi  E(rt | at = i).
The goal of the decision maker is to draw arms so as to
T
maximize the total reward t=1 rt obtained.
This problem is a model for many applications where
there is a need for trading-off exploration and exploitation.
This occurs because we only see the reward of the arm we
pull. An example is clinical trials, where arms correspond
to different treatments or tests, and the goal can be to maximise the number of cured patients over time while being uncertain about the effects of treatments. Other problems, such
as search engine advertisement and movie recommendations
can be formalised similarly (Pandey and Olston 2006).
It has been previously noted (Jain, Kothari, and Thakurta
2012; Thakurta and Smith 2013; Mishra and Thakurta 2015;
Zhao et al. 2014) that privacy is an important consideration
for many multi-armed bandit applications. Indeed, privacy
can be easily violated by observing changes in the prediction of the bandit algorithm. This has been demonstrated for

1.1

Related Work

Differential privacy (DP) was introduced by (Dwork et al.
2006); a good overview is given in (Dwork and Roth 2013).
While initially the focus in DP was static databases, interest in its relation to online learning problems has increased
recently. In the full information setting, (Jain, Kothari, and
Thakurta 2012) obtained differentially private algorithms
with near-optimal bounds. In the bandit setting, (Thakurta
and Smith 2013) were the ﬁrst to present a differentially
private algorithm, for the adversarial case, while (Zhao et
al. 2014) present an application to smart grids in this setting. Then, (Mishra and Thakurta 2015) provided a differentially private algorithm for the stochastic bandit problem.
Their algorithms are based on two non private stochastic
bandit algorithms: Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB, (Auer,
Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002)) and Thompson sampling (Thompson 1933). Their results are sub-optimal: although simple index-based algorithms achieving O(log T )
regret exist (Burnetas and Katehakis 1996; Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002), these differentially private algo-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2087

