Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Instance Multi-Label Class Discovery:
A Computational Approach for Assessing Bird Biodiversity
Forrest Briggs

Xiaoli Z. Fern, Raviv Raich,
Matthew Betts

Facebook, Inc.
fbriggs@gmail.com

Oregon State University
{xfern,raich}@eecs.oregonstate.edu
matt.betts@oregonstate.edu
(e.g., 3 hours after dawn), and the audio signal itself was
not used to make the selection. In this work, we propose
methods for analyzing the audio recordings and for selecting a species-diverse set of recordings for human expert labeling. We apply our proposed methods, and baseline methods, to a real-world dataset of 92,095 ten-second recordings,
collected at 13 sites over a period of two months, in a research forest. These recordings pose many challenges for
automatic species discovery, including multiple simultaneously vocalizing birds of different species, non-bird sounds
such as motor sound, and environmental noises, e.g., wind,
rain, streams, and thunder. Our results show that the proposed methods discover more species/classes than previous
methods.

Abstract
We study the problem of analyzing a large volume of bioacoustic data collected in-situ with the goal of assessing the
biodiversity of bird species at the data collection site. We
are interested in the class discovery problem for this setting.
Speciﬁcally, given a large collection of audio recordings containing bird and other sounds, we aim to automatically select
a ﬁxed size subset of the recordings for human expert labeling such that the maximum number of species/classes is discovered. We employ a multi-instance multi-label representation to address multiple simultaneously vocalizing birds with
sounds that overlap in time, and propose new algorithms for
species/class discovery using this representation. In a comparative study, we show that the proposed methods discover
more species/classes than current state-of-the-art in a real
world dataset of 92,095 ten-second recordings collected in
ﬁeld conditions.

Background
Bird bioacoustic data has been considered by the machine
learning community primarily for supervised classiﬁcation
tasks. Briggs et al. (2012b) proposed to represent audio
recordings of bird sound in the multi-instance multi-label
(MIML) framework (Zhou et al. 2012). In this formulation, an audio recording is transformed to a spectrogram,
then automatically segmented into a collection of regions
believed to be distinct utterances of bird sound. Each segment is then described by a feature vector that characterizes
its shape, texture, and time/frequency proﬁles. A recording
is represented as a set of segment feature vectors (instances).
Because recordings collected in natural environments often
contain sounds from multiple species, each recording is associated with a set of class labels. This multi-instance multilabel representation has previously been successfully used
for predicting the bird species present in a recording (Briggs
et al. 2012b) and also to predict the single species responsible for a speciﬁc utterance (Briggs et al. 2012a) in the
recording. In our work, we employ the same representation
but the recordings are not labeled. Only after the species
discovery algorithm makes its selection, then the selected
recordings are given to experts to be labeled.
Bird species discovery from acoustic data has only recently been studied, and prior methods do not make use
of the audio data directly, but instead rely on meta data
such as the time of day (Wimmer et al. 2013). The classdiscovery problem has been studied in the machine learning
and data-mining communities, although prior work has fo-

Introduction
Bioacoustic monitoring is a rapidly growing ﬁeld, where the
goal is to learn about organisms such as birds and marine
mammals, by applying signal processing and machine learning to audio recordings. In this paper, we consider the problem of class discovery from bird bioacoustics data. Given
a large collection of audio recordings of birds (and other
sounds in the environment), our goal is to automatically select a subset of recordings to be manually labeled by human expert such that we can ﬁnd the maximum number of
species/classes with a ﬁxed labeling budget.
Acquiring critical knowledge about the response of
species to global change necessitates the development efﬁcient and accurate estimates of species abundance and diversity. Birds have been used widely as biological indicators
because they respond rapidly to change, are relatively easy
to detect, and may reﬂect changes at lower trophic levels
(e.g., insects, plants) (Şekercioğlu, Daily, and Ehrlich 2004).
Recently, Wimmer et al. (2013) compared in-ﬁeld manual
point counts, a traditional way for assessing bird biodiversity, to acoustic sampling for discovering bird species. They
found that acoustic sampling detected more species for an
equivalent amount of human effort. In that study, the recordings are chosen randomly from a particular interval of time
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3807

