Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Flattening the Density Gradient for Eliminating
Spatial Centrality to Reduce Hubness
Kazuo Hara∗

Ikumi Suzuki∗

kazuo.hara@gmail.com
National Institute of Genetics
Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan

suzuki.ikumi@gmail.com
Yamagata University
Yonezawa, Yamagata, Japan

Kei Kobayashi

Kenji Fukumizu

kei@ism.ac.jp
fukumizu@ism.ac.jp
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Tachikawa, Tokyo, Japan
Tachikawa, Tokyo, Japan

Miloš Radovanović
radacha@dmi.uns.ac.rs
University of Novi Sad
Novi Sad, Serbia

the labels of its k-NN samples, in which hubs are likely to
be included.
According to Radovanović et al. (2010), hubness occurs
because of the existence of spatial centrality and high dimensionality. Spatial centrality is the tendency of samples
that are closer to the center of a dataset to be closer to all
other samples. As dimensionality increases, this tendency of
such samples is ampliﬁed, causing the samples closer to the
center to become hubs.
To reduce hubness, Suzuki et al. (2013) showed that shifting the origin to the global centroid, known as centering,
is effective when an inner product-based similarity is used.
More precisely, in a high-dimensional dataset with a global
centroid vector c, hubness occurs when the inner product
xi , xj  is used to measure the similarity between samples
xi and xj . However, hubness does not occur if xi −c, xj −c
is used instead. This result occurs because of the elimination
of spatial centrality through the process of centering. However, the centering process cannot eliminate hubness as measured by Euclidean distance because the distance between
samples remains the same before and after the centering.

Abstract
Spatial centrality, whereby samples closer to the center of a dataset tend to be closer to all other samples,
is regarded as one source of hubness. Hubness is well
known to degrade k-nearest-neighbor (k-NN) classiﬁcation. Spatial centrality can be removed by centering,
i.e., shifting the origin to the global center of the dataset,
in cases where inner product similarity is used. However, when Euclidean distance is used, centering has
no effect on spatial centrality because the distance between the samples is the same before and after centering. As described in this paper, we propose a solution for the hubness problem when Euclidean distance
is considered. We provide a theoretical explanation to
demonstrate how the solution eliminates spatial centrality and reduces hubness. We then present some discussion of the reason the proposed solution works, from
a viewpoint of density gradient, which is regarded as
the origin of spatial centrality and hubness. We demonstrate that the solution corresponds to ﬂattening the density gradient. Using real-world datasets, we demonstrate
that the proposed method improves k-NN classiﬁcation
performance and outperforms an existing hub-reduction
method.

Contributions
We propose a solution for the hubness problem considering
Euclidean distance, rather than inner product similarity. We
introduce a value called the sample-wise centrality: for each
sample x, we deﬁne this value as the (squared) distance from
the global centroid vector c, ||x − c||2 . The proposed method
subtracts the sample-wise centrality from the (squared) original Euclidean distance. Subsequently, we provide a theoretical explanation of how the solution eliminates the spatial
centrality and reduces hubness.
As our second contribution, from a viewpoint of density
gradient, we explain why the proposed solution works, i.e.,
the reason for the reduction of hubness by the elimination of
spatial centrality. After verifying that the origin of hubness
lies in the density gradient and high-dimensionality (Low et
al. 2013), we demonstrate that subtracting sample-wise centrality from the (squared) original Euclidean distance ﬂattens

Introduction
Background
The k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) classiﬁer is vulnerable to
the hubness problem, which is a phenomenon that occurs
in high-dimensional spaces (Radovanović, Nanopoulos, and
Ivanović 2010; Schnitzer et al. 2012; Suzuki et al. 2013;
Tomašev and Mladenić 2013). Hubness refers to the property by which some samples in a dataset become hubs, frequently occurring in the k-NN lists of other samples. The
emergence of hubs often affects k-NN classiﬁcation accuracy. The predicted label of a query sample is determined by
∗

Equally contributed
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1659

