Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

co-rank: An Online Tool for Collectively
Deciding Efﬁcient Rankings Among Peers
Ioannis Caragiannis

George A. Krimpas

University of Patras

University of Patras

Marianna Panteli

Alexandros A. Voudouris

University of Patras

University of Patras

The rationale behind co-rank

e.g., see (Piech et al. 2013). Ordinal peer grading is much
simpler. It requires each student to grade a small number of
exam papers submitted by other students and report a ranking representing the relative performance of these students
in the exam. Then, an aggregation step will merge all the
partial rankings reported into a single one.

Our aim with co-rank is to facilitate the grading of exams
or assignments in massive open online courses (MOOCs).
MOOCs have emerged as a new education trend; they are
online platforms that offer, to a huge number of students
from all around the world, open access to top-class courses
and related educational material. As the number of students
attending a single online course usually exceeds 50,000, the
issue of effective grading and assessment of students has
been recognized as an important bottleneck for the success
of such platforms. Since professional graders are costly, inexpensive grading is absolutely necessary in order to make
the new educational experience beneﬁcial for the students
and, at the same time, viable for the MOOC platforms.
Not surprisingly, the problem has attracted a lot of attention in several ﬁelds of computer science, including AI. The
general approach, which has been proposed to address it, is
known as peer grading. In peer grading, the students themselves act as graders of the exam or the assignment in which
they participate. That is, each student has to grade a small
number of exam papers submitted by other students and report to the course instructor. Peer grading seems to be the
only applicable method, especially when one aims to assess the abilities of the students in proving a mathematical
statement or in demonstrating their creative writing skills.
In such cases, the much simpler alternative of organizing the
exam through a multiple-choice questionnaire (which could
be graded automatically) is infeasible and student assessment and grading is an inherently human computation task.
In particular, co-rank provides functionalities for a variant of peer grading, known as ordinal peer grading (Shah et
al. 2013). Ordinal peer grading comes to address the problem that is usually faced by the students when they are asked
to act as graders and assign cardinal scores to exam papers:
they are not experienced in this task and need extensive guidance in order to grade accurately. Even worse, they may have
strong incentives to assign low scores to their fellow students
in order to boost their own relative performance. Hence, peer
grading with cardinal scores cannot be effective unless extensive calibration of the individual grades is used; actually,
this is the main subject of recent work on peer grading —

co-rank functionalities
We describe the co-rank functionalities through a step-bystep scenario that will explain what an instructor and a student can do using the tool. The whole process is represented
graphically in Figure 1.
First, the instructor creates a new exam. To do so, she uploads a ﬁle that contains the exam questions, and deﬁnes
the submission and grading deadlines. She also speciﬁes
grading-related information, such as the number of exam papers that each student will have to grade and the aggregation
method. She has also the option to allow the students to submit feedback or raise ﬂags in order – for example – to report
plagiarism. The instructor can deﬁne the rules for communication between herself and the students during grading;
this can be either unidirectional (from her to the students)
or bidirectional. Typically, the instructor broadcasts grading
guidelines. In the case of bidirectional communication, the
students can ask the instructor for clariﬁcations but they cannot communicate with each other through co-rank.
Once the exam has been created, it is stored in the co-rank
database and is allocated a unique id, which the students can
use to track the exam and participate in it. Then, the students
have access to the questions of the exam and can upload a
ﬁle containing their answers by the submission deadline. Of
course, students can update their ﬁles as many times as they
like before the submission deadline.
After this deadline, the instructor can initiate the grading
process. By doing so, a bundle computation algorithm computes the bundles of exam papers that students will receive
for grading. Grading is performed by the students through
the user-friendly interface of co-rank. Initially, each student
can see the exam papers in her bundle in a random order.
Using the tool, she can rank them or distinguish between
the exam papers she approves and the ones she disapproves,
depending on the grading method deﬁned by the instructor. During this process, the students can assign mnemonic
names to exam papers in order to facilitate grading.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4351

