Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Semi-Supervised Dictionary Learning via Structural Sparse Preserving
Di Wang, Xiaoqin Zhang∗ , Mingyu Fan and Xiuzi Ye
College of Mathematics & Information Science, Wenzhou University
Zhejiang, China
wangdi@amss.ac.cn, zhangxiaoqinnan@gmail.com, {fanmingyu, yexiuzi}@wzu.edu.cn

information in the original training images, it may not be effective enough to fully exploit the discriminative information hidden in the training samples.
To exploit the discriminative ability of the dictionary, Supervised Dictionary Learning (SDL) for classiﬁcation tasks
has gained a lot of attention. The dictionaries are learned
by optimizing a uniﬁed objective function combining reconstructive and discriminative terms(Mairal et al. 2008; 2009b;
Zhang and Li 2010; Yang et al. 2011; Jiang, Lin, and Davis
2011; 2013; Mairal, Bach, and Ponce 2012; Shen et al. 2013;
2015). Different from above works, some researchers make
use of the structural sparsity on the coefﬁcient matrix via
mix regularization. This exploits the fact that once an atom
of a dictionary has been selected to represent a samples, it
may as well be used to represent other samples of the same
class. Mixed regularization can promotes the use of a small
subset of atoms for each class. Thus, sharing of dictionary
atoms for data in the same class could increase the discriminative power of the dictionary (Bengio et al. 2009; Chi et al.
2013b; 2013a). Bengio et al. (Bengio et al. 2009) propose
the method of group sparse coding by using the same dictionary words for all the images in a class, which provides a
discriminative signal in the construction of image representations. Chi et al. (Chi et al. 2013b) propose an intra-block
coherence suppression dictionary learning algorithm by employing the block and group regularized sparse modeling.
They also present a novel afﬁne-constrained group sparse
coding framework (Chi et al. 2013a) to extend the current
sparse representation-based classiﬁcation (SRC) framework
for classiﬁcation problems with multiple inputs.
The performance of the SDL methods is highly dependent on the number of labeled training samples. Insufﬁcient
labeled training samples yield a dictionary with potentially
bad generalization power. However, labeling samples is expensive and time consuming due to the signiﬁcant human
effort involved. On the other hand, one can easily obtain
large amounts of unlabeled samples from public datasets.
This has motivated researchers to develop semi-supervised
algorithms for learning a better dictionary. Shrivastava et al.
(Shrivastava et al. 2012) propose a Semi-Supervised Discriminative Dictionary (S2D2) learning algorithm for classiﬁcation tasks, which iteratively estimates the conﬁdence
matrix of unlabeled samples and uses it to reﬁne the learned
dictionaries. In (Zhang, Jiang, and Davis 2012), it proposes

Abstract
While recent techniques for discriminative dictionary learning have attained promising results on the classiﬁcation tasks,
their performance is highly dependent on the number of labeled samples available for training. However, labeling samples is expensive and time consuming due to the signiﬁcant human effort involved. In this paper, we present a novel
semi-supervised dictionary learning method which utilizes
the structural sparse relationships between the labeled and unlabeled samples. Speciﬁcally, by connecting the sparse reconstruction coefﬁcients on both the original samples and dictionary, the unlabeled samples can be automatically grouped to
the different labeled samples, and the grouped samples share
a small number of atoms in the dictionary via mixed 2,p norm regularization. This makes the learned dictionary more
representative and discriminative since the shared atoms are
learned by using the labeled and unlabeled samples potentially from the same class. Minimizing the derived objective
function is a challenging task because it is non-convex and
highly non-smooth. We propose an efﬁcient optimization algorithm to solve the problem based on the block coordinate
descent method. Moreover, we have a rigorous proof of the
convergence of the algorithm. Extensive experiments are presented to show the superior performance of our method in
classiﬁcation applications.

Introduction
In the recent decade, Compressed Sensing (CS) and its related works have led to state-of-the-art results in image
analysis, such as image denoising (Protter and Elad 2009;
Zhang et al. 2014), image restoration (Mairal, Elad, and
Sapiro 2008; Mairal et al. 2009a), image alignment (Zhang
et al. 2013) and image classiﬁcation (Wright et al. 2009;
Harandi et al. 2013). The success is partly owes to the fact
that many natural images are sparse or compressible in the
sense that they can be coded by a few of atoms in some dictionaries. Learning the dictionary is critical for the performance of sparse coding. Wright et al. (Wright et al. 2009)
directly use the entire set of training samples as the dictionary for sparse coding, and achieve impressive performance
on face recognition. However, due to the uncertain and noisy
∗

Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2137

