Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Conservativeness of Untied Auto-Encoders
Daniel Jiwoong Im∗

Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi∗

Roland Memisevic

Montreal Institute
for Learning Algorithms
University of Montreal
Montreal, QC, H3C 3J7
imdaniel@iro.umontreal.ca

HEC Montreal
3000 Ch de la Cte-Ste-Catherine
Montreal, QC, H3T 2A7
mohamed.2.belghazi@hec.ca

Montreal Institute
for Learning Algorithms
University of Montreal
Montreal, QC, H3C 3J7
roland.memisevic@umontreal.ca

encoder whose weights are tied (decoder-weights are identical to the encoder weights) can be written as the derivative
of a scalar “potential” or energy-function.
In general, a dynamical system that can be written as
the derivative of such a scalar function is called conservative. When it is conservative, the autoencoder thus deﬁnes,
via this scalar function, an energy landscape, which may
viewed as an unnormalized log-density in the data space.
As such, the autoencoder could in principle be turned into
a probabilistic model of the data by simply exponentiating
and normalizing this function. In fact, for sigmoid hidden
units the potential function is identical to the free energy of
an RBM (Kamyshanska 2013). This shows that rather than
thinking of autoencoders and RBMs as two distinct types of
model, one may think of them as merely two different training schemes to ﬁt the same kind of density function to the
data.
Besides rooting autoencoders in the realm of probabilistic
and energy-based models, the energy function has been of
interest because it may help explain how training of multilayer neural networks may be possible via local, biologically
plausible updates (see, for example, (Bengio 2014)).
For untied auto-encoders it has not been clear whether
an energy function exists. It has also not been clear under
which conditions an energy function exists or does not exist,
or even how to deﬁne it in the case where decoder-weights
differ from encoder weights.
In this paper, we describe necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for the existence of an energy function (“conservativeness”), and we show that suitable learning criteria will
lead to an auto-encoder that satisﬁes these conditions at least
locally, near the training data. We verify our results experimentally. We also show how we can use an auto-encoder to
extract the conservative part of a vector ﬁeld.

Abstract
We discuss necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for an autoencoder to deﬁne a conservative vector ﬁeld, in which case it
is associated with an energy function akin to the unnormalized log-probability of the data. We show that the conditions
for conservativeness are more general than for encoder and
decoder weights to be the same (“tied weights”), and that they
also depend on the form of the hidden unit activation functions. Moreover, we show that contractive training criteria,
such as denoising, enforces these conditions locally. Based on
these observations, we show how we can use auto-encoders
to extract the conservative component of a vector ﬁeld.

Introduction
An auto-encoder is a feature learning model that learns to
reconstruct its inputs by going though one or more capacityconstrained “bottleneck”-layers. The motivation for autoencoders is that reconstructing input data will be possible
only for a model that creates a faithful internal representation of the data. If that representation is forced through a bottleneck, like a low-dimensional or sparse hidden layer, then
the model must have learned to compress (or equivalently,
“understand”) the data.
Since technically it deﬁnes a function r : Rn → Rn ,
which maps data to its reconstruction, an auto-encoder can
also be viewed as dynamical system, and minimizing reconstruction error can be viewed as a way to encourage the system to have ﬁxed points at the data (Seung 1998). Recent
renewed interest in the dynamical systems perspective led to
a variety of results that help clarify the role of auto-encoders
and their relationship to probabilistic models.
For example, (Vincent et al. 2008; Swersky et al. 2011)
showed that training an auto-encoder to denoise corrupted
inputs is closely related to performing score matching
(Hyvärinen 2005) in an undirected model. Similarly, (Alain
and Bengio 2014) showed that training the model to denoise
inputs, or to reconstruct them under a suitable choice of regularization penalty, lets the auto-encoder approximate the
derivative of the empirical data density. And (Kamyshanska
2013) showed that, regardless of training criterion, an auto-

Background
We will focus on auto-encoders of the form


r(x) = Rh W T x + b + c

(1)

where x ∈ R is an observation, W and R are d×n encoder
and n × d decoder weights, respectively, b and c are biases,
and h(·) is an elementwise hidden activation function. An
auto-encoder can be identiﬁed with its vector ﬁeld, r(x) −
x, which is the set of vectors pointing from observations to
n

∗

Authors constributed equally.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1694

