Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Video Semantic Clustering with Sparse and Incomplete Tags
Jingya Wang, Xiatian Zhu, Shaogang Gong
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Queen Mary University of London
London E1 4NS, United Kingdom
{jingya.wang, xiatian.zhu, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

leading to suboptimal results. (2) Visual features can be inaccurate and unreliable, due to the inherently ambiguous and
noisy visual observation. It is non-trivial to quantify deterministically which feature dimensions are reliable in different videos. (3) The available text tags of video data are often sparse and incomplete. This causes that the visual (with
much richer but also noisier and redundant information) and
tag (being often sparsely labelled and incomplete) data are
not always directly correlated.
Some progress has been made recently on clustering
tagged videos. For example, the method of (Zhou et al.
2013) separates the whole task into two independent stages:
Tag model learning and video clustering, so that the heteroscedasticity problem can be well mitigated. (Vahdat,
Zhou, and Mori 2014) move one step further by not
only jointly modelling the correlations between visual features, tags and clusters, but also handling the tag sparseness/incompleteness issue with a tag ﬂipping strategy. Alternatively, data embedding (Chang et al. 2015) can be another solution. However, all these methods are restricted in
the following ways.
(I) Tag structure. In these models, tags are organised and
used in a ﬂat structure. Nonetheless, different tags may correspond to varying degrees of concept abstractness, e.g. in
a hierarchical structure. Ignoring such inherent tag structure
may cause degraded data modelling or knowledge loss, as
suggested in studies of tag recommendation (she 2008), image segmentation (Zheng et al. 2014), and object recognition
(Deng et al. 2014). Typically, existing methods as above assume an accurate hierarchy structure. However, this is not
always available, e.g. tag extracted from some loosely structured data source can only provide a rough hierarchy with
potentially inaccurate relations, as the meta-data associated
with TRECVID videos. Such noisy hierarchy imposes more
challenges but still useful if used properly.
(II) Tag correlations. Moreover, tag statistical correlations
are not exploited by these clustering models, partly due
to model complexity, i.e. incorporating such information
into these models is not straightforward nor easy. Correlations are potentially useful as they can offer informative inter-tag constraints. Common tag correlations include:
(1) co-occurrence which has been used for image annotation (Grifﬁths and Ghahramani 2005; Chen et al. 2010),
and object classiﬁcation (Deng et al. 2014), and (2) mutual-

Abstract
Clustering tagged videos into semantic groups is important
but challenging due to the need for jointly learning correlations between heterogeneous visual and tag data. The task
is made more difﬁcult by inherently sparse and incomplete
tag labels. In this work, we develop a method for accurately
clustering tagged videos based on a novel Hierarchical-MultiLabel Random Forest model capable of correlating structured visual and tag information. Speciﬁcally, our model exploits hierarchically structured tags of different abstractness
of semantics and multiple tag statistical correlations, thus discovers more accurate semantic correlations among different
video data, even with highly sparse/incomplete tags.

Introduction
A critical task in video analysis is to automatically discover
the intrinsic semantic groups of large quantities of video data
(Poppe 2010; Niebles, Wang, and Fei-Fei 2008). However,
semantic video clustering by visual feature analysis alone
is inherently limited due to the semantic gap between lowlevel visual features and high-level semantics, particularly
under the “curse” of high dimensionality (Beyer et al. 1999).
On the other hand, videos are often attached with additional
non-visual data, e.g. typically some textual sketch. Such text
information include short tags contributed by either users
or content providers, such as videos from the YouTube and
TRECVID dataset. Exploiting readily accessible textual tags
may be beneﬁcial to video clustering as they possess semantic perspectives unique to visual features.
In general, joint learning of visual and text information,
two different heterogeneous data modalities, in a shared
representational space is non-trivial because: (1) The heteroscedasticity problem (Duin and Loog 2004), that is, disparate data modalities signiﬁcantly differ in representation
(continuous or categorical) and distribution characteristics
with different scale and covariance. In addition, the dimensionality of visual data often exceeds that of tag data by
a great extent, e.g. thousands vs. tens. Due to this dimensionality discrepancy problem, a simple concatenation of
feature spaces will result in an unbalanced representation
favourably inclined towards one dominant modality data,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3618

