Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

A.I. as an Introduction to
Research Methods in Computer Science
Raghuram Ramanujan
Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science
Davidson College, Davidson, NC 28035
raramanujan@davidson.edu

There has been prior work in attempting to incorporate a
research component into an undergraduate level A.I. course.
Most notable among these is the work of Goldsmith and
Mattei who suggest using science ﬁction as a hook for encouraging students to engage more deeply with A.I. concepts (Goldsmith and Mattei 2011). By contrast, our course
focuses more on quantitative analyses — students are tasked
with conducting rigorous, controlled experiments to test hypotheses with a view to answering questions such as “Does
algorithm A outperform algorithm B in this domain?”. Our
work is closest in spirit to that of Chiu and Wallace, who describe a similar approach to teaching a course on web data
management (Chiu and Wallace 2013). In their course, students are assigned open-ended projects with a system evaluation requirement. Chiu and Wallace suggest that an introductory A.I. course would be well-served by a similar format
and describe two projects that they have tested at their institution. In this paper, we describe an approach that takes their
suggestion to its logical extreme, namely building an entire
course around tackling open-ended research projects in A.I.

Abstract
While many computer science programs offer courses
on research methods, such classes typically tend to be
aimed at graduate students. In this paper, we propose a
novel means for introducing undergraduate students to
research experiences in computer science — via an introductory Artiﬁcial Intelligence (A.I.) course. Students
explore the content areas typically covered in an upperlevel A.I. course (heuristic search, constraint satisfaction, game-playing etc.), while also learning about the
mechanics of how empirical research is conducted in
this ﬁeld.

Introduction and Background
The beneﬁts of exposing undergraduates to research experiences are well-documented. Students become better learners, acquire stronger technical and intellectual skills, and
exhibit a greater desire to pursue graduate studies (Russell,
Hancock, and McCullough 2007). Students also experience
personal and professional growth — they report increased
self-conﬁdence, display greater resilience in the face of failure or obstacles, and demonstrate improved communication
and interpersonal skills (Kinkead 2003; Lopatto 2010). Research experiences even aid with retention efforts (Nagda
et al. 1998; Peckham et al. 2007). Given the signiﬁcance of
these ﬁndings, providing every computer science undergraduate with a taste of research seems like a worthy goal. In
this paper, we propose a novel means for helping achieve
this outcome — using an introductory A.I. course as a vehicle for exposing students to empirical research methods in
computer science.
The idea of designing an introductory course on research
methods in computer science is not novel in and of itself.
Indeed, several such courses exist in universities around the
country — for example, David Jensen’s CMPSCI 691DD
(Research Methods for Empirical Computer Science) at the
University of Massachusetts and Cliff Shaffer’s CS5014
(Research Methods in Computer Science) at Virginia Tech.
However, both those courses (and indeed, most courses of
this ﬂavor) are graduate level courses, aimed at ﬁrst-year
Ph.D. students.

Course Structure
Davidson College is a small, private, liberal-arts college with
a student-faculty ratio of about 10:1. Our Artiﬁcial Intelligence course is an upper-level elective, that mainly draws
juniors and seniors. In the spring of 2015, the class enrolled
20 students. The course was designed around bi-weekly
lectures, with assessment taking the form of ﬁve student
projects, spaced apart evenly. There were no other homework assignments or exams in the class. In the remainder of
this paper, we describe the structure and roles of these different facets of the course in greater detail.

A.I. Content
Our course covers systematic and local search, adversarial search, constraint satisfaction problems and combinatorial optimization, classical planning, and reinforcement
learning. Notably, we do not delve into machine learning
or natural language processing to avoid spreading ourselves
“too thin” and to accommodate other content related to research methods. Class meetings comprise a mixture of discussions centered around pre-assigned readings, lectures,
and problem-modeling and problem-solving exercises.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4128

