Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Transfer Learning from Deep Features for
Remote Sensing and Poverty Mapping
Michael Xie, Neal Jean, Marshall Burke, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{xie, nealjean, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu
Department of Earth System Science, Stanford University
{mburke,dlobell}@stanford.edu
measures must be inferred from small-scale and expensive
household surveys, effectively rendering many of the poorest people invisible.
Remote sensing, particularly satellite imagery, is perhaps
the only cost-effective technology able to provide data at a
global scale. Within ten years, commercial services are expected to provide sub-meter resolution images everywhere
at a fraction of current costs (Murthy et al. 2014). This level
of temporal and spatial resolution could provide a wealth
of data towards sustainable development. Unfortunately, this
raw data is also highly unstructured, making it difﬁcult to
extract actionable insights at scale.
In this paper, we propose a machine learning approach
for extracting socioeconomic indicators from raw satellite
imagery. In the past ﬁve years, deep learning approaches
applied to large-scale datasets such as ImageNet have revolutionized the ﬁeld of computer vision, leading to dramatic
improvements in fundamental tasks such as object recognition (Russakovsky et al. 2014). However, the use of contemporary techniques for the analysis of remote sensing imagery is still largely unexplored. Modern approaches such
as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) can, in principle,
be directly applied to extract socioeconomic factors, but the
primary challenge is a lack of training data. While such data
is readily available in the United States and other developed
nations, it is extremely scarce in Africa where these techniques would be most useful.
We overcome this lack of training data by using a sequence of transfer learning steps and a convolutional neural network model. The idea is to leverage available datasets
such as ImageNet to extract features and high-level representations that are useful for the task of interest, i.e., extracting socioeconomic data for poverty mapping. Similar
strategies have proven quite successful in the past. For example, image features from the Overfeat network trained
on ImageNet for object classiﬁcation achieved state-of-theart results on tasks such as ﬁne-grained recognition, image
retrieval, and attribute detection (Razavian et al. 2014).
Pre-training on ImageNet is useful for learning low-level
features such as edges. However, ImageNet consists only
of object-centric images, while satellite imagery is captured
from an aerial, bird’s-eye view. We therefore employ a second transfer learning step, where nighttime light intensities
are used as a proxy for economic activity. Speciﬁcally, we

Abstract
The lack of reliable data in developing countries is a major
obstacle to sustainable development, food security, and disaster relief. Poverty data, for example, is typically scarce,
sparse in coverage, and labor-intensive to obtain. Remote
sensing data such as high-resolution satellite imagery, on the
other hand, is becoming increasingly available and inexpensive. Unfortunately, such data is highly unstructured and currently no techniques exist to automatically extract useful insights to inform policy decisions and help direct humanitarian efforts. We propose a novel machine learning approach
to extract large-scale socioeconomic indicators from highresolution satellite imagery. The main challenge is that training data is very scarce, making it difﬁcult to apply modern
techniques such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN).
We therefore propose a transfer learning approach where
nighttime light intensities are used as a data-rich proxy. We
train a fully convolutional CNN model to predict nighttime
lights from daytime imagery, simultaneously learning features that are useful for poverty prediction. The model learns
ﬁlters identifying different terrains and man-made structures,
including roads, buildings, and farmlands, without any supervision beyond nighttime lights. We demonstrate that these
learned features are highly informative for poverty mapping,
even approaching the predictive performance of survey data
collected in the ﬁeld.

Introduction
New technologies fueling the Big Data revolution are creating unprecedented opportunities for designing, monitoring, and evaluating policy decisions and for directing humanitarian efforts (Abelson, Varshney, and Sun 2014;
Varshney et al. 2015). However, while rich countries are
being ﬂooded with data, developing countries are suffering from data drought. A new data divide is emerging, with
huge differences in the quantity and quality of data available. For example, some countries have not taken a census in
decades, and in the past ﬁve years an estimated 230 million
births have gone unrecorded (Independent Expert Advisory
Group Secretariat 2014). Even high-proﬁle initiatives such
as the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) are affected
(United Nations 2015). Progress based on poverty and infant
mortality rate targets can be difﬁcult to track. Often, poverty
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3929

