Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Single or Multiple? Combining Word Representations
Independently Learned from Text and WordNet
Josu Goikoetxea, Eneko Agirre, and Aitor Soroa
IXA NLP Group
University of the Basque Country
Donostia, Basque Country
{josu.goikoetxea,e.agirre,a.soroa}@ehu.eus
Arora 2015) or post-process previously learned word representations (Faruqui et al. 2015).
This paper departs from previous work in that it explores the combination of word representations which have
been independently learned from different sources like text
corpora or WordNet. We tried several simple combination
techniques like, among others, averaging similarity results
or concatenating vectors, and more complex methods like
canonical correlation analysis (Faruqui and Dyer 2014) or
the recently proposed retroﬁtting (Faruqui et al. 2015). In
particular, we combine state-of-the-art corpus-based word
representations (Mikolov et al. 2013a) and WordNet-based
word representations (Goikoetxea, Soroa, and Agirre 2015).
The simple methods outperform the more complex methods,
as shown in several similarity and relatedness datasets. In the
case of retroﬁtting, we show that our WordNet-based embeddings are able to represent the rich information in WordNet.
The paper is structured as follows. We ﬁrst present related work, followed by the methods to produce our word
representations. The next section presents several combination techniques, followed by the experiments combining two
representations. We then present additional word representations and their combinations.

Abstract
Text and Knowledge Bases are complementary sources of information. Given the success of distributed word representations learned from text, several techniques to infuse additional information from sources like WordNet into word representations have been proposed. In this paper, we follow an
alternative route. We learn word representations from text and
WordNet independently, and then explore simple and sophisticated methods to combine them. The combined representations are applied to an extensive set of datasets on word
similarity and relatedness. Simple combination methods happen to perform better that more complex methods like CCA
or retroﬁtting, showing that, in the case of WordNet, learning word representations separately is preferable to learning
one single representation space or adding WordNet information directly. A key factor, which we illustrate with examples,
is that the WordNet-based representations captures similarity
relations encoded in WordNet better than retroﬁtting.
In addition, we show that the average of the similarities from
six word representations yields results beyond the state-ofthe-art in several datasets, reinforcing the opportunities to explore further combination techniques.

Introduction
Related Work

Word embeddings successfully capture lexical semantic information about words based on co-occurrence patterns extracted from large corpora, with excellent results on several tasks, including word similarity (Collobert and Weston
2008; Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010; Socher et al. 2011).
More recently, the combination of distributed word representations and knowledge bases (KBs) is gaining strength,
exploring the use of KBs such as WordNet (Miller 1995),
FreeBase (Bollacker et al. 2008) and PPDB (Ganitkevitch,
Van Durme, and Callison-Burch 2013) on tasks such as
word similarity and synonym selection (Faruqui et al. 2015),
or analogy (Rastogi, Van Durme, and Arora 2015). These
methods are built on text-based methods (Mikolov, Yih,
and Zweig 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014;
Huang et al. 2012) and use ﬂat lists of relations from KBs
to either modify the learning algorithms (Halawi et al. 2012;
Wang et al. 2014a; Tian et al. 2015; Rastogi, Van Durme, and

Recently, several researchers have tried to infuse knowledge from KBs into corpus-based word representations.
(Halawi et al. 2012) incorporated KB information in lowdimensional word embeddings adding WordNet-based constraints to the optimization process. The constraints are
given by a set of related word pairs in WordNet, which need
to be close in the embedding space.
(Wang et al. 2014b) introduced typed relations between
entities from Freebase in the learning algorithm, projecting
entity embeddings onto an hyperplane w.r.t. the KB relation
and using those projected vectors in the scoring function.
(Tian et al. 2015) improved the method by adopting different
projections for head and tail entities when deﬁning the loss
function.
(Faruqui and Dyer 2014) ﬁnd the correlations between
two sets of multidimensional variables in order to combine word spaces coming from two different languages.
They projected their original monolingual word vectors to a
shared (multilingual) space, improving their performance in

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2608

