Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Solving the Station Repacking Problem
Alexandre Fréchette and Neil Newman and Kevin Leyton-Brown
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia, Canada
{afrechet, newmanne, kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca

A consequence of this design is that the auction must (sequentially!) solve hundreds of thousands of such repacking
problems. This is challenging, because the repacking problem is NP-complete. It also makes the performance of the
repacking algorithm extremely important, as every failure
to solve a single, feasible repacking problem corresponds
to a lost opportunity to lower a price offer. Given the scale
of the auction, individual unsolved problems can cost the
government millions of dollars each.
This paper is the ﬁrst to show how the station repacking
problem can be solved exactly and reliably at the national
scale. It describes the results of an extensive, multi-year investigation into the problem, which culminated in a solver
that we call SATFC. This solver combines a wide variety
of techniques: SAT encoding; algorithm conﬁguration; algorithm portfolios; and a bevy of problem-speciﬁc speedups,
including a powerful and novel caching scheme that generalizes from different but related problem instances. Overall,
SATFC solves virtually all problems in a previously-unseen
test set—99.6%—within one minute. It has been adopted
by the FCC for use in the incentive auction (FCC 2014b).
SATFC is open-source; pointers both to the solver and to data
used in this paper are available at http://www.cs.ubc.ca/labs/
beta/Projects/SATFC.
In what follows, we begin by deﬁning the station repacking problem and explaining some of its salient properties
(Section 2). We then discuss the encodings we considered
and the tools we leverage (Section 3) before detailing the
problem-speciﬁc speedups that make our approach effective
(Section 4). We report experimental results throughout, establishing a baseline in Section 2 and then showing the extent to
which each of our extensions strengthens our solver.

Abstract
We investigate the problem of repacking stations in the FCC’s
upcoming, multi-billion-dollar “incentive auction”. Early efforts to solve this problem considered mixed-integer programming formulations, which we show are unable to reliably solve
realistic, national-scale problem instances. We describe the
result of a multi-year investigation of alternatives: a solver,
SATFC, that has been adopted by the FCC for use in the incentive auction. SATFC is based on a SAT encoding paired
with a wide range of techniques: constraint graph decomposition; novel caching mechanisms that allow for reuse of partial
solutions from related, solved problems; algorithm conﬁguration; algorithm portfolios; and the marriage of local-search
and complete solver strategies. We show that our approach
solves virtually all of a set of problems derived from auction
simulations within the short time budget required in practice.

1

Introduction

The US government will soon hold an innovative “incentive
auction” for radio spectrum, in which television broadcasters are paid to relinquish broadcast rights via a “reverse
auction”, remaining broadcasters are repacked into a narrower band of spectrum, and cleared spectrum is sold to
telecommunications companies. The stakes are enormous:
the auction is forecast to net the government tens of billions of dollars, as well as creating massive economic value
by reallocating spectrum to more socially beneﬁcial uses
(Congressional Budget Ofﬁce 2015). As a result of both its
economic importance and its conceptual novelty, the auction has been the subject of considerable recent study by
the research community, mostly focusing on elements of
the auction design (Bazelon, Jackson, and McHenry 2011;
Kwerel, LaFontaine, and Schwartz 2012; Milgrom et al. 2012;
Calamari et al. 2012; Marcus 2013; Milgrom and Segal 2014;
Dütting, Gkatzelis, and Roughgarden 2014; Vohra 2014;
Nguyen and Sandholm 2014; Kazumori 2014). After considerable study and discussion, the FCC has selected an
auction design based on a descending clock (FCC 2014c;
2014a). Such an auction offers each participating station a
price for relinquishing its broadcast rights, with this price offer falling for a given station as long as it remains repackable.

2

The Station Repacking Problem

Each US television station s ∈ S is currently assigned a
channel cs ∈ C ⊆ N that ensures that it will not excessively interfere with other, nearby stations. The FCC reasons
about what interference would be harmful via a complex,
grid-based physical simulation (“OET-69” (FCC 2013)), but
has also processed the results of this simulation to obtain
a CSP-style formulation listing forbidden pairs of stations
and channels, which it has publicly released (FCC 2014e).
Let I ⊆ (S × C)2 denote a set of forbidden station–channel
pairs {(s, c), (s , c )}, each representing the proposition that

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

702

