Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Image Privacy Prediction Using Deep Features
Ashwini Tonge and Cornelia Caragea
Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas
AshwiniTonge@my.unt.edu, ccaragea@unt.edu

erful deep features (Jia et al. 2014) that go beyond SIFT and
RGB, and work well in many image analysis tasks.
In this study, we explore an approach to image privacy
prediction that uses deep visual features and deep tags for
predicting an image as private or public. Speciﬁcally, we investigate two deep feature representations corresponding to
the output of two layers of an eight-layer deep neural network pre-trained on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015).
We further investigate deep image tags, which correspond to
the top ranked categories derived from the probability distribution over categories obtained from the last layer of the
deep neural network via the softmax function. The results of
our experiments on Flickr images show that models trained
on deep visual features outperform those trained using the
combination of SIFT and global descriptor features (GIST)
(Oliva and Torralba 2001). Moreover, deep image tags combined with user tags yield better performing models compared with those based only on user tags.

Abstract
Online image sharing in social media sites such as Facebook, Flickr, and Instagram can lead to unwanted disclosure and privacy violations, when privacy settings
are used inappropriately. With the exponential increase
in the number of images that are shared online, the development of effective and efﬁcient prediction methods
for image privacy settings are highly needed. In this
study, we explore deep visual features and deep image
tags for image privacy prediction. The results of our experiments show that models trained on deep visual features outperform those trained on SIFT and GIST. The
results also show that deep image tags combined with
user tags perform best among all tested features.

Introduction
The rapid increase in multi-media sharing through social
networking sites such as Facebook, Flickr, and Instagram
can cause potential threats to users’ privacy. Many users are
quick to share private images about themselves, their family
and friends, without thinking much about the consequences
of an unwanted disclosure of these images. Moreover, social
networking sites allow users to tag other people, which can
reveal private information of all users in a particular image
(Ahern et al. 2007). Users rarely change default privacy settings, which could jeopardize their privacy (Zerr et al. 2012).
Current social networking sites do not assist users in making privacy decisions for images that they share online. Manually assigning privacy settings to each image each time can
be cumbersome. To avoid a possible loss of users’ privacy,
it has become critical to develop automated approaches that
can accurately predict the privacy settings for shared images.
Several studies have started to explore classiﬁcation models of image privacy using image tags and image content
features such as SIFT (or Scale Invariant Feature Transform) and RGB (or Red Green Blue) (Zerr et al. 2012;
Squicciarini, Caragea, and Balakavi 2014) and found that
image tags are very informative for classifying images as
private or public. However, given large datasets of labeled images, e.g., the ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky et
al. 2015), deep neural networks are now able to learn pow-

Privacy Prediction Using Deep Features
The privacy of an image can be determined by the image
content and its description. We extract visual features and
tags for differentiating between private and public settings.
Deep Visual Features: A deep neural network takes one
or more blob as input and produces one or more blob as
output. Layers in the network are responsible for forward
pass and backward pass. Forward pass takes inputs and generates the outputs. Backward pass takes gradients with respect to the output and computes the gradient with respect
to the parameters and to the inputs, which are consecutively
back-propagated to the previous layers (Jia et al. 2014).
In the convolutional neural network architecture, features
are extracted from images through each layer in a feedforward fashion. The architecture consists of eight layers
with weights; the ﬁrst ﬁve layers are convolutional and the
remaining three are fully-connected (FC). The last two fully
connected layers are referred as FC7 and FC8 . We used the
output of FC7 and FC8 as deep visual features for images.
The ﬁnal output layer is referred as “Prob” and is obtained
from the output of FC8 via a 1000-way softmax function,
which produces a probability distribution over the 1000 object categories for an input image.
Deep Tag Features: We extract deep tags for images
based on their visual content. Speciﬁcally, for an image, we

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4266

