Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Markov Argumentation Random Fields

1

2

Yuqing Tang1 , Nir Oren2 , and Katia Sycara1

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK

knowledge about conﬂicts — defeat rules. MARFs compile
such knowledge into factor graphs which specify factorized
probabilistic distributions over the possible worlds of argumentation. MARFs then identify features of these possible
worlds via evaluation of acceptability status of arguments
and defeats. The acceptability status takes 4 values: accepted
(A), rejected (R), undecided (U), and ignored (I). These features are deﬁned in a way that the nature of these worlds
can be exposed and parameterized (weighted) governed by
the argumentation properties of being admissible, complete,
grounded, stable and preferred (Dung 1995). As a result,
MARFs are able to reasoning with knowledge about conﬂicts and uncertainties while at the same time exposing reasons and rejections of the inference to humans in an intuitive
manner (Fig. 2).
MARFs inference is in the form of marginal and maximal
probability distribution P r(q | E) over the acceptability status of a query q, condition on observed evidence. The list
of observed evidence is of the form E = {e1 = y1 , e2 =
y2 , .., em = ym } where each yi is the observed acceptability of the evidence ei (i = 1, .., m). MARFs also derive the
sensitivity of a piece of information pi — a premise of q or a
piece of information relevant to q — characterizing how the
changes in pi render the outcome of q differently.

Abstract
We demonstrate an implementation of Markov Argumentation Random Fields (MARFs), a novel formalism combining elements of formal argumentation theory and probabilistic graphical models. In doing so MARFs provide a principled technique for the merger of probabilistic graphical models and non-monotonic reasoning, supporting human reasoning in “messy” domains where the knowledge about conﬂicts
should be applied. Our implementation takes the form of a
graphical tool which supports users in interpreting complex
information. We have evaluated our implementation in the
domain of intelligence analysis, where analysts must reason
and determine likelihoods of events using information obtained from conﬂicting sources.

Markov Argumentation Random Fields
A longstanding goal for the AI community has been to integrate symbolic and probabilistic knowledge. The latter is
suited for dealing with uncertainties, while the former allows for explicit (symbolic) knowledge representation, and
helps to handle complex knowledge structure. Real world
tasks, such as intelligence analysis and social network analysis, require both forms of knowledge. These tasks typically
face uncertainties and conﬂicting information from inaccurate sensors and human. The core challenge is of two folds:
1) how to make use of knowledge on uncertainty and conﬂicts while incorporating probabilistic and symbolic reasoning in a mathematically sound manner, 2) how to expose reasons and rejections in an intuitive manner.
In this work, we present an approach that combines reasoning about probabilities with argumentation based nonmonotonic theory, forming Markov Argumentation Random
Fields (MARFs). Unlike classical logic which describes
knowledge as what holds in all situations, therefore not allowing any conﬂicts, formal argumentation theory (Dung
1995) describes how a justiﬁable “stable” set of arguments
can be extracted from a large set built on the principle
of reinstatement which has been conﬁrmed by human experiments. Underpinning by formal argumentation theory,
MARFs construct possible worlds of argumentation as acceptability interpretations of a predicate language which represents knowledge about inference — argument rules — and

Intelligence Analysis using MARFs
Built on the above theory, the MARF software is composed
of 1) a front-end web interface, and 2) a back-end inference
engine. The front-end has 1) an online knowledge editor
(Fig. 1), and 2) an argumentation graph explorer (Fig. 2).
Upon the request from the front-end, the back-end engine
generates an argumentation graph (Tang et al. 2012) and
performs inference using algorithms adapted from messagepassing and MC-SAT (Richardson and Domingos 2006).
We exemplify MARFs with an intelligence analysis task
— the ELICIT task (Chan and Adali 2012). The ELICIT
task requires a human analyst to answer a list of questions:
who, what, when, and where regarding a possible terrorist
attack given a list of facts. These facts not only contain information related to the questions but also contain noise and
information regarding ruling out possible answers (a form of
argument defeat). In a typical task, facts are incomplete, inconsistent and ambiguous requiring the analyst to apply both
logical reasoning and inconsistency resolution principles to

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4397

