Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Abstract Zobrist Hashing: An Efﬁcient Work
Distribution Method for Parallel Best-First Search
Yuu Jinnai and Alex Fukunaga
Department of General Systems Studies
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo

is a tradeoff between communication overhead and search
overhead, and previous methods have optimized one at the
expense of the other.
In this paper, we investigate node distribution methods for
HDA*. We propose Abstract Zobrist hashing, a new distribution method which is a hybrid of Zobrist hashing and
abstraction. Abstract Zobrist hashing explicitly seeks to balance the uniform hashing property (low search overhead) of
Zobrist hashing with the locality property (low communication overhead) provided by abstraction.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. First, we
review HDA* and previous node distribution methods that
have been used with HDA*. We then describe Abstract Zobrist hashing, which combines Zobrist hashing and abstraction. We then experimentally evaluate HDA* node distribution methods on the 15-puzzle, 24-puzzle, multiple sequence alignment, and domain-independent planning, focusing on the efﬁciency, search overhead, and communication overhead achieved by each method. We show that Abstract Zobrist hashing successfully balances communication
and search overheads, resulting in higher overall efﬁciency
than either Zobrist hashing or abstraction.

Abstract
Hash Distributed A* (HDA*) is an efﬁcient parallel best ﬁrst
algorithm that asynchronously distributes work among the
processes using a global hash function. Although Zobrist
hashing, the standard hash function used by HDA*, achieves
good load balance for many domains, it incurs signiﬁcant
communication overhead since it requires many node transfers among threads. We propose Abstract Zobrist hashing, a
new work distribution method for parallel search which reduces node transfers and mitigates communication overhead
by using feature projection functions. We evaluate Abstract
Zobrist hashing for multicore HDA*, and show that it significantly outperforms previous work distribution methods.

1

Introduction

The A* algorithm (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968) is used
in many areas of AI, including planning, scheduling, pathﬁnding, and sequence alignment. In order to solve large
scale problems, both the CPU and memory requirements can
be performance bottlenecks. Parallelization is one way to
cope with these bottlenecks.
Hash Distributed A* (HDA*) is a parallel best-ﬁrst search
algorithm in which each processor executes A* using local OPEN/CLOSED lists, and generated nodes are assigned
(sent) to processors according to a global hash function
(Kishimoto, Fukunaga, and Botea 2013). HDA* can be used
in distributed memory systems as well as multi-core, shared
memory machines, and has been shown to scale up to hundreds of cores with little search overhead.
The performance of HDA* depends on the hash function used for assigning nodes to processors. Kishimoto
et al. (2009; 2013) showed that HDA* using the Zobrist
hash function (1970) achieves good load balance and low
search overhead. Burns et al (2010) noted that Zobrist hashing incurs a heavy communication overhead because many
nodes are assigned to processes that are different from their
parents, and proposed AHDA*, which used an abstractionbased hash function originally designed for use with Parallel
Best-Nblock First (PBNF) (Burns et al. 2010). Abstractionbased work distribution achieves low communication overhead, but at the cost of high search overhead. Thus, there

2

Background

Hash Distributed A* (HDA*) (Kishimoto, Fukunaga, and
Botea 2013) is a parallel A* algorithm which incorporates
the idea of hash based distribution of Parallel Retraction A*
(PRA*) (Evett et al. 1995) and asynchronous communication of Transposition Table Driven Work Scheduling (TDS)
(Romein et al. 1999). In HDA*, each processor has its own
OPEN and CLOSED. There is a global hash function which
assigns a unique owner thread to every search node. Each
thread T executes the following:
1. For all new nodes n in T ’s message queue, if it is not in
CLOSED (not a duplicate), put n in OPEN.
2. Expand node n with highest priority in OPEN. For every
generated node c, compute hash value H(c), and send c
to the thread that owns H(c).
HDA* has two distinguishing features compared to other
parallel A* variants. First, the work distribution mechanism is simple, requiring only a hash function. Unlike
work-stealing approaches, nodes are not reassigned among

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

717

