Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bidirectional Search That Is Guaranteed to Meet in the Middle
Robert C. Holte

Ariel Felner

Guni Sharon

Nathan R. Sturtevant

Computing Science Dept.
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada T6G 2E8
(rholte@ualberta.ca)

ISE Department
Ben-Gurion University
Be’er-Sheva, Israel
(felner@bgu.ac.il)

ISE Department
Ben-Gurion University
Be’er-Sheva, Israel
(gunisharon@gmail.com)

Computer Science Dept.
University of Denver
(sturtevant@cs.du.edu)

in the middle, but none of them has a theorem to this effect (Areﬁn and Saha 2010; de Champeaux 1983; de Champeaux and Sint 1977; Davis, Pollack, and Sudkamp 1984;
Eckerle 1994; Politowski and Pohl 1984). “Front-to-end”
Bi-HS algorithms (Auer and Kaindl 2004; Ikeda et al. 1994;
Kaindl and Khorsand 1994; Kwa 1989; Pohl 1969; Sadhukhan 2012) are not speciﬁcally designed to meet in the
middle, and often they do not. For example, in Barker and
Korf’s Towers of Hanoi experiment BS* (Kwa 1989) often
expanded nodes at depth 13 in each direction even though
the solution lengths C ∗ were at most 16.
To remedy this we present a new front-to-end Bi-HS algorithm, MM, that is guaranteed to meet in the middle. MM0
is the brute-force (h(s) = 0 ∀s) version of MM. We also
present a new framework for comparing MM0 , unidirectional
brute-force search (Uni-BS), MM, and A* that allows a precise characterization of the regions of the state space that
will be expanded by one method but not another. We use
this to identify conditions under which one method will expand fewer nodes than another, and conditions guaranteeing
BK1’s correctness. We also show that, unlike unidirectional
search, adding a non-zero heuristic (= 0 for every non-goal
node) to Bi-BS can cause it to expand more nodes. For example, MM expands 4 times more nodes than MM0 in one of
our Pancake Puzzle experiments. Overall, our experiments
on the Pancake Puzzle and Rubik’s Cube show that the algorithm expanding the fewest nodes could be any one of
Uni-HS, MM0 or MM, depending on the heuristic used.
Although we introduce a new algorithm (MM), we do not
present an experimental comparison of MM to existing Bi-HS
algorithms, and we do not claim that MM0 and MM are the best
bidirectional search algorithms in terms of minimizing run
time or the number of nodes expanded. These issues are outside the scope of this paper. Like the Barker and Korf paper,
this paper is theoretical. MM’s signiﬁcance is that it is the
only Bi-HS algorithm to which our analysis, and Barker and
Korf’s, applies. These theories give strong justiﬁcation for
bidirectional search algorithms that meet in the middle. As
the ﬁrst of its breed, MM represents a new direction for developing highly competitive Bi-HS algorithms. A thorough

Abstract
We present MM, the ﬁrst bidirectional heuristic search algorithm whose forward and backward searches are guaranteed
to “meet in the middle”, i.e. never expand a node beyond
the solution midpoint. We also present a novel framework
for comparing MM, A*, and brute-force search, and identify
conditions favoring each algorithm. Finally, we present experimental results that support our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction and overview

Bidirectional search algorithms interleave two separate
searches, a normal search forward from the start state, and a
search backward (i.e. using reverse operators) from the goal.
Barker and Korf (2015)’s comparison of unidirectional
heuristic search (Uni-HS, e.g. A*), bidirectional heuristic
search (Bi-HS), and bidirectional brute-force search (Bi-BS)
has two main conclusions (for caveats, see their Section 3):
BK1: Uni-HS will expand fewer nodes than Bi-HS if
more than half of the nodes expanded by Uni-HS have
g ≤ C ∗ /2, where C ∗ is the optimal solution cost.
BK2: If fewer than half of the nodes expanded by Uni-HS
using heuristic h have g ≤ C ∗ /2, then adding h to Bi-BS
will not decrease the number of nodes it expands.
A central assumption made by Barker and Korf is that the
forward and backward searches comprising the bidirectional
search never expand a node whose g-value (in the given direction) exceeds C ∗ /2. We say that a bidirectional search
“meets in the middle” if it has this property.
This assumption raises a difﬁculty in applying their theory, because no known Bi-HS algorithm is guaranteed to
meet in the middle under all circumstances. Papers on
“front-to-front”1 Bi-HS typically claim their searches meet
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In bidirectional heuristic search, there are two different ways
to deﬁne the heuristic function (Kaindl and Kainz 1997). A “frontto-end” heuristic—hF (n) for the forward search and hB (n) for
the backward search—directly estimates the distance from node
n to the target of the search (the target for the forward search is
the goal, the target for the backward search is the start state). By
contrast a “front-to-front” heuristic estimates the distance from n
to the search target indirectly. For forward search it is deﬁned as
hF (n) = minm∈OpenB {h(n, m) + gB (m)} where OpenB is

the backward search’s open list, h(n, m) is a function estimating
the distance between any two nodes, and gB (m) is the g-value of
node m in the backward search. A front-to-front heuristic for the
backward search is deﬁned analogously.

3411

