Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Apprenticeship Scheduling
for Human-Robot Teams
Matthew C. Gombolay
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
gombolay@csail.mit.edu

Introduction

The Role of the Human In-The-Loop

Resource optimization and scheduling is a costly, challenging problem that affects almost every aspect of our lives.
One example that affects each of us is health care: Poor systems design and scheduling of resources can lead to higher
rates of patient noncompliance and burnout of health care
providers, as highlighted by the Institute of Medicine (Brandenburg et al. 2015). In aerospace manufacturing, every
minute re-scheduling in response to dynamic disruptions in
the build process of a Boeing 747 can cost up to $100, 000.
The military is also highly invested in the effective use of
resources. In missile defense, for example, operators must
solve a challenging weapon-to-target problem, balancing
the cost of expendable, defensive weapons while hedging
against uncertainty in adversaries’ tactics.
Researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) planning and
scheduling strive to develop algorithms to improve resource
allocation. However, there are two primary challenges.
First, optimal task allocation and sequencing with upper and
lower-bound temporal constraints (i.e., deadlines and wait
constraints) is NP-Hard (Bertsimas and Weismantel 2005).
Approximation techniques for scheduling exist and typically
rely on the algorithm designer crafting heuristics based on
domain expertise to decompose or structure the scheduling
problem and prioritize the manner in which resources are
allocated and tasks are sequenced (Tang and Parker 2005;
Jones, Dias, and Stentz 2011). The second problem is this
aforementioned reliance on crafting clever heuristics based
on domain knowledge. Manually capturing domain knowledge within a scheduling algorithm remains a challenging
process and leaves much to be desired (Ryan et al. 2013).
The aim of my thesis is to develop an autonomous system that 1) learns the heuristics and implicit rules-of-thumb
developed by domain experts from years of experience, 2)
embeds and leverages this knowledge within a scalable resource optimization framework, and 3) provides decision
support in a way that engages users and beneﬁts them in
their decision-making process. By intelligently leveraging
the ability of humans to learn heuristics and the speed of
modern computation, we can improve the ability to coordinate resources in these time and safety-critical domains.

The ﬁrst step in designing an effective autonomous system to
coordinate a teams’ activities is understanding the respective
roles of the human and robotic (or virtual) team members
within the decision-making loop. I have been conducting a
series of human-subject experiments in which a team of two
human team members, the subject and one confederate, and
one robot team member work together to complete a set of
tasks in an experimental setup analogous to a manufacturing environment. I studied how decision-making authority
over task allocation decisions should be shared between the
team members (Gombolay et al. 2014) and how the team’s
composition, mixed human-robot or strictly human-human,
affected the team’s ﬂuency depending on how decisionmaking authority was shared (Gombolay et al. 2015). I mentored three undergraduate students to assist me in conducting the experiments. We found that increasing the robot’s
authority over task allocation decisions decreased the time
to schedule the team and the time to execute and improved
the humans’ perception of their robotic counterpart. Furthermore, subjects’ perception of the team member responsible
for scheduling improved more signiﬁcantly when that team
member was a robot as opposed to another human. These
studies motivate the development of autonomous systems
for scheduling of human and human-robot teams.

Scalable Methods for Scheduling
The next step in developing an autonomous resource optimization mechanism is creating scalable computational
models and techniques. In the key areas of interest, such
as manufacturing, healthcare, and military operations, one
must consider the interplay of tight upper- and lowerbound
temporal constraints, spatial constraints, and heterogeneous
agent and resource capabilities. Approaches in prior work
typically attempt to decompose techniques and heuristics to
reduce the computational search space. However, the best
solvers are only able to scale to approximately 5 agents and
50 tasks within a solution time of approximately thirty minutes (Korsah, Stentz, and Dias 2013). In prior work, I developed a fast, near-optimal sequencing technique for task sets
with complex dependencies (Gombolay, Wilcox, and Shah
2013). The key to the success of the approach is an analytical schedulability test I developed (Gombolay and Shah
2015; Gombolay, Wilcox, and Shah 2013) that provides an

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4297

