Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Direct Discriminative Bag Mapping for Multi-Instance Learning
†



Jia Wu,† Shirui Pan,† Peng Zhang,† Xingquan Zhu

Quantum Computation & Intelligent Systems Centre, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
Dept. of Computer & Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University, USA
jia.wu@student.uts.edu.au; {shirui.pan, peng.zhang}@uts.edu.au; xzhu3@fau.edu;

gorithm works well in some prediction problems, it discards
most of the instance information in the bags.
Alternatively, bag mapping approaches based on instance
selection have been proposed (Chen, Bi, and Wang 2006)
to map each bag to a new feature space constituted by an
hidden instance set, i.e., intermediate instance pool (IIP),
constructed from training bag of instances. Following the
IIP based bag mapping strategy, Fu et al. (2011) proposed
another bag mapping method, which selects a subset of instances for bag-level feature computation based on the distribution of negative instances. For both methods, it is hard
to guarantee the distinguish capability of selected instances
in the new bag mapping space. In this paper, we propose
a direct discriminative mapping approach for multi-instance
learning (MILDM), which identiﬁes instances to make the
bags being directly distinguished in the new mapping space.

Abstract
Multi-instance learning (MIL) is useful for tackling labeling ambiguity in learning tasks, by allowing a bag
of instances to share one label. Recently, bag mapping
methods, which transform a bag to a single instance in a
new space via instance selection, have drawn signiﬁcant
attentions. To date, most existing works are developed
based on the original space, i.e., utilizing all instances
for bag mapping, and instance selection is indirectly
tied to the MIL objective. As a result, it is hard to guarantee the distinguish capacity of the selected instances
in the new bag mapping space for MIL. In this paper,
we propose a direct discriminative mapping approach
for multi-instance learning (MILDM), which identiﬁes
instances to directly distinguish bags in the new mapping space. Experiments and comparisons on real-world
learning tasks demonstrate the algorithm performance.

MIL with Discriminative Bag Mapping
Introduction

Preliminaries and Optimization Problem

In multi-instance learning (MIL), the learning object is a bag
which contains a number of instances. The label (positive or
negative) is assigned to the bag, but not individual instances.
Such a setting makes MIL effective to accommodate labeling ambiguity in numerous real-world applications (Wu et
al. 2014b).
To support MIL, one common approach is to convert the
multi-instance learning (bag learning) to a traditional supervised learning (single-instance learning) problem. For example, one can propagate the bag label to instances inside
the bag, so a propositional classiﬁer can be learned for further classiﬁcation (Foulds and Frank 2008). However, label
transmission for positive bag may case some negative instances being assigned with wrong labels. Another transmission strategy is to use one instance to represent the related
bag (i.e., bag representation), based on the statistic properties in the bag. In (Dong 2006) three different types of
summarization approaches (“arithmetic mean”, “geometric
mean”, and “minimax”) have been proposed for bag representation. Wu et al. (2014a) also proposed another bag representation method based on the distribution of the negative
bags. Although this type of single-instance representation al-

In multi-instance learning, a bag Bi consists of a set of instances, with xi,j denoting the jth instance in Bi . The class
label of Bi is denoted by yi = Y, with Y = {−1, +1}. The
collection of all bags can be denoted by B. In our proposed
bag mapping framework, each bag Bi will be transformed to
Biφ , a single instance in a new feature space by using the discriminative instance pool (DIP, denoted by P). Given B with
n bags, and the instance set X collected from all bags in B,
Our objective is to ﬁnd a subset P ⊆ X using an instance selection matrix IX (a diagonal matrix, diag(IX ) = d(X )),
where d(X ) is a indicator vector, if xi ∈ P, d(X )i = 1,
otherwise 0. Accordingly, we deﬁne J (P) as an instance
evaluation function to measure the P as follows:

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To obtain the DIP with maximum discriminative power, we
impose that the optimal DIP should have the properties: (a)

P∗ = arg max J (P)
P⊆X

s.t. |P| = m

(1)

where | · | denotes the cardinality of the instance set, and
m is the number of instances to be selected from X (i.e.,
size of DIP). The objective function in Eq. (1) represents
that instances selected for MIL P∗ should have maximum
discriminative power in the new mapping space.

DIP Evaluation Criteria

4274

