Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Adapting Plans through Communication
with Unknown Teammates
Trevor Sarratt
University of California Santa Cruz
tsarratt@soe.ucsc.edu

Introduction

Prior Work: Inference from Known Behaviors

Coordinating a team of autonomous agents is a challenging problem. Agents must act in such a way that progresses
toward the achievement of a goal while avoiding conﬂict
with their teammates. In information asymmetric domains,
it is often necessary to share crucial observations in order
to collaborate effectively. In traditional multiagent systems
literature, these teams of agents share an identical design
for reasoning, planning, and executing actions, allowing perfect modeling of teammates. Ad hoc teamwork (Stone et al.
2010) further complicates this problem by introducing a variety of teammates with which an agent must coordinate. In
these scenarios, one or more agents within a team can be unfamiliar, having unknown planning capabilities guiding their
behavior.
Much of the existing ad hoc teamwork research focuses
on reinforcement learning and decision-theoretic planning.
Agents use models of known behavior to predict an ad hoc
agent’s actions, using decision theory to maximize expected
utility in instances where the predicted actions are uncertain.
Online learning reﬁnes these models with observations of
behaviors during execution, increasing the accuracy of the
models’ predictions, permitting the team to coordinate more
effectively (Barrett et al. 2013).
My thesis addresses the problem of planning under teammate behavior uncertainty by introducing the concept of intentional multiagent communication within ad hoc teams. In
partially observable multiagent domains, agents much share
information regarding aspects of the environment such that
uncertainty is reduced across the team, permitting better coordination. Similarly, we consider how communication may
be utilized within ad hoc teams to resolve behavioral uncertainty. Transmitting intentional messages allows agents
to adjust predictions of a teammate’s individual course of
action. In short, an ad hoc agent coordinating with an unknown teammate can identify uncertainties within its own
predictive model of teammate behavior then request the appropriate policy information, allowing the agent to adapt its
personal plan. The main contribution of this work is the characterization of the interaction between learning, communication, and planning in ad hoc teams.

Prior experience with a variety of agents can provide a set
of known behavior models for future use. Observations of
an unknown teammate can then be used to identify a similar
existing model as a predictor of its future actions (Barrett et
al. 2013). Our initial work in ad hoc teams considered the
case where an agent coordinates with a teammate whose behavior is not represented well by a single model but rather
by a composition of modeled behaviors. In this scenario, the
teammate may adopt new strategies on the ﬂy, adapting its
behavior or pursuing new goals unexpectedly. Traditional
probabilistic approaches assume static behavior and do not
correct the choice of model in a responsive manner (Sarratt and Jhala 2015a; 2015c). Furthermore, perfect Bayesian
inference would require either known transition probabilities, which are not provided in ad hoc domains, or a mechanism for learning the transition likelihoods. By adopting
a technique from on-line learning (Bousquet and Warmuth
2003), we demonstrated a computationally lightweight technique for responsively identifying changes in a teammate’s
behavior, correctly selecting an alternate model that most accurately expresses the post-change observed actions. This
approach outperforms the standard weight revision method,
showing promise for accurately modeling agents of inconsistent behavior as well as agents whose high level strategy
can be expressed by a sequence of more simple behaviors.
Such model inference approaches, while suitable for a
wide range of problems, are not without their limitations,
however. The possession of a set of known models requires
either prior experience or hand-authored knowledge. Even
when complex behavior can be approximated with the composition of known, simple models, the low level behaviors
must be available prior to coordination. Initial work in learning a model during coordination has relied on generalization
of information across known models to speed up the process
(Barrett et al. 2013), and as a result, such transfer learning
techniques may not apply to novel conditions in which no
prior knowledge is available. Furthermore, relying on observations necessitates an act be performed, perhaps irreversibly, before the information can be utilized to infer or
construct an accurate model, a constraint unsuitable for domains with strict limits on potential attempts of completing
a task. For this reason, we motivate communicating in advance of a point of uncertainty.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4315

