Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Context-Sensitive Twitter Sentiment Classiﬁcation Using Neural Network
Yafeng Ren1 , Yue Zhang2 , Meishan Zhang3∗ and Donghong Ji1∗
1. Computer School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2. Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3. School of Computer Science and Technology, Heilongjiang University, Harbin, China
{renyafeng, dhji}@whu.edu.cn
{yue zhang, meishan zhang}@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract
Sentiment classiﬁcation on Twitter has attracted increasing research in recent years. Most existing work
focuses on feature engineering according to the tweet
content itself. In this paper, we propose a contextbased neural network model for Twitter sentiment analysis, incorporating contextualized features from relevant Tweets into the model in the form of word embedding vectors. Experiments on both balanced and unbalanced datasets show that our proposed models outperform the current state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: Target tweet and his contextual information

It is difﬁcult to determine the sentiment polarity of this
tweet because of the unknown word “Clatenberg”, which
can be a exciting performer or a disturbing neighbor. However, we can obtain its sentiment using contextual information of this tweet, shown as Figure 1.
Based on Figure 1, a ﬁrst negative tweet has been produced, which indicates that the second tweet (target tweet)
is negative also. It is the conversation that allows us here to
decide the sentiment category of a tweet. This motivates a
context-based neural network model for Twitter sentiment
classiﬁcation.
Recently, Vanzo et al. (2014) proposed to model a tweet
and its contextual tweets as a sequence, using a sequence
labeling model, SVMHMM , to predict their sentiment labels
jointly. They suggest two types of contexts, including a
conversation-based context, which contains a certain number of Tweets in a discussion thread, and a topic-based context, which contains several tweets in the history stream that
contain overlapping the hashtags. Both types of contexts are
shown useful to improve the accuracies of sentiment classiﬁcation empirically.
One limitation of Vanzo et al. (2014)’s model, however,
is the sequential assumption of context tweets. Intuitively,
the inﬂuence of one tweet is not limited to a few tweets
in the timeline, and coreferences between tweets can form
a complex graph structure. In addition, Vanzo et al. (2014)
use a discrete model with spare manual features, which can
be expensive to obtain. In this paper, we show that signiﬁcant improvements can be achieved by modeling the context
tweets of a given target tweet as a set, using neural pooling functions to extract the most useful features from tweets
automatically.
We build a baseline system using a neural network, which
has been shown to give competitive accuracies compared
with traditional linear models recently (Socher et al. 2013;

Introduction
Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation, which extracts the sentiment polarity of a tweet, has became a heated topic in Natural Language Processing (Jiang et al. 2011; Hu et al. 2013;
Tang et al. 2014; Severyn and Moschitti 2015). Most existing approaches follow Pang et al. (2002) and treat Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation as a special case of text classiﬁcation, focusing on designing effective features to obtain
better performance (Pang and Lee 2008; Maas et al. 2011;
Taboada et al. 2011; Liu 2012; Owoputi et al. 2012; Feldman
2013; Labutov and Lipson 2013). Speciﬁcally, Mohammad
et al. (2013) build the top performing system in the Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation track of SemEval 2013, using diverse sentiment lexicons and a variety of hand-crafted features. Tang et al. (2014) propose a form of sentiment-speciﬁc
word embedding, which gives better performance compared
with the top-performed system using diverse word representations.
The above methods focus on features modeling according
to the tweet content itself, but do not leverage contextual information regarding the target tweet, which limits the performance of the task. Tweets are streams of posts, and a wider
context, such as a conversation, topic or history tweet, is always available. Consider the following tweet from RafeefZiadah, which cites Becker Boris:
• RafeefZiadah: @Becker Boris It is almost 2 pm in BKK
but i can not sleep because of Clatenberg...
∗

corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

215

