Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reinstating Combinatorial Protections for Manipulation and
Bribery in Single-Peaked and Nearly Single-Peaked Electorates
Vijay Menon and Kate Larson
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
{vijay.menon, kate.larson}@uwaterloo.ca

ferent voting rules using constructions on combinatorially
rich structures such as partitions and covers, a recent body
of work, which was mainly inspired from the work of Walsh
(2007), has shown that such combinatorial protections vanish when the voters have structured preferences. In particular, in single-peaked electorates it was observed by Faliszewski et al. (2011) for control and manipulation and by
Brandt et al. (2015) for bribery that many of the previously
known NP-hardness results fall into polynomial time. Subsequently, there has also been work done on the notion of
nearly single-peaked preferences by Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra (2014) where similar, although
not as stark, observations have been made.
In the context of the above results, this paper aims to
take this line of research in a new direction by looking at
the impact of partial preferences on manipulative actions in
single-peaked and nearly single-peaked electorates. In particular, we consider top-truncated ballots, which are natural
in settings where an agent is certain about his most preferred
candidates, but is unsure or indifferent among the remaining
ones, and we look at their impact on manipulative actions
in single-peaked and nearly single-peaked settings. In doing
so, we arrive at a number of interesting results, which in turn
form the theme of our paper – of reinstating combinatorial
protections by allowing top-truncated voting.
Our contributions include the following:

Abstract
Understanding when and how computational complexity can
be used to protect elections against different manipulative actions has been a highly active research area over the past two
decades. A recent body of work, however, has shown that
many of the NP-hardness shields, previously obtained, vanish
when the electorate has single-peaked or nearly single-peaked
preferences. In light of these results, we investigate whether
it is possible to reimpose NP-hardness shields for such electorates by allowing the voters to specify partial preferences
instead of insisting they cast complete ballots. In particular,
we show that in single-peaked and nearly single-peaked electorates, if voters are allowed to submit top-truncated ballots,
then the complexity of manipulation and bribery for many
voting rules increases from being in P to being NP-complete.

1

Introduction

Collective decision making problems abound in human as
well as multiagent contexts and they typically proceed by
using a mechanism that aggregates the preferences of the
participating agents. Voting is one such mechanism, and is,
in fact, one of the most widely used ones. For instance, it
has been proposed as a mechanism for web spam reduction
(Dwork et al. 2001), for collaborative ﬁltering and recommender systems (Pennock, Horvitz, and Giles 2000), and
for multiagent planning (Ephrati and Rosenschein 1993).
As a result of its importance, voting has been extensively
studied, and the theory of social choice has a number of
impossibility results surrounding fundamental issues that
arise in running elections. Among these, one aspect that
has attracted considerable attention is the impact of different manipulative actions (bribery, control, and manipulation) on elections. Although the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem states that all reasonable voting rules are manipulable,
starting with the seminal work of Bartholdi III, Tovey, and
Trick (1989), there has been much work that has looked into
how computational complexity can be used as a barrier to
protect elections against different manipulative actions (see
(Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2010) for
a survey).
While there have been a lot of results in computational
social choice that has obtained NP-hardness shields for dif-

1. We, for the ﬁrst time, systematically study the impact of
partial voting on manipulative actions in structured preference proﬁles. In particular, we look at the problem of manipulation and bribery in single-peaked and nearly singlepeaked settings when top-truncated ballots are allowed.
2. Under the assumption that the voters submit complete ballots, we ﬁrst provide polynomial-time algorithms for manipulation and weighted-bribery for certain voting rules
in single-peaked and nearly single-peaked settings, thus
extending the works of Faliszewski et al. (2011) for manipulation, Brandt et al. (2015) for bribery, and Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra (2014) for
nearly single-peaked electorates. We then show how these
polynomial-time problems become NP-complete when
top-truncated ballots are allowed.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. We show an example of a natural voting rule where, contrary to intuition, the complexity of manipulation actually

565

