Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Generating CP-Nets Uniformly at Random
Thomas E. Allen

Judy Goldsmith

University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky, USA
teal223@g.uky.edu

University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky, USA
goldsmit@cs.uky.edu

Hayden E. Justice

Nicholas Mattei

Kayla Raines

The Gatton Academy, WKU
Bowling Green, Kentucky, USA
hayden.justice259@topper.wku.edu

Data61 and UNSW
Sydney, Australia
nicholas.mattei@nicta.com.au

University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky, USA
kayla.raines@live.com

low displays the statement, “If the weather is fair, I prefer to
go cycling, but if it is raining, I’d rather play table tennis.”

Abstract
Conditional preference networks (CP-nets) are a commonly studied compact formalism for modeling preferences. To study the properties of CP-nets or the performance of CP-net algorithms on average, one needs to
generate CP-nets in an equiprobable manner. We discuss common problems with naı̈ve generation, including sampling bias, which invalidates the base assumptions of many statistical tests and can undermine the
results of an experimental study. We provide a novel
algorithm for provably generating acyclic CP-nets uniformly at random. Our method is computationally efﬁcient and allows for multi-valued domains and arbitrary
bounds on the indegree in the dependency graph.

1

Weather

Activity

Friend

fair  rain

fair : cycling  table tennis
rain : table tennis  cycling

cycling
: emily  henry
table tennis : henry  emily

Methods for generating random data have long been of
interest to computer scientists—Alan Turing advocated for a
random number generator in the 1951 Ferranti Mark I computer (Knuth 1997)—and continue to be an active topic of
research. Random generation not only of numbers, but of
combinatorial objects such as spanning trees and paths in
directed graphs have been studied across both mathematics
and computer science (Kulkarni 1990). To our knowledge,
methods for generating complex preference models such as
CP-nets in a uniform manner have not yet received attention.
There is considerable value in being able to generate CPnets uniformly at random, including: enabling experimental
analysis of CP-net reasoning algorithms, unbiased blackbox
testing, effective Monte Carlo algorithms, analysis of all CPnets to better understand their properties, and simulations for
decision making or social choice experiments. Complementing theoretical results with empirical experiment, whether
from real data or from data generated according to a distribution, may provide a window into feasible algorithms
that provide good results in practice; biased generation may
heavily skew these results.
Experimental research in preference handling requires the
use of real-world or simulated data. Real-world data are often messy, not openly available, notoriously difﬁcult to collect reliably, hard to interpret, and nonexistent for CP-nets
(Allen et al. 2015; Mattei and Walsh 2013). Principled methods exist to generate simulated data in social choice and
preference handling using generative cultures (Berg 1985;
Walsh 2011; Mattei, Forshee, and Goldsmith 2012). Such
cultures have their drawbacks and limitations (Regenwetter
et al. 2006; Popova, Regenwetter, and Mattei 2013), but provide a ﬁrst step in experimentation for ﬁelds where data are
hard to gather. While generative cultures over strict, linear

Introduction

Modeling, capturing, and reasoning with preferences is a
fundamental topic that spans artiﬁcial intelligence, including
constraint programming (Rossi, Venable, and Walsh 2011),
social choice (Chevaleyre et al. 2008), recommendation
systems (Ricci et al. 2011), machine learning (Fürnkranz
and Hüllermeier 2010), multi-agent systems (Goldsmith and
Junker 2009), and other fundamental areas. One of the
most commonly studied preference models is the conditional preference network (CP-net) (Boutilier et al. 2004).
CP-nets are a factored, compact, and qualitative representation used to model, elicit, and reason about preferences. CP-nets have garnered considerable attention, particularly within the preference handling community (Domshlak et al. 2011). CP-nets have many potential and important applications—automated negotiation (Aydoğan et
al. 2013), interest-matching in social networks (Wicker
and Doyle 2007), cybersecurity (Bistarelli, Fioravanti, and
Peretti 2007), and as aggregation primitives for making
group decisions (Lang and Xia 2009; Mattei et al. 2013;
Xia, Conitzer, and Lang 2011), to name a few. One explanation for the popularity of CP-nets is their seemingly intuitive and visual representation of the language many of us
use to describe what we want. For example, the CP-net bec 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

872

