Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Counting-Based Search for
Constraint Optimization Problems
Gilles Pesant
École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
CIRRELT, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
gilles.pesant@polymtl.ca

Background

Abstract

In CP a combinatorial problem is represented using a ﬁnite
set of discrete variables X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } each taking its value from a ﬁnite domain, xi ∈ Di ⊂ Z, 1 ≤
i ≤ n, and a ﬁnite set of constraints (i.e. relations) C =
{c1 , c2 , . . . , cm } each expressed on a subset of the variables,
cj (xj1 , xj2 , . . . , xjk ) ⊂ Zk , 1 ≤ j ≤ m. One must ﬁnd
a combination of values from the domain of each variable
that simultaneously satisﬁes every constraint (i.e. belongs
to every relation). This formalism is called the Constraint
Satisfaction Problem. So at its core CP is designed to handle
combinatorial existence problems.
Although constraints can be arbitrary relations, typically
they each correspond to an important combinatorial substructure of the problem. This explicit access to structure has
been the cornerstone of inference in CP , giving rise to many
distinct ﬁltering algorithms encapsulated in so-called global
constraints, and can also be used to guide search. Generally the exploration of the solution space takes the form of
a search tree in which branches correspond to ﬁxing some
variable to a value in its domain. This decision process is
broken down into a variable-selection heuristic and a valueselection heuristic.
Counting-based search relies on computing the solution density of each variable-value assignment for a constraint in order to build an integrated variable-selection
and value-selection heuristic (Zanarini and Pesant 2007).
Given a constraint c(x1 , . . . , xk ), its number of solutions
#c(x1 , . . . , xk ), respective ﬁnite domains Di 1≤i≤k, a variable xi in the scope of c, and a value d ∈ Di , we call

Branching heuristics based on counting solutions in constraints have been quite good at guiding search to solve constraint satisfaction problems. But do they perform as well
for constraint optimization problems? We propose an adaptation of counting-based search for optimization, show how
to modify solution density computation for some of the most
frequently-occurring constraints, and empirically evaluate its
performance on several benchmark problems.

Introduction
Designing robust generic branching heuristics (e.g. (Boussemart et al. 2004; Refalo 2004; Zanarini and Pesant 2007;
Michel and Van Hentenryck 2012)) is an important step
in making Constraint Programming (CP) competitive with
other approaches to combinatorial problem solving which
adopt a “model-and-solve” philosophy, without the user having to design a dedicated search strategy. Among such
branching heuristics, counting-based search exploits the
structure of a model by querying each constraint about how
frequently a given variable-value assignment appears in solutions. Branching heuristics based on such information
guide search towards areas of the search space likely to contain solutions. These heuristics perform very well to solve
constraint satisfaction problems (Pesant, Quimper, and Zanarini 2012).
But many combinatorial problems seek a solution that is
optimal with respect to some objective and are more naturally framed as constraint optimization problems. How
well does counting-based search perform when we are not
merely looking for any solution but for an optimal one? Unless the best solutions are uniformly distributed in the space
of solutions, orienting the search where most solutions are
may not guide us very well. In this paper we investigate an
adaptation of counting-based search for combinatorial optimization problems. The next section provides some background concepts and reviews the relevant literature. Then
we present our contribution of counting-based search for optimization. Finally we describe its empirical evaluation.

σ(xi , d, c) =

#c(x1 , . . . , xi−1 , d, xi+1 , . . . , xk )
#c(x1 , . . . , xk )

the solution density of pair (xi , d) in c. It measures how often a certain assignment is part of a solution to c. We can exploit the combinatorial structure of the constraint to design
efﬁcient algorithms computing solution densities. Generally
speaking such a problem falls within the realm of enumerative combinatorics and is even harder than the usual ﬁltering
to achieve consistency, akin to existential combinatorics.
Constraint optimization problems are traditionally approached as a succession of constraint satisfaction problems,
raising the bar for the objective value at each step until the

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3441

