Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Automated Veriﬁcation and
Tightening of Failure Propagation Models
Benjamin Bittner,1,2∗ Marco Bozzano,1 Alessandro Cimatti,1 Gianni Zampedri,1
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 2 University of Trento
Trento, Italy - lastname@fbk.eu

Mikulak, and Beauregard 1996) and FTA (Bozzano, Cimatti,
and Tapparo 2007), failure propagation analysis has substantial advantages. First, it allows for ﬁne-grained and precise
analyses that other techniques such as FMECA do not handle (e.g. timing information). While Fault Tree analysis only
explores subsets of propagation paths in response to speciﬁc
feared events, failure propagation presents a more comprehensive and integrated picture. Failure propagation also addresses one of the key difﬁculties in the implementation of
FDIR, i.e. the fact that the design is based on scattered and
informal analysis, without quantitative reference that is essential for FDIR. In this setting, TFPGs are often manually
derived from a given dynamic system of greater complexity,
as an abstract representation of its behavior under speciﬁc
faulty conditions.
In this paper we tackle two key difﬁculties in this process: ﬁrst, how to make sure that no important behavior of
the system is overlooked in the TFPG, and that no spurious,
nonexistent behavior is introduced; second, how to devise
the correct values for the delays between events. We propose
a formal and automatic approach to validate the completeness and tightness of a TFPG for a given inﬁnite-state dynamic system. The approach devises a sufﬁcient set of proof
obligations, in form of temporal properties, that must hold of
the system for the TFPG to be complete. A model checker is
used to check such proof obligations, and to produce diagnostic information if the TFPG does not accurately abstract
the system.
A qualitative TFPG structure thus obtained is the input for an automated synthesis procedure, able to devise a
tight set of parameter assignments. Speciﬁcally, the minimal
and maximal values for the delay parameters are sought by
means of runs of parametric model checking. The approach
has been fully implemented, and evaluated on a number
of synthetic and industrial benchmarks derived in the context of collaborations with the European Space Agency and
The Boeing Company. The experimental evaluation demonstrates the practicality of the approach, and positive feedback is reported from the application in an industrial setting.

Abstract
Timed Failure Propagation Graphs (TFPGs) are used in the
design of safety-critical systems as a way of modeling failure
propagation, and to evaluate and implement diagnostic systems. TFPGs are a very rich formalism: they allow to model
Boolean combinations of faults and events, also dependent on
the operational modes of the system and quantitative delays
between them. TFPGs are often produced manually, from a
given dynamic system of greater complexity, as abstract representations of the system behavior under speciﬁc faulty conditions.
In this paper we tackle two key difﬁculties in this process:
ﬁrst, how to make sure that no important behavior of the system is overlooked in the TFPG, and that no spurious, nonexistent behavior is introduced; second, how to devise the
correct values for the delays between events. We propose a
model checking approach to automatically validate the completeness and tightness of a TFPG for a given inﬁnite-state
dynamic system, and a procedure for the automated synthesis
of the delay parameters. The proposed approach is evaluated
on a number of synthetic and industrial benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Timed Failure Propagation Graphs (TFPGs) (Abdelwahed
et al. 2009) have been studied and used in practice in the
design of safety-critical systems since the early 1990s, as a
way to describe the occurrence of failures and of their direct
and indirect effects, and to assess the corresponding consequences over time. TFPGs are a very rich formalism: they
allow to model Boolean combinations of basic faults, intermediate events, and transitions across them, also dependent
on the operational modes of the system, and to express constraints over the delays. TFPGs have been primarily used
as a way to deploy diagnosis systems (Abdelwahed et al.
2009). Their importance is now increasingly recognized in
the design of autonomous systems, in particular for the definition of Fault Detection, Isolation and Recovery (FDIR)
procedures (Bittner et al. 2014b). TFPGs have been the object of recent invitations to tender by the European Space
Agency (European Space Agency 2011; 2012). In fact, compared to other techniques such as FMECA (McDermott,

Related Work Next to considerable interest in TFPGs
as tools for timed failure propagation modeling and as a
basis for diagnosis implementations (Misra et al. 1992;
Ofsthun and Abdelwahed 2007; Abdelwahed et al. 2009;

∗
The ﬁrst author was partially supported by the European Space
Agency NPI contract No. 4000111815/14/NL/FE.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

907

