Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Relaxed Majorization-Minimization for
Non-Smooth and Non-Convex Optimization
1

Chen Xu1 , Zhouchen Lin1,2,∗ , Zhenyu Zhao3 , Hongbin Zha1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, P. R. China
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University, P. R. China
3
Department of Mathematics, School of Science, National University of Defense Technology, P. R. China
xuen@pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn, dwightzzy@gmail.com, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn
Algorithm 1 Sketch of MM
Input: x0 ∈ C.
1: while not converged do
2:
Construct a surrogate function gk (x) of f (x) at the
current iterate xk .
3:
Minimize the surrogate to get the next iterate: xk+1 =
argminx∈C gk (x).
4:
k ← k + 1.
5: end while
Output: The solution xk .

Abstract
We propose a new majorization-minimization (MM) method
for non-smooth and non-convex programs, which is general
enough to include the existing MM methods. Besides the local majorization condition, we only require that the difference
between the directional derivatives of the objective function
and its surrogate function vanishes when the number of iterations approaches inﬁnity, which is a very weak condition. So
our method can use a surrogate function that directly approximates the non-smooth objective function. In comparison, all
the existing MM methods construct the surrogate function by
approximating the smooth component of the objective function. We apply our relaxed MM methods to the robust matrix
factorization (RMF) problem with different regularizations,
where our locally majorant algorithm shows great advantages
over the state-of-the-art approaches for RMF. This is the ﬁrst
algorithm for RMF ensuring, without extra assumptions, that
any limit point of the iterates is a stationary point.

Existing MM for Non-smooth and Non-convex
Optimization
MM has been successfully applied to a wide range of problems. Mairal (2013) has given a comprehensive review on
MM. Conceptually, the MM methods consist of two steps
(see Algorithm 1). First, construct a surrogate function
gk (x) of f (x) at the current iterate xk . Second, minimize the
surrogate gk (x) to update x. The choice of surrogate is crit-

Introduction
Consider the following optimization problem:
min f (x),
x∈C

(1)

where C is a closed convex subset in Rn and f (x) : Rn →
R is a continuous function bounded below, which could be
non-smooth and non-convex. Often, f (x) can be split as:
f (x) = f˜(x) + fˆ(x),

Table 1: Comparison of surrogate functions among existing MM methods. #1 represents globally majorant MM
in (Mairal, 2013), #2 represents strongly convex MM
in (Mairal, 2013), #3 represents successive MM in (Razaviyayn, Hong, and Luo, 2013) and #4 represents our relaxed MM. In the second to fourth rows, × means that a
function
√ is not necessary to have the feature. In the last three
rows, means that a function has the ability.

(2)

where f˜(x) is differentiable and fˆ(x) is non-smooth1 .
Such an optimization problem is ubiquitous, e.g., in statistics (Chen, 2012), computer vision and image processing (Bruckstein, Donoho, and Elad, 2009; Ke and Kanade,
2005), data mining and machine learning (Pan et al., 2014;
Kong, Ding, and Huang, 2011). There have been a variety
of methods to tackle problem (1). Typical methods include
subdifferential (Clarke, 1990), bundle methods (Mäkelä,
2002), gradient sampling (Burke, Lewis, and Overton,
2005), smoothing methods (Chen, 2012), and majorizationminimization (MM) (Hunter and Lange, 2004). In this paper,
we focus on the MM methods.

Surrogate Functions
Globally Majorant
Smoothness of Difference
Equality of Directional Derivative
Approximate f˜(x) in (2)
Approximate f (x) in (1) (fˆ = 0)

∗
Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1 ˜
f (x) and fˆ(x) may vanish.

Sufﬁcient Descent

812

#1

√
√
√

#2

#3

×
√
√

×
√

√

√

√

√

×
×

×
√

×
×

#4

×
×
×
√
√
√

