Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Using the Shapley Value to Analyze Algorithm Portfolios
Alexandre Fréchette

Lars Kotthoff

Tomasz Michalak

Dept. of Computer Science
Univ. of British Columbia, Canada
afrechet@cs.ubc.ca

Dept. of Computer Science
Univ.y of British Columbia, Canada
larsko@cs.ubc.ca

Univ. of Oxford, UK
Univ. of Warsaw, Poland
tomasz.michalak@cs.ox.ac.uk

Talal Rahwan

Holger H. Hoos

Kevin Leyton-Brown

Masdar Inst. of Science and Technology
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
trahwan@gmail.com

Dept. of Computer Science
Univ. of British Columbia, Canada
hoos@cs.ubc.ca

Dept.of Computer Science
Univ. of British Columbia, Canada
kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca

nent algorithm contributes to the success of the portfolio,
both in order to winnow down the portfolio and to learn
more about the algorithms themselves. This is also relevant
in competitions that determine the current state of the art;
the competition ranking and scores alone are often insufﬁcient to adequately quantify the extent to which an algorithm
contributes to the state of the art.
Perhaps the most natural way to assess the contribution
of an algorithm is by simply assessing its standalone performance. More formally, let X denote a ﬁxed set of instances
of a given problem, A = {i}ni=1 denote the set of available algorithms, and A ⊆ A denote an algorithm portfolio.
Moreover, let perf(A) denote the performance achieved by
leveraging the complementary strengths of the algorithms in
A (e.g., by evaluating the performance on X of executing
algorithm selection, or running all algorithms in parallel),
and let contr(i, A) denote the contribution of i to A. Now if
this contribution is evaluated solely based on the standalone
performance of i, then we obtain the following measure of
contribution:

Abstract
Algorithms for NP-complete problems often have different
strengths and weaknesses, and thus algorithm portfolios often
outperform individual algorithms. It is surprisingly difﬁcult
to quantify a component algorithm’s contribution to such a
portfolio. Reporting a component’s standalone performance
wrongly rewards near-clones while penalizing algorithms that
have small but distinct areas of strength. Measuring a component’s marginal contribution to an existing portfolio is better,
but penalizes sets of strongly correlated algorithms, thereby
obscuring situations in which it is essential to have at least
one algorithm from such a set. This paper argues for analyzing component algorithm contributions via a measure drawn
from coalitional game theory—the Shapley value—and yields
insight into a research community’s progress over time. We
conclude with an application of the analysis we advocate to
SAT competitions, yielding novel insights into the behaviour
of algorithm portfolios, their components, and the state of SAT
solving technology.

Introduction
Many important problems in AI are NP-complete but can still
be solved very efﬁciently in practice by algorithms that exploit various kinds of instance structure. Different algorithms
exploit such structure in subtly different ways, with the result
that a given algorithm may dramatically outperform another
on one problem instance, but the situation may be reversed
on another. Algorithm portfolios (Huberman, Lukose, and
Hogg 1997; Gomes and Selman 2001) are sets of algorithms
that complement each other across an instance distribution.
There has been much recent interest in algorithm portfolios,
fueled by practical successes in SAT (Nudelman et al. 2003;
Xu et al. 2008), CSP (O’Mahony et al. 2008), AI planning
(Helmert, Röger, and Karpas 2011), Max-SAT (Malitsky,
Mehta, and O’Sullivan 2013), QBF (Pulina and Tacchella
2009), ASP (Gebser et al. 2011), and many other problems
(see, e.g., Kotthoff, 2014). Portfolios can run all algorithms
in parallel, can use learned models to select an algorithm on
a per-instance basis, or can employ variations of these ideas.
Regardless of how a portfolio is turned into an actual solver,
it is often important to understand how much each compo-

contrs (i, A) = perf({i}),
where s means standalone. While this measure is easy to
compute, it fails to consider synergies in a portfolio and
hence can give too much credit to strong but highly correlated algorithms. Furthermore, this measure fails to reward
algorithms that perform poorly overall, but dramatically outperform other algorithms in A on some nontrivial subset of
X (in a competition setting this means that the winner may
perform very poorly on this subset). Motivated by these issues, Xu et al. (2012) argued that each algorithm i should
be evaluated in terms of its marginal contribution to a given
portfolio A. That is,
contrm (i, A) = perf(A) − perf(A \ {i}),
where m stands for marginal contribution. The authors also
included an application to SAT; Amadini, Gabbrielli, and
Mauro (2013) conducted an analogous evaluation of CSP
solvers. While the measure contrm addresses the problems
discussed above, it raises some (arguably less severe) problems of its own—notably that it penalizes correlated component algorithms. In the most extreme case, a very important

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3397

