Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting the Next Location:
A Recurrent Model with Spatial and Temporal Contexts
Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, Liang Wang, Tieniu Tan
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{qiang.liu, shu.wu, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Nowadays, the spatial temporal predicting problem has
been extensively studied. Factorizing Personalized Markov
Chain (FPMC) (Rendle, Freudenthaler, and SchmidtThieme 2010) is a personalized extension of common
markov chain models, and has become one of the most
popular methods for sequential prediction. FPMC has also
been applied for next location prediction (Cheng et al. 2013;
Chen, Liu, and Yu 2014). The main concern about FPMC
is that it is based on a strong independence assumption
among different factors. As another popular method, Tensor Factorization (TF) has been successfully applied for
time-aware recommendation (Xiong et al. 2010) as well as
modeling spatial temporal information (Zheng et al. 2010a;
Bahadori, Yu, and Liu 2014). In TF, both time bins and locations are regarded as additional dimensions in the factorized
tensor, which leads the cold start problem in behavior prediction with new time bins, e.g., behaviors in the future. Recently, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) has been successfully employed for word embedding (Mikolov et al. 2010;
2011a; 2011b) and sequential click prediction (Zhang et al.
2014). RNN shows promising performance comparing with
conventional methods.

Abstract
Spatial and temporal contextual information plays a key
role for analyzing user behaviors, and is helpful for predicting where he or she will go next. With the growing
ability of collecting information, more and more temporal and spatial contextual information is collected in
systems, and the location prediction problem becomes
crucial and feasible. Some works have been proposed to
address this problem, but they all have their limitations.
Factorizing Personalized Markov Chain (FPMC) is constructed based on a strong independence assumption
among different factors, which limits its performance.
Tensor Factorization (TF) faces the cold start problem
in predicting future actions. Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) model shows promising performance comparing with PFMC and TF, but all these methods have
problem in modeling continuous time interval and geographical distance. In this paper, we extend RNN and
propose a novel method called Spatial Temporal Recurrent Neural Networks (ST-RNN). ST-RNN can model
local temporal and spatial contexts in each layer with
time-speciﬁc transition matrices for different time intervals and distance-speciﬁc transition matrices for different geographical distances. Experimental results show
that the proposed ST-RNN model yields signiﬁcant improvements over the competitive compared methods on
two typical datasets, i.e., Global Terrorism Database
(GTD) and Gowalla dataset.

Although the above methods have achieved satisfactory
results in some applications, they are unable to handle continuous geographical distances between locations and time
intervals between nearby behaviors in modeling sequential
data. At ﬁrst, these continuous values of spatial and temporal
contexts are signiﬁcant in behavior modeling. For instance,
a person may tend to go to a restaurant nearby, but he or she
maybe hesitate to go to a restaurant far away even if it is
delicious and popular. Meanwhile, suppose a person went to
an opera house last night and a parking lot last month, where
he or she will go to today has a higher probability to be inﬂuenced by the opera house because of the similar interests
and demands in a short period. Secondly, these local temporal contexts have fundamental effects in revealing characteristics of the user and are helpful for the behavior modeling.
If the person went to an opera house last night and an art museum this morning, it is probable that both the opera house
and the museum have higher important than other contexts,
e.g., going to shopping mall last month, in the next location
prediction. Finally, as some behaviors are periodical such as
going to church every Sunday, the effect of time interval becomes important for temporal prediction in such situations.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of available information on the internet and the enhancing ability of systems in collecting information, more and more temporal and spatial contexts have
been collected. Spatial and temporal contexts describe the
essential factors for an event, i.e., where and when. These
factors are fundamental for modeling behavior in practical
applications. It is challenging and crucial to predict where a
man will be at a give time point with complex temporal and
spatial information. For example, based on user historical
check-in data, we can analyze and predict where a user will
go next. Moreover, such analysis can also be used for social
good, such as predicting where trafﬁc jams will happen or
which city terrorist organizations will attack.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

194

