Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Generalized Emphatic Temporal Difference Learning: Bias-Variance Analysis
Assaf Hallak

Aviv Tamar

Remi Munos

Shie Mannor

Technion
Israel
ifogph@gmail.com

UC Berkeley
USA
avivt@berkeley.edu

Google DeepMind
UK
munos@google.com

Technion
Israel
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

sekas and Tsitsiklis 1996). These bounds guarantee that the
asymptotic error, or bias, of the algorithm is contained. For
the off-policy case, however, standard TD methods no longer
maintain this contraction property, the error bounds do not
hold, and these methods might even diverge (Baird 1995).
The standard error-bounds may be shown to hold for an
importance-sampling TD method (IS-TD), as proposed by
Precup, Sutton, and Dasgupta (2001). However, this method
is known to suffer from a high variance of its importancesampling estimator, limiting its practicality.
Lately, Sutton, Mahmood, and White (2015) proposed the
emphatic TD (ETD) algorithm: a modiﬁcation of the TD
idea, which converges off-policy (Yu 2015), and has a reduced variance compared to IS-TD. This variance reduction is achieved by incorporating a certain decay factor over
the importance-sampling ratio. However, to the best of our
knowledge, there are no results that bound the bias of ETD.
Thus, while ETD is assured to converge, it is not known how
good its limit actually is.
In this paper, we propose the ETD(λ, β) framework – a
modiﬁcation of the ETD(λ) algorithm, where the decay rate
of the importance-sampling ratio, β, is a free parameter, and
λ is the same bootstrapping parameter employed in TD(λ)
and ETD(λ). By varying the decay rate, one can smoothly
transition between the IS-TD algorithm, through ETD, to the
standard TD algorithm.
We investigate the bias of ETD(λ, β), by studying the
conditions under which its underlying projected Bellman
operator is a contraction. We show that the original ETD
possesses a contraction property, and present the ﬁrst error
bounds for ETD and ETD(λ, β). In addition, our error bound
reveals that the decay rate parameter balances between the
bias and variance of the learning procedure. In particular,
we show that selecting a decay equal to the discount factor
as in the original ETD may be suboptimal in terms of the
mean-squared error.
The main contributions of this work are therefore a uniﬁcation of several off-policy TD algorithms under the ETD(λ,
β) framework, and a new error analysis that reveals the biasvariance trade-off between them.

Abstract
We consider the off-policy evaluation problem in Markov decision processes with function approximation. We propose a
generalization of the recently introduced emphatic temporal
differences (ETD) algorithm (Sutton, Mahmood, and White
2015), which encompasses the original ETD(λ), as well
as several other off-policy evaluation algorithms as special
cases. We call this framework ETD(λ, β), where our introduced parameter β controls the decay rate of an importancesampling term. We study conditions under which the projected ﬁxed-point equation underlying ETD(λ, β) involves a
contraction operator, allowing us to present the ﬁrst asymptotic error bounds (bias) for ETD(λ, β). Our results show that
the original ETD algorithm always involves a contraction operator, and its bias is bounded. Moreover, by controlling β,
our proposed generalization allows trading-off bias for variance reduction, thereby achieving a lower total error.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL; Sutton and Barto, 1998),
policy-evaluation refers to the problem of evaluating the
value function – a mapping from states to their long-term
discounted return under a given policy, using sampled observations of the system dynamics and reward. Policyevaluation is important both for assessing the quality of a
policy, but also as a sub-procedure for policy optimization.
For systems with large or continuous state-spaces, an
exact computation of the value function is often impossible. Instead, an approximate value-function is sought using
various function-approximation techniques (a.k.a. approximate dynamic-programming; Bertsekas, 2012). In this approach, the parameters of the value-function approximation
are tuned using machine-learning inspired methods, often
based on temporal-differences (TD;Sutton and Barto, 1998).
The source generating the sampled data divides policy
evaluation into two cases. In the on-policy case, the samples
are generated by the target-policy – the policy under evaluation; In the off-policy setting, a different behavior-policy
generates the data. In the on-policy setting, TD methods are
well understood, with classic convergence guarantees and
approximation-error bounds, based on a contraction property of the projected Bellman operator underlying TD (Bert-

Related Work: In recent years, several different offpolicy policy-evaluation algorithms have been studied, such
as importance-sampling based least-squares TD (Yu 2012),

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1631

