Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multiagent-Based Route Guidance
for Increasing the Chance of Arrival on Time
Zhiguang Cao1,2 , Hongliang Guo1,2 , Jie Zhang1 , and Ulrich Fastenrath3
1

School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Energy Research Institute @NTU, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Trafﬁc Information Management and Routing Optimization, BMW Group, Germany
{caoz0005, guohl, zhangj}@ntu.edu.sg, Ulrich.Fastenrath@bmw.de
2

and solved by efﬁcient path ﬁnding algorithms like Dijkstra (Hall 1986). However, in real trafﬁc, different drivers
may have different deadlines, and even the same driver may
have different deadlines in various scenarios. For instance,
if they catch up important appointments, deadlines might be
tight; if they go shopping, deadlines might be loose. Simply seeking LET paths for all drivers is not necessary and
may cause some drivers with tight deadlines to miss their
deadlines due to the inﬂuence from other drivers with loose
deadlines. This will then increase these drivers’ frustration
and impatience, and in consequence the accident rate.
To address this issue, we propose to adopt the probability
tail model which aims to maximize the probability of reaching destination before a deadline (Fan, Kalaba, and Moore II
2005; Lim et al. 2013). This model is more reasonable as
it considers speciﬁc demands of drivers and is consistent
with real-world travel behavior. One common query could
be that “I want to reach airport in 40 minutes. Please ﬁnd a
path with maximum chance”. However, the probability tail
model is originally designed for each single vehicle, which
independently pre-computes a path before each vehicle departs. Trafﬁc is known to be dynamic, so optimality of a precomputed path may not hold once all vehicles are en-route.
It is then desirable to extend the probability tail model to
consider the intentions of other vehicles, with the purpose
of increasing the chance of arrival on time for all vehicles.
To achieve this, we propose a decentralized multiagent approach, where infrastructure agents locally collect intentions
of concerned vehicle agents and formulate route guidance
as a route assignment problem, to guarantee their arrival on
time. Furthermore, its efﬁciency is enhanced by reformulating route assignment as a mixed integer linear programming
(MILP) problem, and its performance is improved by allowing communication between neighboring infrastructure
agents. Experimental results on real road networks show that
our approach outperforms the traditional methods.

Abstract
Transportation and mobility are central to sustainable
urban development, where multiagent-based route guidance is widely applied. Traditional multiagent-based
route guidance always seeks LET (least expected travel
time) paths. However, drivers usually have speciﬁc expectations, i.e., tight or loose deadlines, which may not
be all met by LET paths. We thus adopt and extend the
probability tail model that aims to maximize the probability of reaching destinations before deadlines. Specifically, we propose a decentralized multiagent approach,
where infrastructure agents locally collect intentions of
concerned vehicle agents and formulate route guidance
as a route assignment problem, to guarantee their arrival
on time. Experimental results on real road networks justify its ability to increase the chance of arrival on time.

Introduction
Route guidance for vehicles is a challenging problem in
transportation and mobility, which is crucial to the sustainable development of any city. It attracts broad and deep attention from the government, industry and research community due to its high relevance to people’s daily life.
Multiagent-based approaches are widely applied in route
guidance (France, Ghorbani, and others 2003; Wilt and
Botea 2014), because agent metaphor for modeling a trafﬁc participant or decision-maker can capture complex constraints connecting all problem-solving phases, especially in
the cooperative vehicle routing (Bazzan and Klügl 2014). A
transportation system can be modeled as a large, distributed
and dynamic multiagent system where vehicles represented
as agents move on the road network following their own
routes, which are determined by themselves or infrastructure
agents at road intersections (Jiang, Zhang, and Ong 2014).
Although multiagent-based approaches have achieved big
success in route guidance, a critical issue still remains
to be addressed: most of them only seek LET (least expected travel time) paths for vehicles (Yamashita et al. 2005;
Claes, Holvoet, and Weyns 2011; Wang, Djahel, and McManis 2014). The attractive aspect about LET path is that
it can be transformed into a deterministic routing problem

Related Work
In one of the early multiagent-based approaches for route
guidance (Yamashita et al. 2005), a global server agent constantly collects intentions of routes from all vehicle agents.
It then computes a predicted LET path for each individual
vehicle agent by cooperatively exploring the collected intentions, and all vehicle agents update their routes at each inter-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3814

