Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Detect Overlapping Communities via Ranking Node Popularities
Di Jin1, Hongcui Wang1, Jianwu Dang1,2, Dongxiao He1, Weixiong Zhang3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China, 2School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Japan, 3College of Math and Computer Science, Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China, 4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
{jindi, hcwang, dangjianwu, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn, weixiong.zhang@wustl.edu

resulting in erroneous representation of the network structure. Thus, it is imperative to develop methods that allow
nodes to be members of multiple communities.
A few approaches have been proposed for overlapping
community detection. One of them is based on the idea of
clique percolation where a cluster is interpreted as the union of small, fully connected subgraphs that share common
nodes (Palla et al. 2005; Shen et al. 2009). Another approach utilizes local expansion and optimization which is
based on growing a natural community (Lancichinetti,
Fortunato and Kertész 2009; Jin et al. 2011; Lancichinetti
et al. 2011). Most of these methods rely on a local benefit
function that characterizes the quality of a densely connected group of nodes. The third approach considers link
community detection by partitioning links instead of nodes,
where a node associated with different types of links may
belong to different communities (Ahn, Bagrow and Lehmann 2010; Gopalan and Blei 2013; He et al. 2015). The
fourth approach is based on dynamic label propagation
(Raghavan, Albert and Kumara 2007), which has been extended to overlapping community detection (Gregory 2010;
Xie, Szymanski and Liu 2011). In the process of label
propagation, each node updates its community belonging
coefficients by repeatedly averaging the coefficients passing from all its neighbors.
Thanks to a sound theoretical basis and good performance, the stochastic model constitutes a promising technique for identifying modular structures of networks and
has been well studied recently. Furthermore, the modelbased methods that maintain probabilistic community
memberships have also been adopted to find overlapping
community structures (Airoldi et al. 2008; Shen, Cheng
and Guo 2011; Psorakis et al. 2011; Zhang and Yeung
2012; Yang and Leskovec 2013; Jin et al. 2015).
Despite their popularity, the model-based methods suffer
from some common drawbacks. First, highly connected
nodes in real networks are likely to play important roles
and thus tend to appear in multiple communities (Yang and
Leskovec 2014). The existing model-based methods do not
model this phenomenon well since they assume that the
sum of probabilities for a node belonging to different
communities (or community membership of the node) is 1

Abstract
Detection of overlapping communities has drawn much attention lately as they are essential properties of real complex
networks. Despite its influence and popularity, the well
studied and widely adopted stochastic model has not been
made effective for finding overlapping communities. Here
we extend the stochastic model method to detection of overlapping communities with the virtue of autonomous determination of the number of communities. Our approach
hinges upon the idea of ranking node popularities within
communities and using a Bayesian method to shrink communities to optimize an objective function based on the stochastic generative model. We evaluated the novel approach,
showing its superior performance over five state-of-the-art
methods, on large real networks and synthetic networks
with ground-truths of overlapping communities.

1. Introduction
One of the challenging problems in study of complex networks, e.g., social networks, biological networks, and the
world wide web, is the detection of community structures
(Girvan and Newman 2002), a subject that has attracted a
great deal of interest. A community within a network can
be loosely defined as a set of nodes that are densely connected with respect to the rest of the network. So far, many
different approaches have been proposed to uncover community structures in networks, as reviewed in (Fortunato
2010). Among the existing methods, the most popular are
the ones that focus on partition of nodes, resulting in communities of disjoint sets of nodes and a node being belong
to only one community (Girvan and Newman 2002). However, overlaps of communities, i.e., a node can be members
of more than one community, are ubiquitous in reality
(Palla et al. 2005). For example, an individual has a family
and belongs to a group of co-workers, each of which has its
own functions and forms its own circle of influence. Forcing a node into one community fail to accommodate multiple relationships and functions that a node may possess,
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

172

