Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Semantical Analysis of Second-Order Propositional Modal Logic
F. Belardinelli

W. van der Hoek

Laboratoire IBISC
Université d’Evry, France
belardinelli@ibisc.fr

University of Liverpool, UK
wiebe@liverpool.ac.uk

is important to realise that there is not just one modal logic:
although there is an axiomatisation K that characterises the
class K of validities on all models, this does not mean that
all logics for, say, agency are the same. It only means that
they are extensions of K. As a simple example, the property
[a]ϕ → ϕ (i) seems reasonable when [a] denotes ‘knowing
that’, but is perhaps less desirable when it means ‘believing
that’. One of the reasons for the success of modal logic is
that often, a syntactic scheme corresponds to an additional
constraint on the accessibility relation Ra : in the case of (i),
reﬂexivity of Ra is, in a precise sense, sufﬁcient and necessary for its validity.
To appreciate this, we use a little bit more detail (precise
deﬁnitions are given in Section 2.) Central in the semantics
of modal logic is the notion of Kripke frame F, which includes a set W of states and some accessibility relations Ra ,
for indexes a ∈ I. We can then deﬁne a notion of validity |=
on frames and formulate the result mentioned above:

Abstract
This paper is aimed as a contribution to the use of formal
modal languages in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. We introduce a
multi-modal version of Second-order Propositional Modal
Logic (SOPML), an extension of modal logic with propositional quantiﬁcation, and illustrate its usefulness as a speciﬁcation language for knowledge representation as well as temporal and spatial reasoning. Then, we deﬁne novel notions of
(bi)simulation and prove that these preserve the interpretation
of SOPML formulas. Finally, we apply these results to assess
the expressive power of SOPML.

1

Introduction

Modal logic (Blackburn, de Rijke, and Venema 2001; Blackburn, van Benthem, and Wolter 2007) has become one of
the most popular formal frameworks in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and knowledge representation (van Harmelen, Lifschitz, and Porter 2007). There is a number of reasons for
this. At the core of the semantics of modal logic lies the notion of world, or state. Indeed, the notion of state is very
natural when studying computational concepts, i.e., systems
evolving over time, or notions of agency (states that are preferred, desired, or epistemically possible) and of interaction
(e.g., states can be winning, losing, terminal, initial, . . . ).
Indeed, distributed computing (Halpern and Moses 1990),
temporal systems (Manna and Pnueli 1992), multi-agent
systems (van der Hoek and Wooldridge 2008) and game theory (van der Hoek and Pauly 2006) have all been studied
within modal logic, and this list is by no means exhaustive. Importantly, the states in the models for modal logic
are connected by means of indexed relations Ra that model
(program) transitions, epistemic or desired alternatives, or
the effect of possible moves (here, a can represent a speciﬁc
program, a dimension of time (say, future or past), an agent,
a move, etc.). Each accessibility relation Ra in the semantics is then paired with a necessity operator [a] in the modal
language, where [a]ϕ may read: after every execution of a,
in each future along dimension a, in every state considered
possible or desired by agent a, or in every state that is the
result of performing move a, ϕ holds.
So, the language of modal logic provides a crisp, variablefree way of expressing a variety of properties of interest. It

Ra is reﬂexive

iff

F |= [a]ϕ → ϕ, for all ϕ

(1)

Characterisations like (1) are referred to as correspondence
results (van Benthem 1976), because they establish a correspondence between a ﬁrst-order property on frames and a
modal validity. Another example of correspondence is that
between ∀x∀y(Ra (x, y) → Rb (x, y)) and [b]ϕ → [a]ϕ
(saying, e.g., that whatever is achieved by program b, is also
achieved by a, or that a knows at least as much as b).
Mathematically elegant and powerful correspondence
theory may be, it also has shortcomings. First note that in
(1), truth is global, i.e., holds throughout the frame. This
means that for instance (using a doxastic/epistemic reading
of (i)), we cannot model situations in which a’s beliefs are
true, but b does not know that: the validity of (i) entails b’s
knowledge of (i). That is, we cannot express that for all ϕ,
we have [a]ϕ → ϕ, while for some ψ, also ¬[b]([a]ψ → ψ)
holds. Notice that in such cases, as well as in (1), quantiﬁcation appears at the meta-, and therefore the outermost, level.
It is therefore impossible to distinguish the following two
situations: in the ﬁrst, b knows that a has perfect information and is a perfect reasoner, therefore, b knows that whatever a believes must be correct. The second situation is one
in which b systematically has some way to verify for every
property ϕ, that whenever a believes it, then ϕ is true.
As observed in (Belardinelli and van der Hoek 2015), by

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

886

