Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Metaphysics of Planning Domain Descriptions
Siddharth Srivastava1 and Stuart Russell2 and Alessandro Pinto1
1

2

United Technologies Research Center, Berkeley, CA 94705
Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley CA 94720

arm and gripper movements, each of which is implemented
by lower-level control inputs to motors controlling various
joints, each of which in turn is implemented by a speciﬁc
pattern of voltages being applied, and so on. The SLL description of “pickup”, on the other hand, mentions only a
few logical preconditions and effects: if the gripper is empty
and the block does not have anything on top of it, the gripper
will end up holding the block.
However, abstractions of solvable problems can result in
models that are unsolvable and also models whose solutions
cannot actually be executed. The standard SLL speciﬁcation of blocks world illustrates this by permitting solutions
that cannot be executed. This is because the discrete SLL
model cannot express real preconditions for picking up a
block, which include geometric constraints resulting from
collision avoidance, even in the absence of stacking.1 Thus,
a “pickup” action in a plan computed using an SLL model
may not be executable because all paths between the robot’s
current base pose and the target block are obstructed. Although there do exist real-world scenarios for which the
standard blocks-world speciﬁcation is valid, they are extremely unusual: the robot should be either inﬁnitely tall or
attached to the ceiling, which in turn should be inﬁnitely
high and the robot should be able to pick objects using a
suction/magnetic gripper. In this sense, one could argue that
the true blocks-world problem has never been addressed by
research on planning for SLLs. More generally, the problem
of computing feasible plans using models that are imprecise
abstractions of real-world problems has not received much
research attention.
In this paper, we investigate the relationship between
models in SLLs and the real-world systems that they are
meant to abstract. In order to discuss the adequacy of SLLs
for abstract models, we utilize the principles of metaphysics:
in order to examine how the process of doing “physics” (aka,
writing the rules of a domain) relates to the universe (aka,
the real-world scenario) it purports to describe, one may as-

Abstract
STRIPS-like languages (SLLs) have fostered immense
advances in automated planning. In practice, SLLs are
used to express highly abstract versions of real-world
planning problems, leading to more concise models and
faster solution times. Unfortunately, as we show in the
paper, simple ways of abstracting solvable real-world
problems may lead to SLL models that are unsolvable,
SLL models whose solutions are incorrect with respect
to the real-world problem, or models that are inexpressible in SLLs. There is some evidence that such limitations have restricted the applicability of AI planning
technology in the real world, as is apparent in the case
of task and motion planning in robotics. We show that
the situation can be ameliorated by a combination of
increased expressive power—for example, allowing angelic nondeterminism in action effects—and new kinds
of algorithmic approaches designed to produce correct
solutions from initially incorrect or non-Markovian abstract models.

1

Introduction

The need for using abstract models of systems for computational advantages is well appreciated in the planning literature. The vast majority of ongoing research in planning
is focused on abstract models speciﬁed in STRIPS-like languages (SLLs), e.g. STRIPS, PDDL, SAS, etc.. In these languages, actions are deﬁned using a set of effects that prescribe the atoms (e.g. variable assignments) that should be
added to a state and those that should deleted from the state
on which the action is applied. The use of a common representation language has led to immense progress in planners
that can solve SLL problems, particularly through methods for automated synthesis of heuristic functions from domain speciﬁcations (Bonet and Geffner 2000; Hoffmann and
Nebel 2001; Helmert, Haslum, and Hoffmann 2007).
Most researchers assume that domain experts intuitively
formulate an abstraction of their systems into an SLL. For
instance, the blocks-world model abstracts a situation where
the robot needs to achieve a certain conﬁguration of blocks
on a table. Each “pickup” action in this model is implemented in the real world by a sequence of physical robot

1

The set of blocks obstructing the pickup of a block depends
on several continuous variables such as the poses of the robot’s
base and the target block, the geometries of the robot’s arm and
the block, and ﬁnally, action arguments including the grasping pose
and the trajectory to be used for a pickup; similar considerations are
required when determining the obstructions “added” by a putdown
action.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1074

