Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Ofﬂine Evaluation of Online Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
1

Travis Mandel1 , Yun-En Liu2 , Emma Brunskill3 , and Zoran Popović1,2
Center for Game Science, Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
2
EnlearnTM , Seattle, WA
3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
{tmandel, zoran}@cs.washington.edu, yunliu@enlearn.org, ebrun@cs.cmu.edu

algorithms on real problems of interest in domains such as
healthcare, education, or e-commerce.
These problems have ignited a recent renewal of interest
in ofﬂine policy evaluation in the RL community (Mandel et
al. 2014; Thomas, Theocharous, and Ghavamzadeh 2015),
where one uses a precollected dataset to achieve high-quality
estimates of the performance of a proposed policy. However, this prior work focuses only on evaluating a ﬁxed policy learned from historical data. In many real-world problems, we would instead prefer to deploy a learning algorithm that continues to learn over time, as we expect that
it will improve over time and thus (eventually) outperform
such a ﬁxed policy. Further, we wish to develop testbeds for
RL algorithms which evaluate how they learn over time, not
just the ﬁnal policy they produce.
However, evaluating a learning algorithm is very different
from evaluating a ﬁxed policy. We cannot evaluate an algorithm’s ability to learn by, for example, feeding it 70% of the
precollected dataset as training data and evaluating the produced policy on the remaining 30%. Online, it would have
collected a different training dataset based on how it trades
off exploration and exploitation. In order to evaluate the performance of an algorithm as it learns, we need to simulate
running the algorithm by allowing it to interact with the evaluator as it would with the real (stationary) environment, and
record the resulting performance estimates (e.g. cumulative
reward). See ﬁgure 1.1
A typical approach to creating such an evaluator is to build
a model using the historical data, particularly if the environment is known to be a discrete MDP. However, this approach can result in error that accumulates at least quadratically with the evaluation length (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell
2011). Equally important, in practice it can result in very
poor estimates, as we demonstrate in our experiments section. Worse, in complex real-world domains, it is often unclear how to build accurate models. An alternate approach is
to try to adapt importance sampling techniques to this problem, but the variance of this approach is unusably high if
we wish to evaluate an algorithm for hundreds of timesteps
(Dudı́k et al. 2014).

Abstract
In many real-world reinforcement learning problems, we
have access to an existing dataset and would like to use it to
evaluate various learning approaches. Typically, one would
prefer not to deploy a ﬁxed policy, but rather an algorithm
that learns to improve its behavior as it gains more experience. Therefore, we seek to evaluate how a proposed algorithm learns in our environment, meaning we need to evaluate how an algorithm would have gathered experience if it
were run online. In this work, we develop three new evaluation approaches which guarantee that, given some history,
algorithms are fed samples from the distribution that they
would have encountered if they were run online. Additionally, we are the ﬁrst to propose an approach that is provably
unbiased given ﬁnite data, eliminating bias due to the length
of the evaluation. Finally, we compare the sample-efﬁciency
of these approaches on multiple datasets, including one from
a real-world deployment of an educational game.

1

Introduction

There is a growing interest in deploying reinforcement learning (RL) agents in real-world environments, such as healthcare or education. In these high-risk situations one cannot
deploy an arbitrary algorithm and hope it works well. Instead one needs conﬁdence in an algorithm before risking
deployment. Additionally, we often have a large number of
algorithms (and associated hyperparameter settings), and it
is unclear which will work best in our setting. We would
like a way to compare these algorithms without needing to
collect new data, which could be risky or expensive.
An important related problem is developing testbeds on
which we can evaluate new reinforcement learning algorithms. Historically, these algorithms have been evaluated
on simple hand-designed problems from the literature, often
with a small number of states or state variables. Recently,
work has considered using a diverse suite of Atari games as
a testbed for evaluating reinforcement learning algorithms
(Bellemare et al. 2013). However, it is not clear that these
artiﬁcial problems accurately reﬂect the complex structure
present in real-world environments. An attractive alternative
is to use precollected real-world datasets to evaluate new RL

1

In the bandit community, this problem setup is called nonstationary policy evaluation, but we avoid use of this term to prevent
confusion, as these terms are used in many different RL contexts.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1926

