Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Zero-Suppressed Sentential Decision Diagrams
Masaaki Nishino1 and Norihito Yasuda2 and Shin-ichi Minato2 and Masaaki Nagata1
1

2

NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University
nishino.masaaki@lab.ntt.co.jp

OBDD has many important variants other than SDD. The
Zero-suppressed Binary Decision Diagram (Minato 1993)
is one such variant. Same as OBDD, ZDD represents a
Boolean function as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), but its
reduction rules are different. As a result, ZDDs generally
tend to be smaller than OBDDs when representing sparse
Boolan functions. We say a Boolean function is sparse if it
has a small number of models and each model has small
number of variables whose value is 1.
In this paper, we introduce a new decision diagram called
the Zero-suppressed Sentential Decision Diagram (ZSDD).
It is a variant of SDD and subsumes ZDD as a strict subset.
This relationship is analogous to the SDD subsuming the
OBDD. Like SDDs, ZSDDs have canonical form and support several polytime bottom-up operations for combining
them. Just as ZDDs tend to be more succinct than OBDDs
when representing sparse Boolean functions, ZSDDs tend
to be more succinct than SDDs when representing sparse
Boolean functions. Moreover, ZSDDs have tighter upper
bounds on their size when they are used for representing
CNFs compared with ZDDs; the size of a ZSDD representing a CNF is bounded by the treewidth of the CNF, while the
size of a ZDD is bounded by the pathwidth.
In the following, after reviewing SDDs, we introduce ZSDDs and several bottom-up operations. Then we introduce
implicit partitioning, a simple but powerful technique that
makes ZSDDs much more succinct by suppressing unnecessary substructures. It reduces ZSDD size while maintaining
applicability to several key types of queries. Since practically important queries such as model counting run in time
linear to ZSDD size with implicit partitioning, it is attractive. We also give two upper bounds on ZSDD size with implicit partitioning; one is decided by the size of the family
of sets interpretation of a Boolean function, while the other
is decided by the treewidth of a CNF. We also give analyses on its applicability to several kinds of queries and transformations. Finally we conduct experiments to compare the
size of ZSDD, SDD, and ZDD and show that ZSDD is more
succinct than SDD or ZDDs with standard benchmark instances1 .

Abstract
The Sentential Decision Diagram (SDD) is a prominent
knowledge representation language that subsumes the
Ordered Binary Decision Diagram (OBDD) as a strict
subset. Like OBDDs, SDDs have canonical forms and
support bottom-up operations for combining SDDs, but
they are more succinct than OBDDs. In this paper we
introduce an SDD variant, called the Zero-suppressed
Sentential Decision Diagram (ZSDD). The key idea of
ZSDD is to employ new trimming rules for obtaining a
canonical form. As a result, ZSDD subsumes the Zerosuppressed Binary Decision Diagram (ZDD) as a strict
subset. ZDDs are known for their effectiveness on representing sparse Boolean functions. Likewise, ZSDDs
can be more succinct than SDDs when representing
sparse Boolean functions. We propose several polytime
bottom-up operations over ZSDDs, and a technique for
reducing ZSDD size, while maintaining applicability
to important queries. We also specify two distinct upper bounds on ZSDD sizes; one is derived from the
treewidth of a CNF and the other from the size of a family of sets. Experiments show that ZSDDs are smaller
than SDDs or ZDDs for a standard benchmark dataset.

Introduction
Knowledge compilation is the technique of compiling a
Boolean function into a tractable representation. The Ordered Binary Decision Diagram (OBDD) (Bryant 1986) is
one of the most popular representations and is used in various areas. OBDD is tractable, has canonical forms and supports polytime Apply operations for combining OBDDs.
Following the success of OBDD, several variants of decision diagrams have been proposed (e.g., (Minato 1993;
Bahar et al. 1997)). The Sentential Decision Diagram
(SDD) (Darwiche 2011) is such a prominent variant of the
OBDD. SDD subsumes the Ordered Binary Decision Diagram (OBDD) (Bryant 1986), and has canonical forms and
supports polytime operations for combining SDDs. Moreover, SDDs have bounds on the size that are tighter than
those of OBDDs. Because of these properties, SDDs are attracting much attention (Kisa et al. 2014; Chakraborty et al.
2014).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our sample software of ZSDD is available at https://github.
com/nsnmsak/zsdd/.

1058

