Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Expected Hitting Time Distance∗
De-Chuan Zhan and Peng Hu and Zui Chu and Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhandc, hup, chuz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Most distance metric learning (DML) approaches focus
on learning a Mahalanobis metric for measuring distances
between examples. However, for particular feature representations, e.g., histogram features like BOW and SPM,
Mahalanobis metric could not model the correlations between these features well. In this work, we deﬁne a nonMahalanobis distance for histogram features, via Expected
Hitting Time (EHT) of Markov Chain, which implicitly considers the high-order feature relationships between different
histogram features. The EHT based distance is parameterized by transition probabilities of Markov Chain, we consequently propose a novel type of distance learning approach
(LED, Learning Expected hitting time Distance) to learn appropriate transition probabilities for EHT based distance.
We validate the effectiveness of LED on a series of realworld datasets. Moreover, experiments show that the learned
transition probabilities are with good comprehensibility.

Figure 1: Illustration on the reason of classical Mahalanobis
distance metric learning failure on histogram features: histogram changing tremendously on images of the same dog.
The x-axis is the intensities, and the y-axis is the normalized frequencies (histogram), i.e., these histograms can be
regarded as the intensities distribution.
kinds of Mahalanobis distances are learned and used. This
phenomenon owes to the fact that traditional Mahalanobis
distance metric only handle second-order correlations of individual features and leaves the high-order feature interactions unconsidered. While in reality, e.g., the case of Fig. 1,
adjacent intensities are very similar on visual sense, and
features in these photos should be strongly related. Similar phenomena occur on other histogram style features like
BOW (Sivic and Zisserman 2003) and SPM (Lazebnik,
Schmid, and Ponce 2006), etc. Mahalanobis distance metric
could be inapplicable for these histogram feature representations where high-order feature interactions exist.
Non-Mahalanobis distances are raised in very recent. Kedem et al. (2012) proposed GB-LMNN, an extension of
LMNN (Weinberger and Saul 2009), which utilizes gradient boosting regression trees to obtain a non-linear distance
function; DeepML (Hu, Lu, and Tan 2014) learns nonlinear
mappings for different views with deep brief networks for
face veriﬁcation; EMD (Rubner, Tomasi, and Guibas 2000)
and Kullback-Leibler divergence investigate dissimilarities
between two distributions yet itself a pre-deﬁned distance
measurement rather than performing distance learning; Shi,
Bellet, and Sha (2014) proposed a sparse distance metric
learning approach which can learn a group of local Mahalanobis distances based on ﬁxed metric bases. These approaches are designed according to the characteristics of real
problems, and have achieved better performance than ordinary Mahalanobis metrics in particular tasks. Nevertheless,
those ﬁxed non-linear distance functions or ﬁxed distance

Introduction
Effectiveness of learning methods like k-means, k-NN substantially rely on the distance metric invoked. Most Distance
Metric Learning (DML) methods, e.g., (Davis et al. 2007;
Guillaumin, Verbeek, and Schmid 2009), focus on learning a (squared) Mahalanobis distance which is deﬁned as:
dM (xi , xj )2 = (xi − xj ) M(xi − xj ), where xi and xj
are two instances in Rd , M ∈ Rd×d is a symmetric positive
semi-deﬁnite (PSD) matrix. M in above equation gives the
deﬁnition of Mahalanobis distance metric, and it implicitly
measures the second-order correlations between features.
It is noteworthy, however, that the second-order correlations could not express higher-order feature interactions in
Mahalanobis metric; this may cause some problems on distance measurements. Fig. 1 gives a concrete example: The
left two photos contain a same dog with different poses,
while the right two subplots are the gray channel histograms
respectively. The signiﬁcant differences between histograms
will lead to a large distance between these two images of
dog, and may hurt the generalization ability no matter what
∗
This research was supported by NSFC (61333014) and CCFTencent Open Research Fund (RAGR20150117).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2309

