Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Optimizing Infrastructure Enhancements for Evacuation Planning
Kunal Kumar,1 Julia Romanski,2 and Pascal Van Hentenryck3
1

Ghent University, Belgium.
Brown University, Providence, RI.
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
2

adding lanes to selected road segments and raising road segments so that they survive the ﬂood. Zone-based evacuations
assign a unique path to safety to each residential area, which
makes mobilization and evacuation operations simpler to execute. Convergent plans ensure that there are no forks in
the evacuation graph, making plan compliance simpler to
enforce. Convergent plans also eliminate forks in the evacuation graph, which may lead to congestion due to driver
hesitation (Wolshon, Catarella-Michel, and Lambert 2006).
Even, Pillac, and Van Hentenryck (2015) showed that convergent plans can bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts on a ﬂood case
study in West Sydney, Australia.
To decide which infrastructure enhancements to perform,
we present two approaches: 1) A MIP model whose decision
variables are the infrastructure investment, the evacuation
paths, and the evacuation schedule; 2) A Benders decomposition whose master variables are the investment decisions
and the evacuation paths and the subproblem variables denote the evacuation schedule.
Experimental results evaluate the practicability of the approaches on the case study presented by Even, Pillac, and
Van Hentenryck (2015) concerning a ﬂood event in the
Hawkesbury-Nepean region in the West of Sydney. Our results indicate the practibility of our Benders decomposition
approach which signiﬁcantly outperforms the MIP model
and exbihits small optimality gaps in reasonable time. Our
results also report on the tradeoff between the quality of the
evacuation plans and the budget.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
review the literature on the relevant evacuation planning algorithms. We then present the problem modeling, the MIP
model, and the Benders decomposition approach. Finally,
we present the experimental results and conclude the paper.
Note that, although the results are presented for convergent
plans, the approaches can be generalized to arbitrary zonebased evacuations.

Abstract
With rapid population growth and urbanization, emergency
services in various cities around the world worry that the current transportation infrastructure is no longer adequate for
large-scale evacuations. This paper considers how to mitigate
this issue through infrastructure upgrades, such as the additions of lanes to road segments and the raising of bridges and
roads. The paper proposes a MIP model for deciding the most
effective infrastructure upgrades as well as a Benders decomposition approach where the master problem jointly plans the
upgrades and evacuation routes and the subproblem schedules the evacuation itself. Experimental results demonstrate
the practicability of the approach on a real case study, ﬁlling
a signiﬁcant need for emergencies services.

Introduction
With rapid population growth and increased urbanization,
emergency services in various cities around the world worry
that the current transportation infrastructure is no longer adequate for large-scale evacuations. In some cities, the infrastructure, and in particular the road network, has not kept
up with population growth (Feneley 2015). This is especially worrisome given that existing infrastructure capacity is often well below the level what would be required
for effective large-scale evacuations (Litman 2006). Yet little research on evacuation planning includes the possibility
of improving road infrastructure. Some studies use contraﬂow in order to increase road capacities (Wolshon 2001;
Theodoulou and Wolshon 2004; Even, Pillac, and Van Hentenryck 2014; Kim, Shekhar, and Min 2010). However, Wolshon (2001) warns that the presence of contraﬂow lanes can
lead to congestion due to drivers’ unfamiliarity with lane reversal. Peeta et al. (2010) considered structural upgrades
that would strengthen roads against earthquake damage. In
their model, the upgrades increase the probability that a road
will withstand an earthquake.
In this paper, we attempt to ﬁll this gap in the literature. We study how to upgrade the road network in order to
maximize the number of evacuees reaching safety given an
infrastructure budget. We consider zone-based evacuation
planning over convergent plans and two types of upgrades:

Literature Review
In this paper, we consider a macroscopic approach to evacuation planning, where evacuees are not modeled individually
but as ﬂows in the space-time representation of the road network (Hamacher and Tjandra 2002). Almost all the macroscopic evacuations consider dynamic network ﬂow problems following the pioneering work of (Ford and Fulkerson

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3864

