Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Top-N Recommender System via Matrix Completion
Zhao Kang, Chong Peng, Qiang Cheng
Department of Computer Science,
Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA
{Zhao.Kang, pchong, qcheng}@siu.edu

Model-based methods build a model and then generate
recommendations. For instance, the widely studied matrix
factorization (MF) methods employ the user-item similarities in their latent space to extract the user-item purchase patterns. Pure singular-value-decomposition-based (PureSVD)
matrix factorization method (Cremonesi, Koren, and Turrin 2010) characterizes users and items by the most principal singular vectors of the user-item matrix. A weighted
regularized matrix factorization (WRMF) (Pan et al. 2008;
Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008) method applies a weighting
matrix to differentiate the contributions from observed purchase/rating activities and unobserved ones.
The third category of methods rely on ranking/retrieval
criteria. Here, Top-N recommendation is treated as a ranking
problem. A Bayesian personalized ranking (BPR) (Rendle et
al. 2009) criterion, which is the maximum posterior estimator from a Bayesian analysis, is used to measure the difference between the rankings of user-purchased items and the
rest items. BPR can be combined with ItemKNN (BPRkNN)
and MF method (BPRMF). One common drawback of these
approaches lies in low recommendation quality.
Recently, a novel Top-N recommendation method SLIM
(Ning and Karypis 2011) has been proposed. From user-item
matrix X of size m × n, it ﬁrst learns a sparse aggregation
by encoding each item as a
coefﬁcient matrix W ∈ Rn×n
+
linear combination of all other items and solving an l1 -norm
and l2 -norm regularized optimization problem. Each entry
wij describes the similarity between item i and j. SLIM
has obtained better recommendation accuracy than the other
state-of-the-art methods. However, SLIM can only capture
relations between items that are co-purchased/co-rated by
at least one user, while an intrinsic characteristic of recommender systems is sparsity due to the fact that users typically
rate only a small portion of the available items.
To overcome the above limitation, LorSLIM (Cheng, Yin,
and Yu 2014) has also imposed a low-rank constraint on W .
It solves the following problem:

Abstract
Top-N recommender systems have been investigated widely
both in industry and academia. However, the recommendation quality is far from satisfactory. In this paper, we propose
a simple yet promising algorithm. We ﬁll the user-item matrix based on a low-rank assumption and simultaneously keep
the original information. To do that, a nonconvex rank relaxation rather than the nuclear norm is adopted to provide a
better rank approximation and an efﬁcient optimization strategy is designed. A comprehensive set of experiments on real
datasets demonstrates that our method pushes the accuracy of
Top-N recommendation to a new level.

Introduction
The growth of online markets has made it increasingly difﬁcult for people to ﬁnd items which are interesting and useful to them. Top-N recommender systems have been widely
adopted by the majority of e-commerce web sites to recommend size-N ranked lists of items that best ﬁt customers’
personal tastes and special needs (Linden, Smith, and York
2003). It works by estimating a consumer’s response for new
items, based on historical information, and suggesting to the
consumer novel items for which the predicted response is
high. In general, historical information can be obtained explicitly, for example, through ratings/reviews, or implicitly,
from purchase history or access patterns (Desrosiers and
Karypis 2011).
Over the past decade, a variety of approaches have been
proposed for Top-N recommender systems (Ricci, Rokach,
and Shapira 2011). They can be roughly divided into
three categories: neighborhood-based collaborative ﬁltering, model-based collaborative ﬁltering, and ranking-based
methods. The general principle of neighborhood-based
methods is to identify the similarities among users/items
(Deshpande and Karypis 2004). For example, item-based
k-nearest-neighbor (ItemKNN) collaborative ﬁltering methods ﬁrst identify a set of similar items for each of the items
that the consumer has purchased, and then recommend TopN items based on those similar items. However, they suffer
from low accuracy since they employ few item characteristics.

1
β
min X − XW 2F + W 2F + λW 1 + γW ∗
W 2
2
s.t. W ≥ 0, diag(W ) = 0,
where W ∗ is the nuclear norm of W , deﬁned as the sum
of its singular values. Low-rank structure is motivated by the
fact that a few latent variables from F that explain items’

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

179

