Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Text Classiﬁcation in the Presence of Confounding Bias
Virgile Landeiro and Aron Culotta
Department of Computer Science
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, IL 60616
vlandeir@hawk.iit.edu, aculotta@iit.edu

correlated with both the input variables (text features) and
the output variable (class label). For example, a classiﬁer
trained to predict the political afﬁliation of a Twitter user
may be confounded by an unobserved age variable. This
may inﬂate the coefﬁcients of age-related terms in the classiﬁer (a result of omitted-variable bias (Clarke 2005)).
While identifying and controlling for confounding variables is central to much of empirical social science, it is
mostly overlooked in text classiﬁcation, presumably because
prediction, rather than causal inference, is the primary goal.
Indeed, if we assume that the confounding variable’s inﬂuence is consistent from training to testing data, then there
should be little harm to prediction accuracy. However, this
assumption often does not hold in practice, for at least two
reasons. First, due to the cost of annotation, training sets are
typically quite small, increasing the chance that the correlation between the confounding variable and target variable
varies from training to testing data. Second, and in our view
most importantly, in many domains the relationship between
the confounder and the target variable is likely to shift over
time, leading to poor accuracy. For example, diseases may
spread to new populations or a new political candidate may
attract a unique voter demographic. Without properly controlling for confounding variables, studies based on the output of text classiﬁers are at risk of reaching erroneous conclusions.
In this paper, we present a text classiﬁcation algorithm
based on Pearl’s back-door adjustment (Pearl 2003) to control for confounding variables. The approach conditions on
the confounding variable at training time, then sums out the
confounding variable at prediction time. We further investigate a parameterized version of the approach that allows us
to modulate the strength of the desired adjustment.
We evaluate our approach on three diverse classiﬁcation
tasks: predicting the location of a Twitter user (confounded
by gender), the political afﬁliation of a parliament member (confounded by majority party status), and the sentiment of a movie review (confounded by genre). We ﬁnd
that as the mismatch between training and testing sets increases with respect to the confounder, accuracy can decline
precipitously, in one dataset from 85% to 60%. By properly
controlling for confounders, our approach is able to reliably
improve the robustness of the classiﬁer, maintaining high accuracy even in extreme cases where the correlation between

Abstract
As text classiﬁers become increasingly used in real-time applications, it is critical to consider not only their accuracy but
also their robustness to changes in the data distribution. In this
paper, we consider the case where there is a confounding variable Z that inﬂuences both the text features X and the class
variable Y . For example, a classiﬁer trained to predict the
health status of a user based on their online communications
may be confounded by socioeconomic variables. When the
inﬂuence of Z changes from training to testing data, we ﬁnd
that classiﬁer accuracy can degrade rapidly. Our approach,
based on Pearl’s back-door adjustment, estimates the underlying effect of a text variable on the class variable while controlling for the confounding variable. Although our goal is prediction, not causal inference, we ﬁnd that such adjustments
are essential to building text classiﬁers that are robust to confounding variables. On three diverse text classiﬁcations tasks,
we ﬁnd that covariate adjustment results in higher accuracy
than competing baselines over a range of confounding relationships (e.g., in one setting, accuracy improves from 60%
to 81%).

1

Introduction

While researchers have investigated automatic text classiﬁcation algorithms for over ﬁfty years (Maron 1961), they
have mostly applied them to topical categorization of documents. More recently, however, emerging cross-disciplinary
ﬁelds like computational social science (Lazer et al. 2009)
and computational epidemiology (Marathe and Ramakrishnan 2013) have created new demand for text classiﬁcation in
areas such as public health surveillance (Dredze 2012), political science (Dahllöf 2012), crisis response (Verma et al.
2011), and marketing (Chamlertwat et al. 2012).
These new domains are notably different from those studied historically; the objects to be classiﬁed are often people and their online writings, and the predicted labels may
be health status, political afﬁliation, or personality type. Despite these differences, standard supervised classiﬁcation algorithms are often used with no customization.
However, to ensure the validity of studies based on the
output of text classiﬁcation, these new domains require classiﬁers that are robust to confounding variables. Confounding variables appear in text classiﬁcation when a variable is
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

186

