Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On Parameter Tying by Quantization
Li Chou, Somdeb Sarkhel

Nicholas Ruozzi

Vibhav Gogate

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
{lkc130030,sxs104721}@utdallas.edu

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
nicholas.ruozzi@utdallas.edu

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
vgogate@hlt.utdallas.edu

speaking, since the sufﬁcient statistics of the tied parameters can be combined, the number of samples used to estimate a speciﬁc parameter increases, which in turn reduces
the variance (but increases the bias). Parameter tying is employed in a large variety of graphical models and their extensions such as hidden Markov models (Baum et al. 1970), dynamic Bayesian networks (Murphy 2002), conditional random ﬁelds (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001), and statistical relational models (Getoor and Taskar 2007). However, a key feature of this existing work is that it assumes that
the tied parameters are speciﬁed apriori. As a result, the full
power of parameter tying as a regularization method has not
yet been exploited. We deviate from the existing approach
and seek methods that automatically tie the parameters by
analyzing the data.
A straight-forward approach to solve the parameter tying
problem is to express it as a constrained optimization problem. Given m parameters and a hyperparameter k, which
bounds the maximum number of tied parameters and controls the amount of regularization, ﬁnd a set of at most k
equality constraints that are mutually exclusive (no two constraints have the same parameter) and exhaustive (all parameters are included) such that the likelihood is maximized.
Unfortunately, this problem is computationally difﬁcult as it
includes structure learning as a special case.
To obviate this computational difﬁculty, we propose a
greedy approach that ties parameters by quantizing the
learned weights. Namely, we propose to ﬁnd a many-to-one
function f that maps m parameter values to a set having
k values, such that the sum of the Euclidean distance between a parameter w and its quantized value f (w) is minimized. This problem can be solved optimally using dynamic
programming (Wang and Song 2011). We show that despite
its simplicity, our new approach has several desirable theoretical properties and guarantees. In particular, we provide
and prove novel error bounds which show that if the quantization is accurate then the difference between the average
log-likelihoods of the original model and quantized model
is quite small. Experimentally, we show that the quantized
model often outperforms the untied model on a wide range
of datasets.
A key beneﬁt of parameter tying is that it introduces
symmetries in the probabilistic model, and exploiting them
makes inference easier and more efﬁcient. To this end, we

Abstract
The maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) is generally asymptotically consistent but is susceptible to overﬁtting. To combat this problem, regularization methods which reduce the variance at the cost of (slightly)
increasing the bias are often employed in practice. In
this paper, we present an alternative variance reduction
(regularization) technique that quantizes the MLE estimates as a post processing step, yielding a smoother
model having several tied parameters. We provide and
prove error bounds for our new technique and demonstrate experimentally that it often yields models having higher test-set log-likelihood than the ones learned
using the MLE. We also propose a new importance
sampling algorithm for fast approximate inference in
models having several tied parameters. Our experiments
show that our new inference algorithm is superior to
existing approaches such as Gibbs sampling and MCSAT on models having tied parameters, learned using
our quantization-based approach.

Introduction
Weight (parameter) learning is a central problem in probabilistic graphical models. It is often expressed as the following maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) task: ﬁnd an
assignment of values to all parameters that maximizes the
log-likelihood of the data. MLE is a popular weight learning
formulation because it has several desirable theoretical properties including consistency (convergence in the limit to the
correct value), and asymptotic efﬁciency (best-possible estimator in the limit). However, in practice, when the data size
is small or the number of parameters is large (or both), MLE
yields parameter estimates having high variance, and the resulting models have poor predictive (generalization) accuracy. To combat this, regularization methods such as 1 and
2 regularization, and their Bayesian counterparts Laplace
and Gaussian priors, which reduce the variance by penalizing large parameter values, are often employed in practice.
In this paper, we consider an alternative regularization
method: parameter tying, which forces several parameters
of the graphical model to take the same value. Roughly
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3241

