Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

The 2,1 -Norm Stacked Robust Autoencoders for Domain Adaptation
1

Wenhao Jiang1 , Hongchang Gao1 , Fu-lai Chung2 , Heng Huang1∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA
2
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, China
{cswhjiang, hongchanggao}@gmail.com, cskchung@comp.polyu.edu.hk, heng@uta.edu

including covariate shift (Shimodaira 2000) and sample selection bias (Heckman 1979; Zadrozny 2004). The term domain adaptation only started recently to attract the interest of researchers (Blitzer, McDonald, and Pereira 2006;
Blitzer 2007; Ben-David et al. 2007; Daume III 2007;
Blitzer et al. 2008; Daumé and Marcu 2006).
According to whether there exist labeled samples or unlabeled samples from the target domain in the training stage,
domain adaptation could be categorized into three types:
unsupervised domain adaptation, supervised domain adaptation and semi-supervised domain adaptation (Jiang 2008;
Kumar, Saha, and Daume 2010). In unsupervised domain
adaptation setting, there are no samples with labels from target domain. While in supervised domain adaptation setting,
some amount of labeled samples are available for training.
For semi-supervised domain adaptation, models have access
to both labeled and unlabeled data in target domain 1 . In this
paper, we focus on improving unsupervised domain adaptation performance by feature learning.
Recently, deep learning methods, which can be seen as
feature learning methods, has also been applied to unsupervised domain adaptation to learn features such that the gap
between the distributions of source domain and target domain is overcomed. Glorot et al. (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011) proposed to learn robust feature representations
with stacked denoising autoencoders (SDAs) and demonstrated the potential of deep learning in obtaining good performance in sentiment analysis across different domains on
Amazon review datasets. In (Chen et al. 2012), the authors
found that random corruptions could be marginalized out
under a speciﬁc network structure, and proposed a marginalized SDA (mSDA). The new method is highly effective for
domain adaption problems.
In view of the success of deep learning methods for domain adaption, we make an attempt in this paper to propose a
new method called the 2,1 -norm stacked robust autoencoder
(2,1 -SRA) to learn effective representations. With learned
features, we just train a classiﬁer with samples from source
domain and apply the trained classiﬁer directly to the target
domain. State-of-the-art performances were achieved.

Abstract
Recently, deep learning methods that employ stacked
denoising autoencoders (SDAs) have been successfully
applied in domain adaptation. Remarkable performance
in multi-domain sentiment analysis datasets has been
reported, making deep learning a promising approach
to domain adaptation problems. SDAs are distinguished
by learning robust data representations for recovering
the original features that have been artiﬁcially corrupted with noise. The idea has been further exploited
to marginalize out the random corruptions by a stateof-the-art method called mSDA. In this paper, a deep
learning method for domain adaptation called 2,1 -norm
stacked robust autoencoders (2,1 -SRA) is proposed
to learn useful representations for domain adaptation
tasks. Each layer of 2,1 -SRA contains two steps: a robust linear reconstruction step which is based on 2,1
robust regression and a non-linear squashing transformation step. The experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed method is very effective in multiple cross
domain classiﬁcation datasets which include Amazon
review dataset, spam dataset from ECML/PKDD discovery challenge 2006 and 20 newsgroups dataset.

Introduction
Traditionally, training of a classiﬁer assumes that the training data and the testing data follow the same distributions or
they are in the same domain. However, this may not be valid
in some situations, and thus posing a need to train classiﬁers without such an assumption. For example, we might
have plenty of labeled samples from one domain (source
domain) but very few or even no labeled samples from a
different domain (target domain), and want to train a classiﬁer that will do well on both domains. This is the so-called
domain adaptation problem which aims to produce a classiﬁer that is trained on the source domain and generalizes
well on the target domain (Pan and Yang 2010). Domain
adaptation problem is a fundamental problem in machine
learning and has been studied before under different names
∗

To whom all correspondence should be addressed. This work
was partially supported by NSF-IIS 1117965, NSF-IIS 1302675,
NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NIH R01 AG049371.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For all these three settings, labeled samples from source domain are available.

1723

