Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Truncated Approximate Dynamic Programming
with Task-Dependent Terminal Value
Amir-massoud Farahmand and Daniel N. Nikovski
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
Cambridge, MA, USA

Yuji Igarashi and Hiroki Konaka
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
Hyogo 661-8661, Japan
work, but in the context of discounted MDPs, the use of
function approximation in the form of Approximate Value
Iteration and its variants has been studied, both empirically
and theoretically, by (Ernst, Geurts, and Wehenkel 2005;
Riedmiller 2005; Munos and Szepesvári 2008; Farahmand
et al. 2009; Farahmand and Precup 2012; Mnih et al. 2015).
For ﬁnite horizon MDPs, this idea has been theoretically
studied by (Murphy 2005).
The second computational challenge is due to the time
horizon T . Even though the computational cost is linear in
T , this might still be a bottleneck if the problem has a large
T . Similarly in the discounted case, the appearance of discount factor γ in performance bounds can be seen as determining the effective time horizon, which grows fast as γ
approaches 1 (Scherrer and Lesner 2012).
The computational consequence of the time horizon might
be a concern for real-time applications of ﬁnite-horizon
MDPs where the available computational power is limited.
For instance, our motivating application is the design of
an energy management system for Hybrid Electric Vehicles
(HEV), for which one should decide when to use the electric motor and when to use the internal combustion engine
based on the state of the car and the route ahead in order
to minimize the total fuel and electricity cost. This problem
is commonly formulated as a ﬁnite-horizon MDP (Sciarretta
and Guzzella 2007), in which the length of the route and
the resolution of the decision points determine the appropriate horizon. Nonetheless, due to the computational limit
of the usual onboard computers, solving the problem with a
time horizon in the order of hundreds or thousands might be
impractical. We shall return to this application later in the
paper.
To address the large time horizon T , one may perform DP
(or ADP for large state spaces) only for H  T time steps
and use a certain terminal value for the truncated procedure.
One possibility for the choice of the new terminal value is
to simply use a zero function. This indeed reduces the computational cost from O(T ) to O(H), but it may lead to poor
solutions, e.g., Example 6.5.1 of (Bertsekas 2000). Another
possibility is to use the value function of some base policy
as in the rollout algorithm, see e.g., (Bertsekas 2005) or Section 6.4 of (Bertsekas 2000). In that case one can show that
the obtained policy is not worse than the base policy. One

Abstract
We propose a new class of computationally fast algorithms to ﬁnd close to optimal policy for Markov Decision Processes (MDP) with large ﬁnite horizon T . The
main idea is that instead of planning until the time horizon T , we plan only up to a truncated horizon H  T
and use an estimate of the true optimal value function as
the terminal value. Our approach of ﬁnding the terminal
value function is to learn a mapping from an MDP to its
value function by solving many similar MDPs during a
training phase and ﬁt a regression estimator. We analyze
the method by providing an error propagation theorem
that shows the effect of various sources of errors to the
quality of the solution. We also empirically validate this
approach in a real-world application of designing an energy management system for Hybrid Electric Vehicles
with promising results.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of ﬁnding a close to optimal policy
for Markov Decision Processes (MDP) with a ﬁnite horizon T . The usual approach to solve the ﬁnite-horizon problems is by a Dynamic Programming (DP) procedure that
starts from time t = T and computes the optimal value
function by backward induction towards time t = 1. This
simple Value Iteration procedure faces two possible computational challenges. The ﬁrst is that for a large state space
X , each iteration of DP becomes expensive or even infeasible. For ﬁnite X , the computation time is O(|X |2 ). A
discretization-based approach to deal with continuous X
leads to impractical computation times, e.g., if X is a compact subset of Rd , discretization at the ε-resolution leads
to O(ε−d ) states, which quickly becomes very large as d
grows. To address this curse of dimensionality, we may use
a function approximator to provide a more compact approximate representation of the value function. This idea,
which is sometimes called Approximate Dynamic Programming (ADP), has been studied in the reinforcement learning
(RL), control engineering, and operations research communities (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996; Buşoniu et al. 2010;
Szepesvári 2010; Powell 2011). More closely related to this
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3123

