Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unsupervised Learning of HTNs
in Complex Adversarial Domains
Michael Leece
University of California, Santa Cruz
mleece [at] ucsc.edu

Abstract

Completed Work

While Hierarchical Task Networks are frequently cited
as ﬂexible and powerful planning models, they are often ignored due to the intensive labor cost for experts/programmers, due to the need to create and reﬁne the model by hand. While recent work has begun
to address this issue by working towards learning aspects of an HTN model from demonstration, or even the
whole framework, the focus so far has been on simple
domains, which lack many of the challenges faced in
the real world such as imperfect information and realtime environments. I plan to extend this work using the
domain of real-time strategy (RTS) games, which have
gained recent popularity as a challenging and complex
domain for AI research.

Thus far, I have worked on two approaches to the problem
of learning HTNs from human demonstrations in the RTS
domain. The ﬁrst uses Generalized Sequential Pattern mining (GSP) to search for common patterns of actions from a
database of human replays, working off of the assumption
that common sequences of actions that are closely linked
in the time domain present promising HTN method abstractions. These patterns are then replaced with an abstract symbol representing the method, and the process is repeated.
This results in a hierarchy of methods that decompose into
primitive actions. They lack preconditions, but in theory
those could be learned given the method structure. The initial work on this approach was presented in (Leece and Jhala
2014), though it has progressed since then.
The second approach is an expectation maximization algorithm. At a high level, it proposes a small number of goals
a player could be pursuing at any given time, modeled as
Markov transition functions, initialized randomly. Given a
database of traces, it then assigns actions to goals in order to
maximize the likelihood of each trace occurring. From there
it follows the standard EM iteration, redeﬁning the goals’
transition functions based on their assigned actions, and repeating. At the end, the abstract goal that has the least entropy (representing the least aggregated noise) is added to
the database, and others are discarded. Actions assigned to
the added goal are then replaced with its abstract symbol,
and we iterate on the updated database.
In general, one of the challenges that I have faced is a
way to rigorously evaluate the results of these algorithms. I
have recently implemented an agent that uses HTN planning
to play RTS games, but there are many confounding factors
when using pure strength of gameplay as a metric. I would
welcome advice on this topic from any mentor.
A ﬁnal piece of completed work is some research on
learning meta-reasoning strategies from human demonstrations in RTS games that I am currently working on as a collaboration with the Naval Research Laboratory. As a work
in progress, I cannot go into technical detail, but we hope to
publish it in ICAPS ’16.

Introduction
HTNs are a very popular planning framework, and have been
used in many real-world domains, from manufacturing to
medical care. However, there is one great drawback traditionally cited to them whenever they are considered, and this
is the cost of expert labor involved in creating a useful HTN.
Some work has been done in the learning of HTN method
pre/postconditions, and even of learning the full method decomposition structure from scratch. However, these have focused on extremely simplistic domains such as the classical
Blocks World or logistics transportation proglem.
In light of this, I plan to extend the work on HTN learning into more complex domains. In particular, I am working
with RTS games, a popular video game genre in which players compete in an economic and military simulation to defeat their opponents. This domain has a number of properties
that increase its complexity over standard planning domains;
namely, they are real-time, adversarial, and imperfect information. In addition, the state/action space is many orders of
magnitude greater than prior domains.
In addition to working in a more complex domain, my
goal is to learn from human demonstrations, rather than
planner-generated traces. This introduces new challenges in
the form of unpredictability and lack of knowledge of the
agent’s internal model, but is necessary when working in domains where the hand-authoring of a planner is prohibitive.

Proposed Work

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Both of the approaches described above still have a number
of challenges to address. For the GSP approach, a method

4303

