Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unsupervised Measure of Word Similarity:
How to Outperform Co-Occurrence and Vector Cosine in VSMs
Enrico Santus*, Tin-Shing Chiu*, Qin Lu*, Alessandro Lenci§, Chu-Ren Huang*
* The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
esantus@gmail.com, cstschiu@comp.polyu.edu.hk,{qin.lu, churen.huang}@polyu.edu.hk
§ University of Pisa, Italy
alessandro.lenci@ling.unipi.it

ly used to calculate word similarity by measuring the distance between these vectors (Turney and Pantel, 2010).
A well-known problem with the statistical approaches is
that they rely on a very loose definition of similarity. Indeed, according to the distributional hypothesis, similarity
does not only include synonyms, but also other semantic
relations, such as hypernymy, co-hyponymy and even antonymy (Santus et al., 2014b-c). For this reason, several
datasets have been proposed by the NLP community to test
distributional similarity measures (Santus et al., 2015). One
of the most used is the English as a Second Language dataset (ESL), introduced in Turney (2001). It consists of 50
multiple-choice synonym questions, with 4 choices each.
In this paper, we describe and evaluate APSyn, a completely unsupervised measure that calculates the extent of
the intersection among the N most related contexts of two
target words, weighting such intersection according to the
rank of the contexts in a mutual dependency ranked list. In
our experiments, APSyn outperforms the cosine, with an
improvement ranging between +9.00% and +17.98% in the
ESL test set, depending on the chosen N.

Abstract
In this paper, we claim that vector cosine – which is generally considered among the most efficient unsupervised
measures for identifying word similarity in Vector Space
Models – can be outperformed by an unsupervised measure
that calculates the extent of the intersection among the most
mutually dependent contexts of the target words. To prove
it, we describe and evaluate APSyn, a variant of the Average
Precision that, without any optimization, outperforms the
vector cosine and the co-occurrence on the standard ESL
test set, with an improvement ranging between +9.00% and
+17.98%, depending on the number of chosen top contexts.

Introduction and Related Work
Word similarity detection plays an important role in Natural Language Processing (NLP), as it is the backbone of
several applications, such as paraphrasing, query expansion, word sense disambiguation, automatic thesauri creation, and so on (Terra and Clarke, 2003).
Several approaches have been proposed to measure
word similarity (Jarmasz and Szpakowicz, 2003; Levy et
al., 2015). Some of them are lexicon-based, while others
are corpora-based. The latter generally rely on the distributional hypothesis, according to which words that occur in
similar contexts also have similar meanings (Harris, 1954).
Although all of them extract statistics from large corpora,
they vary in the way they define what has to be considered
context (i.e. lexemes, syntax, etc.) and in which way such
context is used (Santus et al., 2014a; Hearst, 1992).
A common way to represent word meaning in NLP is by
using vectors to encode the Strength of Association (SoA)
between the target word and its contexts. In the resulting
Vector Space Model (VSM), vector cosine is then general-

Method and Evaluation
The vector cosine, described in the following equation
(where  is the i-th feature in the vector x), calculates
word similarity by looking at the normalized correlation
between the contexts distribution of two words,  and  :
     


   

  

 

Our hypothesis is that similar words share more mutually dependent contexts than less similar ones. A way to test
it is: i) measuring the intersection among the N most relat-

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4260

