Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning FRAME Models Using CNN Filters
Yang Lu, Song-Chun Zhu, Ying Nian Wu
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA

ers. A FRAME model is a random ﬁeld model that deﬁnes
a probability distribution on the image space. The model is
generative in the sense that images can be generated from
the probability distribution deﬁned by the model. The probability distribution is the maximum entropy distribution that
reproduces the statistical properties of ﬁlter responses in the
observed images. Being of the maximum entropy, the distribution is the most random distribution that matches the
observed statistical properties of ﬁlter responses, so that images sampled from this distribution can be considered typical images that share the statistical properties of the observed images.
There are two versions of FRAME models in the literature. The original version is a stationary model developed for
modeling texture patterns (Zhu, Wu, and Mumford 1997).
The more recent version is a non-stationary extension designed to represent object patterns (Xie et al. 2015a). Both
versions of the FRAME models can be sparsiﬁed by selecting a subset of ﬁlters from a given dictionary.
The ﬁlters used in the FRAME model are the oriented
and elongated Gabor ﬁlters at different scales, as well as the
isotropic Difference of Gaussian (DoG) ﬁlters of different
sizes. These are linear ﬁlters that capture simple local image
features such as edges and blobs. With the emergence of the
more expressive nonlinear ﬁlters learned by CNN at various
convolutional layers, it is only natural to replace the linear
ﬁlters in the original FRAME models by the CNN ﬁlters in
the hope of learning more expressive models.
We use the Langevin dynamics to sample from the probability distribution deﬁned by the model. Such a dynamics
was ﬁrst applied to the FRAME model by (Zhu and Mumford 1998), and the gradient descent part of the dynamics
was interpreted as the Gibbs Reaction And Diffusion Equations (GRADE). When applied to the FRAME model with
CNN ﬁlters, the dynamics can be viewed as a recurrent generative form of the model, where the reactions and diffusions are governed by the CNN ﬁlters of positive and negative weights respectively.
Incorporating CNN ﬁlters into the FRAME model is not
an ad hoc utilitarian exploit. It is actually a seamless meshing between the FRAME model and the CNN model. The
original FRAME model has an energy function that consists
of a layer of linear ﬁltering followed by a layer of pointwise nonlinear transformation. It is natural to follow the

Abstract
The convolutional neural network (ConvNet or CNN) has
proven to be very successful in many tasks such as those in
computer vision. In this conceptual paper, we study the generative perspective of the discriminative CNN. In particular,
we propose to learn the generative FRAME (Filters, Random
ﬁeld, And Maximum Entropy) model using the highly expressive ﬁlters pre-learned by the CNN at the convolutional layers. We show that the learning algorithm can generate realistic
and rich object and texture patterns in natural scenes. We explain that each learned model corresponds to a new CNN unit
at a layer above the layer of ﬁlters employed by the model.
We further show that it is possible to learn a new layer of
CNN units using a generative CNN model, which is a product of experts model, and the learning algorithm admits an
EM interpretation with binary latent variables.

1

Introduction

The breakthrough made by the convolutional neural network (ConvNet or CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; LeCun et al. 1998) on the ImageNet dataset (Deng
et al. 2009) was a watershed event that has transformed the
ﬁelds of computer vision and speech recognition as well
as related industries. While CNN has proven to be a powerful discriminative machine, researchers have recently become increasingly interested in the generative perspective of
CNN. An interesting example is the recent work of Google
deep dream (http://deepdreamgenerator.com/). Although it
did not smash any performance records, it did capture people’s imagination by generating interestingly vivid images.
In this conceptual paper, we explore the generative perspective of CNN more formally by deﬁning generative models based on CNN features, and learning these models by
generating images from the models. Adopting the metaphor
of Google deep dream, we let the generative models dream
by generating images. But unlike the google deep dream,
we learn the models from real images by making the dreams
come true.
Speciﬁcally, we propose to learn the FRAME (Filters,
Random ﬁeld, And Maximum Entropy) models (Zhu, Wu,
and Mumford 1997; Xie et al. 2015a) using the highly nonlinear ﬁlters pre-learned by CNN at the convolutional layc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1902

