Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

A Survey of Current Practice and Teaching of AI
Michael Wollowski,1 Robert Selkowitz,2 Laura E. Brown,3 Ashok Goel,4
George Luger,5 Jim Marshall,6 Andrew Neel,7 Todd Neller,8 Peter Norvig9
1) Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, wollowski@rose-hulman.edu, 2) Canisius College, selkowir@canisius.edu,
3) Michigan Technological Institute, lebrown@mtu.edu, 4) Georgia Institute of Technology, ashok.goel@cc.gatech.edu,
5) University of New Mexico, luger@cs.unm.edu, 6) Sarah Lawrence College, jmarshall@sarahlawrence.edu,
7) Discover Cards, ajneel@acm.org, 8) Gettysburg College, tneller@gettysburg.edu, 9) Google, pnorvig@google.com

now is a good time to reevaluate the practice of teaching
Artificial Intelligence.
In this paper, we present and evaluate two surveys. One
was aimed at practitioners and the other one at educators.
Broadly, the practitioner’s survey was aimed at gathering
information about which topics and techniques are being
used in practice. Additionally, we invited practitioners to
offer their insights into what topics they believe should be
taught as well as what sort of course outcomes would be
desirable. This sort of data is routinely sought by accredited institutions aiming at obtaining feedback from their
stakeholders.
The aim of the educator’s survey was to capture current
practice of teaching AI as well as gather input on proposed
changes. We gathered information about the kinds of institutions at which our colleagues teach, prerequisites and
course outcomes as well as detailed information about
which topics are being covered, which topics colleagues
would like to cover, and reasons for any disparities between these topic lists.

Abstract
The field of AI has changed significantly in the past couple
of years and will likely continue to do so. Driven by a desire
to expose our students to relevant and modern materials, we
conducted two surveys, one of AI instructors and one of AI
practitioners. The surveys were aimed at gathering information about the current state of the art of introducing AI as
well as gathering input from practitioners in the field on
techniques used in practice. In this paper, we present and
briefly discuss the responses to those two surveys.

Introduction
During the 2014 EAAI conference, Todd Neller conducted
an informal survey of the participants about which topics
they teach in their AI courses as well as which topics they
would like to teach. The survey suggested an apparent disparity between what is taught in many AI courses and what
many AI colleagues would like to teach. We decided to
study this issue by conducting surveys of both educators
and practitioners.
There have been at least two events in the past twenty or
so years which looked at the challenges of AI Education:
the 2008 “AI Education Colloquium” held at the 2008
AAAI conference (AAAI 2008) and the 1994 AAAI Fall
Symposium entitled “Improving Instruction of Introductory Artificial Intelligence.” (AAAI 1994) This is in addition
to regularly held Educational Advances in AI Symposia
collocated with the AAAI conference and past AI Education tracks at FLAIRS. To quote Marti Hearst, the program
chair of the 1994 AAAI Fall Symposium (Hearst 1994),
“This symposium was motivated by the desire to address
the oft-voiced complaint that introductory artificial intelligence is a notoriously difficult course to teach well.” With
the regular progression of the field and recent successes
such as autonomous cars and IBM’s Watson cognitive system, this situation has not become easier. We believe that

Surveys
In order to establish current practice and desires, we conducted a survey of AI educators and a separate survey of
AI practitioners.

Educator’s Survey
We invited AI educators to participate in an online survey.
In order to obtain precise input, we requested data on the
kind of institution our colleagues teach at, prerequisites
and learning outcomes for their AI course as well as major
topics covered. Furthermore, we gathered input on desired
topics and reasons for non-inclusion as well as what topics
should be taught.
In order to manage the input, we asked our participants
to list topics under thirteen categories. The categories given are those that are used on the web site aitopics.org
maintained by AAAI.

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4119

