Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Price of Pareto Optimality in Hedonic Games
Edith Elkind

Angelo Fanelli

Michele Flammini

Oxford University, UK.
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

CNRS (UMR-6211), France.
angelo.fanelli@unicaen.fr

DISIM - University of L’Aquila
& Gran Sasso Science Institute, Italy.
michele.ﬂammini@univaq.it

the worst-case efﬁciency loss caused by strategic behavior
in other types of games.
In this paper, we are interested in exploring Price of
Anarchy-like measures in hedonic games. These are games
where players form coalitions, and each player has preferences over coalitions that she can be a part of (Drèze
and Greenberg 1980; Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez 2001;
Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002). While the standard model
of hedonic games assumes that players’ preferences over
coalitions are ordinal, there are several prominent classes
of hedonic games where players assign cardinal utilities to
coalitions (e.g., a player may assign utilities to individual
players, and lift them to coalitions by computing the sum
or average of her utilities for players in a coalition), and in
such settings it is desirable to have a measure of welfare loss
caused by stability considerations. This agenda was recently
pursued by Bilò et al. (2014; 2015) who have analyzed the
analogues of Price of Anarchy and Price of Stability for the
concept of Nash stability in the context of fractional hedonic games—a simple, but expressive class of hedonic games
that was recently proposed by Aziz et al. (2014).
Now, Nash stability is a well-known notion of stability for
hedonic games, and can be seen as the closest analogue of
Nash equilibrium for such games. However, in contrast with
normal-form games, where Nash equilibrium is clearly the
most prominent solution concept, there are several notions
of stability that are commonly studied for hedonic games.
Indeed, Nash stability focuses on individual deviations and
assumes that any player can join any existing coalition, without asking permission of the coalition members. Given that
hedonic games are intended to model group formation, we
may consider modifying the notion of a permissible deviation along two dimensions: ﬁrst, we can allow for group
deviations, and second, we can allow (some of) the nondeviators to veto the deviators’ moves. These two modiﬁcations have the opposite effect: the former enriches the set
of actions available to the deviators, while the latter shrinks
it. By combining these ideas and their variants, one arrives
at the well-known notions of individual stability, contractual
individual stability, core, strict core, and several others (see
an overview by Aziz and Savani, 2015; Sung and Dimitrov,
2007, propose a somewhat different classiﬁcation).
The classic notion of Pareto optimality has a natural interpretation within this framework. Indeed, according to the

Abstract
Price of Anarchy measures the welfare loss caused by selfish behavior: it is deﬁned as the ratio of the social welfare
in a socially optimal outcome and in a worst Nash equilibrium. A similar measure can be derived for other classes of
stable outcomes. In this paper, we argue that Pareto optimality can be seen as a notion of stability, and introduce the
concept of Price of Pareto Optimality: this is an analogue of
the Price of Anarchy, where the maximum is computed over
the class of Pareto optimal outcomes, i.e., outcomes that do
not permit a deviation by the grand coalition that makes all
players weakly better off and some players strictly better off.
As a case study, we focus on hedonic games, and provide
lower and upper bounds of the Price of Pareto Optimality
in three classes of hedonic games: additively separable hedonic games, fractional hedonic games, and modiﬁed fractional hedonic games; for fractional hedonic games on trees
our bounds are tight.

1

Introduction

The prisoners’ dilemma and the tragedy of commons (Osborne and Rubinstein 1994) are two prominent examples
where selﬁshness causes signiﬁcant loss of social welfare.
By now, a standard measure of disutility caused by selﬁsh
behavior is the Price of Anarchy (Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou 1999): this is the ratio of the social welfare in a socially
optimal outcome of the game and in a worst (social welfareminimizing) Nash equilibrium of the game. Good upper and
lower bounds on the Price of Anarchy have been obtained
for many classes of games (see, e.g., Roughgarden and Tardos, 2007); researchers have also considered the related concept of Price of Stability (Correa, Schulz, and Moses 2004;
Anshelevich et al. 2008), which compares socially optimal
outcomes and best Nash equilibria.
Importantly, the concept of the Price of Anarchy is deﬁned for a speciﬁc notion of stability, namely, Nash equilibrium. Nevertheless, its analogues can be deﬁned for other
solution concepts: e.g., Strong Price of Anarchy (Andelman, Feldman, and Mansour 2007) measures the worst-case
welfare loss in strong Nash equilibria. Indeed, one can extend this concept beyond normal-form games and explore
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

475

