Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Indexable Probabilistic Matrix Factorization
for Maximum Inner Product Search
Marco Fraccaro,† Ulrich Paquet,‡ Ole Winther†
†

Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
‡
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom

where V ∈ RD×M contains vj in its columns. To score
all the items requires an O(M ) linear scan. Real systems,
however, are constrained to complete such requests in a few
milliseconds, and scoring and sorting all items is practically
infeasible (Bachrach et al. 2014).
Instead of solving (1) directly, a number of approaches apply a separate post-processing step to V and ui , so that the
MIPS is transformed to an Euclidean search on the resulting
vectors. The vectors might be expanded to D+1 dimensions,
where the triangle inequality holds, and Approximate Nearest Neighbour Search (ANNS) data structures like kd-trees
(Muja and Lowe 2014) or Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH)
can be used (Neyshabur and Srebro 2015). The component
of the required extra dimension is typically much larger than
any in vj , and this artifact reduces the speedups potentially
obtainable through ANNS (Bachrach et al. 2014). Alternatively, a transformation to D + m dimensions so that (1) becomes an Euclidian distance search in the transformation’s
limit m → ∞ also allows LSH to be used (Shrivastava and
Li 2014; 2015), although with weaker theoretical guarantees than those found in (Neyshabur and Srebro 2015). Both
these post-processing steps give sublinear retrieval time by
transforming the problem to one that is geometrically indexable, by which we mean one that allows O(log M ) or sublinear retrieval time.
As V and ui originate from a statistical model, an alternative view is not to rely on retro-actively adjusting a model
for faster retrieval, but instead to frame the model to operate on natively geometrically indexable vectors, and utilise
the tools provided by an inference framework to ﬁnd such
a geometrically indexable embedding. Through the simple
constraint of requiring all item vectors vj to have a ﬁxed
norm, say vj  = 1, MIPS(V, ui ) is equivalent to a minimization over Euclidean distances, i.e. a Nearest Neighbour
Search (NNS):

Abstract
The Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) problem, prevalent in matrix factorization-based recommender systems,
scales linearly with the number of objects to score. Recent
work has shown that clever post-processing steps can turn the
MIPS problem into a nearest neighbour one, allowing sublinear retrieval time either through Locality Sensitive Hashing
or various tree structures that partition the Euclidian space.
This work shows that instead of employing post-processing
steps, substantially faster retrieval times can be achieved for
the same accuracy when inference is not decoupled from the
indexing process. By framing matrix factorization to be natively indexable, so that any solution is immediately sublinearly searchable, we use the machinery of Machine Learning to best learn such a solution. We introduce Indexable
Probabilistic Matrix Factorization (IPMF) to shift the traditional post-processing complexity into the training phase
of the model. Its inference procedure is based on Geodesic
Monte Carlo, and adds minimal additional computational cost
to standard Monte Carlo methods for matrix factorization. By
coupling inference and indexing in this way, we achieve more
than a 50% improvement in retrieval time against two state of
the art methods, for a given level of accuracy in the recommendations of two large-scale recommender systems.

1

Introduction

The Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) problem is
common when matrix factorization-based recommender
systems are deployed, or when inner product-based comparisons are done between the embedded vector of a query
object and many potential target objects’ vectors, like that
of words in a neural language model. Naively, it scales linearly with the number of objects to score, and various inroads have recently been made towards sublinear retrieval
time (Bachrach et al. 2014; Neyshabur and Srebro 2015;
Shrivastava and Li 2014; 2015). In the parlance of a basic
recommender system, user i and item j are embedded into
vectors ui and vj ∈ RD . To present items to a user, all
j = 1, . . . , M items are scored by uTi vj , and the head of
their sorted list is returned. As an operation, the MIPS problem retrieves the maximizer
MIPS(V, ui ) = argmaxj uTi vj ,

(∗)

NNS(V, ui ) = argmin ui −vj 2 = argmax uTi vj . (2)
j

j

The step denoted with (∗) follows from all vj  being
equal. To exploit this, we introduce Indexable Probabilistic Matrix Factorization (IPMF) in Section 2. It is an extension of Bayesian Probabilistic Matrix Factorization (BPMF)
(Salakhutdinov and Mnih 2008a) that is made inherently geometrically indexable by letting {vj } be a priori governed

(1)

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1554

