Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Online ARIMA Algorithms for Time Series Prediction
Chenghao Liu1,2 , Steven C. H. Hoi2 , Peilin Zhao3 , Jianling Sun1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
twinsken@zju.edu.cn, chhoi@smu.edu.sg, zhaop@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, sunjl@zju.edu.cn
2

Despite its great success, ARMA assumes the underlying
model is linear, which hinders its applications to many chanllenging real-world time series. To solve this issue, the autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model has
been proposed as an extension of ARMA, which can tackle
nonstationary time series forecasting by differencing techniques. Speciﬁcally, differencing techniques can eliminate
the inﬂuences of trend components of data before ARIMA
model can be ﬁtted when the observations present trend and
heteroscedasticity. However, most of existing ARIMA models still suffer from many limitations. First of all, most of
them rely on some strong assumptions with respect to the
noise terms (such as i.i.d. assumption (Hamilton 1994), tdistribution (Damsleth and El-Shaarawi 1989);(Tiku et al.
2000)) and loss functions, while many real applications
may not fully satisfy these assumptions, which makes such
ARIMA models unsuitable to many scenarios. Second, existing algorithms for estimating parameters of ARIMA, such
as least squares and maximum likelihood based methods
(Hamilton 1994), require to access the entire dataset in advance, which violates the streaming characteristics of time
series data and cannot deal with concept-drift issues. In addition, these batch approaches cannot cope with large-scale
datasets due to memory-intensive bottleneck.
To solve these issues, we propose online learning algorithms to efﬁciently estimate parameters of ARIMA by utilizing its recursive formulation in an online learning setting.
Our novel approach allows the noise to be arbitrarily or even
adversarially generated, making it more general to handle a
wider range of time series prediction tasks. Moreover, our
online learning approach handles data observations arriving
sequentially and updates the models simultaneously, which
is more natural for many real-world applications. Finally, the
memory cost of our algorithm is independent of the sample size, signiﬁcantly more scalable to deal with real-time
time series forecasting tasks in the era of big data (ShalevShwartz et al. 2011; Hoi, Wang, and Zhao 2014).
Our Contributions. We propose a novel online learning
method to estimate the parameters of ARIMA models by
reformulating it into a full information online optimization
task (without random noise terms). Theoretically, we give
the regret bounds which show that the solutions produced
by our method asymptotically approaches the best ARIMA
model in hindsight. Moreover, we show that a recent online

Abstract
Autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) is one
of the most popular linear models for time series forecasting due to its nice statistical properties and great ﬂexibility. However, its parameters are estimated in a batch manner
and its noise terms are often assumed to be strictly bounded,
which restricts its applications and makes it inefﬁcient for
handling large-scale real data. In this paper, we propose online learning algorithms for estimating ARIMA models under relaxed assumptions on the noise terms, which is suitable to a wider range of applications and enjoys high computational efﬁciency. The idea of our ARIMA method is to
reformulate the ARIMA model into a task of full information online optimization (without random noise terms). As a
consequence, we can online estimation of the parameters in
an efﬁcient and scalable way. Furthermore, we analyze regret
bounds of the proposed algorithms, which guarantee that our
online ARIMA model is provably as good as the best ARIMA
model in hindsight. Finally, our encouraging experimental results further validate the effectiveness and robustness of our
method.

Introduction
In the past decades, time series forecasting has played an
important role in a wide range of domains including speech
analysis (Rabiner and Schafer 2011), noise cancelation
(Gao et al. 2010), and ﬁnancial market analysis (Hamilton
1994; Brockwell and Davis 2009; Rojo-Álvarez et al. 2004;
Granger and Newbold 2014; Nerlove, Grether, and Carvalho
2014; Tsay 2005; Li and Hoi 2015). Typically, time series
models can collect past observations and uncover their underlying relationship. Among the existing time series models, a fundamental one is the autoregressive moving average (ARMA) model (Hamilton 1994), originated from the
autoregressive model (AR) and the moving average model
(MA). Theoretically, if there is no missing data (Weigend
1994) for a stationary time series, then this model can learn
an identiﬁed underlying process to mimic observations for
predicting signal in the future. In practice, ARMA can describe the behavior of a noisy linear dynamical system, and
is able to represent several different types of time series, due
to its ﬂexible modeling capability.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1867

