Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning a Hybrid Architecture for
Sequence Regression and Annotation
Yizhe Zhang, Ricardo Henao, and Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA

Jianling Zhong and Alexander J. Hartemink
Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
Although applications exist in many domains, this extension to a traditional HMM was originally motivated by a
large collection of biological applications. For example, promoter DNA sequences can be complemented by promoter
activity to learn a model that annotates the DNA sequence,
and simultaneously predicts the activity level of putative
promoters. In this paper, we focus on another question: understanding protein-DNA binding preferences, which is also
important in unraveling gene regulation. We are particularly
interested in learning how transcription factors (TFs) exhibit
sequence binding preferences (motifs), in our case modeled
as position weight matrices (PWMs) (Berg and von Hippel
1987). In situations where bound genomic DNA sequences
are available, HMMs have been applied to jointly learn binding locations and motifs in an unsupervised manner (Bailey and Elkan 1994; Lawrence et al. 1993). However, newer
protein binding microarray (PBM) technology allows us to
learn motifs from in vitro sequence data (Mukherjee et al.
2004). In a typical PBM, about 40,000 synthetic DNA sequences (probes) are placed on a microarray, and the binding afﬁnity of a TF for each probe is reported in the form of
a real-valued ﬂuorescence intensity. Thus, motif inference
on PBM data requires jointly modeling DNA sequences and
real-valued measurements, which poses new challenges for
model design.
Many algorithms have been developed for analyzing PBM
data. Approaches based on K-mers (K-grams of DNA sequence) feed occurrences of each K-mer as features into
more sophisticated models (Weirauch et al. 2013; Berger et
al. 2006). RankMotif++ (Chen, Hughes, and Morris 2007)
maximizes the likelihood for binarized preference observations. Other approaches attempt to jointly learn a probabilistic model. For example, BEELM-PBM (Zhao and Stormo
2011) estimates parameters based on a biophysical energy
model. One advantage of probabilistic models over K-mer
models is that binding preferences can be directly described
via PWMs. DeepBind (Alipanahi et al. 2015) uses a deep
convolutional neural network to improve accuracy. A systematic survey of several deterministic and probabilistic
models was provided by Weirauch et al. (Weirauch et al.
2013). In a PBM scenario, the observed responses reﬂect
the average intensity level over time and probe instances,

Abstract
When learning a hidden Markov model (HMM), sequential observations can often be complemented by real-valued
summary response variables generated from the path of hidden states. Such settings arise in numerous domains, including many applications in biology, like motif discovery and
genome annotation. In this paper, we present a ﬂexible framework for jointly modeling both latent sequence features and
the functional mapping that relates the summary response
variables to the hidden state sequence. The algorithm is compatible with a rich set of mapping functions. Results show
that the availability of additional continuous response variables can simultaneously improve the annotation of the sequential observations and yield good prediction performance
in both synthetic data and real-world datasets.

Introduction
The hidden Markov model (HMM) is a probabilistic formalism for reasoning about sequences of random variables, which naturally arise in temporal (e.g., in natural language) and spatial settings (e.g., in images and biological
sequences). HMMs are especially valued for their efﬁcient
inference, broad applicability, and rich extensibility. In the
traditional context, an HMM enables one to reason about
a sequence of unobserved state variables that evolve under
a Markov assumption, based only on a sequence of observations corresponding to the hidden state sequence (Bishop
2006). Here, we extend this model to incorporate additional
side information. Speciﬁcally, we assume that in addition to
the sequential observations, we have access to a corresponding vector of real-valued “response variables” that somehow provide summary information about the hidden state sequence (if this vector is empty, we have a traditional HMM).
We are interested in the following dual task: simultaneously
learning the hidden state sequence from the sequential observations and summary response variables (sequence annotation), as well as the mapping function that produces realvalued response variables from the hidden state sequence
(sequence regression).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1415

