Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Labeling the Features, Not the Samples:
Efﬁcient Video Classiﬁcation with Minimal Supervision
Marius Leordeanu1,2
1

Alexandra Radu1,2

Shumeet Baluja3

Rahul Sukthankar3

Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania
2
University Politehnica of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
3
Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA

Abstract
Feature selection is essential for effective visual recognition. We propose an efﬁcient joint classiﬁer learning and feature selection method that discovers sparse,
compact representations of input features from a vast
sea of candidates, with an almost unsupervised formulation. Our method requires only the following knowledge, which we call the feature sign—whether or not
a particular feature has on average stronger values over
positive samples than over negatives. We show how this
can be estimated using as few as a single labeled training sample per class. Then, using these feature signs,
we extend an initial supervised learning problem into an
(almost) unsupervised clustering formulation that can
incorporate new data without requiring ground truth
labels. Our method works both as a feature selection
mechanism and as a fully competitive classiﬁer. It has
important properties, low computational cost and excellent accuracy, especially in difﬁcult cases of very limited training data. We experiment on large-scale recognition in video and show superior speed and performance to established feature selection approaches such
as AdaBoost, Lasso, greedy forward-backward selection, and powerful classiﬁers such as SVM.

Figure 1: What classes can trigger the idea of a “train”?
Many classes have similar appearance but are semantically
less related (blue box); others are semantically closer but visually less similar (green box). There is a continuum that
relates appearance, context and semantics. Can we ﬁnd a
group of classiﬁers, which are together robust to outliers,
over-ﬁtting and missing features? Here, we show classiﬁers
that are consistently selected by our method from limited
training data as giving valuable input to the class “train”.

Introduction
Classiﬁer ensembles and feature selection have proved enormously useful over decades of computer vision and machine learning research (Vasconcelos 2003; Dietterich 2000;
Hansen and Salamon 1990; Breiman 1996; Freund and
Schapire 1995; Kwok and Carter 1990; Criminisi, Shotton, and Konukoglu 2012). Every year, new visual features
and classiﬁers are proposed or automatically learned. As
the vast pool of features continues to grow, efﬁcient feature selection mechanisms must be devised since classes are
often triggered by only a few key input features (Fig. 1).
As feature selection is NP-hard (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003;
Ng 1998), previous work focused on greedy methods, such
as sequential search (Pudil, Novovičová, and Kittler 1994)
and boosting (Freund and Schapire 1995), relaxed formulations with l1 - or l2 -norm regularization, such as ridge regression (Vogel 2002) and the Lasso (Tibshirani 1996; Zhao

and Yu 2006), or heuristic genetic algorithms (Siedlecki and
Sklansky 1989).
We approach feature selection from the task of discriminant linear classiﬁcation (Duda and Hart 1973) with novel
constraints on the solution and the features. We put an upper
bound on the solution weights and require it to be an afﬁne
combination of soft-categorical features, which should have
on average stronger outputs on the positive class vs. the negative. We term these signed features. We present both a supervised and an almost unsupervised approach. Our supervised method is a convex constrained minimization problem,
which we extend to the case of almost unsupervised learning, with a concave minimization formulation, in which the
only bits of supervised information required are the feature

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3530

