Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Exploiting View-Speciﬁc Appearance Similarities Across Classes for
Zero-Shot Pose Prediction: A Metric Learning Approach
Alina Kuznetsova

Sung Ju Hwang

Leibniz University Hannover
Appelstr 9A, 30169
Hannover, Germany

UNIST
50 UNIST-gil, 689798
Ulsan, Korea

Bodo Rosenhahn

Leonid Sigal

Leibniz University Hannover
Appelstr 9A, 30169
Hannover, Germany

Disney Research
4720 Forbes Avenue, 15213
Pittsburgh, PA, US

However, obtaining labels for object pose is very difﬁcult. While one can potentially obtain (weak) class labels
from the web (e.g., through Google/Flickr searches), pose
data is not available through such mediums. Therefore pose
labeling almost exclusively requires manual annotation, but
even that is not straightforward as people are not consistent
in their deﬁnition of canonical viewpoints (e.g., some may
deﬁne the side view of a bicycle to be zero-degrees, others
perhaps ninety-degrees) and notoriously bad at ﬁne grained
viewpoint estimation.
In more extreme case of symmetric objects, such as a
ball or a vase, ﬁnding object pose is an ill-posed problem
since one cannot make visual distinction between different
pose orientations of the object. Even if we provide canonical pose for each object and do not consider such ill-posed
cases, the fact that people are bad at the task, requires expensive alignment of templates to ﬁnd the precise pose (Xiang
et al (2014)). Another practical problem is that given photographer bias, in many real-world datasets, the observed
pose variations might not be large enough to cover the entire view-based appearance space of the object (Chen and
Grauman 2014).
To cope with such difﬁculties for constructing supervised
pose datasets, it would be convenient to minimize such labeling effort by possibly transferring knowledge about pose
from one class to another. To this end, we propose a method
to exploit common appearances across classes for the task of
joint categorization and pose estimation. Our idea is based
on the intuition that in many cases, an object could appear
more similar to another object from a different class in the
same viewpoint, than to an object from the same class in a
different viewpoint. For example, a side view of a motorcycle resembles a side view of a bicycle more closely than a
frontal view of a motorcycle, and a side view of a horse resembles a side view cow more closely than a frontal view of
a horse. This suggests that there exist some common appearances shared across classes for the same viewpoint for us to
exploit.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a multi-task metric learning ap-

Abstract
Viewpoint estimation, especially in case of multiple object
classes, remains an important and challenging problem. First,
objects under different views undergo extreme appearance
variations, often making within-class variance larger than
between-class variance. Second, obtaining precise ground
truth for real-world images, necessary for training supervised
viewpoint estimation models, is extremely difﬁcult and time
consuming. As a result, annotated data is often available only
for a limited number of classes. Hence it is desirable to share
viewpoint information across classes. Additional complexity
arises from unaligned pose labels between classes, i.e. a side
view of a car might look more like a frontal view of a toaster,
than its side view. To address these problems, we propose a
metric learning approach for joint class prediction and pose
estimation. Our approach allows to circumvent the problem
of viewpoint alignment across multiple classes, and does not
require dense viewpoint labels. Moreover, we show, that the
learned metric generalizes to new classes, for which the pose
labels are not available, and therefore makes it possible to use
only partially annotated training sets, relying on the intrinsic similarities in the viewpoint manifolds. We evaluate our
approach on two challenging multi-class datasets, 3DObjects
and PASCAL3D+.

Introduction
One of the fundamental challenges in visual object recognition is dealing with the appearance variation of the objects
due to the viewpoint changes. A bicycle and a horse might
look very different depending on whether they are seen from
the frontal or the side view. Therefore, multi-view recognition, or joint pose estimation and object recognition, has
been an important topic in computer vision (Savarese and
Li Fei-Fei 2007, Sun et al. 2009, Zhang et al. 2013) with
recently resurgent interest (Bakry and Elgammal 2014, He,
Sigal, and Sclaroff 2014, Tulsiani and Malik 2015) 1 .
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We will use the terms viewpoint and pose estimation interchangeably.

3523

