Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Online Instrumental Variable Regression with
Applications to Online Linear System Identiﬁcation
Arun Venkatraman1 , Wen Sun1 , Martial Hebert1 , J. Andrew Bagnell1 , Byron Boots2
1

2

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332
{arunvenk,wensun,hebert,dbagnell}@cs.cmu.edu, bboots@cc.gatech.edu

is performed in whole with all of the data at once. However,
with the ever growing prevalence of large datasets, such an
approach becomes quickly infeasible due to the scaling of
the memory and computational complexity with regards to
the data set size and feature dimensionality. Towards this
end, we propose an online version of instrumental variable
regression that replaces each of the regression steps with an
online learner.
Speciﬁcally, we develop an Online Instrumental Variable
Regression (O IVR) procedure that can be regarded as a reduction to no-regret online learning. Under the assumption
that the set of regression and instrumental variables are i.i.d,
we derive a strong no-regret bound with respect to the desired objective optimized by the batch setting (batch I VR).
Our theorem allows us to take advantage of any no-regret
online learning procedure for the multiple regression steps
in I VR. We explicitly show that O IVR allows us to introduce a new family of online system identiﬁcation algorithms that can exploit no-regret online learning. This reduction extends on the initial reduction given by Hefny et.
al (Hefny, Downey, and J. Gordon 2015) from batch predictive state dynamical system learning to batch I VR. Finally, we investigate the experimental performance of several popular online algorithms such as Online Gradient Descent (OGD) (Zinkevich 2003), Online Newton Step (Hazan,
Agarwal, and Kale 2006) (ONS), Implicit Online Gradient
Descent (iOGD) (Kulis et al. 2010), and Follow The Regularized Leader (FTRL) (Shalev-Shwartz 2011) in the context
of O IVR for both dynamical system modeling and on a simple but illustrative econometrics example.

Abstract
Instrumental variable regression (I VR) is a statistical technique utilized to recover unbiased estimators when there are
errors in the independent variables. Estimator bias in learned
time series models can yield poor performance in applications
such as long-term prediction and ﬁltering where the recursive
use of the model results in the accumulation of propagated
error. However, prior work addressed the I VR objective in the
batch setting, where it is necessary to store the entire dataset
in memory - an infeasible requirement in large dataset scenarios. In this work, we develop Online Instrumental Variable Regression (O IVR), an algorithm that is capable of updating the learned estimator with streaming data. We show
that the online adaptation of I VR enjoys a no-regret performance guarantee with respect to the original batch setting by
taking advantage of any no-regret online learning algorithm
inside O IVR for the underlying update steps. We experimentally demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our algorithm in combination
with popular no-regret online algorithms for the task of learning predictive dynamical system models and on a prototypical
econometrics instrumental variable regression problem.

Introduction
Instrumental variable regression (I VR) is a popular statistical linear regression technique to help remove bias in the
prediction of targets when both the features and targets are
correlated with some unknown additive noise, usually a variable omitted from the regression due to the difﬁculty in observing it (Bowden and Turkington 1990). In this setting, ordinary least squares (OLS) (i.e. linear regression) from features to targets leads to a biased estimate of the dependence
between features and targets. For applications where the underlying unbiased dependency is required, such as in the
study of causal effects for econometrics (Miguel, Satyanath,
and Sergenti 2004), epidemiology (Greenland 2000), or for
the learning of dynamical system models (Söderström and
Stoica 2002), I VR provides a technique to remove the correlation with the unobserved variables.
We focus in this work on the regression application of instrumental variables where the I VR process consists of multiple linear regressions steps. Prior attention on I VR has focused on the batch learning scenario: each step of regression

Instrumental Variable Regression
Consider the standard linear regression scenario where we
wish to ﬁnd A given design matrices (datasets) X =
[x1 x2 . . .] and Y = [y1 y2 . . .] representing our explanatory variables (features) xi ∈ Rn×1 and outputs (targets) yi ∈ Rm×1 . This relationship is modeled by:
Y = AX + E

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where E = [ε1

2101

ε2

(1)

. . .] are independent noise (error).

