Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Joint Inference over a Lightly Supervised Information Extraction Pipeline:
Towards Event Coreference Resolution for Resource-Scarce Languages
Chen Chen and Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688
{yzcchen,vince}@hlt.utdallas.edu
if the upstream event extraction system fails to extract certain event mentions, they will not be accessible to the event
coreference resolver, thus harming its recall. Some previous
work sidestepped this error propagation problem by evaluating their event coreference resolvers in a rather unrealistic
setting (Chen, Ji, and Haralick 2009), where they assume
that all but the event coreference system in the pipeline are
implemented by an oracle.
Second, event coreference suffers from the data annotation bottleneck. To date, state-of-the-art end-to-end event
coreference performance has been achieved by training not
only the event coreference resolver but also the other systems in the IE pipeline in a supervised manner (Chen and Ng
2014). In other words, annotated data needs to be provided
to train each of the systems in the pipeline. Unfortunately,
such annotated data is available only for a handful of languages (e.g., English, Chinese, and Arabic, as provided by
the ACE corpora). This data annotation bottleneck makes it
challenging to apply existing event coreference resolution
approaches to most of the world’s natural languages.
To address the error propagation problem, we propose
to perform joint inference via Integer Linear Programming
(ILP) (Roth and Yih 2004) over the outputs of the models
trained for the four key tasks in the IE pipeline, namely
entity extraction, entity coreference, event extraction, and
event coreference. To our knowledge, while there has been
previous work on applying ILP to entity coreference (Denis
and Baldridge 2007; Finkel and Manning 2008) and entity
typing and coreference (Durrett and Klein 2014), this is the
ﬁrst attempt to perform joint inference for four key IE tasks.
To relieve the data annotation bottleneck, we reduce
the amount of labeled data needed to train the systems in
the IE pipeline by employing a combination of unsupervised learning and active learning (Cohn, Atlas, and Ladner
1994). The key idea is to divide the IE tasks in the pipeline
into two groups: domain-independent tasks and domaindependent tasks. Entity coreference and event coreference
can be modeled as domain-independent processes once a set
of entity/event mentions is given. Taking advantage of their
domain-independent nature, we design generative models
for these coreference tasks and train them in an unsupervised manner. On the other hand, the remaining tasks are
domain-dependent. For instance, event extraction is by deﬁnition domain-dependent in the sense that the types/subtypes

Abstract
We address two key challenges in end-to-end event
coreference resolution research: (1) the error propagation problem, where an event coreference resolver has
to assume as input the noisy outputs produced by its upstream components in the standard information extraction (IE) pipeline; and (2) the data annotation bottleneck, where manually annotating data for all the components in the IE pipeline is prohibitively expensive.
This is the case in the vast majority of the world’s natural languages, where such annotated resources are not
readily available. To address these problems, we propose to perform joint inference over a lightly supervised IE pipeline, where all the models are trained using either active learning or unsupervised learning. Using our approach, only 25% of the training sentences in
the Chinese portion of the ACE 2005 corpus need to be
annotated with entity and event mentions in order for
our event coreference resolver to surpass its fully supervised counterpart in performance.

1

Introduction

Event coreference resolution is the task of determining
which event mentions in a text refer to the same real-world
event. Compared to entity coreference, event coreference is
not only much less studied but arguably more challenging.
Our goal in this paper is to examine two unaddressed, yet
signiﬁcant challenges in end-to-end event coreference research. First, event coreference resolvers suffer from the error propagation problem. Recall that for two event mentions
to be coreferent, both their triggers (i.e., the words realizing
the occurrence of the events) and their corresponding arguments (e.g., the times, places, and people involved in them)
have to be compatible. However, identifying potential arguments (which are typically provided by an entity extraction
system), linking arguments to their event mentions (which
is typically performed by an event extraction system), and
determining the compatibility between two event arguments
(which is the job of an entity coreference resolver), are all
non-trivial tasks. The errors made by any of these upstream
components in the information extraction (IE) pipeline can
propagate to the event coreference resolver. For instance,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2913

