Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

MC-HOG Correlation Tracking with Saliency Proposal
Guibo Zhu† , Jinqiao Wang† , Yi Wu‡ , Xiaoyu Zhang§ , and Hanqing Lu†

†
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
‡
B-DAT & CICAEET, School of Information & Control,
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210044, Jiangsu, China
§
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, China
{gbzhu, jqwang, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
ywu.china@yahoo.com, zhangxiaoyu@iie.ac.cn

et al. 2014) have achieved good results in object detection
by concatenating gradient and color features directly. Tang
et al. explored the complementary between color histogram
and HOG features in a co-training framework for tracking
(Tang et al. 2007). Although color and gradient features are
widely used in vision based applications, there is no detailed
analysis on the gradient properties for the same target in different color spaces. Therefore, it is interesting to exploit this
kind of gradient properties for effective feature representation. Inspired by color naming (CN) which transforms RGB
color space into an 11-D probabilistic space (Van De Weijer et al. 2009), the image pixels are projected into multiple color channels to extract gradient features for constructing a new feature descriptor: HOG extracted across Multiple Color channels (MC-HOG). It is a more natural fusion
strategy than direct concatenation which needs to consider
the feature normalization problem across different feature
spaces.

Abstract
Designing effective feature and handling the model drift
problem are two important aspects for online visual tracking. For feature representation, gradient and color features
are most widely used, but how to effectively combine them
for visual tracking is still an open problem. In this paper, we
propose a rich feature descriptor, MC-HOG, by leveraging
rich gradient information across multiple color channels or
spaces. Then MC-HOG features are embedded into the correlation tracking framework to estimate the state of the target.
For handling the model drift problem caused by occlusion or
distracter, we propose saliency proposals as prior information
to provide candidates and reduce background interference. In
addition to saliency proposals, a ranking strategy is proposed
to determine the importance of these proposals by exploiting
the learnt appearance ﬁlter, historical preserved object samples and the distracting proposals. In this way, the proposed
approach could effectively explore the color-gradient characteristics and alleviate the model drift problem. Extensive
evaluations performed on the benchmark dataset show the superiority of the proposed method.

1

Associated with object tracking, model drift means that
the object appearance model gradually drifts away from the
object due to its accumulated errors caused by online update (Matthews, Ishikawa, and Baker 2004). There are many
strategies to alleviate the drift problem, e.g. semi-supervised
learning (Grabner, Leistner, and Bischof 2008), ensemblebased learning (Tang et al. 2007; Kwon and Lee 2010), longterm detector (Kalal, Mikolajczyk, and Matas 2012) and part
context learning (Zhu et al. 2015). In essence, they either explored the supervised information of the training samples or
the search strategy. However, the reliability of training samples collected online is difﬁcult to guarantee. To provide relatively less candidate regions and suppress the background
interference, in this paper we introduce saliency proposals
as prior information from visual saliency, which has been
studied by many researchers (Itti, Koch, and Niebur 1998;
Harel, Koch, and Perona 2006) and owns good characteristics for automatic target initialization and scale estimation (Seo and Milanfar 2010; Mahadevan and Vasconcelos
2013). The saliency map is taken as the prior information
to obtain candidate proposals which are more efﬁcient than
exhaustive search based on sliding windows. In addition to
saliency proposals, a ranking strategy is proposed to determine the importance of these proposals and estimate the

Introduction

Visual tracking, which is to estimate object state in an image sequence, is one of the core problems in computer vision. It has many applications, such as surveillance, action
recognition and autonomous robots/car (Yilmaz, Javed, and
Shah 2006; Wang et al. 2014). One robust visual tracking approach in real-world scenarios should cope with challenges
as much as possible, such as occlusions, background clutter
and shape deformation.
Feature representation is critical for improving the performance in object detection (Dollár et al. 2009), tracking
(Henriques et al. 2015), age estimation (Li et al. 2012) and
image ranking (Li et al. 2014). Gradient and color features
are the most widely used ones. To be speciﬁc, Histogram
of Oriented Gradient (HOG) (Dalal and Triggs 2005) features are good at describing abundant gradient information
while color features like color histograms often capture rich
color characteristics. For example, integral channel features
proposed by (Dollár et al. 2009) and its expansions (Dollár
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3690

