Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Graph-without-Cut: An Ideal Graph Learning for Image Segmentation
1

Lianli Gao1∗ , Jingkuan Song2 , Feiping Nie3 , Fuhao Zou4 , Nicu Sebe2 , Heng Tao Shen1,5

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China. 2 University of Trento, Trento 38122, Italy.
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China. 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China.
5
The University of Queensland, Brisbane 4067, Australia. lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, {jingkuan.song, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it,
feipingnie@gmail.com, fuhao.zou@hust.edu.cn, shenht@itee.uq.edu.au

Abstract

Superpixels Generation

Graph-based image segmentation organizes the image
elements into graphs and partitions an image based on
the graph. It has been widely used and many promising results are obtained. Since the segmentation performance highly depends on the graph, most of existing methods focus on obtaining a precise similarity
graph or on designing efﬁcient cutting/merging strategies. However, these two components are often conducted in two separated steps, and thus the obtained
graph similarity may not be the optimal one for segmentation and this may lead to suboptimal results. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework, Graph-WithoutCut (GWC), for learning the similarity graph and image
segmentations simultaneously. GWC learns the similarity graph by assigning adaptive and optimal neighbors
to each vertex based on the spatial and visual information. Meanwhile, the new rank constraint is imposed
to the Laplacian matrix of the similarity graph, such
that the connected components in the resulted similarity graph are exactly equal to the region number. Extensive empirical results on three public data sets (i.e,
BSDS300, BSDS500 and MSRC) show that our unsupervised GWC achieves state-of-the-art performance
compared with supervised and unsupervised image segmentation approaches.

Ideal Graph Learning

Multi-visual graphs

Original Images

Spatial graph

Learning Results

Figure 1: The overview of GWC.

efforts have been devoted to designing more efﬁcient and
effective segmentation methods, such as edge-based algorithms (Arbelaez et al. 2011), region-based algorithms (Ren
and Shakhnarovich 2013), watershed-based segmentation
(Donoser and Schmalstieg 2014) and graph-based methods
(Peng, Zhang, and Zhang 2013; Arbeláez et al. 2014; Delong and Boykov 2008; Falcao, Udupa, and Miyazawa 2000;
Grady 2005; Pavan and Pelillo 2003).
Among the existing image segmentation techniques,
many successful ones beneﬁt from mapping the image elements onto a graph G = (V, E) which pixels/superpixels are
nodes and the weights of edges measure the similarity between nodes. Cutting/merging is then applied on this graph
to generate the image segments. Most of the existing graphbased methods focus on two research problems: 1) how to
deﬁne a precise similarity graph; and 2) how to cut/merge
the nodes effectively. The Euclidean distance on the visual
features is the simplest way to calculate the similarity graph.
However, the segmentation performance is usually inferior
to a learned similarity. In (Ren and Shakhnarovich 2013;
Liu, Seyedhosseini, and Tasdizen 2015), the authors start
with a ﬁne superpixel over-segmentation and train a logistic
regression model to determine the similarity between two
regions. Based on the similarity graph, they greedily merge
regions at each stage until the whole region merging process
ﬁnishes. By contrast, another pipeline of methods work on

Introduction
Image segmentation i.e., partitioning an image into several disjoint subsets such that each subset has similar color,
intensity or texture achieved an extraordinary success and
has become popular in a wide range of applications, such
as objects recognition, tracking and image analysis (Liu,
Seyedhosseini, and Tasdizen 2015; Arbelaez et al. 2011;
Ren and Bo 2012; Maitin-Shepard et al. 2015; Yi and Moon
2012; Kim et al. 2014; Falcao, Udupa, and Miyazawa 2000;
Sundaramoorthi, Yezzi, and Mennucci 2008; Willett and
Nowak 2007; Boykov and Funka-Lea 2006). The simplest
approach of segmentation is to ﬁnd an appropriate threshold
for separating the image into foreground and background
group (Yi and Moon 2012). More recently, tremendous
∗
This work was done when she was a visiting scholar at University of Trento. Jingkuan Song is the Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1188

