Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Model Checking Probabilistic
Knowledge: A PSPACE Case
Xiaowei Huang and Marta Kwiatkowska
University of Oxford, UK

knowledge is also undecidable. Intuitively, we say that agent
i has limit-sure knowledge over φ to mean that i knows φ
with probability arbitrarily close to 1. These pessimistic results suggest that the usual approach of achieving decidability for an undecidable model checking problem, by ﬁnding
syntactic restrictions over the logic language, may not sufﬁce in this particular case.
The goal of this paper is to identify a suﬃciently general
decidable logic fragment for partial information stochastic multiagent systems that admits eﬃcient model checking. More speciﬁcally, we suggest working with formulas
in which the agent’s limit-sure knowledge concerns a special
class of atomic propositions, named resource propositions to
denote that they have the same value in all initial states and
can change their value at most once in a run. These propositions have been the subject of many studies, e.g., diagnosability of discrete-event systems and winning of multiplayer
games, and can express a wide range of properties such as
safety, reachability and diagnosability. With this additional
restriction, we obtain a logic combining LTL and an agent’s
limit-sure knowledge with PSPACE-complete model checking complexity, same as LTL model checking.

Abstract
Model checking probabilistic knowledge of memoryful semantics is undecidable, even for a simple formula concerning
the reachability of probabilistic knowledge of a single agent.
This result suggests that the usual approach of tackling undecidable model checking problems, by ﬁnding syntactic restrictions over the logic language, may not suﬃce. In this paper, we propose to work with an additional restriction that
agent’s knowledge concerns a special class of atomic propositions. A PSPACE-complete case is identiﬁed with this additional restriction, for a logic language combining LTL with
limit-sure knowledge of a single agent.

Introduction
For a system with multiple agents, the properties concerning agents’ knowledge can be important for its correctness.
For instance, for a system with a diagnosis component, it
is essential to have the property that, when a failure of the
system occurs, the component can eventually know it. Some
speciﬁc action (e.g., recover or terminate) can then be taken
once the component gains the knowledge. Temporal epistemic logic (Fagin et al. 1995) has been developed to express
these properties.
When considering stochasticity in the environment, e.g.,
imprecise sensor information, component failure or the occurrence of random events, it is necessary to formalise probabilistic knowledge. To work with such stochastic multiagent systems, the knowledge modality needs to be endowed
with probabilistic measures, to express properties such as
“once a failure occurs, the diagnosis component can eventually know this with probability greater than 90%”.
However, it has been shown in (Huang, Su, and Zhang
2012; Huang 2013) that the model checking problem for
a logic of probabilistic knowledge and discrete time is undecidable: the emptiness problem of probabilistic ﬁnite automata (Paz 1971) can be reduced to the model checking of
a very simple formula concerning the reachability of a single
agent’s probabilistic knowledge over an atomic proposition.
Moreover, due to the undecidability of value 1 problem of
probabilistic ﬁnite automata (Gimbert and Oualhadj 2010)
it is a reasonable conjecture that model checking limit-sure

Preliminaries: Stochastic MAS and PLTLK
A multiagent system (MAS) consists of a set of agents running simultaneously within an environment (Fagin et al.
1995). At each time point, every agent is in some local state,
and the environment is in some environment state. A global
state is formed from an environment state and local states,
one for each agent. At a global state, every agent will make
an observation over the system, take a local action and update its local state, and the environment will update the environment state according to the joint local action of the
agents.
A stochastic multiagent system (SMAS) (Huang, Su, and
Zhang 2012; Huang 2013) introduces probabilistic characteristics into a multiagent system: initial probability and
transition probability. Initial probability assumes a probabilistic distribution over the states. Transition probability assumes a probabilistic distribution over the next possible environment states after considering the joint action from the
agents. Moreover, (Huang, Luo, and van der Meyden 2011)
deﬁnes a stochastic multiagent system in which agents take
randomised protocol. Formally, a ﬁnite SMAS is a tuple

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2516

