Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Hierarchy Prediction in Online Communities
Denys Katerenchuk and Andrew Rosenberg†
dkaterenchuk@gradcenter.cuny.edu, andrew@cs.qc.cuny.edu

CUNY Graduate Center, New York, USA
365 Fifth Avenue, Room 4319, New York, NY 10016
†
CUNY Queens College, New York, USA
65-30 Kissena Boulevard, Room A-202, Flushing, NY 11367

analysis. The researchers studied word usage (Bramsen et al.
2011) and showed that simple word frequencies can be indicative of power relationships. They used simple n-grams,
part-of-speech n-grams and mixed n-grams models in their
experiments. Eric Gilbert also used n-grams in his research
(Gilbert 2012), but conducted more detailed text analysis.
All of these studies considered dyadic communications. In
our research, we consider communicational threads where
participants reply to multiple users, and we rank the users
according to their hierarchy. Ranking user groups makes the
task much harder, but provides broader background for understanding user communities.

Abstract
With the development of the Internet, a big part of social
interactions have moved online, and people have unconsciously brought their daily communicational habits to
the web. Understanding these communications is important because it will lead to a better understanding of
online communities, and can improve areas such as ecommerce, advertisement, topic modeling, security, and
others. We propose to develop a natural language based
ranking algorithm to predict user inﬂuence levels in online communication groups.

1

Introduction

3

Communication is a part of our existence. Through interactions we build social hierarchies. Scientists have shown
that people change their communicational behavior based
on their collocutor (Yaman, Hakkani-Tür, and Tür 2010).
These changes can reveal a lot of information about a conversation’s participants. In recent years, a big part of interactions has moved to the Internet. Inevitably, this leads to a
creation of hierarchical relationships similar to those formed
during face-to-face interactions. Understanding user relationships and social structures are essential to many areas
such as e-commerce, advertisement, security, and others.
We propose an algorithm to improve current hierarchy
prediction from text communications, a well known problem
in natural language processing (NLP). While early studies
were concentrated on social network analysis (SNA) (Diesner and Carley 2005), in recent years multiple studies have
been done on text communication analysis (Gilbert 2012).
Still, the hierarchy prediction task remains a challenge. In
this paper, we propose to bring together different techniques
from NLP to improve the current state-of-the-art algorithms
for hierarchy prediction from text.

2

Data

A big part of research on hierarchy prediction is done on
Enron corpus and wiki talk pages (“talk” tab). We, however,
want to perform analysis on data that is closer to real world
communications. For this reason, we collect data from Reddit1 . Reddit is a website where users create posts on different
topics or share resources such as pictures, videos, or links to
other resources. Users can participate in discussions through
creating threads of comments. Each comment can earn comment karma, which is Reddit’s form of approval. The comments and posts can be on any subject and not restricted to
follow any rules such as business style emails in Enron data
or Wikipedia improvement discussion. However, to facilitate discussions, we collect data from politics subreddit.
We deﬁne user hierarchy in terms of k-index. The deﬁnition of k-index is inﬂuenced by familiar author-metric index, h-index, used in science. K-index means that a user has
k posts with at least k karma scores. We assign k-index to
each user inside a single thread. This means that a user can
have high hierarchy level in one thread, but low in another.
In other words, we consider only local user hierarchical levels.

Related Work

4

With the release of Enron email corpus (Klimt and Yang
2004), many scientists have tried to predict corporation
structure from email communications. Initial effort was focused on SNA algorithms (Diesner and Carley 2005). On the
other hand, more work has been done in recent years on text

Methods

In this paper, we propose to develop an algorithm that brings
together a state-of-the-art NLP research from multiple subareas to enhance hierarchy prediction in online communications. Our proposed algorithm relies on data from different
NLP domains.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4224

www.reddit.com

