Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Future Classiﬁers without Additional Data
Atsutoshi Kumagai

Tomoharu Iwata

NTT Secure Platform Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
3-9-11, Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo, Japan
kumagai.atsutoshi@lab.ntt.co.jp

NTT Communication Science Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
2-4, Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan
iwata.tomoharu@lab.ntt.co.jp

posed (Shimodaira 2000; Dyer, Capo, and Polikar 2014).
However, using unlabeled data might be difﬁcult. For example, in the security domain, anti-virus software vendors
periodically distribute update ﬁles (that is, data for updating
classiﬁers) to their users. Users employing anti-virus software in an ofﬂine environment, which carries a risk of virus
infections via physical mediums such as USB, cannot receive these ﬁles and therefore cannot update their classiﬁers.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for classifying data in the future when only labeled data with timestamps collected until the current time are available. With
the proposed approach, a decision boundary is deﬁned by
the parameters of classiﬁers, and the dynamics of the decision boundary are modeled by using time-series models.
We present a probabilistic model to realize this approach,
where vector autoregressive and logistic regression models
are used for the time-series model and classiﬁer, respectively. Since our proposed model takes into account the time
evolution of the decision boundary, the proposed method can
reduce the deterioration of classiﬁcation performance without additional data.
We developed two learning algorithms for the proposed
model on the basis of variational Bayesian inference. The
ﬁrst algorithm is a two-step algorithm, which learns a timeseries model after the classiﬁers learned. The second algorithm is a one-step algorithm, which learns a time-series
model and classiﬁers simultaneously.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we brieﬂy review related work. We formulate the
proposed model in Section 3 and describe two learning algorithms for the proposed model on the basis of variational
Bayesian inference in Section 4. In Section 5, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method with experiments using synthetic and real-world data sets. Finally, we
present concluding remarks and a discussion of future work
in Section 6.

Abstract
We propose probabilistic models for predicting future
classiﬁers given labeled data with timestamps collected
until the current time. In some applications, the decision boundary changes over time. For example, in spam
mail classiﬁcation, spammers continuously create new
spam mails to overcome spam ﬁlters, and therefore, the
decision boundary that classiﬁes spam or non-spam can
vary. Existing methods require additional labeled and/or
unlabeled data to learn a time-evolving decision boundary. However, collecting these data can be expensive
or impossible. By incorporating time-series models to
capture the dynamics of a decision boundary, the proposed model can predict future classiﬁers without additional data. We developed two learning algorithms for
the proposed model on the basis of variational Bayesian
inference. The effectiveness of the proposed method
is demonstrated with experiments using synthetic and
real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

The decision boundary dynamically changes over time in
some applications. For example, in spam mail classiﬁcation,
spammers continuously create new spam mails to overcome
spam ﬁlters, and therefore, the decision boundary that classiﬁes spam or non-spam can vary (Fdez-Riverola et al. 2007).
In activity recognition using sensor data, the decision boundary can vary as user activity patterns change (Abdallah et al.
2012). When we do not update classiﬁers for tasks where the
decision boundary evolves over time, the performance of the
classiﬁers deteriorate quickly (Gama et al. 2014).
Many methods have been proposed for updating classiﬁers to maintain performance, such as online learning
(Rosenblatt 1958; Crammer, Dredze, and Pereira 2009;
Crammer, Kulesza, and Dredze 2009), forgetting algorithms
(Klinkenberg 2004), time-window methods (Babcock et al.
2002) and ensemble learning (Wang et al. 2003; Kolter and
Maloof 2007). These methods require labeled data to update
a time-evolving decision boundary. However, it would be
quite expensive to continuously collect labeled data since labels need to be manually assigned by domain experts. Methods that use only unlabeled data for updating have been pro-

2

Related Work

To capture a time-evolving decision boundary, updating
classiﬁers with labeled data has been widely used. Online
learning algorithms have been developed to update classiﬁers after the every arrival of labeled data (Rosenblatt 1958;
Crammer, Dredze, and Pereira 2009; Crammer, Kulesza, and
Dredze 2009). Forgetting algorithms learn the latest deci-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1772

