Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bayesian Markov Games with Explicit Finite-Level Types
Muthukumaran Chandrasekaran1 and Yingke Chen2 and Prashant Doshi3
539G Boyd GSRC, THINC Lab, University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia 30602
{mkran1 ,pdoshi3 }@uga.edu, yke.chen@gmail.com2

types, as motivated by behavioral equivalence (Zeng and
Doshi 2012), in order to speed up computation of the equilibrium. Consequently, we model the multi-access broadcast
channel and foraging problems – well-known evaluation domains for ad hoc teamwork – as a BMG and solve it.

Abstract
In impromptu or ad hoc settings, participating players are
precluded from precoordination. Subsequently, each player’s
own model is private and includes some uncertainty about
the others’ types or behaviors. Harsanyi’s formulation of a
Bayesian game lays emphasis on this uncertainty while the
players each play exactly one turn. We propose a new gametheoretic framework where Bayesian players engage in a
Markov game and each has private but imperfect information regarding other players’ types. Consequently, we construct player types whose structure is explicit and includes a
ﬁnite level belief hierarchy instead of utilizing Harsanyi’s abstract types and a common prior distribution. We formalize
this new framework and demonstrate its effectiveness on two
standard ad hoc teamwork domains involving two or more ad
hoc players.

BMG with Finite-Level Types

We explicitly deﬁne a type space for player i as, ΘK
i =
Θi , Si , Σi , βi , where Θi is the non-empty set of types of
player i; Si is the collection of all sigma algebras on Θi ;
Σi : Θi → Sj maps each type in Θi to a sigma algebra
in Sj ; and βi gives the belief associated with each type of i,
βi (θi ) ∈ (X ×Θj , F X ×Σi (θi )), X is the states of nature
(set of payoff functions), F X is a sigma algebra on X.
We deﬁne a Bayesian Markov game (BMG) below which
uses Kets’ (2014) formalization of ﬁnite-level beliefs:
Deﬁnition 1 (BMG). A Bayesian Markov game with ﬁnitelevel type spaces (BMG) is a collection:

Empirical ﬁndings in strategic games (Goodie, Doshi, and
Young 2012) strongly suggest that humans reason about others’ beliefs to ﬁnite and often low depths. In part, this explains why a signiﬁcant proportion of human participants
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to play Nash equilibrium proﬁles of games
because it involves them reasoning about others’ who in
turn reason about the others and so on ad inﬁnitum and
such reasoning is typically beyond their conscious cognitive
capacity. Consequently, Kets (2014) characterized a ﬁnitelevel equilibrium between players having ﬁnite-level beliefs
in a framework generalized from the standard Harsanyi’s
Bayesian games.
We further generalize Kets’ single-stage framework to allow Bayesian players to play a Markov game with incomplete information where players with explicit types are situated in a dynamic environment whose states transitions
stochastically to another state sequentially as all participants
simultaneously perform their actions at each stage of game.
Contextual to these types that induce ﬁnite belief hierarchies, we characterize and deﬁne the equilibria within this
new framework for Bayesian Markov games (BMGs) with
explicit types as Markov-perfect ﬁnite-level equilibria and
formalize the computation of ﬁnding such equilibria as a
constraint satisfaction problem solved using an adaptation
of Soni et al. (2007)’s constraint satisfaction algorithm. Additionally, we exploit equivalences between these dynamic

G ∗ = S, X, (Ai , Ri , Θki )i∈N , T, OC
• S is the set of physical states of the game;
• Ai is the set of player i’s actions;

• Ri : S × X ×
Ai → R is i’s reward function;
i∈N

• Θki is the ﬁnite-level Kets type space of depth k;

• T : S×
A → Δ(S) is a stochastic physical state
i∈N

transition function of the Markov game; and
• OC is the optimality criterion in order to optimize over
ﬁnite or inﬁnite steps with discount factor, γ ∈ (0, 1).
A BMG between two agents, i and j of some type θi
and θj respectively, proceeds as follows: both agents initially start at st and perform actions ati and atj according
to their markov strategies, respectively. The state then transitions to st+1 according to the stochastic transition function
of the game, T . Both agents now receive observations, ot+1
i
= st+1 , atj  and ot+1
= st+1 , ati , respectively, that perj
fectly inform them about current state and other’s previous
action. Based on these observations, the agents update their
and at+1
respective types and their next actions, at+1
i
j , are
selected based on their strategies. Since the mixed-strategy
space is continuous, we discretize it using a τ -grid as deﬁned
in Soni et al. (2007). We deﬁne the equilibrium next.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4198

