Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On Learning Causal Models from Relational Data
Sanghack Lee and Vasant Honavar
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Laboratory
College of Information Sciences and Technology
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
{sxl439, vhonavar}@ist.psu.edu

the standard entity-relationship (ER) model (Chen 1976) to
incorporate probabilistic dependencies. DAPER uniﬁes and
offers more expressive power than several models of relational data, including probabilistic relational models (Getoor
and Taskar 2007) and plate models (Buntine 1994). Maier et
al. (2013) demonstrated the lack of completeness of RPC
for learning causal models from relational data (which we
will refer to as relational causal models or RCM) and introduced Relational Causal Discovery (RCD) as an alternative
to RPC. RCD employs a constraint-based approach (testing conditional independencies (CI) and reasoning about
them to determine the direction of causal dependencies) in
an RCM. Maier, Marazopoulou, and Jensen (2013) introduced relational d-separation, the relational counterpart of
d-separation (Pearl 2000) (graphical criteria for deriving CI
that hold in a CBN), and introduced abstract ground graph
(AGG), for algorithmic derivation of CI that hold in an RCM
by applying (traditional) d-separation criteria to AGG.
The proof of correctness of RCD (Maier et al. 2013) relies on the soundness and completeness of AGG for relational d-separation, which in turn requires that the AGG is
a DAG that represents exactly the edges that could appear
in all possible ground graphs, i.e., instances of the RCM in
question. However, our recent work (Lee and Honavar 2015)
has called into question the completeness of AGG for relational d-separation: In short, there exist cases in which dseparation on an AGG does not yield CI that hold in the corresponding RCM. Moreover, in general, AGG can contain
an inﬁnite number of vertices and edges: It is not immediately obvious whether the practical implementation of RCD
that work with a ﬁnite subgraph of the AGG inherits the theoretical guarantees of RCD based on the purported soundness and completeness of AGG for relational d-separation.
Furthermore, RCD orients causal relationships based on the
acyclicity of AGG which, in general, does not guarantee the
maximal-orientedness of the resulting RCM.
Against this background, we revisit the problems of learning an RCM from relational data. The main contributions
of this paper are: (i) An investigation of RCMs under two
weaker faithfulness conditions (Ramsey, Zhang, and Spirtes
2006), leading to a simple approach to identifying a subset of relational d-separation queries that needed for learning the structure of an RCM; (ii) An original theoretical
analysis that provides the basis of a provably sound al-

Abstract
Many applications call for learning causal models from relational data. We investigate Relational Causal Models (RCM)
under relational counterparts of adjacency-faithfulness and
orientation-faithfulness, yielding a simple approach to identifying a subset of relational d-separation queries needed
for determining the structure of an RCM using d-separation
against an unrolled DAG representation of the RCM. We provide original theoretical analysis that offers the basis of a
sound and efﬁcient algorithm for learning the structure of an
RCM from relational data. We describe RCD-Light, a sound
and efﬁcient constraint-based algorithm that is guaranteed to
yield a correct partially-directed RCM structure with at least
as many edges oriented as in that produced by RCD, the only
other existing algorithm for learning RCM. We show that unlike RCD, which requires exponential time and space, RCDLight requires only polynomial time and space to orient the
dependencies of a sparse RCM.

Introduction
Discovering causal relationships from observations and experiments is one of the hallmarks of intelligence. Applications of causal inference span virtually every area of human endeavor. There has been considerable progress on algorithms for eliciting causal relationships from data (Pearl
2000; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000; Shimizu et
al. 2006). Most of this work relies on Causal Bayesian
Networks (CBN), directed acyclic graph (DAG)-structured
probabilistic models of propositional data. However, in
many real-world settings, the data exhibit a relational structure. Such settings call for probabilistic models of relational data (Getoor and Taskar 2007; Friedman et al. 1999;
Richardson and Domingos 2006). Existing work on such
models has largely focused on learning models that maximize the likelihood of the data as opposed to discovering
causal relationships using independence relations from data.
It is against this background that Maier et al. (2010) introduced RPC, an extension of the PC algorithm (Spirtes,
Glymour, and Scheines 2000), to the relational setting for
learning causal relationships from relational data. RPC uses
directed acyclic probabilistic entity-relationship (DAPER)
model (Heckerman, Meek, and Koller 2007), which extends
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3263

