Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Co-Regularized PLSA for Multi-Modal Learning
1

Xin Wang1 , Ming-Ching Chang1 , Yiming Ying2 , Siwei Lyu1

Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University at Albany, State University of New York
Albany, NY 12222

Jordan 2003), we can model each data entity in a multimodal dataset as a probabilistic mixture of “topics” that corresponds to common thematic concepts. Then the same topic
is instantiated as multiple probabilistic distributions, each of
which is deﬁned over the basic representation of one data
modality. Representing data entities using their topic composition thus discounts the difference of basic representations in the data modalities. As such, learning methods based
on the topic representations of the multi-modal dataset can
leverage compatible and complementary conceptual themes
encompassed within each modality, and are often more effective than methods that use features from direct concatenation of all modalities.
In several previous works (Nallapati and Cohen 2008;
Nallapati et al. 2008; Liu, Niculescu-Mizil, and Gryc 2009),
integrating multi-modal data at topic level is achieved by
requesting each data entity to have the same topic compositions across different modalities. This is equivalent to require multiple representations of one data entity over different modalities to share their topic compositions. This approach fares well when different modalities contain information largely consistent with each other. But this may not
always be the case, for instance, an image of the Central
Park may be associated with texts in a Wiki document about
New York City, but its contents may also be related with another document about Parks. A less restrictive approach is to
model topic compositions of each data entity across different
modalities separately, and the learning algorithms encourage
them to be similar but not necessarily identical. As such, it
has the ﬂexibility of capturing non-overlapping topic compositions over different modalities, and can recover more
diverse topics across different modalities to summarize the
thematic concepts embodied in the dataset.
In this work, we study co-regularized probabilistic latent semantic analysis (coPLSA) as a general method for
topic analysis of multi-modal datasets. We describe a general framework of coPLSA where the co-regularizers are
divergences between discrete probability distributions that
correspond to topic compositions of a data entry across different modalities. Optimizing the objective of PLSA while
minimizing such divergences serve to encourage similarity
between topic compositions of a data entry across different modalities during topic learning. For three widely used
divergences (i.e., symmetric KL, 2 and 1 divergences),

Abstract
Many learning problems in real world applications involve
rich datasets comprising multiple information modalities. In
this work, we study co-regularized PLSA (coPLSA) as an efﬁcient solution to probabilistic topic analysis of multi-modal
data. In coPLSA, similarities between topic compositions of
a data entity across different data modalities are measured
with divergences between discrete probabilities, which are incorporated as a co-regularizer to augment individual PLSA
models over each data modality. We derive efﬁcient iterative learning algorithms for coPLSA with symmetric KL, 2
and 1 divergences as co-regularizers, in each case the essential optimization problem affords simple numerical solutions
that entail only matrix arithmetic operations and numerical
solution of 1D nonlinear equations. We evaluate the performance of the coPLSA algorithms on text/image cross-modal
retrieval tasks, on which they show competitive performance
with state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Numerous real-world applications of machine learning involve rich datasets comprising multiple and heterogeneous
information modalities. For instance, Wikipedia pages typically include both texts and images, articles recounting
emerging news stories often have multiple versions translated into different languages, and datasets of social network
usually contain user proﬁles as well as friendship links. In
a multi-modal dataset, each data modality may only reveal
partial yet relevant information of the data entities being
studied, and only in combination do they yield a complete
description. Combining multiple modalities can improve the
performance of learning algorithms, and the resulting multimodal learning methods have found wide ranges of applications, such as image annotation (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2012), multi-media retrieval (Pereira et al. 2014;
Rasiwasia et al. 2010; Mao et al. 2013), and audio-visual
speech classiﬁcation (Ngiam et al. 2011).
As each data modality may have intrinsically different
representations, simply concatenating them cannot lead to
a satisfactory solution to multi-modal learning problems.
On the other hand, borrowing ideas from probabilistic topic
analysis for text documents (Hofmann 1999; Blei, Ng, and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2166

