Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

ConTaCT: Deciding to Communicate during Time-Critical
Collaborative Tasks in Unknown, Deterministic Domains
Vaibhav V. Unhelkar and Julie A. Shah
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
{unhelkar, julie a shah}@csail.mit.edu
that include communications (Pynadath and Tambe 2002;
Goldman and Zilberstein 2003) and assume complete knowledge of action and sensing uncertainty present in the model.
These approaches are particularly suited for multi-agent settings that include uncertain outcomes from agents’ actions
and partially observable local states, and circumstances where
the associated uncertainty - namely, transition and observation probabilities - can be quantiﬁed a priori.
The focus of our work, in contrast, is a subclass of decentralized, multi-robot problems wherein the world model is
initially unknown but deterministic in nature. In the DECPOMDP model, this corresponds to a setting with a deterministic but initially unknown transition function. We are
motivated by real-world applications, including the coordination of disaster response teams, where agents can often
achieve the desired outcome from a chosen action in a robust fashion (e.g., through the use of dynamic controllers),
thereby de-emphasizing uncertainty about the outcomes of
actions. However, the world model is unknown at the outset, potentially precluding a priori generation of optimal or
even feasible plans. In addition, these domains are typically
time-critical, meaning that there are hard temporal deadlines
under which tasks must be completed. Finally, agents are
assumed to have prior knowledge of the planning behavior,
initial states and goal states of their collaborators.
The key contribution of this paper is an online, decentralized communication strategy, ConTaCT, that allows an agent
to reason about whether to communicate to team members
during execution of a time-critical collaborative task within
an unknown, deterministic domain. By maintaining an estimate of what other team members know about the domain,
the algorithm allows the agent to compare the expected beneﬁt of its decision against the cost of communication.
We begin with a formal deﬁnition of the subclass of the
multi-agent problems of interest, and highlight how it differs
from problems considered in prior art. Next, we describe the
ConTaCT algorithm and evaluate its performance of a simulated task motivated by rescue operations in disaster response.
We compare ConTaCT with online communication policies
generated using an existing approach for multi-agent communication (Roth, Simmons, and Veloso 2005) applied to our
task model, and show that ConTaCT achieves comparable
task performance while substantially reducing communication overhead.

Abstract
Communication between agents has the potential to improve team performance of collaborative tasks. However,
communication is not free in most domains, requiring
agents to reason about the costs and beneﬁts of sharing information. In this work, we develop an online,
decentralized communication policy, ConTaCT, that enables agents to decide whether or not to communicate
during time-critical collaborative tasks in unknown, deterministic environments. Our approach is motivated by
real-world applications, including the coordination of
disaster response and search and rescue teams. These settings motivate a model structure that explicitly represents
the world model as initially unknown but deterministic
in nature, and that de-emphasizes uncertainty about action outcomes. Simulated experiments are conducted in
which ConTaCT is compared to other multi-agent communication policies, and results indicate that ConTaCT
achieves comparable task performance while substantially reducing communication overhead.

Introduction
Communication between agents has the potential to improve
team performance during collaborative tasks, but often has
associated costs. These costs may arise due to the power requirements necessary to transmit data, computational requirements associated with processing new data, or the limitations
of human information processing resources (if the team in
question includes human agents). The beneﬁt gleaned from
using newly communicated information may not necessarily
outweigh the associated costs, and excessive communication
can hamper collaborative task performance.
A number of works (Xuan, Lesser, and Zilberstein 2004;
Spaan, Gordon, and Vlassis 2006; Williamson, Gerding, and
Jennings 2009) have aimed to design communication strategies that support agents in communicating only when necessary, reducing communication overhead and potentially
improving collaborative task performance. Prior decisiontheoretic approaches for generating online communication
(Roth, Simmons, and Veloso 2005; Wu, Zilberstein, and
Chen 2011) have largely focused on tasks modeled using extensions of DEC-POMDP (Bernstein et al. 2002)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2544

