Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Column-Oriented Datalog Materialization for Large Knowledge Graphs
Jacopo Urbani

Ceriel Jacobs

Markus Krötzsch

Dept. Computer Science
VU University Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
jacopo@cs.vu.nl

Dept. Computer Science
VU University Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
c.j.h.jacobs@vu.nl

Faculty of Computer Science
Technische Universität Dresden
Dresden, Germany
markus.kroetzsch@tu-dresden.de

OWLIM materialize KGs of 100M–1B edges in times ranging from half an hour to several days (Kolovski, Wu, and
Eadon 2010; Bishop et al. 2011). Research prototypes such
as Marvin (Oren et al. 2009), C/MPI (Weaver and Hendler
2009), WebPIE (Urbani et al. 2012), and DynamiTE (Urbani et al. 2013) achieve scalability by using parallel or distributed computing, but often require signiﬁcant hardware
resources. Urbani et al., e.g., used up to 64 high-end machines to materialize a KG with 100B edges in 14 hours
(2012). In addition, all the above systems only support (fragments of) the OWL RL ontology language, which is subsumed by Datalog but signiﬁcantly simpler.
Motik et al. have recently presented a completely new approach to this problem (2014). Their system RDFox exploits
fast main-memory computation and parallel processing. A
groundbreaking insight of this work is that this approach
allows processing mid-sized KGs on commodity machines.
This has opened up a new research ﬁeld for in-memory Datalog systems, and Motik et al. have presented several advancements (2015a; 2015b; 2015c).
Inspired by this line of research, we present a new approach to in-memory Datalog materialization. Our goal is to
further reduce memory consumption to enable even larger
KGs to be processed on even simpler computers. To do so,
we propose to maintain inferences in an ad-hoc columnbased storage layout. In contrast to traditional row-based
layouts, where a data table is represented as a list of tuples
(rows), column-based approaches use a tuple of columns
(value lists) instead. This enables more eﬃcient joins (Idreos
et al. 2012) and eﬀective, yet simple data compression
schemes (Abadi, Madden, and Ferreira 2006). However,
these advantages are set oﬀ by the comparatively high cost of
updating column-based data structures (Abadi et al. 2009).
This is a key challenge for using this technology during Datalog materialization, where frequent insertions of large numbers of newly derived inferences need to be processed. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, no materialization approach has yet made use of columnar data structures. Our
main contributions are as follows:

Abstract
The evaluation of Datalog rules over large Knowledge Graphs
(KGs) is essential for many applications. In this paper, we
present a new method of materializing Datalog inferences,
which combines a column-based memory layout with novel
optimization methods that avoid redundant inferences at runtime. The pro-active caching of certain subqueries further increases eﬃciency. Our empirical evaluation shows that this
approach can often match or even surpass the performance of
state-of-the-art systems, especially under restricted resources.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are widely used in industry and
academia to represent large collections of structured knowledge. While many types of graphs are in use, they all
rely on simple, highly-normalized data models that can be
used to uniformly represent information from many diverse
sources. On the Web, the most prominent such format is
RDF (Cyganiak, Wood, and Lanthaler 2014), and large KGs
such as Bio2RDF (Callahan, Cruz-Toledo, and Dumontier
2013), DBpedia (Bizer et al. 2009), Wikidata (Vrandečić
and Krötzsch 2014), and YAGO (Hoﬀart et al. 2013) are
published in this format.
The great potential in KGs is their ability to make connections – in a literal sense – between heterogeneous and
often incomplete data sources. Inferring implicit information from KGs is therefore essential in many applications,
such as ontological reasoning, data integration, and information extraction. The rule-based language Datalog oﬀers a
common foundation for specifying such inferences (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995). While Datalog rules are rather
simple types of if-then rules, their recursive nature is making
them powerful. Many inference tasks can be captured in this
framework, including many types of ontological reasoning
commonly used with RDF. Datalog thus provides an excellent basis for exploiting KGs to the full.
Unfortunately, the implementation of Datalog inferencing on large KGs remains very challenging. The task is
worst-case time-polynomial in the size of the KG, and hence
tractable in principle, but huge KGs are diﬃcult to manage.
A preferred approach is therefore to materialize (i.e., precompute) inferences. Modern DBMS such as Oracle 11g and

• We design novel column-based data structures for inmemory Datalog materialization. Our memory-eﬃcient
design organizes inferences by rule and inference step.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We develop novel optimization techniques that reduce the

258

