Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

The Complexity of LTL on Finite Traces:
Hard and Easy Fragments
Valeria Fionda and Gianluigi Greco
DeMaCS, University of Calabria, Italy
{ﬁonda, ggreco}@mat.unical.it

F are the only available temporal operators) is a PSPACEcomplete problem in general (Sistla and Clarke 1985) and
efforts have been spent over the years in order to come
up with more favorable complexity results, by focusing on
syntactic fragments of LTL (Artale et al. 2013; Bauland
et al. 2009; Chen and Lin 1993; Demri and Schnoebelen
2002; Dixon, Fisher, and Konev 2007; Hemaspaandra 2001;
Markey 2004; Ono and Nakamura 1980; Schobbens and
Raskin 1999). When moving to LTLf formulas, satisﬁability is known to remain PSPACE-complete (De Giacomo
and Vardi 2013) and, of course, the basic NP-hard “lower
bound” (of propositional logic) still holds even in absence of
temporal operators. However, little was known so far about
the complexity for fragments of LTLf , where satisﬁability
might be NP-complete or even tractable.
This paper ﬁlls this gap by providing results that are interesting from the theoretical point of view and that have concrete implications in the design of efﬁcient heuristics and
even exact solution approaches. In more detail, we consider
classes of LTLf formulas deﬁned by syntactic restrictions
on the temporal operators and on the Boolean connectives
being allowed and provide the following contributions:

Abstract
This paper focuses on LTL on ﬁnite traces (LTLf ) for which
satisﬁability is known to be PSPACE-complete. However, little is known about the computational properties of fragments
of LTLf . In this paper we ﬁll this gap and make the following
contributions. First, we identify several LTLf fragments for
which the complexity of satisﬁability drops to NP-complete
or even P, by considering restrictions on the temporal operators and Boolean connectives being allowed. Second, we
study a semantic variant of LTLf , which is of interest in the
domain of business processes, where models have the property that precisely one propositional variable evaluates true at
each time instant. Third, we introduce a reasoner for LTLf
and compare its performance with the state of the art.

Introduction
Linear temporal logic (LTL) is a modal logic in which
modalities are temporal operators relating events happening in different time instants over a linearly ordered timeline. LTL has been introduced in the seventies as a formal tool for verifying the correctness of computer programs and reactive systems and found applications in several
ﬁelds of artiﬁcial intelligence and computer science. LTL
formulas are interpreted over inﬁnite traces (Pnueli 1977;
1981). However, there are certain applications, in particular, related to the speciﬁcation and veriﬁcation of business processes (Pesic, Bosnacki, and van der Aalst 2010;
Pesic, Schonenberg, and van der Aalst 2007; van der Aalst,
Pesic, and Schonenberg 2009), where a more natural choice
is to focus on the LTLf variant where formulas are interpreted over ﬁnite traces (Baier and McIlraith 2006; De Giacomo and Vardi 2013; 2015). Note that there are LTL formulas that admit inﬁnite models but do not have any ﬁnite model (e.g., the formula a∧G(X(a))). Indeed, LTL and
LTLf exhibit subtle different behaviors and known properties for LTL cannot be easily generalized to LTLf (see,
e.g., (De Giacomo et al. 2014; De Giacomo, De Masellis,
and Montali 2014)).
Given an LTLf (resp., LTL) formula ϕ, the most relevant reasoning task is that of deciding whether there is
some ﬁnite (resp., inﬁnite) trace π that satisﬁes ϕ. Deciding the satisﬁability of LTL formulas (even when X, G, and

 We identify those classes for which satisﬁability is always
witnessed by models whose length is linear in the size of
the formula. In particular, a dichotomy result is shown:
Either a class enjoys the linear-length model property, or
it contains satisﬁable formulas for which no model exists
whose length is polynomially bounded.
 We study the problem of model validation, that is checking whether some given trace π is a model of a given LTLf
formula ϕ. We show that this problem can be solved in
polynomial time.
 We perform a systematic study of the complexity of satisﬁability. For each class, satisﬁability emerged to be either
PSPACE-complete, or NP-complete, or even tractable.
Actually, for each of the points listed above, in addition
to focusing on LTLf fragments, we also consider (fragments
of) a variant of LTLf , which we name LTLf,s , whose syntax is the same as LTLf and whose semantics is deﬁned
over simple (ﬁnite) traces, i.e., over ﬁnite traces such that
exactly one propositional variable holds at each time instant. The study of LTLf,s is motivated by the fact that

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

971

