Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Assumed Density Filtering Methods for Learning Bayesian Neural Networks
Soumya Ghosh

Francesco Maria Delle Fave

Jonathan Yedidia

{soumya.ghosh, francesco.dellefave, yedidia}@disneyresearch.com
Disney Research, 222 Third Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

more robust to overﬁtting. Furthermore, standard stochastic gradient descent training using backpropagation requires
a large number of possibly layer-speciﬁc hyperparameters,
such as learning rate and momentum, to be tuned on a per
dataset basis through computationally expensive procedures.
In contrast, a Bayesian view of neural networks makes the
rich literature on probabilistic inference available, allowing
for the design of “parameter free” algorithms.
A variety of probabilistic inference algorithms including
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, variational inference, Laplace approximation, and expectation propagation, have been studied for learning weight distributions in Bayesian neural networks (Neal 1995; Hinton and Van Camp 1993; Graves
2011; MacKay 1992; Jylänki, Nummenmaa, and Vehtari
2014). However, these methods either fail to scale to large
datasets and architectures and/or provide poor posterior estimates. Promising recent work has focused on improving
both scalability and accuracy (Soudry, Hubara, and Meir
2014; Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015; Balan et al.
2015; Blundell et al. 2015). The algorithms developed by
(Balan et al. 2015) and (Blundell et al. 2015) rely on stochastic gradients, either for approximating the posterior through
stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) (Welling
and Teh 2011) or for optimizing the variational free energy. Although these algorithms maintain parameter uncertainty they are plagued by the same hyperparameter selection problems exhibited by classical stochastic gradient descent learning. An orthogonal direction is provided
by (Soudry, Hubara, and Meir 2014; Hernández-Lobato and
Adams 2015), where the authors build upon the online
Bayesian inference algorithm known as assumed density ﬁltering (ADF) (Opper 1998) to develop methods for learning
Bayesian neural networks — expectation backpropagation
(EBP) and probabilistic backpropagation (PBP). These algorithms are scalable, accurate, and parameter-free, and have
been shown to be extremely competitive with standard backpropagation both in terms of generalization error and speed
of training, for regression and classiﬁcation tasks.
Despite these advantages, several factors hamper the use
of PBP and EBP. First, they assume certain tractabilities
which make developing extensions for handling important
practical problems of multiclass classiﬁcation and count
regression problems difﬁcult. Further, PBP as presented
by (Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015) only handles con-

Abstract
Buoyed by the success of deep multilayer neural networks,
there is renewed interest in scalable learning of Bayesian neural networks. Here, we study algorithms that utilize recent advances in Bayesian inference to efﬁciently learn distributions
over network weights. In particular, we focus on recently
proposed assumed density ﬁltering based methods for learning Bayesian neural networks – Expectation and Probabilistic
backpropagation. Apart from scaling to large datasets, these
techniques seamlessly deal with non-differentiable activation
functions and provide parameter (learning rate, momentum)
free learning. In this paper, we ﬁrst rigorously compare the
two algorithms and in the process develop several extensions,
including a version of EBP for continuous regression problems and a PBP variant for binary classiﬁcation. Next, we extend both algorithms to deal with multiclass classiﬁcation and
count regression problems. On a variety of diverse real world
benchmarks, we ﬁnd our extensions to be effective, achieving
results competitive with the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Neural networks employing multilayer architectures are expressive models capable of capturing complex relationships
between input-output pairs. Deep architectures employing
rectiﬁed linear units (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton 2010), when
trained on massive datasets using backpropagation (Rumelhart et al. 1986) based stochastic gradient techniques and
improved regularization schemes like dropout (Srivastava et
al. 2014) and drop-connect (Wan et al. 2013), demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance on a variety of learning tasks
spanning computer vision (Wan et al. 2013; Krizhevsky et al.
2012), natural language processing (Sutskever et al. 2014)
and reinforcement learning (Mnih et al. 2015).
Fostered by these successes, there is renewed interest in
Bayesian neural network models (MacKay 1992) that account for uncertainty in network parameters. These models
are attractive for several reasons. They naturally provide calibrated estimates of prediction uncertainty by propagating
parameter uncertainties into predictions. By retaining distributions over parameters and averaging over them rather
than relying on a single point estimate, they also tend to be
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1589

