Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Shoot to Know What:
An Application of Deep Networks on Mobile Devices
Jiaxiang Wu, Qinghao Hu, Cong Leng, and Jian Cheng
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China, 100190
{jiaxiang.wu, qinghao.hu, cong.leng, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved impressive performance in a wide range of computer vision
areas. However, the application on mobile devices remains
intractable due to the high computation complexity. In this
demo, we propose the Quantized CNN (Q-CNN), an efﬁcient
framework for CNN models, to fulﬁll efﬁcient and accurate
image classiﬁcation on mobile devices. Our Q-CNN framework dramatically accelerates the computation and reduces
the storage/memory consumption, so that mobile devices can
independently run an ImageNet-scale CNN model. Experiments on the ILSVRC-12 dataset demonstrate 4 ∼ 6× speedup and 15 ∼ 20× compression, with merely one percentage drop in the classiﬁcation accuracy. Based on the Q-CNN
framework, even mobile devices can accurately classify images within one second.

Figure 1: Our demo system allows the user to accurately
classify arbitrary photos captured by the camera with a convolutional neural network.

Introduction
To verify the effectiveness of our Q-CNN framework, we
evaluate its classiﬁcation performance on the ILSVRC-12
benchmark (Russakovsky et al. 2015), based on AlexNet
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), CNN-S (Chatﬁeld et al. 2014), and VGG-16 (Simonyan and Zisserman
2015). For all three networks, our approach offers 4 ∼ 6×
speed-up and 15 ∼ 20× compression, at a cost of less than
1% drop in the top-5 classiﬁcation accuracy.
We develop an Android application to demonstrate the
on-site CNN-based image classiﬁcation on mobile devices,
as depicted in Figure 1. To the best of our knowledge, this
should be the very ﬁrst attempt to deploy an ImageNetscale network on mobile devices. With the efﬁcient Q-CNN
framework, image classiﬁcation with AlexNet on a common
smartphone only takes 0.95s and the storage/memory consumption is merely 13MB/75MB.

In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
become the state-of-the-art methods in various computer vision tasks, especially large-scale image classiﬁcation. From
AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) to VGG16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015), the classiﬁcation accuracy consistently improves as the network grows deeper.
Nevertheless, the model complexity also increases correspondingly. Even as a relatively small convolutional network, AlexNet involves 60 million parameters and over 729
million FLOPs1 are required to classify a single image. Such
costly computation complexity makes the deployment of
CNN models unaffordable for common PCs and mobile devices. Hence, it is urgent to develop acceleration and compression techniques for CNN models.
In this demo, we adopt an efﬁcient framework, namely
Quantized CNN (Q-CNN), to realize fast and accurate onsite image classiﬁcation on mobile platforms. It is often
difﬁcult, if not impossible, to run a CNN model on mobile devices, due to the limited computation ability, storage,
and memory space. However, with our proposed Q-CNN
framework, the required computation resource of convolutional networks can be dramatically reduced, with only minor degradation in the classiﬁcation accuracy.

System Framework
In our demo system, the user can arbitrarily take a photo (or
load an existing photo) with the smartphone, and then recognize objects within the photo using convolutional networks.
In Figure 2, we depict the workﬂow of our image classiﬁcation, which mainly involves two procedures: pre-processing,
and image classiﬁcation with the Q-CNN framework.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4399

FLOPs: number of FLoating-point OPerations.

