Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning with Marginalized Corrupted Features and Labels Together
Yingming Li† , Ming Yang‡ , Zenglin Xu† , and Zhongfei (Mark) Zhang‡
†

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Big Data Research Center
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
‡
Department of Computer Science, State University of New York at Binghamton, NY, USA
yingming.li01@gmail.com, myang@binghamton.edu,
zenglin@gmail.com, zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu
For the problem of limited training data, a simple approach is to extend the training set explicitly with artiﬁcially
created examples (Burges and Schölkopf 1996). However, it
lacks elegance and the computational cost of processing the
extra corrupted examples is prohibitively expensive for most
real-world applications. Many algorithms have been developed to consider implicit approaches to tagging objects that
are subject to corruptions. (Bishop 1994) shows that training
with attribute noise is equivalent to adding a regularization
term to the error function. (Globerson and Roweis 2006) introduces a minimax framework under a worst case scenario
of feature deletion at test time. (van der Maaten et al. 2013)
learns invariant predictors with marginalized corrupted features (MCF), which aims to minimize the expected value
of the reconstruction error under the corrupting distribution.
MCF enjoys the property of scaling linearly in the number
of training samples while ignoring the inﬂuence of the incomplete training label set.
On the other hand, recent studies, for example (Chen,
Zheng, and Weinberger 2013), consider training with label
noise to mitigate the inﬂuence of incomplete training label
set. It assumes that the given label set is incomplete and
proposes a co-regularized learning method to enrich the incomplete user tags. The resulting algorithm signiﬁcantly improves over the prior state-of-the-art in reducing training and
testing time. However, it still suffers from learning with limited training examples, which makes it difﬁcult to develop
robust predictors that generalize well to test data.
To improve the generalization performance of tagging, it
is necessary to consider both attribute noise and label noise.
To achieve this goal, we propose to train robust predictors
with attribute noise and label noise simultaneously. In particular, we present the Regularized Marginalized Cross-View
learning (referred as RMCV) model, which learns predictors
with marginalized corrupted features and labels together.
Conceptually, this is equivalent to training the model with
inﬁnitely many (corrupted) training examples under attribute
noise and label noise together. On the one hand, RMCV extends the general cross-view learning with marginalized corrupted features by corrupting training examples with noise
from known distributions within the exponential family; on
the other hand, it exploits label noise to enrich the incomplete training label set through a marginalized denoising
autoencoder regularization. In addition, it also leads to an

Abstract
Tagging has become increasingly important in many
real-world applications noticeably including web applications, such as web blogs and resource sharing systems. Despite this importance, tagging methods often
face difﬁcult challenges such as limited training samples and incomplete labels, which usually lead to degenerated performance on tag prediction. To improve
the generalization performance, in this paper, we propose Regularized Marginalized Cross-View learning
(RMCV) by jointly modeling on attribute noise and
label noise. In more details, the proposed model constructs inﬁnite training examples with attribute noises
from known exponential-family distributions and exploits label noise via marginalized denoising autoencoder. Therefore, the model beneﬁts from its robustness
and alleviates the problem of tag sparsity. While RMCV
is a general method for learning tagging, in the evaluations we focus on the speciﬁc application of multi-label
text tagging. Extensive evaluations on three benchmark
data sets demonstrate that RMCV outstands with a superior performance in comparison with state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
Tagging has attracted a great attention in many real-world
applications noticeably including web applications such as
web blogs and resource sharing systems. It aims at improving the information organization and management by assigning textual descriptions or key-words (called tags) to information object. With typically explosive amount of data
to be tagged, it is very time-consuming and labor-intensive
for manually labeling data. Consequently, machine learning
techniques for tagging have become an effective alternative.
In order to reduce the manual effort, many fast tagging methods (Elisseeff and Weston 2001; Yu, Yu, and Tresp 2005;
Liu, Jin, and Yang 2006; Zhang and Zhou 2007; Hsu et al.
2009; Zhang and Zhou 2014; Liu and Tsang 2015) have been
developed. But most of these studies assume that the amount
of training data is sufﬁcient and the given training labels are
complete. In contrast, the real-world applications of tagging
often face two challenges: limited training examples and incomplete labels.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1251

