Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Strategic Behaviour when Allocating Indivisible Goods
Toby Walsh
UNSW and Data61 (formerly NICTA)
Sydney, Australia
toby.walsh@nicta.com.au

With voting, reasoning about uncertainty is closely related to manipulation (Konczak and Lang 2005; Walsh 2007;
Pini et al. 2008; Walsh 2008). The same is true for allocation. For instance, if an outcome is possible given uncertainty in an agent’s preferences over the items, then this
agent can manipulate the allocation to ensure the given outcome. Questions about possible or necessary outcomes thus
relate to questions about manipulation. How do we efﬁciently compute what items an agent can possibly be allocated? What items does an agent necessarily receive? In this
paper, I survey recent work in this area and identify some interesting open challenges that remain. We focus on resource
allocation where money is not exchanged and fairness properties are important. If money is involved and efﬁciency is of
concern, there is a large and relevant literature on auctions.

Abstract
We survey some recent research regarding strategic behaviour
in resource allocation problems, focusing on the fair division
of indivisible goods. We consider a number of computational
questions like how a single strategic agent misreports their
preferences to ensure a particular outcome, and how agents
compute a Nash equilibrium when they all act strategically.
We also identify a number of future directions like dealing
with non-additive utilities, and partial or probabilistic information about the preferences of other agents.

Introduction
Resource allocation is a perennial problem facing society.
Economical, environmental and political pressures are forcing us to try to do more with fewer resources and to do so
more fairly. One important and challenging case is the fair
division of indivisible goods. This captures a wide range of
problems including allocating workers to shifts, houses to
people, classes to students, landing slots to airlines, players
to teams, leads to salespeople, and time slots on expensive
scientiﬁc instruments to scientists.
Unfortunately, many mechanisms for allocating indivisible goods are manipulable in theory, and are manipulated
in practice (see, for example, (Budish and Cantillon 2012)).
Such manipulation can cause signiﬁcant welfare loss as well
as unfairness in the outcome. Recently, attention has turned
to how precisely agents might compute such strategic behaviour. What if it is just too computationally difﬁcult to
compute a manipulation (Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick 1989;
Bartholdi and Orlin 1991)? If manipulation is hard to compute, perhaps agents might simply behave sincerely? Manipulation has been shown to be computationally hard to
compute in many voting situations, e.g. (Davies et al. 2011;
Narodytska, Walsh, and Xia 2011; Davies, Narodytska, and
Walsh 2012; Narodytska, Walsh, and Xia 2012; Davies et
al. 2014)). Also, it may not be just the agents being allocated the goods that can behave strategically. As with voting
(Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick 1992), can the chair also manipulate the outcome? For example, what if they can remove or
add items? Or adjust the allocation mechanism? If so, how
do they compute the best strategic behaviour?

An example
Suppose you are named as one of two captains and are picking a football team. You and the other captain take turns to
pick players. This is a fair division problem over indivisible
goods. Now suppose your ﬁrst choice is Bob, the top goal
scorer all year. But you know the other captain has fallen
out with Bob, and so he’ll choose Carol ﬁrst as she is the
best goal keeper by far. You win the toss so get to make
the ﬁrst pick. You strategically pick Carol, even though she
isn’t your ﬁrst choice. You know that the other captain will
leave Bob sitting on the bench so you can still pick him in
a later round. The net result is that you get a stronger team,
both the best goal scorer and the best goal keeper. If you had
been forced to pick players sincerely, you would have only
got the best goal scorer. Of course, the other captain may
also behave strategically, not picking players you will leave
on the bench till the end of the allocaton. But how do you
(and the other captain) compute your optimal strategy? By
the end of reading this paper, you will know a simple, linear
time method to do so.

Formal background
We suppose that there are n agents being allocated m items.
For simplicity, we suppose m is an integer multiple of n and
add dummy items of no utility to achieve this. An allocation
is an assignment of items to agents. A special case is house
allocation, when n = m and each agent gets exactly one

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4177

