Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Emergence of Social Punishment and Cooperation
through Prior Commitments
The Anh Han
School of Computing and Digital Futures Institute
Teesside University, UK

virtual online agent societies (Savarimuthu et al. 2009) and
e-marketplace (Michalak et al. 2009), in order to enhance
cooperative behavior and norms compliance, e.g. by both
customers and sellers (Michalak et al. 2009).
Given the abundance of the social punishment behavior
(i.e. punishment targeting at wrongdoers or defectors), the
puzzle is, how this behavior could evolve as it is costly to
punish others, hence unlikely to evolve unless it results in direct or indirect beneﬁts. Various studies have argued that this
kind of punishment can evolve if it is cost-effective, i.e. the
punished agent suffers a sufﬁciently higher cost compared
to that of the punisher (Sigmund, Hauert, and Nowak 2001;
Boyd et al. 2003; Sigmund et al. 2010). However, it appears that this argument is only valid if antisocial punishment (i.e. defectors punish cooperators) is not allowed or
unavailable, as shown in recent work (Rand et al. 2010;
Rand and Nowak 2011). In fact, as deﬁned, an antisocial
punisher can take advantage of the cost-efﬁciency effect of
punishment even after its wrongdoing, by punishing any cooperative co-player. As such, antisocial punishment reduces
even further the chance that cooperation can survive. Moreover, empirical studies show that antisocial punishment does
exist across cultures, see e.g. (Herrmann, Thöni, and Gächter
2008). Thus, a more subtle question arises: whether and how
social punishment could evolve in different societies under
the presence of antisocial behaviors?
A major approach to addressing this query has been based
on reputation (for a review, see (Raihani and Bshary 2015)).
The key idea is, if agents’ actions are assumed or made publicly available, social punishers can gain indirect beneﬁts
through maintaining a good reputation of punishing wrongdoers and unjust behavior (Hilbe and Traulsen 2012) (more
discussion on this in Related Work).
In this paper, we propose and analyze a novel approach to
resolving this antisocial behavior issue, without relying on
reputation and the assumption that agents’ actions are nonanonymous, which is not realistic in many contexts or application domains (Nowak 2006), e.g. in populations or systems with a large number of agents, or when activities observation is not easy. We use methods from evolutionary game
theory (Hofbauer and Sigmund 1998; Sigmund 2010) (see
Models and Methods section) to show that antisocial punishment can be signiﬁcantly restrained by relying on prior
commitments (Nesse 2001; Han et al. 2013; Han, Pereira,

Abstract
Social punishment, whereby cooperators punish defectors, has been suggested as an important mechanism
that promotes the emergence of cooperation or maintenance of social norms in the context of the one-shot
(i.e. non-repeated) interaction. However, whenever antisocial punishment, whereby defectors punish cooperators, is available, this antisocial behavior outperforms
social punishment, leading to the destruction of cooperation. In this paper, we use evolutionary game theory to show that this antisocial behavior can be efﬁciently restrained by relying on prior commitments,
wherein agents can arrange, prior to an interaction,
agreements regarding posterior compensation by those
who dishonor the agreements. We show that, although
the commitment mechanism by itself can guarantee a
notable level of cooperation, a signiﬁcantly higher level
is achieved when both mechanisms, those of proposing prior commitments and of punishment, are available
in co-presence. Interestingly, social punishment prevails
and dominates in this system as it can take advantage of
the commitment mechanism to cope with antisocial behaviors. That is, establishment of a commitment system
helps to pave the way for the evolution of social punishment and abundant cooperation, even in the presence of
antisocial punishment.

Introduction
Punishment has been suggested as one of the most important instruments or mechanisms for enforcing cooperation
and compliance of social norms in various societies (Fehr
and Gachter 2002; Herrmann, Thöni, and Gächter 2008;
Powers, Taylor, and Bryson 2012; Airiau, Sen, and Villatoro
2014; Sigmund, Hauert, and Nowak 2001; Boyd et al. 2003;
Sigmund et al. 2010). Numerous empirical studies show
that human subjects are eager to incur a cost to punish unjust behaviors and violation of social norms (Fehr
and Gachter 2002; Herrmann, Thöni, and Gächter 2008;
De Quervain et al. 2004). While sanctioning systems have
been widely implemented in modern societies for law enforcement, many social norms are still enforced through private sanctions (Fehr and Gachter 2002). Punishment has also
been implemented in several computerized systems such as
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2494

