Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deep Learning for Algorithm Portfolios
Andrea Loreggia

Yuri Malitsky

University of Padova
IBM Research, NY, USA
andrea.loreggia@gmail.com

IBM Research, NY, USA
yuri.malitsky@gmail.com

Horst Samulowitz

Vijay Saraswat

IBM Research, NY, USA
samulowitz@us.ibm.com

IBM Research, NY, USA
vijay@saraswat.org
new solvers is imperative and the only way to drive research
forward, but it is clear that rather than being general purpose Jack-of-all-Trades programs, these new solvers need to
be highly specialized for only a small subset of problems. It
is then the job of algorithm selection techniques to identify
when each of the solvers should be used.
Yet while there is now a plethora of competing algorithm
selection approaches (Kotthoff 2014), all of them are fundamentally dependent on the quality of a set of structural
features they use to distinguish amongst the instances. If the
features are too noisy or uninformative, no selection technique will be able to make intelligent decisions. Over the
years, each domain has deﬁned and reﬁned its own set of
features, yet at their core they are mostly a collection of everything that was considered useful in the past. It is typically
the job of ﬁltering techniques to identify the most representative feature set for each selection technique for a particular
set of solvers. In recent years, there have been a few attempts
to augment this shotgun generation of features through the
use of a systematic analysis of the latent features based on
solver performances (Malitsky and O’Sullivan 2014), but in
practice such approaches take a considerable amount of expertise to generate.
The focus of this paper is therefore to eliminate the human element from the feature generation process by using
a deep learning approach. The paper notes that for a majority of domains, the speciﬁcs of any problem instance is
typically expressed as a text document. For example, a SAT
problem is typically represented in the DIMACS CNF format (Trick et al. 1993) where after a header, each line in
the ﬁle describes the literals in each clause. Similarly, CSP
problems can be represented in the XCSP format (Roussel
and Lecoutre 2009) while MIPs can be represented in LP
or MPS formats (ILOG 2006). Regardless of the format, the
problem instances are represented in a text ﬁle. This paper,
therefore presents a way to automatically convert any such
text ﬁle into a grayscale square image, which can in turn be
used to train a deep neural network to predict the best solver
for the instance.
The proposed technique was applied across multiple
datasets in SAT and CSP domains. We ﬁrst benchmark the
datasets by showing the performance of a state-of-the-art al-

Abstract
It is well established that in many scenarios there is no single
solver that will provide optimal performance across a wide
range of problem instances. Taking advantage of this observation, research into algorithm selection is designed to help
identify the best approach for each problem at hand. This segregation is usually based on carefully constructed features,
designed to quickly present the overall structure of the instance as a constant size numeric vector. Based on these features, a plethora of machine learning techniques can be utilized to predict the appropriate solver to execute, leading
to signiﬁcant improvements over relying solely on any one
solver. However, being manually constructed, the creation of
good features is an arduous task requiring a great deal of
knowledge of the problem domain of interest. To alleviate
this costly yet crucial step, this paper presents an automated
methodology for producing an informative set of features utilizing a deep neural network. We show that the presented approach completely automates the algorithm selection pipeline
and is able to achieve signiﬁcantly better performance than a
single best solver across multiple problem domains.

Introduction
Over the last decade, it has become an accepted fact that
there is often no single approach that will dominate across
a wide range of problem instances. Techniques like algorithm conﬁguration (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011;
Ansótegui, Sellmann, and Tierney 2009; Fitzgerald, Malitsky, and O’Sullivan 2015) can certainly improve the average performance of any parameterized solver for a particular
dataset, such improvements are typically achieved by sacriﬁcing some performance on a subset of instances. Therefore,
if instead there are a number of highly specialized solvers
available, techniques like algorithm selection are designed to
automatically determine the most appropriate approach for
any newly presented instance (Rice 1976). When applied to
competitions in domains like SAT (Le Berre, Roussel, and
Simon 2014), MaxSAT (Argelich et al. 2014), and CSP (van
Dongen et al. 2009), it is commonly observed that a portfolio properly utilizing solvers from one or even two years ago
can readily dominate over any new single solver. Developing
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1280

