Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

DECT: Distributed Evolving Context Tree for
Understanding User Behavior Pattern Evolution
Xiaokui Shu

Nikolay Laptev

Danfeng (Daphne) Yao

Virginia Tech
Department of Computer Science
Blacksburg, VA USA
subx@cs.vt.edu

Yahoo! Labs
701 First Avenue
Sunnyvale, CA USA
nlaptev@yahoo-inc.com

Virginia Tech
Department of Computer Science
Blacksburg, VA USA
danfeng@cs.vt.edu

The above assumption, however, does not hold in the
real world. New products are releasing; UI of existing web
sites/pages are changing; cyber attacks occur; breaking news
happen. The Internet is evolving, and the observed Internet
user behavior patterns should reﬂect the changes.
This demo will introduce DECT (distributed evolving
context tree), a time-variant model for efﬁciently describing Internet user behavior patterns and their changes through
time. The input to DECT is a set of user sessions, each of
which is a sequence of sites a user visited. DECT constructs
the user behavior model and yields time-series based on historical visiting paths. Visiting prediction can be performed
at any speciﬁc time given the session the user initialized.
DECT is a time-variant variable-order Markov model. It
improves the state of the art variable-order Markov models
by releasing its assumption of static time-invariant user behavior patterns. DECT is designed to handle large volumes
of user session data and can be efﬁciently constructed via
distributed computing.
Time-variant variable analysis, e.g., visit counts of services, has been widely used in industry to detect anomalies (Laptev, Hyndman, and Wang 2015; Laptev, Amizadeh,
and Flint 2015) like attacks, failures, and bugs. However,
these commonly used variables are stateless or only ﬁrstorder with respect to Markov models.
In contrast, DECT enables higher-order time-variant visiting path analysis. DECT yields both regular time series of
individual path probabilities and high-dimensional time series for a set of related paths, e.g., paths that share the same
preﬁx. We demonstrate that DECT distinguishes ad click
probability variations based on historical web pages/sites a
user visits, while existing low-order modeling is blind to different types of users who come from diverse paths.

Abstract
Internet user behavior models characterize user browsing dynamics or the transitions among web pages. The models help
Internet companies improve their services by accurately targeting customers and providing them the information they
want. For instance, speciﬁc web pages can be customized
and prefetched for individuals based on sequences of web
pages they have visited. Existing user behavior models abstracted as time-homogeneous Markov models cannot efﬁciently model user behavior variation through time. This
demo presents DECT, a scalable time-variant variable-order
Markov model. DECT digests terabytes of user session data
and yields user behavior patterns through time. We realize
DECT using Apache Spark and deploy it on top of Yahoo!
infrastructure. We demonstrate the beneﬁts of DECT with
anomaly detection and ad click rate prediction applications.
DECT enables the detection of higher-order path anomalies
and provides deep insights into ad click rates with respect to
user visiting paths.

Introduction
Understanding Internet user behavior is the key to the optimization of Internet information feeding systems. A web
page can be prepared/prefetched for a user if the service
provider knows the user will visit the page in the short future. Links/ads on a web page can be customized if the service provider understands which links/ads the user is likely
to click (Sarukkai 2000). Search engines can be designed to
ﬁt human browsing dynamics (Page et al. 1999).
Markov model (ﬁrst-order, time-homogeneous) is
commonly adopted for Internet user behavior modeling (Chierichetti et al. 2012). It is, however, amnesiac;
the next visit probability is solely based on the current
user status. Higher-order Markov models cure the amnesia
issue by digesting historical visiting sites of users (Pirolli
and Pitkow 1999). Variable-order Markov models improve
higher-order Markov models by pruning away unnecessarily
higher-order paths for space saving purposes.
While the community has developed a string of advanced
Markov models to describe Internet user behavior patterns,
one strong assumption is constantly kept in all existing models: user behavior patterns do not change over time.

DECT
The two major features of DECT are variable-order and
time-variant. The former is realized through a ﬂattened context tree, and the latter is accomplished through a window
sliding process (discussed in our full paper).
A ﬂattened context tree TF only has a depth of two:
depth 0: root, and depth 1: all data nodes. Each depth1 node np̄ corresponds to a visiting path p̄ = (c̄, t) =
(s−y , . . . , s−2 , s−1 , s0 , t), which is a string of sites visited
in a user session. A node records a time series of transition

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4395

