Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Angry Birds as a Challenge for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Jochen Renz XiaoYu Ge, Rohan Verma, Peng Zhang
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University
jochen.renz@anu.edu.au

Abstract
The Angry Birds AI Competition1 has been held annually
since 2012 in conjunction with some of the major AI conferences, most recently with IJCAI 2015. The goal of the competition is to build AI agents that can play new Angry Birds
levels as good as or better than the best human players. Successful agents should be able to quickly analyze new levels
and to predict physical consequences of possible actions in
order to select actions that solve a given level with a high
score. Agents have no access to the game internal physics,
but only receive screenshots of the live game.
In this paper we describe why this problem is a challenge for
AI, and why it is an important step towards building AI that
can successfully interact with the real world. We also summarise some highlights of past competitions, including a new
competition track we introduced recently.

1

Figure 1: Angry Birds, Easter Eggs level 8 ( c
Rovio Entertainment). A good shot would hit the three round rocks on
the top right which will trigger the destruction of the left half
of the structure.
Chess that are difﬁcult for humans, but easy for computers
to play. The main difﬁculty of PBSGs like Angry Birds is
related to the problem that the consequences of physical actions are not known in advance without simulating or executing them. This is partly due to the fact that the exact physics
parameters are not available, which makes exact calculations
impossible. But even if they were available, it would be necessary to simulate a potentially inﬁnite number of possible
actions, as every tiny change in release coordinate or tap
time can have a different outcome. Knowing the outcome
of an action is important for selecting a good action, and
particularly for selecting a good sequence of actions.
The capabilities required for accurately estimating consequences of physical actions using only visual input or other
forms of perception are essential for the future of AI. Any
major AI system that will be deployed in the real world and
that physically interacts with the world must be aware of
the consequences of its physical actions and must select its
actions based on potential consequences. This is necessary
for guaranteeing that there won’t be any unintended consequences of its actions, that nothing will get damaged and no
one will get hurt. If this cannot be guaranteed, it is unlikely
society will accept having these AI systems living among
them, as they will be perceived as potentially dangerous and
threatening. Angry Birds and other PBSGs provide a simpliﬁed and controlled environment for developing and testing
these capabilities. It allows AI researchers to integrate methods from different ﬁelds of AI, such as Computer Vision,
Machine Learning, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, Heuristic Search, Reasoning under Uncertainty, and AI
Planning that are required to achieve this.

Introduction

Angry Birds is one of the most popular games of all times. It
has a simple game play and one simple task: destroy all pigs
of a given level by throwing different angry birds at them
using a slingshot (see Figure 1). The pigs are protected by a
structure composed of blocks of different materials with different physical properties such as mass, friction, or density.
The actions a player can perform are spegiﬁed by the release coordinate x, y and the tap time t after release when
the bird’s optional special power is activated. Angry Birds is
an example of the physics-based simulation game (PBSG)
category. The game world in these games simulates Newtonian physics using a game internal physics engine such
as Box2D (http://box2d.org) that knows all physics parameters and spatial conﬁgurations at all times, which makes the
physics of the game play look very realistic.
In the Angry Birds AI Competition (AIBIRDS), the task
is to build AI agents that can play new game levels as good
as or better than human players. AI agents do not have access
to the game internal parameters, they play a live game just
like humans and get all their information about the current
state of the game using computer vision.
This “human way” of playing makes it very hard for computers to play well, particularly compared to games like
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://aibirds.org

4338

