Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Derivative-Free Optimization via Classiﬁcation∗
Yang Yu and Hong Qian and Yi-Qi Hu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{yuy,qianh,huyq}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

a few evolutionary algorithms (Yu, Yao, and Zhou 2012;
Qian, Yu, and Zhou 2015a; 2015b).

Abstract
Many randomized heuristic derivative-free optimization
methods share a framework that iteratively learns a model
for promising search areas and samples solutions from the
model. This paper studies a particular setting of such framework, where the model is implemented by a classiﬁcation
model discriminating good solutions from bad ones. This setting allows a general theoretical characterization, where critical factors to the optimization are discovered. We also prove
that optimization problems with Local Lipschitz continuity
can be solved in polynomial time by proper conﬁgurations of
this framework. Following the critical factors, we propose the
randomized coordinate shrinking classiﬁcation algorithm to
learn the model, forming the R ACOS algorithm, for optimization in continuous and discrete domains. Experiments on the
testing functions as well as on the machine learning tasks including spectral clustering and classiﬁcation with Ramp loss
demonstrate the effectiveness of R ACOS.

Many derivative-free optimization methods are modelbased, i.e., they learn a model from the solutions evaluated in the optimization path, and the model is then used
to guide the sampling of solutions for the next round. For
example, cross-entropy methods may use Gaussian distribution as the model, Bayesian optimization methods employ
Gaussian process to model the joint distribution, and the estimation of distribution algorithms have incorporated many
kinds of learning models.
In this paper we study model-based optimization methods with a particular type of model: classiﬁcation model. A
classiﬁcation model learns to classify solutions into two categories, good or bad. The learned model partitions the solution space into good and bad areas. Then solutions are sampled from the good areas. Employing a classiﬁcation model
is not a new idea, since many different learning models have
been explored (e.g., (Lozano et al. 2006)). However, the theoretical understanding was only roughly touched (Yu and
Qian 2014). Important questions need to be addressed, including which factors of a classiﬁcation model effect the
optimization performance, what problems can be efﬁciently
solved. Towards this direction, this paper makes two contributions:
• We prove a general optimization performance bound of a
classiﬁcation-based optimization framework, which directly
depends on two critical factors of the classiﬁcation models:
the error-target dependence and the shrinking rate. We also
show that problems with Local Lipschitz continuity can be
solved in polynomial time, if the framework is properly conﬁgured.
• Following the critical factors, we design the randomized
coordinate shrinking classiﬁcation algorithm, which learns
to discriminate good and bad solutions while trying to keep
the the error-target dependence and the shrinking rate small.
Employing this algorithm, we propose the R ACOS optimization algorithm for both continuous and discrete domains.
We then conduct experiments comparing R ACOS with some
state-of-the-art derivative-free optimization methods on optimization testing functions and machine learning tasks including spectral clustering and classiﬁcation with Ramp
loss. The experiment results show that R ACOS is superior

Introduction
Sophisticated optimization problems are often encountered
in numerous real-world applications and are in the core
of many ﬁelds. In the realm of optimization, these problems can be formalized as argminx∈X f (x), where X is
the domain. In many optimization tasks, we cannot assume that f has good properties such as linearity, convexity, or even differentiability. Thus derivative-free optimization methods are quite appealing, including genetic algorithms (Golberg 1989), randomized local search (Neumann and Wegener 2007), estimation of distribution algorithms (Larrañaga and Lozano 2002), cross-entropy methods (de Boer et al. 2005), Bayesian optimization methods (Brochu, Cora, and De Freitas 2010), optimistic optimization methods (Munos 2014), etc. However, due to the
extremely large variety of the problems and the heuristics
in the algorithms, most derivative-free optimization algorithms are very weak in their theoretical foundations, only
except the recent development of the optimistic optimization
method (Munos 2011; 2014), Bayesian optimization methods (Bull 2011; de Freitas, Smola, and Zoghi 2012), and
∗

This research was supported by the NSFC (61375061,
61272217, 61223003), Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (201451).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2286

