Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deep Quantization Network for Efﬁcient Image Retrieval∗
Yue Cao, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Han Zhu and Qingfu Wen
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
{caoyue10,zhuhan10,qingfu.wen}@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Many learning to hash methods have been proposed to enable efﬁcient ANN search using Hamming distance (Kulis
and Darrell 2009; Gong and Lazebnik 2011; Norouzi and
Blei 2011; Fleet, Punjani, and Norouzi 2012; Liu et al. 2012;
Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012; Liu et al. 2013; Gong et al.
2013; Yu et al. 2014; Xia et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2014;
Shen et al. 2015; Lai et al. 2015; Erin Liong et al. 2015).
Hash learning can be divided into unsupervised methods and
supervised methods. While unsupervised methods are more
general and can be trained without semantic labels or relevances, they are restricted by the semantic gap dilemma
(Smeulders et al. 2000) that high-level semantic description
of an object often differs from low-level feature descriptors.
Supervised methods can incorporate semantic labels or relevances to mitigate the semantic gap and improve the hashing
quality, i.e. achieve accurate search with fewer bits of codes.
Recently, deep learning to hash methods (Xia et al. 2014;
Lai et al. 2015) have shown that both feature representation
and hash coding can be learned more effectively using deep
neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Lin, Chen, and Yan 2014), which can naturally encode any
nonlinear hashing functions. These deep hashing methods
have created state-of-the-art results on many benchmarks.
However, a crucial disadvantage of these deep learning to
hash methods is that the quantization error is not statistically
minimized and the feature representation is not optimally
compatible with binary hash coding. Note that, not all input
vectors can be quantized effectively using vector quantization (VQ)—if input vectors do not exhibit a cluster structure,
then they may not be quantized accurately (Ge et al. 2014).
Hence it is important to improve the quantizability of the
deep image representations such that they can be quantized
more effectively. Another limitation is that these methods do
not adopt a well-speciﬁed pairwise loss to link the pairwise
distances with the similarity labels, i.e. to classify whether
a data pair is similar or dissimilar (pairwise classiﬁcation)
based on the pairwise distances. Therefore, suboptimal hash
coding may be produced by existing deep hashing methods.
In this paper, we put forward a novel Deep Quantization
Network (DQN) architecture for supervised hashing, which
learns deep image representation compatible for hash coding
and formally controls the quantization error in an optimization framework. The DQN architecture constitutes four key
components: (1) a sub-network with multiple convolution-

Abstract
Hashing has been widely applied to approximate nearest
neighbor search for large-scale multimedia retrieval. Supervised hashing improves the quality of hash coding by exploiting the semantic similarity on data pairs and has received
increasing attention recently. For most existing supervised
hashing methods for image retrieval, an image is ﬁrst represented as a vector of hand-crafted or machine-learned features, then quantized by a separate quantization step that
generates binary codes. However, suboptimal hash coding
may be produced, since the quantization error is not statistically minimized and the feature representation is not optimally compatible with the hash coding. In this paper, we
propose a novel Deep Quantization Network (DQN) architecture for supervised hashing, which learns image representation for hash coding and formally control the quantization
error. The DQN model constitutes four key components:
(1) a sub-network with multiple convolution-pooling layers
to capture deep image representations; (2) a fully connected
bottleneck layer to generate dimension-reduced representation optimal for hash coding; (3) a pairwise cosine loss layer
for similarity-preserving learning; and (4) a product quantization loss for controlling hashing quality and the quantizability
of bottleneck representation. Extensive experiments on standard image retrieval datasets show the proposed DQN model
yields substantial boosts over latest state-of-the-art hashing
methods.

Introduction
While image big data with large volume and high dimension
are pervasive in search engines and social networks, it has
attracted increasing attention to enable approximate nearest
neighbors (ANN) retrieval of images with both computation
efﬁciency and search quality. An advantageous solution is
hashing methods (Wang et al. 2014), which transform highdimensional data into compact binary codes and generate
similar binary codes for similar data items. In this paper, we
focus on learning to hash methods that build data-dependent
hash coding for efﬁcient image retrieval, which have shown
better performance than data-independent hashing methods,
e.g. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Gionis et al. 1999).
∗

Corresponding authors: Mingsheng Long and Jianmin Wang.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3457

