Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

What Happens Next? Event Prediction
Using a Compositional Neural Network Model
Mark Granroth-Wilding and Stephen Clark
{mark.granroth-wilding, stephen.clark}@cl.cam.ac.uk
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK

particular points in the narrative and their effects on the state.
Ensuring coherence in generated sequences of events is crucial (Pérez y Pérez and Sharples 2004). Knowledge representations are typically built by hand for small domains, but
acquiring them automatically from text is a difﬁcult task.
Unsupervised induction in the style of Chambers and Jurafsky (2008) can provide a useful approximation to one part
of this knowledge (McIntyre and Lapata 2009).

Abstract
We address the problem of automatically acquiring knowledge of event sequences from text, with the aim of providing
a predictive model for use in narrative generation systems.
We present a neural network model that simultaneously learns
embeddings for words describing events, a function to compose the embeddings into a representation of the event, and a
coherence function to predict the strength of association between two events.
We introduce a new development of the narrative cloze evaluation task, better suited to a setting where rich information about events is available. We compare models that learn
vector-space representations of the events denoted by verbs in
chains centering on a single protagonist. We ﬁnd that recent
work on learning vector-space embeddings to capture word
meaning can be effectively applied to this task, including
simple incorporation of a verb’s arguments in the representation by vector addition. These representations provide a good
initialization for learning the richer, compositional model of
events with a neural network, vastly outperforming a number
of baselines and competitive alternatives.

Ultimately, we aim to provide tools for broad-domain narrative generation. We consider a component that takes a
context of events/actions concerning a character (the story
so far) and measures the plausibility of possible continuations. This is related to the narrative cloze task (Chambers
and Jurafsky 2008). In particular, we are interested in the
ﬁrst half of the schema extraction pipeline, which addresses
the narrative cloze prediction task, but less in the subsequent
step, which infers generalized script-like schemas.
This paper makes two key contributions. Firstly, we propose a new task, multiple choice narrative cloze (MCNC),
closely related to the narrative cloze task, but better suited
to comparing systems’ usefulness as a component in narrative generation. In MCNC, a system is able to make use of
richer information about events (in both the context and predictions). Secondly, we present a neural network model for
predicting whether or not two events are expected to appear
in the same chain by learning vector representations of event
predicates and argument nouns and a composition function
that builds a dense vector representation of the event.

Introduction
This paper follows a line of work begun by Chambers
and Jurafsky (2008), who introduced a technique for automatically extracting knowledge about typical sequences of
events from text. They observed that coreference resolution, which identiﬁes passages that make repeated mentions
of the same entity, provides a source of information about
where an entity participates in multiple events within a document. They make an assumption that places where an entity is mentioned as the argument to a verb denote events that
the entity is involved in. In this way, they extract chains of
events, each centered on a single entity. They use this data
to infer prototypical narrative chains that are similar to the
classical notion of a script (Schank and Abelson 1977).
A narrative generation system builds the structure of a
story at some level of abstraction, involving sequences of
events, actions and states, and the characters and entities
that participate in them. Planning-based approaches (Turner
1994; Pérez y Pérez and Sharples 2001; Gervás et al. 2005)
require knowledge of actions and events that are possible at

We evaluate a range of systems that induce vector-space
representations of events and use them to make predictions,
comparing the results to the positive pointwise mutual information (PPMI) measure of Chambers and Jurafsky (2008,
henceforth C&J08). We ﬁnd that the vector-learning system of Mikolov et al. (2013a), word2vec, learns useful
representations of events for the MCNC task. We show that
a naive use of the same system to learn representations of
verb arguments yields an improvement in prediction accuracy. We then treat these representations as a starting point
for the more sophisticated neural network model that composes information about an event from a verb and its arguments into a single vector. The composed representation
can be used for measuring the plausibility of possible next
events, vastly outperforming the other models.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2727

