Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Five Dimensions of Reasoning in the Wild
Don Perlis
University of Maryland, College Park MD
perlis@cs.umd.edu

brushed and general, whereas my main point is a technical
suggestion about reasoning informed by meaning, especially meaning concerning experience and action.
One quick example at the outset: The Wason Selection
Task (Wason 1968) shows that human inference is strongly
aided when the details of the task at hand have real meaning that the subjects can relate to in terms of things that
matter to them, helping keep attention on what is relevant;
and this holds even when the task in the abstract is a matter
of so-called pure logic. While this could be seen as a defect
in human reasoning, something computers would never trip
up on, I think it points in the opposite direction: inference
without broader meaning is not worth much, and not worth
being good at.
I will illustrate my main points with a series of examples
based on the activities of proving, planning, and understanding.

Abstract
Reasoning does not work well when done in isolation from
its significance, both to the needs and interests of an agent
and with respect to the wider world. Moreover, those issues
may best be handled with a new sort of data structure that
goes beyond the knowledge base and incorporates aspects of
perceptual knowledge and even more, in which a kind of anticipatory action may be key.

Out of the Ivory Tower
Reasoning is one of the oldest topics in artificial intelligence (AI). And it has made lots of progress, in the form of
commonsense reasoning (CSR), planning, automated theorem-proving, and more. But I suspect it has hit a barrier
that must be surmounted if we are to approach anything
like human-level inference. Here I give evidence for such a
barrier, and ideas about dealing with it, loosely based on
evidence from human behavior.
In rough synopsis, reasoning does not work well when
done in isolation from its broader significance, both for the
needs and interests of an agent and for the wider world.
Moreover, those issues may best be handled with a new
sort of data structure that goes beyond the knowledge base
(KB) and incorporates aspects of perceptual knowledge
and even more, in which a kind of anticipatory action
many be key.
I suspect this has ties with recent calls to “put the Science” back in AI (Levesque 2013, Langley 2012). For
what I am arguing, in some sense, is that reasoning should
be regarded as “in the wild” as events unfold rather than
confined to management of an isolated KB; and that this
speaks to an agent interacting with the world, rather than a
puzzle in abstract inference (yet I will also argue that even
“pure” reasoning as in mathematics hugely benefits from
many connections with the world). And finally, we then
will end up studying the nature of world-embedded cognitive agents, humans included. But this is very broad-

Proving
Mathematicians not only need to stop now and then for
lunch or sleep. Their respite from plowing straight ahead
with lemma upon lemma goes far beyond that. In fact, I
would venture to claim that mathematical reasoning is
much more a matter of assessing where one is, what one
has done, and where one should go next, than it is singleminded carrying out of steps in proofs. Of course, there is
checking of ideas, seeing if a method pans out. But even
that – except in somewhat rare cases of brute computation,
say of an integral – is largely again a matter of looking to
see what step to take next, whether things look as expected,
and so on. And equally important: whether there is evidence of sufficient progress to justify further effort in the
same direction, or perhaps it is time to try something else.
Thus I argue that mathematical prowess tends to involve
large amounts of broad knowledge of connections, and not
so much sequential depth. While the end-product may be
long, it arises from very short pieces built from fairly direct
connections, and stitched together again by similarly direct
(albeit sometimes not widely known) connections.

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4152

