Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Face Behind Makeup
1

Shuyang Wang1

Yun Fu1,2

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
2
College of Computer & Information Science,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
{shuyangwang, yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

(\HEURZ

,QSXW)DFH
ZLWK
0DNHXS

In this work, we propose a novel automatic makeup detector and remover framework. For makeup detector, a localityconstrained low-rank dictionary learning algorithm is used to
determine and locate the usage of cosmetics. For the challenging task of makeup removal, a locality-constrained coupled dictionary learning (LC-CDL) framework is proposed
to synthesize non-makeup face, so that the makeup could be
erased according to the style. Moreover, we build a stepwise
makeup dataset (SMU) which to the best of our knowledge is
the ﬁrst dataset with procedures of makeup. This novel technology itself carries many practical applications, e.g. products recommendation for consumers; user-speciﬁed makeup
tutorial; security applications on makeup face veriﬁcation. Finally, our system is evaluated on three existing (VMU, MIW,
YMU) and one own-collected makeup datasets. Experimental results have demonstrated the effectiveness of DL-based
method on makeup detection. The proposed LC-CDL shows
very promising performance on makeup removal regarding
on the structure similarity. In addition, the comparison of face
veriﬁcation accuracy with presence or absence of makeup is
presented, which illustrates an application of our automatic
makeup remover system in the context of face veriﬁcation
with facial makeup.

0DNHXS
'HWHFWLRQ

(\HODVKHV
(\HVKDGRZ
+LJKOLJKW

0DNHXS
5HPRYH

/LSVWLFN

Figure 1: Framework and examples of our system. It ﬁrst
tells what and where the cosmetics are. Furthermore, the system can remove the detected cosmetics to virtually recover
the original face (right image of each pair).

Introduction

lots of applications, for example, user can then virtually try
on other cosmetics and the performance of face veriﬁcation
with makeup could also be improved. Regarding above system requirements, the most basic and also challenging tasks
are makeup detection and makeup removal. Corresponding
approaches to above two sub-problems will be introduced.
The ﬁrst step of our system is to detect and locate
the makeup region in a face. Different from previous two
makeup detection works (Chen, Dantcheva, and Ross 2013;
Guo, Wen, and Yan 2014), which use SVM and Adaboost as
classiﬁers, our makeup detection method employs localityconstrained low-rank dictionary learning. Since makeup
basically has several speciﬁc styles, learning a localityconstrained dictionary could give different styles of makeup
a better representation.
Some digital makeup clone researches (Guo and Sim
2009; Du and Shu 2013) have been conducted to add virtual
makeup to bare face images. The result seems encouraging
by using image processing techniques like gradient editing

Facial makeup has been ubiquitous in our daily life and social networks. It is quite common for women to wear cosmetics to hide facial ﬂaws and appear to be more attractive.
What information can we learn from face makeup and what
if we can virtually remove the makeup? Take the security application for example, the use of makeup poses a signiﬁcant
challenge to biometric systems. Facial makeup is capable
to alter and hide one’s original appearance, leading to some
more difﬁcult veriﬁcation tasks. Recently, Dantcheva et al.
discussed the negative impact introduced by facial cosmetics
to the face recognition problem (Dantcheva, Chen, and Ross
2012). Therefore, a system for detecting, analysing and even
removing the makeup is eagerly needed.
In this work, we design a system to ﬁrst detect and locate
each makeup region, then further decompose each region of
cosmetics to recover the original face. This function leads to
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

58

