Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Deep Choice Model
Makoto Otsuka

Takayuki Osogami

CREST, JST
4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi,
Saitama 332-0012, Japan
motsuka@ucla.edu

IBM Research - Tokyo
19-21 Hakozaki, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 103-8510, Japan
osogami@jp.ibm.com

recently proposed (Osogami and Otsuka 2014). The RBM
choice model is the only choice model that has been proved
to represent three typical phenomena of human choice (the
similarity effect, the compromise effect, and the attraction
effect) and can learn those phenomena from choice data.
The RBM choice model, however, cannot handle features of
items. In this model, two items are either identical or distinct, and there is no notion of similarity between items.
Conventional choice models, including the standard multinomial logit model (MLM), take into account the features
of items, but there has been no work that deals with natural
stimuli with choice models in the literature.

Abstract
Human choice is complex in two ways. First, human choice
often shows complex dependency on available alternatives.
Second, human choice is often made after examining complex items such as images. The recently proposed choice
model based on the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM
choice model) has been proved to represent three typical phenomena of human choice, which addresses the ﬁrst complexity. We extend the RBM choice model to a deep choice model
(DCM) to deal with the features of items, which are ignored
in the RBM choice model. We then use deep learning to extract latent features from images and plug those latent features as input to the DCM. Our experiments show that the
DCM adequately learns the choice that involves both of the
two complexities in human choice.

Deep learning (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Vincent
et al. 2010; Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009a) extracts distributed representations of features that can be used for additional learning. The performance of classiﬁcation and regression is greatly improved using deep learning in various
ﬁelds including image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012) and audio classiﬁcation (Lee et al. 2009).
To date, deep learning has not been applied to choice models, and it is non-trivial how deep learning should be applied,
particularly to the RBM choice model, in a way that represents the typical phenomena of human choice.

Introduction
The models of choice have been extensively studied in artiﬁcial intelligence (Faradani, Hartmann, and Ipeirotis 2011;
Pfeiffer et al. 2012; Zhen et al. 2015) and other areas (Farias,
Jagabathula, and Shah 2013). The research has revealed that
people show rather irrational but systematic bias in their
choices, and our choices are inﬂuenced by available alternatives in a complex manner (Rieskamp, Busemeyer, and
Mellers 2006). For example, the probability of choosing an
item, A, can be increased by adding an item, D, into the
choice set, when D is inferior to A in all aspects under
consideration (i.e., D acts as a decoy). This phenomenon is
known as the attraction effect (Rieskamp, Busemeyer, and
Mellers 2006). In addition, we make choices after examining
complex information. For example, we often choose or purchase items after looking at photos or reading textual information about products. However, these natural stimuli have
not been the scope of research on choice due to the difﬁculty
of handling their high-dimensional features. In fact, it has
been conﬁrmed in psychological experiments that phenomena such as the attraction effect appear when people make
choices from images of human faces (Ariely 2010).
Existing choice models either cannot represent some of
the biases in human choice or cannot effectively handle
natural stimuli. A choice model using a restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM), called an RBM choice model, was

We propose a deep choice model (DCM) by extending the
RBM choice model to incorporate features extracted through
deep learning, which is the ﬁrst contribution of this paper.
We show that the DCM generalizes the RBM choice model,
so that the DCM is guaranteed to represent all of the typical choice phenomena in the sense of Osogami and Otsuka
(2014) when it corresponds to the RBM choice model. We
will also see that the DCM generalizes the MLM in such a
way that it represents the typical choice phenomena. In addition, the DCM can be trained by following the exact loglikelihood gradient without approximation.
We validate the effectiveness of the DCM with experiments that capture the essence of human choice from a set
of natural stimuli, which constitute our second contribution. Speciﬁcally, our choice set consists of images, and the
choice exhibits the attraction effect. Our experiments show
that we can train the DCM in such a way that the trained
DCM can adequately predict the choice probabilities for unseen images or unseen combinations of images.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

850

