Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting Spatio–Temporal Propagation of Seasonal Inﬂuenza
Using Variational Gaussian Process Regression
Ransalu Senanayake,1,2 Simon O’Callaghan,2 and Fabio Ramos1,2
1

School of Information Technologies, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
National ICT Australia (NICTA)

Inﬂuenza Prediction

Abstract

In most studies, modeling inﬂuenza or inﬂuenza-like illnesses (ILI) has been considered as a time series problem. Therefore, autoregressive models have been the popular
choice of many researchers (Dugas et al. 2013) (Viboud et
al. 2003). While many studies model seasonal effects, Wang
et al. (2015) have focused on improving the short-term prediction accuracy. Similarly, variations of particle ﬁlters and
ensemble ﬁlters have been used to predict inﬂuenza activity. Yang et al. (2014) compared six state-of-the-art ﬁlters
and concluded that their results are comparable. Additionally, ensemble of other simple regressions such as matrix
factorized based regression, nearest neighbor based regression, etc. (Chakraborty et al. 2014) have been tested . Although these autoregressive, ﬁlter-based and ensemble models are convenient to use, they ignore the disease’s strong
geographical dependencies. Crucially, they do not provide
an uncertainty measure about the prediction which prohibits
any risk-based decision-making process.
Although attempts to map retrospective spatio-temporal
effects of inﬂuenza and other diseases are not rare, correlating space and time is not widely studied. A hierarchical
Bayesian parametric model has been proposed for modeling the spatio-temporal interaction of generic disease mapping (Waller et al. 1997) however it lacks the ability to forecast future outbreaks. Unlike inﬂuenza whose case count in
a given place can suddenly increase or decrease, lung cancer data that they have used in experiments are smooth in
both space and time. Moreover, Markov chain Monte Carlo
(McMC) calculations in their solution ultimately limits the
maximum size of the dataset that can be considered.

Understanding and predicting how inﬂuenza propagates is
vital to reduce its impact. In this paper we develop a nonparametric model based on Gaussian process (GP) regression to capture the complex spatial and temporal dependencies present in the data. A stochastic variational inference approach was adopted to address scalability. Rather than modeling the problem as a time-series as in many studies, we capture the space-time dependencies by combining different kernels. A kernel averaging technique which converts spatiallydiffused point processes to an area process is proposed to
model geographical distribution. Additionally, to accurately
model the variable behavior of the time-series, the GP kernel
is further modiﬁed to account for non-stationarity and seasonality. Experimental results on two datasets of state-wide
US weekly ﬂu-counts consisting of 19,698 and 89,474 data
points, ranging over several years, illustrate the robustness of
the model as a tool for further epidemiological investigations.

Introduction
Inﬂuenza is an infectious disease caused by a virus whose
activity is typically peaked during winter. Inﬂuenza is responsible for more than 2% of all deaths in the US which
is the highest mortality due to any infectious disease (CDC
). Moreover, deaths can be in the order of millions during
a pandemic: 0.4 million deaths during 2009 swine ﬂu, 1
million during 1968 Hong Kong ﬂu, 2 million during 1959
Asian ﬂu and 40–50 million during 1918 Spanish ﬂu (WHO
2005).
Annihilating all sources of virus (types A, B and C) are
impossible. Although vaccines can be designed to abate the
overrun of inﬂuenza virus, they cannot be used over consecutive years as inﬂuenza virus change its biological form
frequently due to its high mutation rate. Additionally, modiﬁcation and manufacturing of vaccines on a large scale takes
time. A plausible solution to reduce the annual death rate
and to prevent transforming a seasonal epidemic to a pandemic is to subside transmission. Consequently, envisaging
how the virus spreads across geographical areas with time,
i.e. spatio-temporal dynamics, is vital.

Bayesian Nonparametric Models
For any dataset, it is less desirable to utilize a parametric
model unless all of its dependencies are known. Although
few studies show the correlation between inﬂuenza and external factors (Charland et al. 2009) (Viboud et al. 2006),
all major factors that affect inﬂuenza activity remain elusive. This is mainly due to the complexity of the problem,
amount of data and the number of plausible factors. As a
result, this eventually becomes a big data analytics problem (Chakraborty et al. 2014) (Davidson, Haim, and Radin
2015) with unknown dependencies and hence many aforementioned parametric methods are less useful.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3901

