Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Jikan to Kukan: A Hands-On Musical Experience in AI, Games and Art
(Demonstration)
Georgia Rossmann Martins1∗ , Mário Escarce Junior1∗ , Leandro Soriano Marcolino2
1

Phersu Interactive, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
{georgia,mario}@phersu.com.br
2
Computer Science Department, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
sorianom@usc.edu
We present Jikan to Kukan, an artistic game that we are
currently developing to explore these ideas. Instead of the traditional view of interacting in a world while some pre-deﬁned
music plays in the background, the player dynamically generates the music of the game in an online manner, while playing
the game. She experiences this while exploring the unconscious world of a character, hence differing from systems
where the objective of the user is to generate music; as in
our case the generation is a “side-effect”. In this demonstration, we allow the conference participants to play “Jikan to
Kukan”, and have their own unique musical experience.

Abstract
AI is typically applied in video games in the creation
of artiﬁcial opponents, in order to make them strong,
realistic or even fallible (for the game to be “enjoyable”
by human players). We offer a different perspective: we
present the concept of “Art Games”, a view that opens up
many possibilities for AI research and applications. Conference participants will play Jikan to Kukan, an art game
where the player dynamically creates the soundtrack with
the AI system, while developing her experience in the
unconscious world of a character.

Introduction

Art Games

The main effort in the game industry has been in the optimization of graphical resources, to ensure realistic images.
This strive for a realistic representation also affected the
way agents are designed, mostly focused on behaviors that
simulate realistic human actions (Scott 2002). Additionally,
another important area of focus is developing agents that
play with moderate strengths, increasing the “enjoyment” of
human players (Lidén 2004). Traditional AI research, on the
other hand, is mostly focused on the creation of strong artiﬁcial players, motivated by a desire to overcome the best
human players (Newborn 2011). Meanwhile, a trend is emerging on the application of AI for the generation of music. Instead of creating fully autonomous systems (Eigenfeldt and
Pasquier 2013), however, many researchers are ﬁnding more
valuable to create AI systems where humans and algorithms
cooperate in the music generation process (d’Inverno and McCormack 2015). This AI and arts development is happening
apart of the main electronic games development efforts.
Games, however, are actually also an artistic expression.
Recent titles are breaking common paradigms, and are showing that games can be a way to obtain unique (even provocative) experiences and feelings. Similarly to contemporary
paintings and novels, the main focus of games does not have
to be just “fun” and “enjoyment”. This new view, however,
calls for new ways to apply traditional AI techniques, and
also the development of new AI approaches that go beyond
merely programming strong/realistic/fun agents.

The focus of Art Games is on the innovation, on breaking
paradigms and on creating unique experiences, motivated by
artistic movements. Often their visual is aesthetically beautiful, and not necessarily realistic. The way the player interacts
with the game (i.e., the game mechanics) is generally complex, or at least different than the usual forms. Moreover,
instead of a ﬁxed script, they borrow characteristics from contemporary literature, and present stories that are non-linear
and often open to a variety of interpretations. Hence, well
accepted notions such as the necessity of a well-deﬁned set of
rules, continuous challenge proposals and conditions for victory/defeat are transformed into non-essential features. The
main objective of Art Games turns exclusively into producing
extraordinary and surreal experiences.
In particular, instead of the traditional view of AI as being
a tool for the development of non-player characters (NPCs),
Art Games open the possibilities for AI to be applied, instead,
to enrich the expressiveness of the games. Hence, AI can
take control, for example, on how the music is performed,
how the levels are generated, which visual effects are used,
and how the story unfolds in an open an non-traditional way.
Moreover, since games are interactive by nature, we do not
need AI systems that autonomously generate art. In fact, we
envision systems where the art emerges in the continuous
interaction between the player and the game; where each
player has her own and unique experience as algorithms act
in a supportive role for the creative process.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Georgia Rossmann Martins and Mário Escarce Junior are
both ﬁrst authors of this paper.

In order to explore the potential of games as a collaborative
AI system, we are developing Jikan to Kukan. In our game,

Jikan to Kukan

4377

