Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Topic Models to Infer Socio-Economic Maps
Lingzi Hong

Enrique Frias-Martinez

Vanessa Frias-Martinez

College of Information Studies
University of Maryland
lzhong@umd.edu

Telefonica Research
Madrid, Spain
enrique.friasmartinez@telefonica.com

College of Information Studies
University of Maryland
vfrias@umd.edu

On the other hand, the ubiquitous presence of cell phones
worldwide is generating datasets of spatio-temporal data
across large groups of individuals. As previous research
has shown, cell phone data can offer a detailed picture of
how humans move and interact with each other (Becker
et al. 2013). Recent results found that cell phone-based
behavioral patterns might be correlated to speciﬁc socioeconomic characteristics (Eagle, Macy, and Claxton 2010;
Soto et al. 2011; Frias-Martinez et al. 2013). For example, higher socio-economic levels have been associated to
stronger social networks or longer distances traveled (Blumenstock and Eagle 2010). Furthermore, previous work has
shown that regional socio-economic levels can be inferred
from cell phone-based behavioral features with acceptable
accuracies using various regression and classiﬁcation techniques over a set of behavioral features (Frias-Martinez et
al. 2012). Framing the problem as a supervised learning setting, these approaches use the spatio-temporal data to compute a set of pre-determined behavioral features per region
and attempt to predict the regional socio-economic levels
manually collected by the NSIs. Such features are usually
deﬁned based on ad-hoc hypothesis about human behaviors and socio-economic values often neglecting underlying
spatio-temporal relationships. Rather than pre-determined
features, regions might be better characterized by probabilistic models of latent behaviors not obvious through observation. Such latent recurring patterns might best reﬂect the
complex nature of human behaviors and the impact that geography and time might have on that behavior.

Abstract
Socio-economic maps contain important information regarding the population of a country. Computing these maps is
critical given that policy makers often times make important decisions based upon such information. However, the
compilation of socio-economic maps requires extensive resources and becomes highly expensive. On the other hand,
the ubiquitous presence of cell phones, is generating large
amounts of spatio-temporal data that can reveal human behavioral traits related to speciﬁc socio-economic characteristics. Traditional inference approaches have taken advantage
of these datasets to infer regional socio-economic characteristics. In this paper, we propose a novel approach whereby topic
models are used to infer socio-economic levels from largescale spatio-temporal data. Instead of using a pre-determined
set of features, we use latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to
extract latent recurring patterns of co-occurring behaviors
across regions, which are then used in the prediction of socioeconomic levels. We show that our approach improves state
of the art prediction results by ≈ 9%.

Introduction
Socio-economic maps gather large amounts of information
regarding the status of households at a national scale. These
maps contain information that characterizes various social
and economic aspects like the educational level of the citizens or the access to electricity. Such information is aggregated and reported at various granularity levels, from a national scale, to states, all the way down to urban geographic
areas of a few square kilometers. The accuracy of these maps
is critical given that many policy decisions made by governments and international organizations are based upon such
information. National Statistical Institutes (NSIs) compute
these maps every ﬁve to ten years, and typically require a
large number of enumerators that carry out interviews gathering information pertaining the main socio-economic characteristics of each household. All these prerequisites make
the computation highly expensive, especially for budgetconstraint emerging economies. To reduce costs, countries
have made cuts both in the number of interview questions
and in the number of citizens interviewed, which unfortunately impacts the quality of the ﬁnal census information.

In this paper, we propose a novel approach to the problem of inferring regional socio-economic levels from spatiotemporal data. Speciﬁcally, we propose a topic modeling
framework based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA).
LDA models are typically used in research involving documents whereby a document is represented as a set of words
and distributions are drawn to identify topics across documents in an unsupervised manner. However, they have also
been successfully applied in a variety of different scenarios
for model estimation and inference including computer vision (Fei-Fei and Perona 2005) or climate modeling (Tand
and Monteleoni 2014). We investigate the hypothesis that
using individual behaviors (words) collected from cell phone
data to identify probabilistic large-scale population behaviors (topics) across regions might allow to improve the cur-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3835

