Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Uncertainty Propagation in Long-Term
Structured Regression on Evolving Networks
Djordje Gligorijevic, Jelena Stojanovic and Zoran Obradovic
Center for Data Analytics and Biomedical Informatics, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA
{gligorijevic, jelena.stojanovic, zoran.obradovic}@temple.edu

efﬁcient fund management and providing more stable services.
However, good predictive accuracy is not always sufﬁcient for the long–term decision making. Uncertainty estimation, a tally of reliability for model predictions, is an important quality indicator used for decision making (Smith
2013). It is also reasonable to assume that reliability of a
model decreases when predicting further in the future. This
is due to noisiness in input data, caused by a change in distribution or accumulated error of iterative predictions, and it
should be reﬂected in the increase of estimated uncertainty
of the model predictions. This effect is often referred to as
uncertainty propagation. Therefore, to decide the time point
on the prediction horizon, or level of certainty with which
the predictive model could be considered as useful and reliable, it is important to have a proper uncertainty propagation
estimate for reasoning under uncertainty.
Thus, a particular interest of this paper is long-term forecasting on non-static networks with continuous target variables (structured regression) and proper uncertainty propagation estimate in such evolving networks. This is motivated
by climate modeling of long–term precipitation prediction in
spatio–temporal weather station networks, as well as prediction of different disease trends in temporal disease-disease
networks.
Methods that address uncertainty propagation in multiple
steps-ahead prediction can be viewed as direct and iterative (Smith 2013). In both types, error estimates made by
the models should be taken into account, to ensure uncertainty propagation. Direct methods are the ones where uncertainties can be explicitly computed while predicting in
the future. They assume that input variables will be available
in the entire prediction horizon. However, this is a strong
assumption when predicting far ahead, thus limiting many
of the models. Moreover, these methods usually need more
training data than iterative methods to produce useful predictions. Therefore, we will not focus on direct methods in
this paper. Iterative methods, on the other hand, can provide
prediction any number of steps ahead, up to the desired horizon. These methods are iteratively predicting one step ahead
and use lagged predictions as model inputs, as shown in Figure 1. In this study we assume that input variables in each
of the steps are normally distributed as N (μXT +k , ΣXT +k ),
and that the new point estimate ŷT +k = μT +k is obtained

Abstract
In long-term forecasting it is important to estimate the
conﬁdence of predictions, as they are often affected by
errors that are accumulated over the prediction horizon. To address this problem, an effective novel iterative method is developed for Gaussian structured learning models in this study for propagating uncertainty in
temporal graphs by modeling noisy inputs. The proposed method is applied for three long-term (up to 8
years ahead) structured regression problems on realworld evolving networks from the health and climate
domains. The obtained empirical results and use case
analysis provide evidence that the new approach allows
better uncertainty propagation as compared to published
alternatives.

Introduction
Conditional probabilistic graphical models provide a powerful framework for structured regression in spatio-temporal
datasets with complex correlation patterns. It has been
shown that models utilizing underlying correlation patterns
(structured models) can signiﬁcantly improve predictive accuracy as compared to models not utilizing such information (Radosavljevic, Vucetic, and Obradovic 2010; 2014;
Ristovski et al. 2013; Wytock and Kolter 2013; Stojanovic
et al. 2015) .
This study is aimed to support structured regression for
long-term decision making, which has been of interest in
many high impact applications. For example, in order to
prepare beds, personnel and medications, hospitals are interested in estimating future number of patients admitted
in different departments. Providing long-term predictions of
healthcare trends could immensely increase quality of decisions, which could lead to better hospital care (Dey et
al. 2014; Stiglic et al. 2014; Ghalwash, Radosavljevic, and
Obradovic 2014; Gligorijevic, Stojanovic, and Obradovic
2015), drug coverage and health insurances for clients in
need. On the other hand, long-term predictions of geophysical variables, such are predictions of precipitation and lightning strikes, are very important in agriculture, telecommunications, power systems and elsewhere (Sivakumar and
Berndtsson 2010; Dokic et al. 2016), thus enabling more
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1603

