Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Goal Recognition Design
with Non-Observable Actions
Sarah Keren and Avigdor Gal and Erez Karpas
{sarahn@tx,avigal@ie,karpase@}.technion.ac.il
Technion — Israel Institute of Technology

recognition applications such as assisted cognition (Kautz
et al. 2003) and security (Jarvis, Lunt, and Myers 2004;
Kaluza, Kaminka, and Tambe 2011; Boddy et al. 2005) that
suffer from reduced observability due to sensor malfunction, deliberate sabotage, or lack of sufﬁcient budget. In a
safe home setting, for example, reduced coverage means less
control over access to sensitive areas such as a hot oven.
Earlier work on goal recognition design (Keren, Gal,
and Karpas 2014; 2015) assumed fully observable models.
In this work we relax this assumption and offer innovative
tools for a goal recognition design analysis that accounts
for a model with non-observable actions and a design process that involves sensor placement. The partially observable setting partitions the set of actions into observable and
non-observable actions, reﬂecting, for example, partial sensor coverage. The proposed analysis relies on a partial incoming stream of observations. A key feature of this setting
is that it supports a scenario where the system has no information regarding the actions of agents beyond what is observed. Therefore, in the absence of an observation, the system cannot differentiate unobserved actions from idleness
of an agent. An example of such a scenario can be found in
Real Time Location Systems (RTLS) where the last known
location of an agent is taken as its current position.
The partially observable setting provides three contributions to the goal recognition design state-of-the-art. The key
novelty lies in the differentiation it creates between an execution sequence and the observation sequence it emits. The
fact that an observation sequence includes only the observable actions performed by an agent means that the same observation sequence may be generated by more than one execution sequence. In previous settings an execution sequence
was considered non distinctive if it represented a preﬁx of legal plans to more than one goal. Here this condition is generalized to include execution sequences for which the emitted
observation sequence is shared by preﬁxes of paths to more
than one goal. The worst case distinctiveness (wcd) is then
the length of the maximal execution that produces a nondistinctive observation sequence.
Second, despite the partial observability and the asymmetry of the model, attributed to the difference between an observation sequence and an execution sequence, we propose a
method for calculating wcd that is based on a compilation to
a fully observable classical planning framework. This com-

Abstract
Goal recognition design involves the ofﬂine analysis of goal
recognition models by formulating measures that assess the
ability to perform goal recognition within a model and ﬁnding efﬁcient ways to compute and optimize them. In this work
we relax the full observability assumption of earlier work by
offering a new generalized model for goal recognition design
with non-observable actions. A model with partial observability is relevant to goal recognition applications such as assisted
cognition and security, which suffer from reduced observability due to sensor malfunction or lack of sufﬁcient budget. In
particular we deﬁne a worst case distinctiveness (wcd) measure that represents the maximal number of steps an agent
can take in a system before the observed portion of his trajectory reveals his objective. We present a method for calculating
wcd based on a novel compilation to classical planning and
propose a method to improve the design using sensor placement. Our empirical evaluation shows that the proposed solutions effectively compute and improve wcd.

Introduction
Goal recognition design (grd) (Keren, Gal, and Karpas
2014; 2015) provides an ofﬂine analysis of goal recognition
models, which are also known as plan recognition (Kautz
and Allen 1986; Lesh and Etzioni 1995; Pattison and Long
2011). Goal recognition design formulates measures to assess the ability to understand the goal of an agent by the
online observation of his behavior and ﬁnds efﬁcient ways
to compute and optimize them.
Goal recognition design consists of two main stages. The
calculation stage ﬁnds the worst case distinctiveness (wcd)
of the model, representing the maximal number of steps an
agent can take in a system before the observed portion of
his trajectory reveals his objective. wcd serves as an upper
bound on the number of actions an agent can perform before
his goal can be recognized. The second stage involves modifying the system (hence, goal recognition design) to minimize wcd.
Goal recognition design is applicable to any domain for
which quickly performing goal recognition is essential and
in which the model design can be controlled. In particular, goal recognition design is relevant to goal and plan
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3152

