Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

MIP-Nets: Enabling Information Sharing
in Loosely-Coupled Teamwork
Ofra Amir, Barbara J. Grosz and Krzysztof Z. Gajos
Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
{oamir,grosz,kgajos}@seas.harvard.edu
the team’s plans or policies to compute the value of information. Although some approaches assume only incomplete
knowledge of agents’ plans (Barrett and Stone 2015), these
approaches still assume a known planning domain. In realworld distributed human teamwork settings, such plan models
are not available for modeling (Amir et al. 2013).
Our approach avoids the complete plan knowledge assumption by utilizing the extended duration of the teamwork to
learn team members’ role allocation and dependencies between activities. This information is implicitly represented in
a new representation, MIP-Net. We deﬁne a MIP-DOI algorithm, which uses the MIP-Net to reason about information
sharing decisions. We evaluate our approach in simulation,
showing that it is capable of learning collaboration patterns
and sharing relevant information with team members.

Abstract
People collaborate in carrying out such complex activities as
treating patients, co-authoring documents and developing software. While technologies such as Dropbox and Github enable
groups to work in a distributed manner, coordinating team
members’ individual activities poses signiﬁcant challenges. In
this paper, we formalize the problem of “information sharing
in loosely-coupled extended-duration teamwork”. We develop
a new representation, Mutual Inﬂuence Potential Networks
(MIP-Nets), to model collaboration patterns and dependencies
among activities, and an algorithm, MIP-DOI, that uses this
representation to reason about information sharing.

Introduction
Distributed teamwork is becoming increasingly prevalent as
technology enables groups of people distributed over vast distances, with few opportunities for synchronous interaction, to
work together on complex activities extended in time. Technologies such as Google Drive, Dropbox and Github enable
teams to share work artifacts remotely and asynchronously.
The coordination of their activities remains a challenge, however, because these technologies do not have capabilities for
focusing people’s attention on the actions taken by others
that matter most to their own activities.
Coordination is especially challenging in teamwork that is
extended over a long time period and that is loosely-coupled
in nature (Amir et al. 2015; Pinelle and Gutwin 2006). While
loosely-coupled teamwork allows collaborators to focus on
their individual tasks and reduces coordination needs, it also
makes it harder to identify the dependencies and conﬂicts
between collaborators’ activities (Hutchins 1995).
This paper deﬁnes the problem of Information Sharing in
Loosely-coupled Extended-duration Teamwork (ISLET) and
presents new methods for addressing it. Successful solutions
to the ISLET problem need to identify and share with team
members information that is relevant to their activities and
to do so within a limited communication budget so as to not
overwhelm them with too much information.
We extend prior research in multi-agent systems, which has
developed a variety of methods for reasoning about information sharing (Kamar, Gal, and Grosz 2009; Wu, Zilberstein,
and Chen 2011). These approaches rely on a complete plan
knowledge assumption. They use a model and knowledge of

The ISLET Problem
An ISLET problem setting comprises the following: (1) P : a
set of collaborating partners. The set can change over time
with partners joining or leaving the team; (2) O: a set of
objects that partners interact with. The set can change over
time as a result of partners’ actions; (3) A: the set of act-types
{ADD, M OD, DEL} for adding, modifying or deleting
objects, and (4) S: A set of interaction sessions of partners. A
session s(p, t, (a1 , o1 , ..., a|s| , o|s| )) is deﬁned by a triple:
the partner acting , the time of the session, and a set of
pairs of act-types and the objects they operate on (ai , oi ).
For brevity, we denote a session recorded at time t as st .
Figure 1(a) shows an example session.
The ISLET problem is to determine a set of l objects
Oshare ⊂ O to inform a partner p ∈ P about when p starts
session st , given sessions s1 to st−1 and the identity of p.
The communication budget l restricts the amount of information that can be shared, reﬂecting the need not to overwhelm
partners with too much information. The set Oshare should
include objects that are relevant to the partner.

Mutual Inﬂuence Potential Networks
MIP-Nets represent interactions between partners and objects and dependencies between different objects. Partners
and objects are represented by nodes. A particular partner
p and a particular object o are represented by nodes np and
no , respectively. The nodes np and no are connected by an
edge if p performed an action on o. The edge weight corresponds to the extent of the interaction. Similarly, no and

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4192

