Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

The Meta-Problem for Conservative Mal’tsev Constraints
Clément Carbonnel∗

LAAS-CNRS
University of Toulouse, INP Toulouse, France
carbonnel@laas.fr

A number of sufﬁcient conditions for tractability have been
identiﬁed this way; for instance, CSP(Γ) is solved by enforcing generalized arc-consistency (GAC) if Γ has a semilattice
polymorphism (Jeavons, Cohen, and Gyssens 1997). Each
sufﬁcient condition deﬁnes a tractable class, that is, a set T
of languages such that ∀Γ ∈ T, CSP(Γ) is in P.
There are some desirable properties that good tractable
classes can be expected to have. First, we know that there
exists a polynomial-time algorithm for each ﬁxed Γ ∈ T, but
there is no guarantee that there exists one polynomial-time
algorithm that solves every CSP(Γ), Γ ∈ T. This can be formalized as a promise problem: if CSP(T) is CSP together
with the promise that the instance is over a language in T, is
it true that CSP(T) ∈ P? If the answer is yes, we say that T is
uniformly tractable (or equivalently that T uniformizes (Kolaitis and Vardi 2000)).
We shall illustrate this notion with an example. Consider
the tractable class Tc of all languages Γ such that CSP(Γ)
can be solved by enforcing strong k-consistency, where k
only depends on Γ. Since there is no bound on k in the definition of Tc , it is not clear that Tc is uniformly tractable.
However, a powerful result by Bulatov implies that enforcing a form of consistency called (2, 3)-minimality sufﬁces
to solve CSP(Γ) for each Γ ∈ Tc (Bulatov 2010). Enforcing (2, 3)-minimality is polynomial-time, so Tc is uniformly
tractable.
Even if the class is uniformly tractable, one problem remains: how hard is it to decide if a given language Γ is in
T? This is the meta-problem for T. In its full generality, the
meta-problem has no restriction on the input language. In
particular, the domain size is not assumed to be bounded.
In the worst case the meta-problem is not necessarily decidable, but in practice it is often in NP. If the class is deﬁned
by the existence of polymorphisms satisfying a certain set
of identities (which is usually the case), the meta-problem is
a polymorphism detection problem. For instance, the class
of languages that admit a semilattice polymorphism is uniformly tractable since it is solved by GAC, but the metaproblem is NP-complete (Green and Cohen 2008).
Beyond pure academic interest, the main reason for investigating the complexity of meta-problems concerns generalpurpose solvers. It is great to know that languages with a
nice polymorphism can be solved efﬁciently, but this information is virtually useless for practical constraint solvers if

Abstract
In the algebraic approach to CSP (Constraint Satisfaction
Problem), the complexity of constraint languages is studied
using closure operations called polymorphisms. Many of
these operations are known to induce tractability of any language they preserve. We focus on the meta-problem: given a
language Γ, decide if Γ has a polymorphism with nice properties. We design an algorithm that decides in polynomial-time
if a constraint language has a conservative Mal’tsev polymorphism, and outputs one if one exists. As a corollary we obtain that the class of conservative Mal’tsev constraints is uniformly tractable, and we conjecture that this result remains
true in the non-conservative case.

1

Introduction

The complexity of constraint satisfaction problems is a very
active and fruitful research area. In particular, the study of
CSP over ﬁxed constraint languages has attracted considerable interest since it was conjectured that for every ﬁnite
constraint language Γ, CSP(Γ) is either in P or NP-hard (the
Feder-Vardi Dichotomy Conjecture) (Feder and Vardi 1998).
The most remarkable achievements to date include a characterization of languages that can be solved by local consistency methods (Barto and Kozik 2014) or Gaussian-like algorithms (Idziak et al. 2007), and a proof of the Dichotomy
Conjecture for conservative languages (languages with all
possible unary relations over the domain) (Bulatov 2003).
These results use the algebraic approach to CSP: every language Γ can be associated with a set of closure operations,
called polymorphisms, which have been shown to entirely
determine the complexity of CSP(Γ) (Jeavons, Cohen, and
Gyssens 1997).
Given an operation f : Dk → D, a language Γ over the
domain D admits f as a polymorphism if every constraint
relation R ∈ Γ is closed under componentwise application
of f . For example, the afﬁne relation x + y + z = c is closed
under the polymorphism f (x1 , x2 , x3 ) = x1 −x2 +x3 , since
x1 + y1 + z1 = c, x2 + y2 + z2 = c, x3 + y3 + z3 = c
imply that f (x1 , x2 , x3 ) + f (y1 , y2 , y3 ) + f (x3 , y3 , z3 ) =
(x1 − x2 + x3 ) + (y1 − y2 + y3 ) + (z1 − z2 + z3 ) = c.
∗

supported by ANR Project ANR-10-BLAN-0210.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3376

