Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Write-righter: An Academic Writing Assistant System
Yuanchao Liu, Xin Wang, Ming Liu, Xiaolong Wang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
ycliu@hit.edu.cn, xwang@insun.hit.edu.cn, mliu@insun.hit.edu.cn, wangxl@insun.hit.edu.cn

is shown in Fig. 1. While users are writing in the client, the
server side can give corresponding real-time hint and
recommendation for words, phrases, example sentences
and similar words in separate areas. Currently, 5.4GB
index generated from 40, 243 scientific papers, which is
mainly crawled from Sciencedirect2, is used in the system.

Abstract
Writing academic articles in English is a challenging task
for non-native speakers, as more effort has to be spent to
enhance their language expressions. This paper presents
an academic writing assistant system called Write-righter,
which can provide real-time hint and recommendation by
analyzing the input context. To achieve this goal, some novel strategies, e.g., semantic extension based sentence retrieval and LDA based sentence structure identification have
been proposed. Write-righter is expected to help people express their ideas correctly by recommending top N most
possible expressions.

Introduction
It is a challenging work for non-native speakers to write
articles in English, as more effort has to be spent to
enhance their language besides from content development.
Some writing assistant systems have been proposed
correspondingly. FLOW (Chen et al., 2012) is an
interactive writing assistant system which aims mainly at
providing phrases suggestions. Translation-based English
writing assistant system PENS (Liu et al., 2000) can
provide translated words or phrases, thus can allow users to
write in their native language occasionally. EAME (Yang
et al., 2000˅is an academic abstract writing assistant
system, which uses a question-driven framework to create
abstract drafts by asking users to select some patterns and
fill blanks. Corpus linguistics plays an important role in
writing assistant system (Sun et al., 2007; Dai et al., 2014).
This paper presents a corpus based academic writing
assistant system called Write-righter. In the following, we
will briefly introduce the system and its main strategies.

Fig. 1. The main framework of write-righter

Semantic extension based sentence retrieval
Semantic extension is very useful for fully utilizing the
existing corpus. For example, supposing the original
sentence is “Several online writing assistance tools have
been developed through efforts in the areas of natural
language processing”, the extensions can be like this: 1).
“several”Æ“various”; 2). “developed”Æ“designed” and
etc. In this way the recommended results may be richer by
using extension query. As shown in Fig.2, we use the
Wordnet 3 synonym to construct the lexicon for semantic
extension. Only frequently used words in academic papers
are extended, because they are so frequent that authors tend
to express their meaning using different forms to improve
the diversity.

The main framework of Write-righter
The system is a stand-alone editor1 and the attendees can
interact with it directly in the session. The main framework

Fig. 2. The construction of synonym lexicon

1

The demo video address: http://www.iqiyi.com/w_19rt9lbzz5.html
http://www.sciencedirect.com
3
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

4373

