Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Differential Privacy Preservation for Deep Auto-Encoders:
An Application of Human Behavior Prediction
NhatHai Phan1 , Yue Wang2 , Xintao Wu3 , Dejing Dou1

1

{haiphan,dou}@cs.uoregon.edu, ywang91@uncc.edu, xintaowu@uark.edu
University of Oregon, USA; 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA; 3 University of Arkansas, USA

any particular record with high conﬁdence (controlled by parameter ), even if the adversary possesses all the remaining tuples of the sensitive data. In this paper, we propose
to develop an -differential privacy preserving deep learning model. The structure of deep learning models, e.g., deep
auto-encoders (Bengio 2009), deep belief networks (Hinton,
Osindero, and Teh 2006), usually contains multiple layers of
neurons. At each layer, they use different objective functions
(e.g., cross-entropy error, energy based functions) and algorithms (e.g., contrastive divergence (Hinton 2002), backpropagation) to learn the optimal parameters for output tasks
such as classiﬁcation and prediction. In addition, the designs
of deep learning models are varied and dependent on application domains. It is difﬁcult, therefore, to design a uniﬁed
-differential privacy solution that covers all deep learning
models. Deep auto-encoders (dAs) (Bengio 2009) are one of
the fundamental deep learning models which have been used
in many applications such as healthcare and medicine, natural language processing, etc. (Deng and Yu 2014). In this paper, we aim at deriving an -differential privacy approach to
deep auto-encoders (dAs) for a binomial classiﬁcation task.

Abstract
In recent years, deep learning has spread beyond both
academia and industry with many exciting real-world applications. The development of deep learning has presented obvious privacy issues. However, there has been lack of scientiﬁc study about privacy preservation in deep learning. In
this paper, we concentrate on the auto-encoder, a fundamental component in deep learning, and propose the deep private
auto-encoder (dPA). Our main idea is to enforce -differential
privacy by perturbing the objective functions of the traditional
deep auto-encoder, rather than its results. We apply the dPA to
human behavior prediction in a health social network. Theoretical analysis and thorough experimental evaluations show
that the dPA is highly effective and efﬁcient, and it signiﬁcantly outperforms existing solutions.

Introduction
Deep learning is a timely and promising area of machine
learning research. In general, deep learning is about learning
multiple levels of representation and abstraction that help to
make sense of data such as images, sound, and text (Deng
and Yu 2014). With signiﬁcant success in recent years, the
applications of deep learning are being expanded into other
ﬁelds such as social media (Yuan et al. 2013), social network analysis (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), bioinformatics (Chicco, Sadowski, and Baldi 2014), medicine
and healthcare (Song et al. 2014). This presents obvious issues about protecting privacy in deep learning models when
they are built on users’ personal and highly sensitive data,
such as clinical records, user proﬁles, photo, etc. The present
research efforts lack sufﬁcient deep learning techniques that
incorporate privacy concerns. Therefore, developing a privacy preserving deep learning model is an urgent demand.
Releasing sensitive results of statistical analysis and data
mining while protecting privacy has been studied in the past
few decades. One state-of-the-art approach to the problem
is -differential privacy (Dwork et al. 2006), which works
by injecting random noise into the released statistical results
computed from the underlying sensitive data, such that the
distribution of the noisy results is relatively insensitive to
any change of a single record in the original dataset. This ensures that the adversary cannot infer any information about

There are several potential solutions for -differential privacy that target regression, which is similar to the data reconstruction and cross-entropy error functions in deep autoencoders (Zhang et al. 2012; Chaudhuri and Monteleoni
2008; Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and Sarwate 2011; Lei 2011;
Smith 2011). The most pertinent algorithm that we can
adapt in our work is functional mechanism (FM) (Zhang
et al. 2012). The FM enforces -differential privacy by perturbing the objective function of the optimization problem,
e.g., logistic regression, rather than its results. By leveraging the functional mechanism to perturb the objective functions in deep auto-encoders so that the -differential privacy
is preserved, we propose a novel -differential Private Autoencoder (PA). First, the cross-entropy error functions of the
data reconstruction and softmax layer are approximated to
polynomial forms by using Taylor Expansion (Arfken 1985).
Second, we inject noise into these polynomial forms so that
the -differential privacy is satisﬁed in the training phases.
Third, in the PA, we add a normalization layer on top of the
hidden layer to protect the -differential privacy when stacking multiple PAs. Multiple PAs can be stacked on each other
to produce a deep private auto-encoder (dPA). To evaluate
its performance, we apply the dPA model for human behav-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1309

