Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Graphical Hedonic Games of Bounded Treewidth
Dominik Peters
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
dominik.peters@cs.ox.ac.uk

NP-hard to maximise social welfare; and it is often even Σp2 complete to identify hedonic games with non-empty core.
See Ballester (2004), Sung and Dimitrov (2010), Woeginger
(2013), and Peters and Elkind (2015) for a selection of such
results.
A standard criticism of hardness results such as these is that
they apply only in the worst case. Instances arising in practice
can be expected to show much more structure than the highly
contrived instances produced in 3 SAT-reductions. In noncooperative game theory, graphical games (Kearns, Littman,
and Singh 2001) are an inﬂuential way to allow formalisation
of the notion of a ‘structured’ game. In a graphical game,
agents form the vertices of an undirected graph, and each
agent’s utility function only depends on the actions taken by
her neighbours. The underlying graph can guide algorithms
in ﬁnding a stable outcome, and imposing restrictions on the
graph topology can yield tractability (Gottlob, Greco, and
Scarcello 2005).
A particularly successful restriction on graph topology is
bounded treewidth. The treewidth of a graph (Robertson and
Seymour 1986) measures how ‘tree-like’ a given graph is.
Many NP-hard problems become ﬁxed-parameter tractable
with respect to the treewidth of some graph naturally associated with the problem instances. Indeed, dynamic programming over a given tree decomposition often yields algorithms
that are exponential in the treewidth, but linear in the problem size. See Bodlaender’s (1994) ‘tourist guide through
treewidth’ for an introduction to this area.
The treewidth approach was ﬁrst applied to the domain
of hedonic games by Elkind and Wooldridge (2009), who
propose a representation formalism for hedonic games called
hedonic coalition nets that expresses agents’ preferences by
weighted boolean formulas. They also introduce a notion of
treewidth for hedonic games—very close to ours—and show
that (when numbers in the input are polynomially bounded)
it is ﬁxed-parameter tractable with respect to treewidth to
decide whether a given partition is core-stable.
In this paper, we study graphical hedonic games, which we
deﬁne in analogy to graphical games. Here, agents are again
arranged in an underlying graph, and need to be partitioned
into coalitions. Every agent only cares about which of her
neighbours are in the same coalition as her. Every hedonic
game can be made graphical by introducing edges whenever
one agent’s utility depends on the other’s presence. We will

Abstract
Hedonic games are a well-studied model of coalition
formation, in which selﬁsh agents are partitioned into
disjoint sets and agents care about the make-up of the
coalition they end up in. The computational problems
of ﬁnding stable, optimal, or fair outcomes tend to be
computationally intractable in even severely restricted
instances of hedonic games. We introduce the notion of
a graphical hedonic game and show that, in contrast, on
classes of graphical hedonic games whose underlying
graphs are of bounded treewidth and degree, such problems become easy. In particular, problems that can be
speciﬁed through quantiﬁcation over agents, coalitions,
and (connected) partitions can be decided in linear time.
The proof is by reduction to monadic second order logic.
We also provide faster algorithms in special cases, and
show that the extra condition of the degree bound cannot
be dropped. Finally, we note that the problem of allocating indivisible goods can be modelled as a hedonic
game, so that our results imply tractability of ﬁnding
fair and efﬁcient allocations on appropriately restricted
instances.

1

Introduction

Hedonic games, ﬁrst studied by Banerjee, Konishi, and
Sönmez (2001) and Bogomolnaia and Jackson (2002), provide a general framework for the study of coalition formation.
Hedonic games subsume the well-studied matching problems (stable marriage, stable roommates, hospital-residents),
but are able to express more general preference structures.
They have been applied to problems in public good provision, voting, and clustering, and, as we show below, they also
encapsulate a variety of allocation problems.
A hedonic game consists of a set N of agents, each of
whom has a preference ordering over all coalitions S ⊆ N
containing her. The outcome of such a game is a partition of
the agent set into disjoint coalitions, with agents preferring
those partitions in which they are in a preferred coalition.
Unfortunately, it has turned out that many key questions
about hedonic games are computationally hard to answer.
For example, it is typically NP-complete to decide whether a
hedonic game admits a Nash stable outcome; it is typically
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

586

