Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

ClaimEval: Integrated and Flexible Framework for
Claim Evaluation Using Credibility of Sources
Mehdi Samadi

Partha Talukdar

Manuela Veloso

Manuel Blum

Carnegie Mellon
University
msamadi@cs.cmu.edu

Indian Institute of
Science
ppt@serc.iisc.in

Carnegie Mellon
University
veloso@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon
University
mblum@cs.cmu.edu

Domain

Abstract

Webpage
ContainsEvidence

The World Wide Web (WWW) has become a rapidly growing platform consisting of numerous sources which provide
supporting or contradictory information about claims (e.g.,
“Chicken meat is healthy”). In order to decide whether a
claim is true or false, one needs to analyze content of different sources of information on the Web, measure credibility
of information sources, and aggregate all these information.
This is a tedious process and the Web search engines address
only part of the overall problem, viz., producing only a list of
relevant sources. In this paper, we present ClaimEval, a novel
and integrated approach which given a set of claims to validate, extracts a set of pro and con arguments from the Web information sources, and jointly estimates credibility of sources
and correctness of claims. ClaimEval uses Probabilistic Soft
Logic (PSL), resulting in a ﬂexible and principled framework
which makes it easy to state and incorporate different forms
of prior-knowledge. Through extensive experiments on realworld datasets, we demonstrate ClaimEval’s capability in determining validity of a set of claims, resulting in improved
accuracy compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

HasWebPage

http://www.peta.org/living/
food/top-10-reasons-eatturkeys/

W1

Evidence
meats are the same.
E1 All
Every cell is wrapped in..

E2

Claim

DoesNotSupportClaim

Turkey ﬂesh is brimming
with fat. Just one…

———————————
———————————

D1 peta.org

HasWebPage

HasWebPage

http://www.whfoods.com/
genpage.php?
tname=foodspice&dbid=
125

W2
——————————

ample time spent
E5 With
foraging in a pasture with…

Turkey is
C1 healthy.

E6

Turkey (together with
chicken) has emerged…

SupportsClaim

E7

Lose the Fat, Avoid the
Flu, Both the Centers….

DoesNotSupportClaim

E8

Chickens are the most
bused animals on the…

——————————

http://www.peta.org/living/
other/top-10-reasons-eatchickens/

W3
———————————
———————————

D2 whfoods.com

HasWebPage

http://www.whfoods.com/
genpage.php?
tname=foodspice&dbid=
116

C2

Chicken is
healthy.

Organic standards help

E9 lower risk of contaminated…

W4

SupportsClaim

———————————
———————————

E10

Pasture raising of chickens
has been recently analyzed…

Figure 1: The Credibility Assessment (CA) Graph constructed to evaluate C2, while the user has already speciﬁed the other claim C1 to be true (green concentric rectangle). In addition to the claims, the CA graph also consists of
nodes corresponding to Domains, Webpages and Evidences.
While some evidences are supportive of the claims (solid
green lines), others are not (red dotted line) (see Section for
details). ClaimEval, the proposed system, estimates credibility of the domains based on the assessment available on
claim C1, and combines that with the level of support from
evidences originating from those domains to evaluate claim
C2 (see Section for more details).

Introduction
The World Wide Web (WWW) and the Web search engines,
such as Google, Bing, etc., that operate over millions of
documents have made information readily available to everyone. Over the last few years, several large knowledge
bases (KBs), such as Freebase, Yago, Google Knowledge
Graph, etc., have also been developed which makes it possible to readily evaluate factoid claims (e.g., “Paris is the
capital of France”). In spite of this democratization of information, evaluating correctness of non-factoid claims (e.g.,
“Turkey meat is healthy”), is still an open challenge. This
is particularly challenging as two different webpages may
contain conﬂicting evidences even related to a single claim.
For example, while an animal rights website might not support meat-eating and thus term turkey meat as unhealthy, the
website of a grocery store might claim otherwise. Additionally, a scientiﬁc paper focusing on this question might provide the most authoritative answer. So ideally, one would
want to trust evidences contained in the credible source (the
scientiﬁc paper) and ignore the other two. Hence, given a

set of claims, one needs to identify relevant sources on the
Web, extract supporting and contradictory evidences from
those sources, estimate source credibility, and ﬁnally aggregate all these information to evaluate the given set of claims.
This is a tedious and time consuming process, and current
Web search engines only address the ﬁrst aspect of this bigger problem, viz., identifying relevant sources. Thus, there
is a growing need for an integrated approach for automatic
extraction of relevant evidences and sources, estimation of
information source credibility and utilizing those credibility
estimates in claim evaluation.
Moreover, estimating information source credibility may
be subjective (Bhattacharya, Devinney, and Pillutla 1998;

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

222

