Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Linear Submodular Bandits with a Knapsack Constraint
†

Baosheng Yu†∗ and Meng Fang‡∗ and Dacheng Tao†
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology, Sydney
‡
Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
baosheng.yu@student.uts.edu.au, meng.fang@unimelb.edu.au, dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

2010; Fang and Tao 2014), in which multiple news articles
are recommended to a user.
Diversiﬁcation is a key problem for information retrieval
systems such as diverse rankings of documents (Radlinski,
Kleinberg, and Joachims 2008), products recommendation
(Ziegler et al. 2005) and news article recommendation (Li et
al. 2010). Implications affecting user satisfaction have been
observed in practice: recommendation requires the proposal
of a diverse set of items and redundant items are helpless
(Ziegler et al. 2005). Submodularity is an intuitive notion of
diminishing returns, which states that adding a new item to
a larger environment help less than adding the same item to
a smaller environment. It has turned out that diversiﬁcation
can be well captured by a submodular function (Krause and
Golovin 2012) and the linear submdoular bandits (Yue and
Guestrin 2011) has thus been proposed to handle the diversiﬁcation problem in bandit setting.
There is nevertheless always a budget constraint in realworld scenarios, where limited resources are consumed during whole process of actions. For example, in dynamic
procurement (Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and Slivkins 2013),
budget is limited for buying items. In clinical trials, experiments on alternative medical treatments are limited by the
cost of materials. However, it is more reasonable for other
applications to put the budget constraint on each time step,
not the whole process. For example, in online advertising
(Chakrabarti et al. 2009), the size of a webpage is limited
while the ads are changing each time the user visits the
webpage. In news article recommendation, several articles
are recommended to a user and feedback is obtained each
time, but users will only have limited time to read those articles (if we recommend three short news articles, the user
may read all of them, but if we recommend three long articles, the user might be not patient enough to read all of
them). In order to improve user satisfaction, we formulate
this per-round budget constraint imposed on each time step,
as follows: ∀i ∈ E, let ci denote the cost of pulling arm
i, where E is the set of all arms. The total costs of armpulling are limited by a budget B. At each time step t, we
choose a subset
 of arms At ⊆ E under the budget constraint
C(At ) =
i∈At ci ≤ B, which is known as a knapsack
constraint (Sviridenko 2004).
In order to improve user satisfaction by considering both
diversiﬁcation and budget constraint, we introduce the per-

Abstract
Linear submodular bandits has been proven to be effective in solving the diversiﬁcation and feature-based exploration problems in retrieval systems. Concurrently,
many web-based applications, such as news article recommendation and online ad placement, can be modeled
as budget-limited problems. However, the diversiﬁcation problem under a budget constraint has not been
considered. In this paper, we ﬁrst introduce the budget
constraint to linear submodular bandits as a new problem called the linear submodular bandits with a knapsack constraint. We then deﬁne an α-approximation
unit-cost regret considering that submodular function
maximization is NP-hard. To solve this problem, we
propose two greedy algorithms based on a modiﬁed
UCB rule. We then prove these two algorithms with different regret bounds and computational costs. We also
conduct a number of experiments and the experimental
results conﬁrm our theoretical analyses.

Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is the simplest instance
of the exploration versus exploitation dilemma (Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002), which is a trade-off between exploring the environment to ﬁnd a better action (exploration)
and adopting the current best action as often as possible (exploitation). The classical multi-armed bandit problem is formulated as a system of m arms. At each time step, we choose
an arm to pull and obtain a reward from an unknown distribution. The goal is to maximize cumulative rewards by optimally balancing exploration and exploitation in ﬁnite time
steps T . The most popular measure of an algorithm’s success is the regret, which is the cumulative loss of failing to
pull the optimal arm. A variant of the classical multi-armed
bandit problem, which is usually called the combinatorial
multi-armed bandit problem (Chen, Wang, and Yuan 2013;
Gai, Krishnamachari, and Jain 2012), allows multiple arms
chosen at each time step. With the rapid development of the
Internet, many web-based applications can be modeled as
a combinatorial multi-armed bandit problem, for example,
the personalized recommendation of news articles (Li et al.
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1380

