Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Differential Privacy of Bayesian Inference
Zuhe Zhang† and Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein
†
School of Mathematics and Statistics,
Department of Computing and Information Systems,
The University of Melbourne, Australia
zhang.zuhe@gmail.com, brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au


Christos Dimitrakakis‡§

§

‡
Univ-Lille-3, France
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
christos.dimitrakakis@gmail.com

at will. For example, a third-party pharmaceutical might use
the released posterior as a prior on the efﬁcacy of drugs, and
update it with their own patient data. Or they could form a
predictive posterior for classiﬁcation or regression, all while
preserving differential privacy of the original data.
Our focus in this paper is Bayesian inference in probabilistic graphical models (PGMs), which are popular as a
tool for modelling conditional independence assumptions.
Similar to the effect on statistical and computational efﬁciency of non-private inference, a central tenet of this paper
is that independence structure should impact privacy. Our
mechanisms and theoretical bounds are the ﬁrst to establish
such a link between PGM graph structure and privacy.

Abstract
We study how to communicate ﬁndings of Bayesian inference to third parties, while preserving the strong guarantee
of differential privacy. Our main contributions are four different algorithms for private Bayesian inference on probabilistic graphical models. These include two mechanisms for
adding noise to the Bayesian updates, either directly to the
posterior parameters, or to their Fourier transform so as to
preserve update consistency. We also utilise a recently introduced posterior sampling mechanism, for which we prove
bounds for the speciﬁc but general case of discrete Bayesian
networks; and we introduce a maximum-a-posteriori private
mechanism. Our analysis includes utility and privacy bounds,
with a novel focus on the inﬂuence of graph structure on privacy. Worked examples and experiments with Bayesian naïve
Bayes and Bayesian linear regression illustrate the application of our mechanisms.

Main Contributions. We develop the ﬁrst mechanisms
for Bayesian inference on the ﬂexible PGM framework
(cf. Table 1). We propose two posterior perturbation mechanisms for networks with likelihood functions from exponential families and conjugate priors, that add Laplace
noise (Dwork et al. 2006) to posterior parameters (or their
Fourier coefﬁcients) to preserve privacy. The latter achieves
stealth through consistent posterior updates. For general
Bayesian networks, posteriors may be non-parametric. In
this case, we explore a mechanism (Dimitrakakis et al. 2014)
which samples from the posterior to answer queries—no additional noise is injected. We complement our study with
a maximum a posteriori estimator that leverages the exponential mechanism (McSherry and Talwar 2007). Our utility
and privacy bounds connect privacy and graph/dependency
structure, and are complemented by illustrative experiments
with Bayesian naïve Bayes and linear regression.

Introduction
We consider the problem faced by a statistician B who analyses data and communicates her ﬁndings to a third party A .
While B wants to learn as much as possible from the data,
she doesn’t want A to learn about any individual datum.
This is for example the case where A is an insurance agency,
the data are medical records, and B wants to convey the efﬁcacy of drugs to the agency, without revealing the speciﬁc
illnesses of individuals in the population. Such requirements
of privacy are of growing interest in the learning (Chaudhuri
and Hsu 2012; Duchi, Jordan, and Wainwright 2013), theoretical computer science (Dwork and Smith 2009; McSherry
and Talwar 2007) and databases communities (Barak et al.
2007; Zhang et al. 2014) due to the impact on individual
privacy by real-world data analytics.
In our setting, we assume that B is using Bayesian inference to draw conclusions from observations of a system
of random variables by updating a prior distribution on parameters (i.e., latent variables) to a posterior. Our goal is
to release an approximation to the posterior that preserves
privacy. We adopt the formalism of differential privacy to
characterise how easy it is for A to discover facts about the
individual data from the aggregate posterior. Releasing the
posterior permits external parties to make further inferences

Related Work. Many individual learning algorithms have
been adapted to maintain differential privacy, including
regularised logistic regression (Chaudhuri and Monteleoni
2008), the SVM (Rubinstein et al. 2012; Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and Sarwate 2011), PCA (Chaudhuri, Sarwate, and
Sinha 2012), the functional mechanism (Zhang et al. 2012)
and trees (Jagannathan, Pillaipakkamnatt, and Wright 2009).
Probabilistic graphical models have been used to preserve
privacy. Zhang et al. (2014) learned a graphical model from
data, in order to generate surrogate data for release; while
Williams and McSherry (2010) ﬁt a model to the response

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2365

