Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Towards Structural Tractability in Hedonic Games∗
Dominik Peters
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
dominik.peters@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

Finding Friends is Hard

Hedonic games are a well-studied model of coalition
formation, in which selﬁsh agents are partitioned into
disjoint sets, and agents care about the make-up of the
coalition they end up in. The computational problem of
ﬁnding a stable outcome tends to be computationally
intractable, even after severely restricting the types of
preferences that agents are allowed to report. We investigate a structural way of achieving tractability, by requiring that agents’ preferences interact in a well-behaved
manner. Precisely, we show that stable outcomes can
be found in linear time for hedonic games that satisfy a
notion of bounded treewidth and bounded degree.

Annoyingly, the problem of ﬁnding a core-stable partition in
a hedonic game as just described has turned out to be computationally hard in almost all cases. In order to make this
claim precise, we need a way to succinctly represent agents’
preferences over the exponential space of all coalitions. An
inﬂuential and universally expressive way to do this are hedonic coalition nets (or HC-nets), introduced by Elkind and
Wooldridge (2009), in which agents are characterised by a list
of weighted boolean rules: for example, the rule b ∧ ¬c →a 3
means that agent a derives utility 3 in coalitions that include
agent b but not c. The total utility of a in a coalition S is the
sum of the weights of all rules satisﬁed in S.
As Elkind and Wooldridge (2009) show, deciding whether
a game given by an HC-net admits a core-stable outcome is
Σp2 -complete. This comes as a blow to the project of ﬁnding
stable outcomes: the problem encapsulates the full hardness
of the second level of the polynomial hierarchy, and is thus
considerably harder than ‘merely’ NP-complete problems.
What can be done? A natural and initially promising approach was to restrict agents’ preferences: what if, for example, agents’ preferences are additively separable? Here,
agents assign other agents numbers vi (j) and 
evaluate coalitions according to the sum of the values in it: j∈S vi (j).
Alas, this does not make ﬁnding stable solutions easier:

Introduction
A coalition is an alliance between a group of individuals,
formed in order to achieve a common goal. How do such
coalitions form if agents are selﬁsh? An extensive literature
in economics and computer science has studied this question
using the natural model of a hedonic game (see the survey by
Aziz and Savani (2016)). A hedonic game consists of a set
N of agents, each of which submits a (complete, transitive)
preference ordering i over all possible coalitions S ⊆ N
with i ∈ S. An outcome of the game is a partition of the
agent set N into disjoint coalitions: agents like a partition π
exactly as much as they like their coalition S in π. If agents
are selﬁsh, we want to ﬁnd a stable outcome, while in other
situations a welfare-optimal or fair outcome might be desired.
Formally, a partition π is core-stable if it is resistant to
group deviations: there is no non-empty coalition S ⊆ N
such that S i π for all i ∈ S. It is strict-core-stable if there
is no non-empty S ⊆ N such that S i π for all i ∈ S,
with at least one preference strict. Given a game, we wish to
ﬁnd a partition that is core-stable. To study the computational
complexity of this, we will consider the decision problem of
whether a given hedonic game admits any such outcome.
Here, we study what kind of restrictions on the structure of
the hedonic games involved can be used to make this problem
tractable, and argue that restrictions on the entire preference
proﬁle rather than individual preferences are most promising.

Theorem 1 (Peters 2015). The problems of deciding whether
a given additively separable hedonic game admits a coreor a strict-core-stable partition are Σp2 -complete, even if
valuations are symmetric (vi (j) = vj (i)) and sparse: no
agent has non-zero valuations for more than 10 agents.
This result is an extension of a result of Woeginger (2013).
An impressive number of other preference restrictions have
been studied, and invariably NP-hardness remains: in particular, this is the case when agents only care about their most
or least preferred agent in a coalition (Hajduková 2006), or
if agents take the average of the vi (j) rather than the sum
(Brandl, Brandt, and Strobel 2015), and Σp2 -hardness remains
for the strict core even if preferences are dichotomous (Peters
2015). Indeed, ﬁnding a core-stable outcome must remain
hard for all (succinct) preference representations which allow
agents a minimum of expressive freedom, in that they are
allowed to arbitrarily rank coalitions of form {i, j} and they
are allowed to dislike some players (Peters and Elkind 2015).

∗
This is a ‘student abstract’ based on material in Peters (2016a;
2016b; 2015). I wish to thank Edith Elkind for advice and guidance.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4252

