Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient Learning of Timeseries Shapelets
Lu Hou

James T. Kwok

Jacek M. Zurada

Department of Computer Science and Engineering Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, 40292, USA
Hong Kong
Information Technology Institute
University of Social Science, Lodz 90-113, Poland

proposed to directly learn the shapelets jointly with the classiﬁer. The resultant optimization problem is highly nonlinear, but the classiﬁcation accuracy can be further improved.
Despite such promising performance, the search for
shapelets is computationally expensive. In recent years, numerous solutions have been proposed to improve the efﬁciency. Rakthanmanon and Keogh (2013) pruned the space
of shapelet candidates using the triangle inequality. However, given N length-Q timeseries, the search still takes
O(N 2 Q3 ) time. Instead of using the information gain as
quality measure for shapelets, Hills et al. (2014) used other
measures such as the Kruskal-Wallis statistic (Kruskal and
others 1952) and F-statistic (Wright 1949). While these measures are easier to compute than the information gain, the
speed improvement is minor. Chang et al. (2012) proposed
to parallelize the distance computations of different shapelet
segments using graphics processing units (GPUs). However,
this requires signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the distance computation, and also considerable effort to deal with memory access issues and limited hardware capabilities of the
GPU. Rakthanmanon and Keogh (2013) proposed to make
the search process more efﬁcient by projecting the timeseries
to a reduced-dimensional space based on the SAX representation (Lin et al. 2007). However, the shapelets obtained are
of the same length as SAX words, which reduces the prediction accuracy.
Very recently, Wistuba, Grabocka, and Schmidt-Thieme
(2015) proposed an ultra-fast shapelet algorithm that randomly selects shapelets. This is based on the assumption
that discriminative shapelets should appear frequently in the
timeseries data, so random sampling will have a high chance
of discovering them. However, since these shapelets are random, ensuring a high accuracy requires using a large number of shapelets, which in turn slows prediction. Moreover,
random shapelets are more difﬁcult to interpret. Later, they
proposed an algorithm for scalable discovery of shapelets
using online clustering and pruning (Grabocka, Wistuba,
and Schmidt-Thieme 2015). A supervised shapelet selection
procedure is used that tries to ﬁlter out only candidates that
improve accuracy. However, empirically, the prediction accuracy is poor.
Existing methods perform a combinatorial search for
shapelet discovery. As can be seen from above, even with
speedup heuristics such as pruning, clustering, and dimen-

Abstract
In timeseries classiﬁcation, shapelets are subsequences
of timeseries with high discriminative power. Existing
methods perform a combinatorial search for shapelet
discovery. Even with speedup heuristics such as pruning, clustering, and dimensionality reduction, the search
remains computationally expensive. In this paper, we
take an entirely different approach and reformulate the
shapelet discovery task as a numerical optimization
problem. In particular, the shapelet positions are learned
by combining the generalized eigenvector method and
fused lasso regularizer to encourage a sparse and blocky
solution. Extensive experimental results show that the
proposed method is orders of magnitudes faster than the
state-of-the-art shapelet-based methods, while achieving comparable or even better classiﬁcation accuracy.

Introduction
Timeseries is the object of interest in many real-world applications such as ﬁnance, medical diagnosis, and weather
forecasting (Hamilton 1994). In recent years, a new primitive called shapelets has attracted a lot of attention in timeseries classiﬁcation (Ye and Keogh 2009; Rakthanmanon
and Keogh 2013; Hills et al. 2014; Grabocka et al. 2014).
Shapelets are subsequences of a timeseries with high discriminative power. The idea is that different classes of timeseries can often be distinguished by their local variations instead of the global structure. Besides, these local shapelets
allow easier visualization and interpretation of the data.
Shapelet-based timeseries classiﬁcation is ﬁrst proposed
in (Ye and Keogh 2009). The best discriminative shapelets
are searched over all possible subsequences, and a decision tree is constructed based on the standard information
gain criterion. Instead of relying only on decision trees,
Hills et al. (2014) proposed to ﬁrst transform the data by
measuring distances between the original timeseries data
and discovered shapelets. An off-the-shelf classiﬁer (such
as the support vector machine) is then used on the shapelettransformed data. Empirically, this improves prediction accuracy while still maintaining the explanatory power of
shapelets. Instead of restricting the shapelets to subsequences in the original timeseries, Grabocka et al. (2014)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1209

