Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Tractable Probabilistic Models for Fault Localization
Aniruddh Nath∗ and Pedro Domingos
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195, U.S.A.
{nath, pedrod}@cs.washington.edu

In this work, we apply state-of-the-art probabilistic methods to the problem of fault localization. We propose
Tractable Fault Localization Models (TFLMs) that can be
learned from a corpus of known buggy programs (with the
bug locations annotated). The trained model can then be
used to infer the probable locations of buggy lines in a previously unseen program. Conceptually, a TFLM is a probability distribution over programs in a given language, modeled
jointly with any attributes of interest (such as bug location
indicator variables, or diagnostic features). Conditioned on
a speciﬁc program, a TFLM deﬁnes a joint probability distribution over the attributes.
The key advantage of probabilistic models is their ability
to learn from experience. Many software faults are instances
of a few common error patterns, such as off-by-one errors
and use of uninitialized values (Brun and Ernst 2004). Human debuggers improve with experience as they encounter
more of these common fault patterns, and learn to recognize them in new programs. Automated debugging systems
should be able to do the same. Another advantage of probabilistic models is that they allow multiple sources of information to be combined in a principled manner. The relative contribution of each feature determined by its predictive
value in the training corpus, rather than by a human expert. A
TFLM can incorporate as features the outputs of other fault
localization systems, such as the TARANTULA hue (Jones,
Harrold, and Stasko 2002) of each line.
In recent years, there has been renewed interest in learning rich, tractable models, on which exact probabilistic inference can be performed in polynomial time (e.g. SumProduct Networks; Poon and Domingos 2011). TFLMs build
on Relational Sum-Product Networks (Nath and Domingos
2015) to enable exact inference in space and time linear in
the size of the program. We empirically compare TFLMs to
the widely-used TARANTULA fault localization method, as
well as the Statistical Bug Isolation (SBI) system, on four
mid-sized C programs. TFLMs outperform the other systems on three of the four test subjects.

Abstract
In recent years, several probabilistic techniques have been applied to various debugging problems. However, most existing
probabilistic debugging systems use relatively simple statistical models, and fail to generalize across multiple programs.
In this work, we propose Tractable Fault Localization Models
(TFLMs) that can be learned from data, and probabilistically
infer the location of the bug. While most previous statistical debugging methods generalize over many executions of
a single program, TFLMs are trained on a corpus of previously seen buggy programs, and learn to identify recurring
patterns of bugs. Widely-used fault localization techniques
such as TARANTULA evaluate the suspiciousness of each line
in isolation; in contrast, a TFLM deﬁnes a joint probability
distribution over buggy indicator variables for each line. Joint
distributions with rich dependency structure are often computationally intractable; TFLMs avoid this by exploiting recent developments in tractable probabilistic models (specifically, Relational SPNs). Further, TFLMs can incorporate
additional sources of information, including coverage-based
features such as TARANTULA. We evaluate the fault localization performance of TFLMs that include TARANTULA scores
as features in the probabilistic model. Our study shows that
the learned TFLMs isolate bugs more effectively than previous statistical methods or using TARANTULA directly.

Introduction
According to a 2002 NIST study (RTI International 2002),
software bugs cost the US economy an estimated $59.5 billion per year. While some of these costs are unavoidable, the
report claimed that an estimated $22.2 billion could be saved
with more effective tools for the identiﬁcation and removal
of software errors. Several other sources estimate that over
50% of software development costs are spent on debugging
and testing (Hailpern and Santhanam 2002).
The need for better debugging tools has long been recognized. The goal of automating various debugging tasks has
motivated a large body of research in the software engineering community. However, this line of work has only recently
begun to take advantage of recent advances in probabilistic
models, and their inference and learning algorithms.

Background
Coverage-based Fault Localization

∗

Now at Google, Inc.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Coverage-based debugging methods isolate the bug’s location by analyzing the program’s coverage spectrum on a set

1294

