Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Basic Probabilistic Ontological Data Exchange with Existential Rules
Thomas Lukasiewicz,1 Maria Vanina Martinez,2 Livia Predoiu,1,3 Gerardo I. Simari2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
Institute for Computer Science and Engineering (Universidad Nacional del Sur–CONICET), Bahia Blanca, Argentina
3
Department of Computer Science, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany
{thomas.lukasiewicz, livia.predoiu}@cs.ox.ac.uk, {mvm, gis}@cs.uns.edu.ar

proposed a probabilistic extension of the classical deterministic framework to probabilistic databases and a probabilistic source-to-target mapping. Recently, Lukasiewicz et
al. (2015b) have extended this probabilistic data exchange
framework towards probabilistic ontological data exchange.
In addition to weakly acyclic existential rules, which are
the only source-to-target mapping rules and constraints on
the target database that have been considered in data exchange so far (see, e.g., (Barcelo 2009)), in (Lukasiewicz et
al. 2015b), several other fragments of Datalog+/– are considered as ontology and source-to-target mapping languages.
In this paper, we continue this line of research. We consider a more basic probabilistic model where probabilities
of annotations with Boolean events are speciﬁed via pairwise independent random variables (rather than Bayesian
networks). We study the data and combined complexity
of deciding the existence of (universal) probabilistic solutions, obtaining a complete picture of the data complexity
and the general, bounded-arity, and ﬁxed-program combined
complexity for the main Datalog+/– languages.
Note that annotations with Boolean events are widely
used for encoding probabilities in probabilistic logical
knowledge representation (Fuhr and Rölleke 1997; Suciu et
al. 2011) and are also known as data provenance and lineage
(Imielinski and Witold Lipski 1984; Fuhr and Rölleke 1997;
Green, Karvounarakis, and Tannen 2007; Suciu et al. 2011).
Note also that closely related to exchanging uncertain and/or
ontological data as studied in (Fagin, Kimelfeld, and Kolaitis
2011; Lukasiewicz et al. 2015b) is exchanging incomplete
databases as proposed in (Arenas, Pérez, and Reutter 2013),
which considers incomplete deterministic source and target
databases in the data exchange problem and deterministic
mappings. Also related is the approach to knowledge base
exchange between deterministic DL-LiteRDFS and DL-LiteR
ontologies in (Arenas et al. 2012; 2013).
The main contributions of this paper are brieﬂy as follows.

Abstract
We study the complexity of exchanging probabilistic data between ontology-based probabilistic databases. We consider
the Datalog+/– family of languages as ontology and ontology
mapping languages, and we assume different compact encodings of the probabilities of the probabilistic source databases
via Boolean events. We provide an extensive complexity analysis of the problem of deciding the existence of a probabilistic
(universal) solution for a given probabilistic source database
relative to a (probabilistic) data exchange problem for the different languages considered.

Introduction
Being able to process uncertainty attached to data is becoming increasingly important in many areas such as information extraction, data cleaning, and Web data integration. Applications in these areas produce large volumes of uncertain
data. At the moment, the best way to model, store, and process uncertain data is in probabilistic databases (Suciu et al.
2011). Enriching databases with ontological knowledge has
recently gained more importance through the requirement of
ontology-based data access (OBDA) (Poggi et al. 2008).
A crucial challenge of accessing distributed Web-based
knowledge as found in the Semantic Web and created
through distributed OBDA applications is to integrate and
exchange knowledge. We may have to map complex concepts or queries over one or several ontologies to another
one. Apart from the uncertainty attached to source data,
a second kind of uncertainty may have to be considered
as well, namely, the uncertainty of automatically (or semiautomatically) created ontology mappings.
Data exchange (Fagin et al. 2005) is an important and
powerful theoretical framework used for studying datainteroperability tasks that require data to be transferred from
existing source databases to a target database that comes
with its own (independently created) schema (and schema
constraints). The data is translated from one database to
another one via schema mappings, which are declarative
speciﬁcations that describe the relationship between two
database schemas. Fagin, Kimelfeld, and Kolaitis (2011)

• We consider a more basic probabilistic model than the
one presented in (Lukasiewicz et al. 2015b). It involves
probabilistically independent Boolean random variables
representing possible worlds without dependencies. Our
complexity analysis of the problem of solution existence
reveals a lower data complexity, yielding tractability for
nearly all Datalog+/– languages considered.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1023

