Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Semi-Supervised Learning through Label Aggregation
Yan Yan, Zhongwen Xu, Ivor W. Tsang, Guodong Long, Yi Yang
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{yan.yan-3, zhongwen.xu}@student.uts.edu.au,{ivor.tsang, guodong.long, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

LapSVM (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006) is O(n3 )
due to the requirement for the inverse of a dense Gram matrix. TSVM in (Joachims 1999) treats the SVM problem as
a sub-problem and infers the labels of unlabeled data via a
label switch procedure, which may lead to a large number of
iterations.
In addition to the scalability issue, SSL algorithms may
suffer from label noise, leading to unreliable performance.
In the SSL setting, there are usually only small amount of
labeled data and a large proportion of unlabeled data. Even
small mistakes in the human (non-expert) annotation process
are likely to result in label noise. Thus robustness is particularly critical for SSL methods in many applications (Lu et
al. 2015; Jing et al. 2015).
This paper focuses on the two aforementioned challenges
of SSL, i.e. scalability and robustness. Inspired by crowdsourcing (Sheng, Provost, and Ipeirotis 2008; Snow et al.
2008), we propose an efﬁcient RObust Semi-Supervised Ensemble Learning (ROSSEL) method to approximate groundtruth labels of unlabeled data through aggregating a number of pseudo-labels generated by low-cost weak annotators,
such as linear SVM classiﬁers. Meanwhile, based on the
aggregated labels, ROSSEL learns an inductive SSL classiﬁer by Multiple Label Kernel Learning (MLKL) (Li et al.
2009). Unlike most existing SSL algorithms, the proposed
ROSSEL requires neither expensive graph Laplacian nor iterative label switching. Instead, it only needs one iteration
for label aggregation and can be solved by an SVM solver
very efﬁciently. The major contributions are listed as follows,

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is proposed to exploit both labeled
and unlabeled data. However, as the scale of data in real
world applications increases signiﬁcantly, conventional semisupervised algorithms usually lead to massive computational
cost and cannot be applied to large scale datasets. In addition, label noise is usually present in the practical applications
due to human annotation, which very likely results in remarkable degeneration of performance in semi-supervised methods. To address these two challenges, in this paper, we propose an efﬁcient RObust Semi-Supervised Ensemble Learning (ROSSEL) method, which generates pseudo-labels for
unlabeled data using a set of weak annotators, and combines
them to approximate the ground-truth labels to assist semisupervised learning. We formulate the weighted combination
process as a multiple label kernel learning (MLKL) problem
which can be solved efﬁciently. Compared with other semisupervised learning algorithms, the proposed method has linear time complexity. Extensive experiments on ﬁve benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior effectiveness, efﬁciency and robustness of the proposed algorithm.

Introduction
Massive data can be easily collected from social networks
and online services due to the explosion of Internet development. However, the vast majority of collected data
are usually unlabeled and unstructured. Labeling a large
amount of unlabeled data can be expensive. Therefore, it
is natural to consider exploiting the abundance of unlabeled data to further improve the performance of algorithms. This has led to a rising demand for semi-supervised
learning methods that leverage both labeled data and unlabeled data (Zhang et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2015; Zhu 2005;
Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien 2006).
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an active research area
and a variety of SSL algorithms have been proposed (Bennett, Demiriz, and others 1999; Blum and Chawla 2001;
Chapelle, Weston, and Schölkopf 2002; Smola and Kondor
2003; Belkin, Matveeva, and Niyogi 2004; Li, Kwok, and
Zhou 2010; Wang, Nie, and Huang 2014). However, many
existing algorithms are faced with the scalability issue owing to the high complexity. For example, the complexity of

• Leveraging an ensemble of low-cost supervised weak
annotators, we propose ROSSEL to efﬁciently obtain
a weighted combination of pseudo-labels of unlabeled
data to approximate ground-truth labels to assist semisupervised learning.
• Instead of simple label aggregation strategies used in
crowdsourcing (e.g. majority voting), ROSSEL performs
a weighted label aggregation using MLKL. Meanwhile it
learns an inductive SSL classiﬁer, which only requires one
iteration and linear time complexity w.r.t. number of data
and features.
• Complexity analysis of several competing SSL methods
and the proposed method is provided.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2244

