Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

SentiCap: Generating Image Descriptions with Sentiments
Alexander Mathews∗ , Lexing Xie∗† , Xuming He†∗
∗

The Australian National University, † NICTA
alex.mathews@anu.edu.au, lexing.xie@anu.edu.au, xuming.he@nicta.com.au

Abstract

This is a dog resting on a computer.
A white shaggy beautiful dog laying its
head on top of a computer keyboard.

The recent progress on image recognition and language modeling is making automatic description of image content a reality. However, stylized, non-factual aspects of the written
description are missing from the current systems. One such
style is descriptions with emotions, which is commonplace
in everyday communication, and inﬂuences decision-making
and interpersonal relationships. We design a system to describe an image with emotions, and present a model that automatically generates captions with positive or negative sentiments. We propose a novel switching recurrent neural network with word-level regularization, which is able to produce emotional image captions using only 2000+ training
sentences containing sentiments. We evaluate the captions
with different automatic and crowd-sourcing metrics. Our
model compares favourably in common quality metrics for
image captioning. In 84.6% of cases the generated positive
captions were judged as being at least as descriptive as the
factual captions. Of these positive captions 88% were conﬁrmed by the crowd-sourced workers as having the appropriate sentiment.

1

A motorcycle parked behind a truck
on a green field.
A beat up, rusty motorcycle on
unmowed grass by a truck and trailer.

Figure 1: Example images with neural, positive (green)
and negative (red) captions, by crowd workers in MSCOCO
dataset (Chen et al. 2015) and this work (Section 4).
2008; Socher et al. 2013), the synthesis of text with sentiment that is relevant to a given image is still an open problem. In Figure 1, each image is described with a factual
caption, and with positive or negative emotion, respectively.
One may argue that the descriptions with sentiments are
more likely to pique interest about the subject being pictured
(the dog and the motocycle), or about their background settings (interaction with the dog at home, or how the motocycle came about).
In this paper, we describe a method, called SentiCap, to
generate image captions with sentiments. We build upon
the CNN+RNN (Convolution Neural Network + Recurrent
Neural Network) recipe that has seen many recent successes (Donahue et al. 2015; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015;
Mao et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015a). In
particular, we propose a switching Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model to represent sentiments. This model
consists of two parallel RNNs – one represents a general
background language model; another specialises in descriptions with sentiments. We design a novel word-level regularizer, so as to emphasize the sentiment words during training
and to optimally combine the two RNN streams (Section 3).
We have gathered a new dataset of several thousand captions
with positive and negative sentiments by re-writing factual
descriptions (Section 4). Trained on 2000+ sentimental captions and 413K neutral captions, our switching RNN outperforms a range of heuristic and learned baselines in the
number of emotional captions generated, and in a number
of caption evaluation metrics. In particular SentiCap has the
highest number of success in placing at least one sentiment

Introduction

Automatically describing an image by generating a coherent sentence uniﬁes two core challenges in artiﬁcial intelligence – vision and language. Despite being a difﬁcult
problem, the research community has recently made headway into this area, thanks to large labeled datasets, and progresses in learning expressive neural network models. In addition to composing a factual description about the objects,
scene, and their interactions in an image, there are richer
variations in language, often referred to as styles (Crystal
and Davy 1969). Take emotion, for example, it is such a
common phenomena in our day-to-day communications that
over half of text accompanying online pictures contains an
emoji (a graphical alphabet for emotions) (Instagram 2015).
How well emotions are expressed and understood inﬂuences
decision-making (Lerner et al. 2015) – from the mundane
(e.g., making a restaurant menu appealing) to major (e.g.,
choosing a political leader in elections). Recognizing sentiment and opinions from written communications has been
an active research topic for the past decade (Pang and Lee
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3574

