Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Verb Pattern: A Probabilistic Semantic Representation on Verbs
Wanyun Cui, Xiyou Zhou, Hangyu Lin, Yanghua Xiao∗
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
wanyuncui1@gmail.com, { xiyouzhou13, 14302010017, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn

Haixun Wang

Seung-won Hwang

Wei Wang

Facebook, USA
haixun@gmail.com

Yonsei University
seungwonh@yonsei.ac.kr

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science
School of Computer Science, Fudan Uni.
weiwang1@fudan.edu.cn

2005), describe verbs’ semantic roles (e.g. ingestor and ingestibles for “eat”). However, semantic roles in general are
too coarse to differentiate a verb’s ﬁne-grained semantics.
A verb in different phrases can have different semantics but
similar roles. In Example 1, both “eat”s in “eat breakfast”
and “eat apple” have ingestor. But they have different
semantics.
The unawareness of verbs’ polysemy makes traditional verb representations unable to fully understand the
verb in some applications. In sentence I like eating
pitaya, people directly know “pitaya” is probably one
kind of food since eating a food is the most fundamental semantic of “eat”. This enables context-aware conceptualization of pitaya to food concept. But by only knowing pitaya’s
role is the “ingestibles”, traditional representations cannot
tell if pitaya is food or meal.
Verb Patterns We argue that verb patterns (available at
http://kw.fudan.edu.cn/verb) can be used to represent more
ﬁne-grained semantics of a verb. We design verb patterns
based on two word collocation principles proposed in corpus
linguistics (Sinclair 1991): idiom principle and open-choice
principle. Following the principles, we designed two types
of verb patterns.

Abstract
Verbs are important in semantic understanding of natural language. Traditional verb representations, such as FrameNet,
PropBank, VerbNet, focus on verbs’ roles. These roles are
too coarse to represent verbs’ semantics. In this paper, we introduce verb patterns to represent verbs’ semantics, such that
each pattern corresponds to a single semantic of the verb. First
we analyze the principles for verb patterns: generality and
speciﬁcity. Then we propose a nonparametric model based
on description length. Experimental results prove the high effectiveness of verb patterns. We further apply verb patterns to
context-aware conceptualization, to show that verb patterns
are helpful in semantic-related tasks.

Introduction
Verb is crucial in sentence understanding (Ferreira and Henderson 1990; Wu and Palmer 1994). A major issue of verb
understanding is polysemy (Rappaport Hovav and Levin
1998), which means that a verb has different semantics or
senses when collocating with different objects. In this paper,
we only focus on verbs that collocate with objects. As illustrated in Example 1, most verbs are polysemous. Hence, a
good semantic representation of verbs should be aware of
their polysemy.
Example 1 (Verb Polysemy). eat has the following senses:

• Conceptualized patterns According to open-choice principle, a verb can collocate with any objects. Objects have
certain concepts, which can be used for semantic representation and sense disambiguation (Wu et al. 2012). This
motivates us to use the objects’ concepts to represent the
semantics of verbs. In Example 1, eat breakfast and
eat lunch have similar semantics because both objects
have concept meal. Thus, we replace the object in the
phrase with its concept to form a conceptualized pattern
verb $C concept (e.g. eat $C food). Each verb phrase in
open-choice principle is assigned to one conceptualized
pattern according to the object’s concept.

• a. Put food in mouth, chew it and swallow it, such as eat
apple and eat hot dog.
• b. Have a meal, such as eat breakfast, eat
lunch, and eat dinner.
• c. Idioms, such as eat humble pie, which means admitting that you are wrong.
Many
typical
verb
representations,
including
FrameNet (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998), PropBank (Kingsbury and Palmer 2002), and VerbNet (Schuler

• Idiom patterns According to idiom principle, some verb
phrases have speciﬁc meanings unrelated to the object’s
concept. We add $I before the object to denote the idiom
pattern ( i.e. verb $I object).

∗

Correspondence author. This paper was supported by the National NSFC(No.61472085, 61171132, 61033010), by National
Key Basic Research Program of China under No.2015CB358800,
by Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Commission foundation key project under No.15JC1400900. Seung-won
Hwang was supported by Microsoft.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

According to the above deﬁnitions, we use verb patterns
to represent the verb’s semantics. Phrases assigned to the
same pattern have similar semantics, while those assigned to
different patterns have different semantics. By verb patterns,

2587

