Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Ad Auctions and Cascade Model: GSP Inefﬁciency and Algorithms
Gabriele Farina and Nicola Gatti
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
I-20133, Milan, Italy
gabriele2.farina@mail.polimi.it, nicola.gatti@polimi.it

depends also on the ads actually allocated. This model is
extensively experimentally validated (Craswell et al. 2008;
Joachims et al. 2007). However, it is not known whether
ﬁnding the best allocation of APDC is FN P–hard, but it
is commonly conjectured to be. (Gatti and Rocco 2013)
provides an exact algorithm that can be used in real time
only with 40 ads or less, while in real–world applications
the ads can be even more than 1,000. The problem admits
a constant–ratio (1 − )/4, with  ∈ [0, 1], approximation algorithm (Gatti and Rocco 2013; Kempe and Mahdian
2008), but no known algorithm is proved to lead to a truthful economic mechanism. In addition, the known approximation algorithms can be applied in real time only with
100 ads or less (Gatti and Rocco 2013). More expressive
models include a contextual graph, see (Gatti et al. 2015;
Fotakis, Krysta, and Telelis 2011), but they are Poly–APX –
hard. Hence, the APDC is considered as the candidate providing the best trade–off between accuracy and tractability.
While the GSP is still popular in many SSAs, the increasing evidence of its limits is strongly pushing towards
the adoption of the more appealing VCG mechanism, which
is already successfully employed in the related scenario of
contextual advertising, by Google (Varian and Harris 2014)
and Facebook (Hegeman 2010). The main drawback of the
GSP is the inefﬁciency of its equilibria (in terms of social welfare) w.r.t. the VCG outcome (the only known results concern PDC): considering the whole set of Nash
equilibria in full information, the PoA of the GSP is upper bounded by about 1.6, while considering the set of
Bayes–Nash equilibria the PoA is upper bounded by about
3.1 (Leme and E. Tardos 2010). Furthermore, automated
bidding strategies, used in practice by the advertisers to ﬁnd
their best bids, may not even converge to any Nash equilibrium and, under mild assumptions, the states they converge to are shown to be arbitrarily inefﬁcient (Evangelos and Telelis 2010). Some works study how inefﬁciency
is affected by some form of externalities, showing that no
Nash equilibrium of the GSP provides a larger revenue
than the VCG outcome (Kuminov and Tennenholtz 2009;
Gomes, Immorlica, and Markakis 2009).
Original contributions. Under the assumption that the
users behave as prescribed by APDC, we study the PoA and
PoS both over the social welfare and over the auctioneer’s
revenue of the GSP w.r.t. the VCG based on APDC (we

Abstract
The design of the best economic mechanism for Sponsored Search Auctions (SSAs) is a central task in computational mechanism design/game theory. Two open
questions concern (i) the adoption of user models more
accurate than the currently used one and (ii) the choice
between Generalized Second Price auction (GSP) and
Vickrey–Clark–Groves mechanism (VCG). In this paper, we provide some contributions to answer these
questions. We study Price of Anarchy (PoA) and Price
of Stability (PoS) over social welfare and auctioneer’s
revenue of GSP w.r.t. the VCG when the users follow
the famous cascade model. Furthermore, we provide
exact, randomized, and approximate algorithms, showing that in real–world settings (Yahoo! Webscope A3
dataset, 10 available slots) optimal allocations can be
found in less than 1s with up to 1,000 ads, and can be
approximated in less than 20ms even with more than
1,000 ads with an average accuracy greater than 99%.

Introduction
SSAs, in which a number of advertisers bid to have their
ads displayed in some slot alongside the search results of a
keyword, constitute one of the most successful applications
of microeconomic mechanisms, with a revenue of about $50
billion dollars in the US alone in 2014 (IAB 2015). Similar models are used in many other advertisement applications, e.g. contextual advertising (Varian and Harris 2014).
A number of questions remain currently open in the study
of effective SSAs. Among these, two are crucial and concern (i) the adoption of the best user model in real–world
settings and (ii) the design of the best economic mechanism.
In this paper, we provide some contributions to answer these
questions.
The commonly adopted user model is the position dependent cascade (PDC) in which the user is assumed to
observe the slots from the top to the bottom with probabilities to observe the next slot that depend only on the
slots themselves (Narahari et al. 2009). The optimal allocation can be efﬁciently found in a greedy fashion. The natural extension is the ad/position–dependent cascade (APDC)
model, in which the probability to observe the next slot
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

489

