Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Temporal Topic Analysis with
Endogenous and Exogenous Processes
Baiyang Wang, Diego Klabjan
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences,
Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois, USA, 60208
baiyang@u.northwestern.edu
d-klabjan@northwestern.edu

documents with time stamps and a related exogenous process, the problem is to ﬁnd a relationship between the topics
discussed and the exogenous process. This setting is natural
in an economic context; for instance, changes in macroeconomic indicators have an impact on government reports and
Wall Street Journal news articles. Meanwhile, we also notice that for most temporal documents, the topic proportions
change over time, which indicates an endogenous process of
topic evolution.
With the goal of establishing topic dependency on the endogenous and exogenous processes, LDA-type topic models are especially suitable. The latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) is the original model.
Since then, a large number of variants have been proposed,
many of which can be found in Blei (2011).
Meanwhile, there has been relatively limited discussion
on modeling time-dependent documents when there are
relevant simultaneous exogenous processes. Many timedependent topic models without the exogenous component
have been proposed, such as the Topics over Time (ToT)
model (Wang and McCallum 2006) and the dynamic topic
model (DTM) (Blei and Lafferty 2006), to name a few. However, to the best of our knowledge, none of these papers incorporate the effect of exogenous processes. On the other
hand, the structural topic model (STM) (Roberts, Stewart,
and Airoldi 2015) considers the effect of metadata, i.e. the
attributes speciﬁed for each document, on the topic distribution. While STM can be applied for mining time-dependent
textual data with exogenous covariates, it does not explicitly
consider the time factor or the endogenous topic evolution
processes of time-stamped documents.
Our approach to this problem is to incorporate both endogenous and exogenous processes into a topic model. For
the endogenous part of our paper, we impose a Markovian structure on the topic distribution over time, similar
to Blei and Lafferty (2006) and Dubey et al. (2014). For
the exogenous process, we incorporate it into the topic distribution in each period, adjusting the endogenous topic
evolution process. In this way, our model is essentially a
stick-breaking truncation of a ”group-correlated” hierarchical Dirichlet process. Our model has the following contributions: (i) it addresses the question of measuring the inﬂuence
of exogenous processes on the topics in related documents,
(ii) it incorporates both endogenous and exogenous aspects,

Abstract
We consider the problem of modeling temporal textual
data taking endogenous and exogenous processes into
account. Such text documents arise in real world applications, including job advertisements and economic
news articles, which are inﬂuenced by the ﬂuctuations of the general economy. We propose a hierarchical Bayesian topic model which imposes a ”groupcorrelated” hierarchical structure on the evolution of
topics over time incorporating both processes, and show
that this model can be estimated from Markov chain
Monte Carlo sampling methods. We further demonstrate that this model captures the intrinsic relationships
between the topic distribution and the time-dependent
factors, and compare its performance with latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and two other related models. The
model is applied to two collections of documents to illustrate its empirical performance: online job advertisements from DirectEmployers Association and journalists’ postings on BusinessInsider.com.

1

Introduction

Many organizations nowadays provide portals for job posting and job search, such as glassdoor.com from Glassdoor,
indeed.com from Recruit, and my.jobs from DirectEmployers Association. Our work is inspired by data collected from
the portal my.jobs, a website where job seekers can apply to
the posted job openings through a provided link. The data
collected from the website includes user clickstreams (users
create accounts on the site) and attributes of job advertisements, such as their description, location, company name,
and posted date.
In this paper, we investigate the relationship between economic ﬂuctuations and the related changes in job advertisements, which can reveal the economic conditions of different
time periods. More generally, this question is about the inﬂuence of any exogenous process on textual data with temporal dimensions. We adopt the perspective that the documents
are organized into a certain number of topics, and study the
impact of the exogenous process on the topic distribution,
i.e. the relative topic proportions. Given a corpus of text
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3045

