Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Joint Model for Question Answering over Multiple Knowledge Bases
Yuanzhe Zhang, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, Jun Zhao
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
{yzzhang, shizhu.he, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

*HQHUDO

0XVLF

JHUELUWK3ODFH
RZOVDPH$V
JHH$QQHB+DWKDZD\ JHH1HZB<RUN

PXUSHUIRUPHU

As the amount of knowledge bases (KBs) grows rapidly, the
problem of question answering (QA) over multiple KBs has
drawn more attention. The most signiﬁcant distinction between multiple KB-QA and single KB-QA is that the former must consider the alignments between KBs. The pipeline
strategy ﬁrst constructs the alignments independently, and
then uses the obtained alignments to construct queries. However, alignment construction is not a trivial task, and the
introduced noises would be passed on to query construction. By contrast, we notice that alignment construction and
query construction are interactive steps, and jointly considering them would be beneﬁcial. To this end, we present a
novel joint model based on integer linear programming (ILP),
uniting these two procedures into a uniform framework. The
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach
outperforms state-of-the-art systems, and is able to improve
the performance of both alignment construction and query
construction.

PXH,B'UHDPHG
BDB'UHDP

PXH$QQHB
+DWKDZD\

RZOVDPH$V

RZOVDPH$V

0RYLH
PRUVWDUULQJ
PRH$QQHB+DWKDZD\ PRH9DOHQWLQHV
B'D\ 

Figure 1: Three KBs should be used to answer the question “Which songs are performed by person who was born
in New York and played a role in Valentine’s Day?”.
Shekarpour et al. 2014; Fader, Zettlemoyer, and Etzioni
2014).
This is a challenging task. For example, consider the following question:
Which songs are performed by person who was born in
New York and played a role in Valentine’s Day?1
As illustrated in Figure 1, the answer to “songs performed
by” is in a music domain KB, and the answer to “born
in New York” is in a general domain KB, and answering
“played a role in Valentine’s Day” should turn to a movie
domain KB. The ﬁnal structured query is generated by uniting different fragments as follows:
SELECT ?v1 WHERE {
?v1, mur:perfomer, ?v22
?v2, owl:sameAs, ?v3
?v3, mor:starring, moe:Valentines Day(2010)
?v3, owl:sameAs, ?v4
?v4, ger:birthPlace, gee:New York }
From this example, we can see that the most signiﬁcant difference between multiple KB-QA and single KBQA is that the former needs to consider the interconnections

Introduction
With the continued growth of knowledge bases (KBs) on the
web, how to access such precious intellectual resources becomes increasingly important (Unger, Freitas, and Cimiano
2014). Knowledge base based question answering (KB-QA)
just focuses on this problem and is able to use natural language as query language. Therefore, it has received more
attention in recent years.
The key problem in KB-QA is to convert natural language questions into structured queries, such as SPARQL
queries. There are many researches that focus on this problem, and most of them are single KB-QA (Frank et al. 2007;
Zettlemoyer and Collins 2005; 2007; 2009; Kwiatkowski et
al. 2011; 2013). They often assume that the answers could
be acquired from a single KB. However, it is almost unpractical that using a single KB could cover all questions.
A plenty of KBs exist on the web and they could focus on
different domains. It is not rare that a natural language question involves many aspects, and each aspect is covered by
a relevant KB. Such question would be answered by using
multiple KBs. We name this task as multiple KB-QA, which
is seldom investigated before, except for (Lopez et al. 2012;

1
This is a real case in Chinese QA scenario, and there is no such
a Chinese KB could answer it alone.
2
This triple pattern means that ?v2 is the performer of ?v1. The
ﬁrst two letters of the preﬁx represent the source KB (mo: movie,
mu: music and ge: general), and the last letter represents the type
(e: entity, c: class and r: relation). E.g., mur means the resource is
from music KB and is a relation.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3094

