Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Addressing a Question Answering Challenge by Combining
Statistical Methods with Inductive Rule Learning and Reasoning
Arindam Mitra

Chitta Baral

Arizona State University
amitra7@asu.edu

Arizona State University
chitta@asu.edu

In the following paragraph, we provide some examples of
the tasks from (Weston et al. 2015). A detailed description
of all the tasks can be found there. Each task is noiseless,
provides a set of training and test data and a human can potentially achieve 100% accuracy.

Abstract
A group of researchers from Facebook has recently proposed a set of 20 question-answering tasks (Facebook’s
bAbl dataset) as a challenge for the natural language understanding ability of an intelligent agent. These tasks are designed to measure various skills of an agent, such as: fact
based question-answering, simple induction, the ability to
ﬁnd paths, co-reference resolution and many more. Their goal
is to aid in the development of systems that can learn to solve
such tasks and to allow a proper evaluation of such systems.
They show existing systems cannot fully solve many of those
toy tasks. In this work, we present a system that excels at all
the tasks except one. The proposed model of the agent uses
the Answer Set Programming (ASP) language as the primary
knowledge representation and reasoning language along with
the standard statistical Natural Language Processing (NLP)
models. Given a training dataset containing a set of narrations, questions and their answers, the agent jointly uses a
translation system, an Inductive Logic Programming algorithm and Statistical NLP methods to learn the knowledge
needed to answer similar questions. Our results demonstrate
that the introduction of a reasoning module signiﬁcantly improves the performance of an intelligent agent.

Example 1. Task 8: List/Sets
Mary grabbed the football.
Mary traveled to the ofﬁce.
Mary took the apple there.
What is Mary carrying? A:football,apple
Mary left the football.
Daniel went back to the bedroom.
What is Mary carrying? A:apple
Example 2. Task 19: Path Finding
The ofﬁce is east of the hallway.
The kitchen is north of the ofﬁce.
The garden is west of the bedroom.
The ofﬁce is west of the garden.
The bathroom is north of the garden.
How do you go from the kitchen to the garden?
A:s,e

Developing intelligent agents is one of the long term goals
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. To track the progress towards
this goal, several challenges have been recently proposed
that employs a Question-Answering (QA) based strategy to
test an agent’s understanding. The Allen Institute for AI’s
ﬂagship project ARISTO, (Richardson, Burges, and Renshaw 2013)’s MCTest and the Winograd Schema Challenge
(Levesque, Davis, and Morgenstern 2012) are all examples
of this. As mentioned in the work of (Weston et al. 2015),
even though these tasks are promising and provide real
world challenges, successfully answering their questions require competence on many sub-tasks (deduction, use of
common-sense, abduction, coreference etc.); which makes
it difﬁcult to interpret the results on these benchmarks. Often the state-of-the-art systems are highly domain speciﬁc
and rely heavily on the prior knowledge. In this light, they
(Weston et al. 2015) have proposed a new dataset (Facebook
bAbl dataset) that put together several question-answering
tasks where solving each task develops a new skill set into
an agent.

In this work, we describe an agent architecture that simultaneously works with a formal reasoning model and a statistical inference based model to address the task of questionanswering. Human beings in their lifetime learn to perform
various tasks. For some tasks they may have a clear reasoning behind their actions. For example, the knowledge needed
to answer the previous question “What is Mary carrying?”
is clear and can be described formally. On the other hand,
there are tasks such as Named Entity Recognition that we
can do easily, however, we may not be able to describe it
well enough for anyone else to use the description for recognition. In these cases, a statistical inference model that allows to learn by observing a distribution may be a better ﬁt.
In this research, thus, we work with a heterogeneous agent
model. In our current implementation, the agent model contains three layers.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Statistical Inference Layer This layer contains statistical
NLP models. In this case study, it contains only an Ab-

2779

