Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Beyond OWL 2 QL in OBDA: Rewritings and Approximations
Elena Botoeva,1 Diego Calvanese,1 Valerio Santarelli,2 Domenico F. Savo,2
Alessandro Solimando,3 , and Guohui Xiao1
1
2

KRDB Research Centre for Knowledge and Data, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy, lastname@inf.unibz.it
Dip. di Ing. Informatica Automatica e Gestionale, Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy, lastname@dis.uniroma1.it
3
DIBRIS, University of Genova, Italy, alessandro.solimando@unige.it

simple account by means of the axiom (expressed in description logic notation) CAcc  ∃inNameOf.Person  SAcc.
We assume that the information about the accounts and their
owners is stored in a database D, and that the ontology terms
CAcc, inNameOf, and Person are connected to D respectively via the mapping assertions sql 1 (x)  CAcc(x),
sql 2 (x, y)  inNameOf(x, y) and sql 3 (x)  Person(x),
where each sql i is a (possibly very complex) SQL query
over D. Suppose now that the user intends to extract all simple accounts from D. Formulating such a query directly over
D would require to know precisely how D is structured, and
thus could be complicated. Instead, exploiting OBDA, the
user can simply query the ontology with q(x) = SAcc(x),
and rely on the OBDA system to get the answers.
Making OBDA work efﬁciently over large amounts of
data, requires that query answering over the ontology is
ﬁrst-order (FO)-rewritable1 (Calvanese et al. 2007; Artale
et al. 2009), which in turn limits the expressiveness of the
ontology language, and the degree of detail with which
the domain of interest can be captured. The current language of choice for OBDA is DL-LiteR , the logic underlying OWL 2 QL (Motik et al. 2009), which has been specifically designed to ensure FO-rewritability of query answering. Hence, it does not allow one to express disjunctive information, or any form of recursion on the data (e.g., as resulting from qualiﬁed existentials on the left-hand side of concept inclusions), since using such constructs in general causes the loss of FO-rewritability (Calvanese et al. 2013). For
this reason, in many situations the expressive power of DLLiteR is too restricted to capture real-world scenarios; e.g.,
the axiom in our example is not expressible in DL-LiteR .
The aim of this work is to overcome these limitations of
DL-LiteR by allowing the use of additional constructs in
the ontology. To be able to exploit the added value coming from OBDA in real-world settings, an important requirement is the efﬁciency of query answering, achieved
through a rewriting-based approach. This is only possible
for ontology languages that are FO-rewritable. Two general mechanisms that have been proposed to cope with
computational complexity coming from high expressiveness of ontology languages, and that allow one to regain
FO-rewritability, are conservative rewriting (Lutz, Piro, and

Abstract
Ontology-based data access (OBDA) is a novel paradigm facilitating access to relational data, realized by linking data
sources to an ontology by means of declarative mappings.
DL-LiteR , which is the logic underpinning the W3C ontology language OWL 2 QL and the current language of choice
for OBDA, has been designed with the goal of delegating
query answering to the underlying database engine, and thus
is restricted in expressive power. E.g., it does not allow one
to express disjunctive information, and any form of recursion on the data. The aim of this paper is to overcome these
limitations of DL-LiteR , and extend OBDA to more expressive ontology languages, while still leveraging the underlying
relational technology for query answering. We achieve this
by relying on two well-known mechanisms, namely conservative rewriting and approximation, but signiﬁcantly extend
their practical impact by bringing into the picture the mapping, an essential component of OBDA. Speciﬁcally, we develop techniques to rewrite OBDA speciﬁcations with an expressive ontology to “equivalent” ones with a DL-LiteR ontology, if possible, and to approximate them otherwise. We
do so by exploiting the high expressive power of the mapping
layer to capture part of the domain semantics of rich ontology
languages. We have implemented our techniques in the prototype system O NTO P ROX, making use of the state-of-theart OBDA system O NTOP and the query answering system
C LIPPER, and we have shown their feasibility and effectiveness with experiments on synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Ontology-Based Data Access (OBDA) is a popular paradigm that enables end users to access data sources through
an ontology, abstracting away low-level details of the data
sources themselves. The ontology provides a high-level description of the domain of interest, and is semantically linked to the data sources by means of a set of mapping assertions (Calvanese et al. 2009; Giese et al. 2015). Typically,
the data sources are represented as relational data, the ontology is constituted by a set of logical axioms over concepts
and roles, and each mapping assertion relates an SQL query
over the database to a concept or role of the ontology.
As an example, consider a bank domain, where we can
specify that a checking account in the name of a person is a
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

921

Recall that FO queries constitute the core of SQL.

