Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Accelerating Random Kaczmarz Algorithm
Based on Clustering Information
Yujun Li and Kaichun Mo and Haishan Ye
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{liyujun145,yhs12354123}@gmail.com, daerduomkch@sjtu.edu.cn

Needell 2011), which selects the optimal update from a randomly chosen set of linear equations during each iteration.
Empirical studies demonstrate an improved rate of convergence than former methods. Moreover, along another direction of researches on accelerating Kaczmarz algorithm, multiple rows of A are utilized at the same time to perform one
single updating step. These RKA-Block methods (Elfving
1980; Needell and Tropp 2014; Briskman and Needell 2014)
use subsets of constraints during iterations so that an expected linear rate of convergence can be provably achieved if
utilizing randomization as well. However, geometric properties of blocks are important. Blocks with bad-condition number will interfere the rate of convergence.
Since Kaczmarz based algorithms are widely used nowadays (Natterer 1986; Sezan and Stark 1987; Dai, Soltanalian, and Pelckmans 2014; Thoppe, Borkar, and Manjunath
2014), many other branches of research on Kaczmarz are
developed. In terms of inconsistent case, many useful methods (Needell 2010; Zouzias and Freris 2013) are proposed.
When A is a large sparse matrix, there will appear a big
ﬁll-in, modiﬁed Kaczmarz via clustering Jaccard and Hamming distances can overcome this problem (Pomparău and
Popa 2014; Pomparău 2013). However in this paper, we
consider solving consistent system of linear equations with
high-dimensional matrix A following Gaussian distribution.
One greedy idea highlighted by (Eldar and Needell 2011)
emphasize the importance of choosing hyperplanes that give
the furthest distance to the current estimate during updating steps. Many methods such as (Eldar and Needell 2011)
are proposed to approximately utilize this idea by considering acceptable number of hyperplanes and selecting the furthest one. In this paper, we utilize clustering methods to gain
more insight on where is the furthest hyperplane. Eventually,
we incorporated clustering algorithms into one version of
randomized Kaczmarz algorithm(RKA-JL) and block Kaczmarz algorithm(RKA-Block) in order to better approximate
that optimal plane.
It is well-known that high-dimensioanl data points randomly sampled according to Gaussian distribution are much
likely be orthogonal to each other. One can refer to (Blum,
Hopcroft, and Kannan 2015) and Theorem 1 for details.
Even though real data entities in high dimension are not ideally sampled from Gaussian distribution, they still tend to
stretch along with different axes. In this paper, we cluster

Abstract
Kaczmarz algorithm is an efﬁcient iterative algorithm to solve
overdetermined consistent system of linear equations. During
each updating step, Kaczmarz chooses a hyperplane based
on an individual equation and projects the current estimate
for the exact solution onto that space to get a new estimate. Many vairants of Kaczmarz algorithms are proposed
on how to choose better hyperplanes. Using the property of
randomly sampled data in high-dimensional space, we propose an accelerated algorithm based on clustering information to improve block Kaczmarz and Kaczmarz via JohnsonLindenstrauss lemma. Additionally, we theoretically demonstrate convergence improvement on block Kaczmarz algorithm.

1

Introduction

In many real applications, we will face with solving the
overdetermined consistent system of linear equations of the
form Ax = b, where A ∈ Rn×p and b ∈ Rn are given data,
and x ∈ Rp is unknown vector to be estimated. If A has
a small size, we could directly solve the problem by computing pseudo-inverse, x = A† b. However, if A is of large
size, either we cannot store it in the main memory or it is
extremely time-consuming to compute the pseudo-inverse.
Fortunately, in such cases, the Kaczmarz algorithm can be
used to solve the problem, since we can update our current
estimate to the exact solution x∗ iteratively by only using a
small fraction of entire data each time.
Recently, many variants of the classical Kaczmarz algorithm (Kaczmarz 1937) are proposed by researchers. Classical Kaczmarz algorithm performs each iterative step by selecting rows of A in a sequential order. Despite the power
of it, theoretical guarantee for its rate of convergence is
scarce. However, a randomized version of Kaczmarz algorithm (Strohmer and Vershynin 2009), denoted as RKA
in this paper, yields provably exponential rate of convergence in expectation by sampling rows of A at random,
with probability proportional to Euclidean norm. Recently,
more accelerated variants of Kaczmarz algorithms are put
forth by researchers. With the usage of well-known JohnsonLindenstrauss lemma (Johnson and Lindenstrauss 1984), Eldar and Needell proposed RKA-JL algorithm (Eldar and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1823

