Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reuse of Neural Modules for General Video Game Playing
Alexander Braylan, Mark Hollenbeck, Elliot Meyerson, Risto Miikkulainen
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
{braylan,mhollen,ekm,risto}@cs.utexas.edu

has been provided with this additional relational knowledge, or, if it can be learned (Talvitie and Singh 2007;
Taylor, Kuhlmann, and Stone 2008; Ammar et al. 2015b),
cases where task mappings are useful. The second assumption implies that it is known what knowledge will be useful
and how it should be incorporated before learning on the target task begins, preventing the agent from adapting the way
it uses source knowledge as it gains information about the
target domain.
General ReUse of Static Modules (GRUSM) is proposed
in this paper as a general neural network approach to transfer learning that avoids both of these assumptions. GRUSM
augments the learning process to allow learning networks
to route through existing neural modules (source networks)
selectively as they simultaneously develop new structure
for the target task. Unlike previous work, which has dealt
with mapping task variables between source and target,
GRUSM is domain-independent, in that no knowledge about
the structure of the source domain or even knowledge about
where the network came from is required for it to be reused.
Instead of using mappings between task-spaces to facilitate
transfer, it searches directly for mappings in the solution
space, that is, connections between existing source networks
and the target network. This approach is motivated by studies that have shown in both naturally occurring complex networks (Milo et al. 2002) and in artiﬁcial neural networks
(Swarup and Ray 2006) that certain network structures repeat and can be useful across domains, without any context
for how exactly this structure should be used. This work is
further motivated by the idea that neural resources in the human brain are reused for countless purposes in varying complex ways (Anderson 2010).
In this paper, an implementation of GRUSM based on the
Enforced Subpopulations (ESP) neuroevolution framework
(Gomez and Miikkulainen 1997; 1999) is presented. The
approach is validated on the stochastic Atari 2600 general
game playing platform, ﬁnding that GRUSM-ESP improves
learning for more complex target games, and that these improvements may be predicted based on domain complexity
features. This result demonstrates that even without traditional transfer learning assumptions, successful knowledge
transfer via general reuse of existing neural modules is possible and useful for long-range sequential control tasks. In
principle, this approach scales naturally to transfer from an

Abstract
A general approach to knowledge transfer is introduced in
which an agent controlled by a neural network adapts how it
reuses existing networks as it learns in a new domain. Networks trained for a new domain can improve their performance by routing activation selectively through previously
learned neural structure, regardless of how or for what it was
learned. A neuroevolution implementation of this approach
is presented with application to high-dimensional sequential decision-making domains. This approach is more general than previous approaches to neural transfer for reinforcement learning. It is domain-agnostic and requires no prior assumptions about the nature of task relatedness or mappings.
The method is analyzed in a stochastic version of the Arcade
Learning Environment, demonstrating that it improves performance in some of the more complex Atari 2600 games,
and that the success of transfer can be predicted based on a
high-level characterization of game dynamics.

Introduction
The ability to apply available previously learned knowledge
to new tasks is a hallmark of general intelligence. Transfer learning is the process of reusing knowledge from previously learned source tasks to bootstrap learning of target tasks. In long-range sequential control domains, such
as robotics and video game-playing, transfer is particularly
important, because previous experience can help agents explore new environments efﬁciently (Taylor and Stone 2009;
Konidaris, Scheidwasser, and Barto 2012). Knowledge acquired during previous tasks also contains information about
an agent’s domain-independent decision making and learning dynamics, and thus can be useful even if the domains
seem unrelated.
Existing approaches to transfer learning in such domains
have demonstrated successful transfer of varying kinds of
knowledge, but they make two fundamental assumptions
that restrict their generality: (1) some sort of a priori humandeﬁned understanding of how tasks are related, and (2) separability of knowledge extraction and target learning. The
ﬁrst assumption limits how well the approach can be applied by restricting its use only to cases where the agent
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

353

