Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Ontology-Mediated Queries for NOSQL Databases
Marie-Laure Mugnier

Marie-Christine Rousset

Federico Ulliana

Université de Montpellier
CNRS, LIRMM
GrahpIK Team, INRIA
marie-laure.mugnier@lirmm.fr

Univ. Grenoble Alpes
CNRS, LIG
IUF (Institut Universitaire de France)
marie-christine.rousset@imag.fr

Université de Montpellier
CNRS, LIRMM
GrahpIK Team, INRIA
federico.ulliana@lirmm.fr

and Pieris 2012) and existential rules (Baget et al. 2011)).
Within this framework, decidability and complexity results
have been obtained for ontology-mediated query answering,
and many algorithms have been designed and implemented.
Whether this paradigm can be used to query datasources
that are not relational is a still an open question. The naive
way to deal with non relational datasources is to deﬁne mappings for translating them into relational structures, and then
use the classic OBDA framework as it is. However, this approach would induce a signiﬁcant performance degrade as it
would add a step for converting the data using the mappings
and, most importantly, it would make impossible to take advantage of the low level query optimizations provided by
native systems. This can be particularly acute for NOSQL
systems, like key-value stores, that have been speciﬁcally
designed to scale when dealing with very large collections
of data.
In this paper, we study ontology-based data access directly on top of NOSQL systems. The term NOSQL (NotOnly SQL) deﬁnes a broad collection of languages. Keyvalue stores are NOSQL systems adopting the data model of
key-value records (also called JSON records). These records
are processed on distributed systems, but also increasingly
exchanged on the Web thereby replacing semistructured
XML data and many RDF formats (see JSON-LD (Sporny
et al. 2004)). Key-value records are non-ﬁrst normal forms
where values are not only atomic (in contrast with relational databases) and nesting is possible (Abiteboul, Hull,
and Vianu 1995).

Abstract
Ontology-Based Data Access has been studied so far for relational structures and deployed on top of relational databases.
This paradigm enables a uniform access to heterogeneous
data sources, also coping with incomplete information.
Whether OBDA is suitable also for non-relational structures,
like those shared by increasingly popular NOSQL languages,
is still an open question. In this paper, we study the problem
of answering ontology-mediated queries on top of key-value
stores. We formalize the data model and core queries of these
systems, and introduce a rule language to express lightweight
ontologies on top of data. We study the decidability and data
complexity of query answering in this setting.

Introduction
Ontology-based data access (OBDA) is a well-established
paradigm for querying incomplete data sources while taking into account knowledge provided by a domain ontology
(Poggi et al. 2008). Today, the main applications of OBDA
can be found in data integration as well as in querying the
Semantic Web. The interest of OBDA is to allow the users to
ask queries on high-level ontology vocabularies and to delegate to algorithms (1) the reformulation of these high-level
queries into a set of low-level databases queries, (2) the efﬁcient computation of their answers by native data management systems in which data is stored and indexed, and (3)
the combination of these answers in order to obtain the ﬁnal answers to the users’ query. The advantage of OBDA is
that, since the query reformulation step is independent of the
data, ontology-mediated query answering has the same data
complexity as the query engines equipping the underlying
native data storage systems, and can beneﬁt from the many
low-level optimizations making them efﬁcient and scalable.

Illustrative example
{ department : “Computer Science”,
professor : [
{ name : “Alice”, reachable : “yes”,
boss : “Charles” }
{ name : “Bob”, phone : {office : “5-256”} }]
course : [ [“C123”, “Java”] , [“C310”, “C++”] ]
director : null }

OBDA has been studied so far for relational structures
and deployed on top of relational databases. The database
queries used in OBDA are (unions of) conjunctive relational
queries, while the ontologies are speciﬁed in either a description logic (e.g., the lightweight DL-Lite (Calvanese et
al. 2007)(Kontchakov et al. 2010), or the expressive HornSHIQ (Eiter et al. 2012)), or, more generally, a suitable
fragment of ﬁrst-order logic (e.g., Datalog± (Calı̀, Gottlob,

Figure 1: Key-value record

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1051

