Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Combinatorial Search Perspective
on Diverse Solution Generation
Satya Gautam Vadlamudi and Subbarao Kambhampati
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University
{gautam , rao}@asu.edu

tion Problem (CSP),
 each copy with a different set of variable names, adds K
2 additional constraints for handling the
minimum distance requirement between all pairs, and uses
off-the-shelf solvers to generate solutions. As one would expect, they report that this approach generates prohibitively
large CSPs and therefore propose a greedy method. The
greedy approach which has since been widely adopted (Petit and Trapp 2015; Bloem 2015; Roberts, Howe, and Ray
2014; Nguyen et al. 2012) works as follows:
Obtain a candidate solution satisfying any given cost criteria, add this to the solution K-set, provide feedback to the
method ﬁnding candidate solutions about the current composition of the K-set so that it tries to ﬁnd the next candidate
solution distant to the current K-set. Upon obtaining the next
candidate solution, the greedy method adds it to the K-set if
it indeed satisﬁes the distance criteria and provides feedback
to ﬁnd the next solution, otherwise the candidate solution is
simply discarded. This process is continued until a set of K
diverse solutions is found. (Roberts, Howe, and Ray 2014;
Eiter et al. 2013) and (Nguyen et al. 2012) consider the
ﬁrst solution generated to be the starting solution (permanent member) for constructing the K-set through the above
greedy approach. (Bloem 2015) considers an optimal solution to be the starting solution of the greedy method. (Petit
and Trapp 2015) attempt to address the issue of ﬁxed starting solution by running the greedy approach multiple times
with different optimal solutions as the starting solution on
each occasion.
A pertinent issue with the above approaches is that the
ﬁrst solution (or an optimal solution) is always considered
to be part of the solution set, which may often result in not
ﬁnding a K-set even when there exists one, even with a very
good feedback strategy to search for distant solutions after
ﬁnding the initial solution. Note that an optimal solution (or
the ﬁrst found solution) need not be part of a diverse set of
the required size at all. Figure 1 shows an example of an
instance where the optimal solution is not part of the most
diverse solution set of size 2 (assuming that the distance between two plans is inversely proportional to the number of
edges/actions they have in common; p1 and p2 have edge a
in common and p2 and p3 have edge b in common).
In this paper, we address this problem in depth by proposing complete algorithms which guarantee to ﬁnd a set of K
diverse solutions whenever there exists one. In order to ac-

Abstract
Finding diverse solutions has become important in many
combinatorial search domains, including Automated Planning, Path Planning and Constraint Programming. Much of
the work in these directions has however focussed on coming up with appropriate diversity metrics and compiling
those metrics in to the solvers/planners. Most approaches use
linear-time greedy algorithms for exploring the state space
of solution combinations for generating a diverse set of solutions, limiting not only their completeness but also their
effectiveness within a time bound. In this paper, we take a
combinatorial search perspective on generating diverse solutions. We present a generic bi-level optimization framework
for ﬁnding cost-sensitive diverse solutions. We propose complete methods under this framework, which guarantee ﬁnding
a set of cost sensitive diverse solutions satisﬁcing the given
criteria whenever there exists such a set. We identify various aspects that affect the performance of these exhaustive
algorithms and propose techniques to improve them. Experimental results show the efﬁcacy of the proposed framework
compared to an existing greedy approach.

In many real-world domains involving combinatorial search
such as automated planning, path planning and constraint
programming, generating diverse solutions is of much importance. In the case of automated planning, real-world scenario often involves working with unknown or partially
known user preferences (Kambhampati 2007), as the user
preferences are many times difﬁcult to be articulated and
speciﬁed completely. Such situations lead to multiple, often, large number of plans that satisfy a given problem instance. In order to facilitate serving the user with a closest
plan possible as per her (hidden) preferences, presenting a
diverse set of plans to the user is explored (Roberts, Howe,
and Ray 2014; Nguyen et al. 2012) so that the user can make
a well-informed decision. In the constraint programming domain, diverse (resp. similar) solutions are explored in order
to handle unknown user preferences as well as to generate
robust solutions (Hebrard et al. 2005).
Several methods have been proposed in the literature for
ﬁnding a diverse set of plans. In the context of constraint
programming, (Hebrard et al. 2005) presents a complete
method which creates K copies of the Constraint Satisfacc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

776

