Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Continuous-Time Bayesian Networks in
Relational Domains: A Non-Parametric Approach
Shuo Yang

Tushar Khot

Kristian Kersting

Sriraam Natarajan

School of Informatics
and Computing
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408

Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, WA 98103

Department of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University
Germany

School of Informatics
and Computing
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408

efﬁciently from data, see e.g. (Weiss, Natarajan, and Page
2012). Without extensive feature engineering, however, it is
difﬁcult—if not impossible—to apply CTBNs to relational
domains, in which e.g. there is a varying number of heterogeneous objects and relations among them. Many of today’s
datasets, however, are inherently relational and have no natural timeslices. Consider an Electronic Health Record (EHR).
It typically contains demographic information, prescription
history, lab tests, diagnoses, along with imaging data and
possibly in the near future, genetic (SNPs) data as well. Another example is the human-to-X communication network
where users typically call many different people, use a multitude of apps, take pictures, listen to music, and so on. Statistical Relational Learning (SRL) has been proven successful in such domains by combining the power of ﬁrst-order
logic and probability (Getoor and Taskar 2007). As far as
we are aware, there are no continuous-time SRL approaches.
It is possible to model relational CTBNs in CTPPL (Pfeffer 2009), a general purpose probabilistic programming language for processes over continuous time. However, the use
of a relational language allows us to develop a more powerful structure learning approach.
Consequently, we develop Relational Continuous-Time
Bayesian Networks (RCTBNs). They extend SRL towards
modeling in continuous time by “lifting” CTBNs to relational data. The syntax and semantics are based on Bayesian
Logic Programs (BLP) (Kersting and De Raedt 2002), and
the use of the logical notation allows for an expressive representation that does not ﬁx the number of features in advance
yet results in a homogeneous process. Although already interesting on its own, we go one step further. Based on Friedman’s functional-gradient boosting (Friedman 2001), we
develop a non-parametric learning approach for RCTBNs
that simultaneously learns the dependencies between the
trajectories in the data and the parameters that quantify
these dependencies. Our extensive experimental evaluation
demonstrates that RCTBNs are comparable to state-of-theart methods on propositional data but can handle relations
faithfully, where propositional methods either fail or need to
be engineered speciﬁcally for each task.
To summarize, we make the following key contributions:
(1) We present the ﬁrst continuous-time relational model. (2)
We develop a non-parametric learning algorithm for learning these models. (3) We prove the convergence properties

Abstract
Many real world applications in medicine, biology, communication networks, web mining, and economics, among
others, involve modeling and learning structured stochastic processes that evolve over continuous time. Existing approaches, however, have focused on propositional domains
only. Without extensive feature engineering, it is difﬁcult—
if not impossible—to apply them within relational domains
where we may have varying number of objects and relations
among them. We therefore develop the ﬁrst relational representation called Relational Continuous-Time Bayesian Networks (RCTBNs) that can address this challenge. It features
a nonparametric learning method that allows for efﬁciently
learning the complex dependencies and their strengths simultaneously from sequence data. Our experimental results
demonstrate that RCTBNs can learn as effectively as stateof-the-art approaches for propositional tasks while modeling
relational tasks faithfully.

Introduction
Modeling structured stochastic processes that evolve over
time is an important and challenging task with applications
in many ﬁelds ranging from surveillance to activity recognition to reliability monitoring of communication networks
to treatment planning in biomedicine. Classical AI solutions
such as Dynamic Bayesian networks (Murphy 2002) discretize the time into ﬁxed intervals and perform the modeling on these intervals. While discretization is often indeed
reasonable, there are domains such as medicine in which no
natural discretization is available; if we discretize time too
ﬁnely, the learning problem can quickly become intractable,
but if we discretize time too coarsely, we lose information.
Therefore it is not surprising that models over ﬁnite
spaces but across continuous time have been proposed. The
most popular ones fall under the category of ContinuousTime Markov Processes. They are described by an initial
distribution over the states of the model and a matrix that
speciﬁes the rate of transition between states. Its successor, Continuous-Time Bayesian Networks (CTBNs) make
the problem more tractable by factorizing the rate matrix so
that conditional independencies can be exploited (Nodelman, Shelton, and Koller 2002). The models can be learned
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2265

