Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Generalised Brown Clustering and Roll-Up Feature Generation
Leon Derczynski

Sean Chester

University of Shefﬁeld
211 Portobello, Shefﬁeld S1 4DP
United Kingdom
leon@dcs.shef.ac.uk

NTNU Aarhus Universitet
Sem Saelandsvei 9 Åbogade 34
7491 Trondheim, Norway 8200 Aarhus N, Denmark
sean.chester@idi.ntnu.no

Abstract
love, eat

Brown clustering is an established technique, used in hundreds of computational linguistics papers each year, to group
word types that have similar distributional information. It is
unsupervised and can be used to create powerful word representations for machine learning. Despite its improbable success relative to more complex methods, few have investigated
whether Brown clustering has really been applied optimally.
In this paper, we present a subtle but profound generalisation
of Brown clustering to improve the overall quality by decoupling the number of output classes from the computational
active set size. Moreover, the generalisation permits a novel
approach to feature selection from Brown clusters: We show
that the standard approach of shearing the Brown clustering
output tree at arbitrary bitlengths is lossy and that features
should be chosen insead by rolling up Generalised Brown hierarchies. The generalisation and corresponding feature generation is more principled, challenging the way Brown clustering is currently understood and applied.

1

cats, dogs you, I
Figure 1: A hierarchical clustering of semantically similar
terms. Leaves correspond to clusters of words, and leaves
near common parents correspond to similar clusters.
Carreras, and Collins 2008; Blunsom and Cohn 2011), performing as well as or better than the recent embeddings (Qu
et al. 2015; Šuster, van Noord, and Titov 2015).
We propose that better representations can be generated
with a subtle generalisation of Brown clustering. Previous
work on improving Brown clustering features is limited, focusing on hyperparametre and input representation tuning.
By contrast, we propose abandoning the tree structure and
instead deﬁning features using mutual information.
We begin by introducing our Generalised Brown algorithm. The existing Brown clustering algorithm artiﬁcially
constrains its greedy search space based on the pre-speciﬁed
output size. Although computational resources are becoming faster and more parallel, coarse granularity Brown clustering cannot leverage modern computational resources to
search a larger space of possible conﬁgurations. Conversely,
exploring a larger search space fractures output clusters. Either case compromises solution quality. Generalised Brown
decouples search space size from output size, freeing the algorithm to explore as many possible conﬁgurations as computationally feasible, thereby improving the quality of the
set of output clusters. Furthermore, Generalised Brown run
once generates thousands of potential features.
We then turn to feature generation. The traditional
method—generating additional features based on ancestor
nodes—yields varied granularities of clusters, but in an artiﬁcially balanced and data-agnostic manner. We introduce a
method, based on Generalised Brown, that, rather than using tree structure to vary granularity, uses mutual information. This ensures that the quality and number of clusters can
be explicitly controlled, and allows the choice of features to
arise from the input corpus, rather than an arbitrary set of
integers. We further show great potential for mining ideal

Introduction

For most statistical NLP tasks, performance is limited by
the quality of the underlying representation (i.e., features)
of words. Consequently, recent research has focused on
improving word representations (Bengio et al. 2003; Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski 2014) and shown that a simple unsupervised technique, Brown clustering, produces excellent features that are competitive with far newer approaches (Bansal, Gimpel, and Livescu 2014; Qu et al.
2015). We posit that the features produced from Brown clustering can be signiﬁcantly improved.
Brown clustering (Brown et al. 1992) learns word representations by clustering word types using bigram mutual information (Shannon 1956; van Rijsbergen 1977) as a greedy
heuristic, and then constructing a binary hierarchy over the
clusters (like Figure 1). Representation of a word is thus a
single feature: an encoding of the ID of the leaf in which the
word appears; additional features can be extracted by considering ancestor nodes at pre-speciﬁed depths. This representation yields strong performance in a wide range of NLP
tasks, including semi- and unsupervised scenarios (Koo,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1533

