Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

TGSum: Build Tweet Guided Multi-Document Summarization Dataset
Ziqiang Cao,1 Chengyao Chen,1 Wenjie Li,1 Sujian Li,2 Furu Wei,3 Ming Zhou3
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{cszqcao, cscchen, cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
lisujian@pku.edu.cn
{furu, mingzhou}@microsoft.com

2

rely on well-designed features. Sometimes unsupervised approaches (e.g., (Rioux, Hasan, and Chali 2014)) even outperform supervised ones.
Basically, there are two major factors restricting manual
annotation. On the one hand, summarization is an extremely
time consuming and labor-intensive process. Before writing a summary, annotators have to read and understand the
whole document(s). On the other hand, it is very subjective.
Even experts fail to reach a consensus. As a result, DUC has
to provide multiple reference summaries in order to have a
relatively objective evaluation. In this paper, we suggest an
effective way to automatically collect large-scales of news
multi-document summaries with reference to social media’s
reactions on Twitter. Previously, a series of NLP tasks have
tried to utilize the social annotations like followers (Chen et
al. 2014), emoticons (Zhao et al. 2012) and responses (Hu et
al. 2014) etc. Here two kinds of common social labels, i.e.,
hyper-links and hashtags are leveraged for our purpose. A
hashtag in the news area often serves for the brief description of an event. For example, given “#BangkokBlast”, we
know the tweets with this hashtag all talk about the recent
terrorist attack in Bangkok. Therefore, it is a nice indicator
to cluster documents into the same topic. On the other hand,
we take advantage of linked tweets (i.e., tweets with hyperlinks) to generate the optimal reference summary for a document cluster. From our observation, linked tweets hold the
following properties:
• A large proportion of linked tweets can highlight key
points of related news;
• Tags such as “#” and “@” frequently appears in a linked
tweet, bringing a large amount of noise;
• Due to the length limitation, most tweets are shortened
and describe only one aspect of related documents.
The noise and incompleteness hamper a linked tweet to directly become a reference summary. Take the tweets in Table 1 as an example. This document describes how Greece’s
Crisis drowns the life of a sardine ﬁsherman. Since the local
ﬁsh industry owns the world ﬁrst robotic sardine processing line, Tweet 1 is interested in how it works. Tweet 2 and
3 both describe the key points of this paper, like “Greece”,
“ﬁsh industry” and “crisis”, but Tweet 2 can be used as the title while Tweet 3 tells author’s writing experience. Although
all the three tweets are able to indicate saliency, none of them

Abstract
The development of summarization research has been signiﬁcantly hampered by the costly acquisition of reference
summaries. This paper proposes an effective way to automatically collect large scales of news-related multi-document
summaries with reference to social media’s reactions. We utilize two types of social labels in tweets, i.e., hashtags and
hyper-links. Hashtags are used to cluster documents into different topic sets. Also, a tweet with a hyper-link often highlights certain key points of the corresponding document. We
synthesize a linked document cluster to form a reference summary which can cover most key points. To this aim, we adopt
the ROUGE metrics to measure the coverage ratio, and develop an Integer Linear Programming solution to discover the
sentence set reaching the upper bound of ROUGE. Since we
allow summary sentences to be selected from both documents
and high-quality tweets, the generated reference summaries
could be abstractive. Both informativeness and readability of
the collected summaries are veriﬁed by manual judgment.
In addition, we train a Support Vector Regression summarizer on DUC generic multi-document summarization benchmarks. With the collected data as extra training resource, the
performance of the summarizer improves a lot on all the test
sets. We release this dataset for further research1 .

Introduction
The rapid growth of on-line digital content calls for efﬁcient automatic summarization systems. So far, the learningbased models have become the dominant summarization
approaches. Despite decades of research, the quality of a
machine generated summary is still far from satisfactory.
A big bottleneck of supervised summarizers is the lack
of human summaries used for training. For instance, the
generic multi-document summarization task aims to summarize a cluster of documents telling the same topic. In this
task, the most widely-used datasets are published by Document Understanding Conferences2 (DUC) in 01, 02 and
04. Totally, there are 139 document clusters with 376 human reference summaries. The limitation of labeled data
forces a learning-based summarization system to heavily
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www4.comp.polyu.edu.hk/∼cszqcao/
2
http://duc.nist.gov/

2906

