Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Selecting Near-Optimal Learners via Incremental Data Allocation
Ashish Sabharwal

Horst Samulowitz and Gerald Tesauro

Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, WA, USA
AshishS@allenai.org

IBM Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
samulowitz,gtesauro@us.ibm.com

approach is acceptable if the computational cost of training
all learners is not an issue. However, in the era of Big Data,
this is becoming increasingly infeasible. Web-scale datasets
are proliferating from sources such as Twitter, TREC, SNAP,
ImageNet, and the UCI repository, particularly in domains
such as vision and NLP. ImageNet datasets can exceed 100
gigabytes, and the recent “YouTube-Sports-1M” video collection exceeds 40 terabytes. Moreover, the diverse set of
learners available in today’s ML packages (Hall et al. 2009;
Pedregosa and others 2011; Schaul et al. 2010; McCallum
2002) are continually expanding, and many of the most successful recent algorithms entail very heavy training costs
(e.g., Deep Learning neural nets with Dropout).
The above factors motivate a search for techniques to reduce training cost while still reliably ﬁnding a near-optimal
learner. One could consider training each learner on a small
subset of the training examples, and choose the best performing one. This entails less computation, but could result
in signiﬁcant loss of learner accuracy, since performance on
a small subset can be a misleading predictor of performance
on the full dataset. As an alternative, the small-subset results
could be projected forward using parameterized accuracy
models to predict full training set accuracy. Creating such
models is, however, a daunting task (Guerra, Prudencio, and
Ludermir 2008), potentially needing prior knowledge about
learners and domain, characteristic features of the data, etc.
In this paper, we develop a novel formulation of what it
means to solve the above dual-objective problem, and we
present a novel solution approach, inspired by multi-armed
bandit literature (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002;
Thompson 1933; Scott 2010; Agrawal and Goyal 2012). Our
method develops model-free, cost-sensitive strategies for sequentially allocating small batches of training data to selected learners, wherein “cost” reﬂects misallocated samples
that were used to train other learners that were ultimately not
selected. We express the cost in terms of the regret of the approach, comparing the algorithm’s cost with that of an oracle
which only allocates data to the best learner.
Our main contributions are as follows. First, we give a
precise deﬁnition of a new ML problem setting, called the
Cost-Sensitive Training Data Allocation Problem. Second,
we present a simple, knowledge-free, easy-to-use and practical new algorithm for this setting, called DAUB (Data
Allocation with Upper Bounds). Third, we give empiri-

Abstract
We study a novel machine learning (ML) problem setting of
sequentially allocating small subsets of training data amongst
a large set of classiﬁers. The goal is to select a classiﬁer
that will give near-optimal accuracy when trained on all
data, while also minimizing the cost of misallocated samples.
This is motivated by large modern datasets and ML toolkits
with many combinations of learning algorithms and hyperparameters. Inspired by the principle of “optimism under uncertainty,” we propose an innovative strategy, Data Allocation
using Upper Bounds (DAUB), which robustly achieves these
objectives across a variety of real-world datasets.
We further develop substantial theoretical support for DAUB
in an idealized setting where the expected accuracy of a classiﬁer trained on n samples can be known exactly. Under these
conditions we establish a rigorous sub-linear bound on the regret of the approach (in terms of misallocated data), as well
as a rigorous bound on suboptimality of the selected classiﬁer. Our accuracy estimates using real-world datasets only
entail mild violations of the theoretical scenario, suggesting
that the practical behavior of DAUB is likely to approach the
idealized behavior.

Introduction
The goal of our work is to develop novel practical methods
to enhance tractability of Data Science practice in the era of
Big Data. Consider, for example, the following very common scenario: A Data Science practitioner is given a data
set comprising a training set, a validation set, and a collection of classiﬁers in an ML toolkit, each of which may
have numerous possible hyper-parameterizations. The practitioner would like to determine which classiﬁer/parameter
combination (hereafter referred to as “learner”) would yield
the highest validation accuracy, after training on all examples in the training set. However, the practitioner may have
quite limited domain knowledge of salient characteristics of
the data, or indeed of many of the algorithms in the toolkit.
In such a scenario, the practitioner may inevitably
resort to the traditional approach to ﬁnding the best
learner (cf. Caruana and Niculescu-Mizil 2006), namely,
brute-force training of all learners on the full training set,
and selecting the one with best validation accuracy. Such an
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2007

