Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Uncorrelated Group LASSO

1

Deguang Kong1 , Ji Liu2 , Bo Liu3 and Xuan Bao4

Samsung Research America, 2 University of Rochester, 3 Philips Research North America, 4 Google Inc.
doogkong@gmail.com, jliu@cs.rochester.edu, boliu@cs.umass.edu, xbxuanbao8@gmail.com

which enforces sparsity at row-level (corresponding to features). If each row of W is viewed as a group (i.e., corresponding to each feature), 2,1 -norm can be viewed as a special case of group Lasso (Yuan and Lin 2006).
However, in standard 2,1 -norm based approach (such as
f (W) + λW2,1 ), the correlations among different features are simply ignored. Thus, some strongly correlated
variables tend to be in or out of the model together. Moreover, the correlated variables may share similar properties
and thus reveal overlapped or redundant information. Especially when the number of selected variables are limited,
more discriminant information with minimum correlations
are desirable for prediction or classiﬁcation tasks. Therefore,
it is natural to eliminate the correlations in feature selection
process using 2,1 -norm.
In this paper, we propose an exclusive group 2,1 term
for uncorrelated feature selection. In “exclusive group 2,1 ”
regularizer, highly correlated features are put into the same
group such that the most discriminant features can survive
using standard 2,1 regularization at the intra-group level.
Meanwhile, it enforces 2 norm at the inter-group level since
there is no need for sparsity if different groups are jointly
considered. Essentially, this term can be viewed as a {2,1};2
norm. It excels standard 2,1 method because it eliminates
the correlated features.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
eliminates the correlated features in 2,1 method through a
novel regularization term: exclusive group 2,1 -norm. This
can be viewed as an extension of exclusive feature learning work (Zhou, Jin, and Hoi 2010), (Kong et al. 2014)
on multi-class/multi-task settings, which can be potentially
applied in medical image analytics, bio-marker recognition,
and ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation, etc.
Contribution The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows.

Abstract
2,1 -norm is an effective regularization to enforce a simple
group sparsity for feature learning. To capture some subtle
structures among feature groups, we propose a new regularization called exclusive group 2,1 -norm. It enforces the sparsity at the intra-group level by using 2,1 -norm, while encourages the selected features to distribute in different groups by
using 2 norm at the inter-group level. The proposed exclusive
group 2,1 -norm is capable of eliminating the feature correlations in the context of feature selection, if highly correlated
features are collected in the same groups. To solve the generic
exclusive group 2,1 -norm regularized problems, we propose
an efﬁcient iterative re-weighting algorithm and provide a rigorous convergence analysis. Experiment results on real world
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed new
regularization and algorithm.

Introduction
Sparse coding starts from Lasso (R.Tibshirani 1994) using 1 norm for 2-class feature selection, and grows
for 2,1 norm based multi-class feature selection. Group
Lasso (Yuan and Lin 2006) incorporates feature group information into the feature learning process. The sparsity term
is effective due to the inherent sparse structures of the real
world data. Other extensions of spare coding includes exclusive Lasso (Zhou, Jin, and Hoi 2010), fused Lasso (Tibshirani et al. 2005), and generalized Lasso (Roth 2004), (Liu,
Yuan, and Ye 2013). Due to the intuitive interpretation of
sparse learning results, structural sparsity based methods
have been widely applied to solve many practical problems,
such as medical image analysis (Yang et al. 2010), cancer prediction (Gao and Church 2005), and gene-expression
analysis (Ji et al. 2009).
Among all the above methods, 2,1 -norm based method
as well as its variants and extensions (Liu, Ji, and Ye
2012), (Nie et al. 2010), (Yuan and Lin 2006) are considered as one of the most effective feature selection method.
2,1 norm of a matrix W ∈ p×K is deﬁned as

p 
p


K

Wij2 =
wi 2 ,
(1)
W2,1 =
i=1

j=1

• A new regularizer known as exclusive group 2,1 -norm is
proposed to eliminate the feature correlations for multiclass/multi-task feature learning;
• An effective iterative re-weighting algorithm is proposed
to tackle the complicated non-smoothness in the exclusive
group 2,1 term;

i=1

• Promising results on real world datasets suggest potential
applications of the proposed method.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1765

