Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Natural Language Processing for Enhancing Teaching and Learning
Diane Litman
Department of Computer Science &
Learning Research and Development Center &
Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
• Teaching and learning language-related subject matter
– e.g., reading, writing, speaking

Abstract
Advances in natural language processing (NLP) and educational technology, as well as the availability of unprecedented
amounts of educationally-relevant text and speech data, have
led to an increasing interest in using NLP to address the needs
of teachers and students. Educational applications differ in
many ways, however, from the types of applications for which
NLP systems are typically developed. This paper will organize and give an overview of research in this area, focusing
on opportunities as well as challenges.

• Using language to teach any subject
– e.g., teaching in the disciplines
• Processing language to support the needs of students,
teachers, researchers
– e.g., MOOC forums, textbooks, lecture materials
Figure 1: Roles for language processing in education.

Natural language processing (NLP) has over a 50 year history as a scientiﬁc discipline, with applications to education
appearing as early as the 1960s. Initial work focused on automatically scoring student texts as well as on developing
text-based dialogue tutoring systems, while later work also
included spoken language technologies. While research in
these traditional application areas continues to progress, recent phenomena such as big-data, mobile technologies, social media and MOOCs have resulted in the creation of many
new research opportunities and challenges. Commercial applications already include high-stakes assessments of text
and speech, writing assistants, and online instructional environments, with companies increasingly reaching out to the
research community.1
As shown in Figure 1, NLP can enhance educational technology in several ways. As an example of the ﬁrst role, NLP
is being used to automate the scoring of student texts with
respect to linguistic dimensions such as grammatical correctness or organizational structure. As an example of the
second role, dialogue technologies are being used to achieve
the beneﬁts of human one-on-one tutoring - particularly in
STEM domains - in a cost-effective and scalable manner.
Examples of the third role include processing text from the
web in order to personalize instructional materials to the interests of individual students, automate the generation of test
questions for teachers, or (semi-)automate the authoring of
an educational technology system.

Given the increasing interest in applying natural language
processing to education, communities have emerged that
now sponsor regular meetings and shared tasks. Beginning
in the 1990s, a series of tutorial dialogue systems workshops began to span the Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Education
and the Natural Language Processing communities, including a AAAI Fall Symposium2 . Since 2003, ten workshops
on the ‘Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications’3 have been held at the annual conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. In 2006, the ‘Speech and Language Technology in Education’4 special interest group of the International Speech Communication Association was formed and
has since organized six workshops5 ; members have also organized related special sessions at Interspeech conferences.
Recent shared academic tasks have included student response analysis6 (Dzikovska et al. 2013), grammatical error detection7 (Ng et al. 2014), and prediction of MOOC
attrition from discussion forums8 (Rosé and Siemens 2014).
There have also been highly visible competitions sponsored
by the Hewlett Foundation in the areas of essay9 and shortanswer response10 scoring.
2

http://www.aaai.org/Library/Symposia/Fall/fs00-01.php
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/ tetreaul/naacl-bea10.html
4
http://www.sigslate.org
5
https://www.slate2015.org/slate.html
6
https://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2013/task7/
7
http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/ nlp/conll14st.html
8
http://emnlp2014.org/workshops/MOOC/call.html
9
https://www.kaggle.com/c/asap-aes
10
https://www.kaggle.com/c/asap-sas
3

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
As one example, Appen, McGraw-Hill Education/CTB, Educational Testing Service, Grammarly, Turnitin Lightside Labs, Paciﬁc Metrics and Pearson were all gold sponsors of the 2015 ‘Innovative Use of NLP for Building Education Applications’ meeting.

4170

