Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

SVVAMP: Simulator of Various Voting
Algorithms in Manipulating Populations
François Durand

Fabien Mathieu and Ludovic Noirie

Paris Dauphine University
francois.durand@dauphine.fr

Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs France
{fabien.mathieu, ludovic.noirie}@alcatel-lucent.com

Importing / Creating Populations

Abstract

Populations in SVVAMP can be described through ordinal or
cardinal preferences. Cardinal preferences are transparently
converted to rankings whenever necessary. Importing a population from an external ﬁle is straightforward: SVVAMP can
read simple CSV ﬁles containing the utilities of the population or ﬁles using the PrefLib format (Mattei and Walsh
2013). To generate artiﬁcial random populations, SVVAMP
implements a variety of probabilistic models (cultures):
Spheroid, Cubic Uniform and Ladder, three extensions of
the Impartial Culture.
Gaussian Well and Euclidean Box, two geometric models, which can be for instance used to produce single-peaked
populations.
Von Mises–Fisher, which is similar to Mallows’
model (Mallows 1957), but outputs cardinal preferences.
For any given population, SVVAMP can produce basic
analysis: existence of a Condorcet winner, Borda and Plurality scores, . . .

We present SVVAMP, a Python package dedicated to the study
of voting systems with an emphasis on manipulation analysis.

Introduction
History of voting theory has been marked by the discovery
of several paradoxes, such as Gibbard–Satterthwaite impossibility theorem on manipulation (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975). Since no reasonable voting system can avoid
these paradoxes totally, their likeliness of occurrence under
various probability assumptions or in real-life elections has
been studied at length. However, there remain open questions in the domain, especially about the relative performance of various voting systems according to different criteria and under different sets of assumptions on the preferences of the voters.
Recently, interesting results were published about algorithmic issues linked to voting systems and their manipulation (Bartholdi and Orlin 1991; Xia et al. 2009; Walsh 2010;
Zuckerman, Procaccia, and Rosenschein 2009; Zuckerman,
Lev, and Rosenschein 2011; Gaspers et al. 2013). However,
to the best of our knowledge, there was no publicly available
software building on these existing techniques, in particular
for the study of manipulability.
This observation led us to develop SVVAMP (Simulator of
Various Voting Algorithms in Manipulating Populations), a
Python package designed to study voting systems and their
manipulability.
Voters’ preferences can be imported from external ﬁles
or generated by a variety of probabilistic models. SVVAMP
currently implements more than 20 voting systems, and its
object-oriented design facilitates the implementation of new
voting systems. Special attention has been paid to Coalitional Manipulability (CM) and its variants. Algorithms for
Condorcet efﬁciency, Individual Manipulability (IM) and Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA) are also implemented.

Implemented Voting Systems
SVVAMP currently implements more than 20 voting systems: Approval, Range Voting, Majority Judgment, Plurality, Anti-Plurality, Borda Rule, Simpliﬁed Dodgson
method, Kemeny method, Maximin, Baldwin method, Nanson method, Tideman’s Ranked Pairs, Schulze method, IRVlike multi-rounds systems (Instant-Runoff Voting, Exhaustive Ballot, Instant-Condorcet Runoff Voting, . . . ), TwoRound System, Coombs method, Bucklin method and Iterated Bucklin method. For more details, please refer to the
documentation or (Tideman 2006).

Studying Manipulability
For any given election (combination of a population and a
voting system), SVVAMP can decide, in addition to the sincere winner w of the election, the following issues:
Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA): is w still
the winner when the election is held with any subset of the
candidates including w? IIA is a central notion in Arrow’s
celebrated impossibility theorem (Arrow 1950).
Individual manipulation (IM): can a voter v, by casting an
insincere ballot, secure an outcome c that she strictly prefers
to w (while other voters still vote sincerely).

Functionalities
SVVAMP can investigate multiple manipulation-related criteria for a large set of populations and voting systems.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4353

