Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Teaching Big Data Analytics Skills with Intelligent Workflow Systems
Yolanda Gil
Information Sciences Institute and Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey CA 90292
gil@isi.edu

flows that are used by students for practice with real-world
datasets within pre-defined lesson units. The workflows
include semantic constraints that the system uses to assist
the users to set up parameters and validate the workflows.
Several key features of the educational materials that we
are developing include:
1. Expose students to well-understood end-to-end data
analysis processes that have proven successful in
several challenging domains and represent the stateof-the-art
2. Allow students to easily experiment with different
combinations of data analysis processes, represented
as workflows of computations that they can easily
reconfigure and that the underlying system can easily manage and execute
3. Provide students with a lesson units of structured lessons to analyze real-world and scientific data, posing significant challenges to the students over and
above what is learned in textbooks
4. Guide users to achieve target performance levels in
each lesson as they experiment with different algorithms by easily changing the workflow steps with a
graphical editor
5. Teach students basic concepts concerning semantics,
formats, and metadata for real-world datasets
This work supplements existing academic training materials in big data and data science, by providing an on-line
workflow environment for practice and exploration that is
accessible to non-programmers.
The course was pre-tested in the Summer of 2015 with
four students, three are non-CS undergraduates and one is a
high-school student. The students were able to follow the
materials, and used basic programming skills from intro
courses they had taken (one student learned R on her own)
and developed new workflows for basic statistical analysis
of data, for image processing (using the OpenCV open
source package), and for basic social network analysis.
The course will be taught at USC in Spring 2016. It has
been approved as a masters level course in the new Communications Informatics and Spatial Informatics programs.
The students will be journalism and geography majors

Abstract
We have designed an open and modular course for data science and big data analytics using a workflow paradigm that
allows students to easily experience big data through a sophisticated yet easy to use instrument that is an intelligent
workflow system. A key aspect of this work is the use of
semantic workflows to capture and reuse end-to-end analytic methods that experts would use to analyze big data, and
the use of an intelligent workflow system to elaborate the
workflow and manage its execution and resulting datasets.
Through the exposure of big data analytics in a workflow
framework, students will be able to get first-hand experiences with a breadth of big data topics, including multi-step
data analytic and statistical methods, software reuse and
composition, parallel distributed programming, high-end
computing. In addition, students learn about a range of topics in AI, including semantic representations and ontologies,
machine learning, natural language processing, and image
analysis.

Introduction
Big data analytics has emerged as a widely desirable
skill in many areas. Although courses are now available on
a variety of aspects of big data, there is a lack of a broad
and accessible course doe non-CS majors that enables them
to learn about big data analytics in practice. Students with
limited or no programming skills that are interested in data
science include most students in science, engineering and
the humanities. As a result, acquiring practical data analytics skills is out of reach for many students and professionals, posing severe limitations to our ability as a society to
take advantage of our vast digital data resources.
We are developing educational materials for data science
and big data analytics to provide broad and practical training in data analytics in the context of real-world and science-grade datasets and data analytics methods. We capture common analytic methods as computational work-

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4081

