Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-Learning
Hado van Hasselt , Arthur Guez, and David Silver
Google DeepMind

exploration technique (Kaelbling et al. 1996). If, however,
the overestimations are not uniform and not concentrated at
states about which we wish to learn more, then they might
negatively affect the quality of the resulting policy. Thrun
and Schwartz (1993) give speciﬁc examples in which this
leads to suboptimal policies, even asymptotically.
To test whether overestimations occur in practice and at
scale, we investigate the performance of the recent DQN algorithm (Mnih et al. 2015). DQN combines Q-learning with
a ﬂexible deep neural network and was tested on a varied
and large set of deterministic Atari 2600 games, reaching
human-level performance on many games. In some ways,
this setting is a best-case scenario for Q-learning, because
the deep neural network provides ﬂexible function approximation with the potential for a low asymptotic approximation error, and the determinism of the environments prevents
the harmful effects of noise. Perhaps surprisingly, we show
that even in this comparatively favorable setting DQN sometimes substantially overestimates the values of the actions.
We show that the Double Q-learning algorithm (van Hasselt 2010), which was ﬁrst proposed in a tabular setting, can
be generalized to arbitrary function approximation, including deep neural networks. We use this to construct a new algorithm called Double DQN. This algorithm not only yields
more accurate value estimates, but leads to much higher
scores on several games. This demonstrates that the overestimations of DQN indeed lead to poorer policies and that it
is beneﬁcial to reduce them. In addition, by improving upon
DQN we obtain state-of-the-art results on the Atari domain.

Abstract
The popular Q-learning algorithm is known to overestimate
action values under certain conditions. It was not previously
known whether, in practice, such overestimations are common, whether they harm performance, and whether they can
generally be prevented. In this paper, we answer all these
questions afﬁrmatively. In particular, we ﬁrst show that the
recent DQN algorithm, which combines Q-learning with a
deep neural network, suffers from substantial overestimations
in some games in the Atari 2600 domain. We then show that
the idea behind the Double Q-learning algorithm, which was
introduced in a tabular setting, can be generalized to work
with large-scale function approximation. We propose a speciﬁc adaptation to the DQN algorithm and show that the resulting algorithm not only reduces the observed overestimations, as hypothesized, but that this also leads to much better
performance on several games.

The goal of reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998)
is to learn good policies for sequential decision problems,
by optimizing a cumulative future reward signal. Q-learning
(Watkins 1989) is one of the most popular reinforcement
learning algorithms, but it is known to sometimes learn unrealistically high action values because it includes a maximization step over estimated action values, which tends to
prefer overestimated to underestimated values.
In previous work, overestimations have been attributed
to insufﬁciently ﬂexible function approximation (Thrun and
Schwartz 1993) and noise (van Hasselt 2010, 2011). In this
paper, we unify these views and show overestimations can
occur when the action values are inaccurate, irrespective
of the source of approximation error. Of course, imprecise
value estimates are the norm during learning, which indicates that overestimations may be much more common than
previously appreciated.
It is an open question whether, if the overestimations
do occur, this negatively affects performance in practice.
Overoptimistic value estimates are not necessarily a problem in and of themselves. If all values would be uniformly
higher then the relative action preferences are preserved and
we would not expect the resulting policy to be any worse.
Furthermore, it is known that sometimes it is good to be optimistic: optimism in the face of uncertainty is a well-known

Background
To solve sequential decision problems we can learn estimates for the optimal value of each action, deﬁned as the
expected sum of future rewards when taking that action and
following the optimal policy thereafter. Under a given policy
π, the true value of an action a in a state s is
Qπ (s, a) ≡ E [R1 + γR2 + . . . | S0 = s, A0 = a, π] ,
where γ ∈ [0, 1] is a discount factor that trades off the importance of immediate and later rewards. The optimal value is
then Q∗ (s, a) = maxπ Qπ (s, a). An optimal policy is easily derived from the optimal values by selecting the highestvalued action in each state.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2094

