Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Maximizing Revenue with Limited Correlation:
The Cost of Ex-Post Incentive Compatibility
Michael Albert

Vincent Conitzer

Giuseppe Lopomo

Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Stop D9500
Austin, TX 78712, USA
malbert@cs.utexas.edu

Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Duke University
The Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708, USA
glopomo@duke.edu

focus for the subsequent correlated valuation literature due
to its departure from standard results in independent valuation settings. Since the initial Cremer and McLean (1985)
paper, much of the subsequent literature has focused on the
criticality of the assumptions that lead to full revenue extraction, but one assumption has traditionally been viewed
as innocuous: ex-post incentive compatibility (IC for short).
Due to the revelation principle (for a discussion see Krishna (2009)), mechanism design has restricted its attention
to incentive compatible mechanisms, i.e. mechanisms where
telling the truth about one’s type is the optimal strategy for
any given agent. However, the speciﬁc form of incentive
compatibility is dependent on the game theoretic solution
concept employed, with the two we will focus on being
ex-post IC, corresponding to ex-post Nash equilibrium, and
Bayesian IC, corresponding to Bayesian Nash equilibrium,
with Bayesian IC being the more permissive. Cremer and
McLean (1985) show that under their correlation assumption
and ex-interim individual rationality (IR), ex-post IC is sufﬁcient for full revenue extraction, negating the need to examine Bayesian IC separately. While, in follow up work (Cremer and McLean 1988), they are able to relax slightly their
initial correlation assumption if they only require Bayesian
IC, the literature (McAfee and Reny 1992; Dobzinski, Fu,
and Kleinberg 2011; Roughgarden and Talgam-Cohen 2013;
Fu et al. 2014) has continued to focus on ex-post IC, due to
its sufﬁciency.
Cremer and McLean (1985; 1988) require extremely precise knowledge by the seller of a very expressive distribution
over bidders’ beliefs, and when a more realistic assumption
is made over the knowledge of the seller, the Cremer and
McLean mechanism achieves revenue far from full surplus
(Albert, Conitzer, and Lopomo 2015). Therefore, practical
mechanism design must account for more limited forms of
correlation and less expressive prior distributions. If so, the
Cremer and McLean (1985) result is no longer a guarantee
for the sufﬁciency of ex-post IC.
In this paper, we assume ex-interim IR and explore the
case of a single bidder whose valuation is correlated with
an external signal that both the seller and bidder observe expost. This allows us to examine bidder beliefs over the value
of the external signal with arbitrary expressiveness, and in so
doing, we characterize necessary and sufﬁcient conditions
for full surplus extraction in both Bayesian and ex-post IC

Abstract
In a landmark paper in the mechanism design literature, Cremer and McLean (1985) (CM for short) show that when a
bidder’s valuation is correlated with an external signal, a monopolistic seller is able to extract the full social surplus as
revenue. In the original paper and subsequent literature, the
focus has been on ex-post incentive compatible (or IC) mechanisms, where truth telling is an ex-post Nash equilibrium.
In this paper, we explore the implications of Bayesian versus ex-post IC in a correlated valuation setting. We generalize the full extraction result to settings that do not satisfy
the assumptions of CM. In particular, we give necessary and
sufﬁcient conditions for full extraction that strictly relax the
original conditions given in CM. These more general conditions characterize the situations under which requiring expost IC leads to a decrease in expected revenue relative to
Bayesian IC. We also demonstrate that the expected revenue
from the optimal ex-post IC mechanism guarantees at most a
(|Θ| + 1)/4 approximation to that of a Bayesian IC mechanism, where |Θ| is the number of bidder types. Finally, using
techniques from automated mechanism design, we show that,
for randomly generated distributions, the average expected
revenue achieved by Bayesian IC mechanisms is signiﬁcantly
larger than that for ex-post IC mechanisms.

Introduction
Mechanism design has emerged as a key tool in multi-agent
systems for the allocation of tasks and resources to selfinterested agents. Though much of the focus of the mechanism design literature has been on independent bidder valuations, many situations, such as the mineral rights model
(Wilson 1969), are naturally characterized by assuming correlated bidder valuations, so starting with Milgrom and Weber (1982) there has been an increasing body of work on
optimal mechanisms in correlated valuation settings. This
line of research has led to important, and often quite surprising, insights into many fundamental aspects of mechanism
design, the most prominent of which is due to Cremer and
McLean (1985). In their landmark paper, they demonstrate
that given even small amounts of correlation between bidders’ valuations, a monopolistic seller is able to extract the
full social surplus as revenue even though the bidders possess private information. This result has become a central
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

376

