Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fast Hybrid Algorithm for Big Matrix Recovery
Tengfei Zhou, Hui Qian∗ , Zebang Shen, Congfu Xu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{zhoutengfei,qianhui,shenzebang,xucongfu}@zju.edu.cn

Many algorithms, such as (Mazumder, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2010; Toh and Yun 2010; Lin et al. 2009; Yang and Yuan
2013; Jaggi and Sulovsk 2010; Avron et al. 2012) , have been
devised to solve NNLS. However, scalability issue always
exists (especially when we want to solve large-scale NNLS
with high accuracy), since these algorithms have to perform
top-ρ SVD of an m × n matrix in each iteration, which is
computationally prohibitive when m and n are large. In addition, most of them suffer sublinear convergence rates.
Besides the convex formulation (1), LRMR can also be
cast as nonconvex ﬁx rank optimization problem (when rank
is known):
1
(2)
min A(X) − b2 subject to X ∈ Mr
X 2
where the feasible set Mr = {X|rank(X) = r} is the ﬁx
rank manifold. Since ﬁx rank manifold is smooth, (2) is a
smooth optimization problem and can be solved by Riemannian optimization methods such as Riemannian conjugate
gradient descent (Vandereycken 2013; Mishra and Sepulchre 2014a), Riemannian trust region (Mishra et al. 2014),
and Riemannian Newton (Absil, Amodei, and Meyer 2014).
Theoretically, for NNLS these ﬁx rank solvers are more scalable than convex solvers, because large-scale top-ρ SVD is
avoided in each iteration. According to (Absil, Mahony, and
Sepulchre 2009), they converge superlinearly in general.
However, in most LRMR applications, the rank of the data
under study is unknown, which often precludes the use and
potential advantage of the ﬁx rank manifold based methods.
For such a regime, we propose two hybrid methods which
combine convex optimization framework with scalable Riemannian optimization techniques to solve large-scale NNLS
with high accuracy. Our hybrid methods comprise of two
phases. In the ﬁrst phase we use ADMM both to identify the active ﬁx rank manifold Mr∗ where an optimum
X∗ resides and to provide an initializer for the subsequent
reﬁnement. In the second phase, we optimize F (X) over
Mr∗ by Riemannian optimization techniques. We prove that
ADMM will identify the active ﬁx rank manifold Mr∗ in ﬁnite steps, which means the amount of computation in ﬁrst
phase is small. In the second phase two superlinearly convergent Riemannian optimization approaches, Riemannian
NewTon (NT) and Riemannian Conjugate Gradient decent
(CG), are adopted to minimize F (X) over Mr∗ . Furthermore, we prove that our hybrid method of ADMM and NT

Abstract
Large-scale Nuclear Norm penalized Least Square
problem (NNLS) is frequently encountered in estimation of low rank structures. In this paper we accelerate the solution procedure by combining non-smooth
convex optimization with smooth Riemannian method.
Our methods comprise of two phases. In the ﬁrst phase,
we use Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
(ADMM) both to identify the ﬁx rank manifold where
an optimum resides and to provide an initializer for the
subsequent reﬁnement. In the second phase, two superlinearly convergent Riemannian methods: Riemannian
NewTon (NT) and Riemannian Conjugate Gradient descent (CG) are adopted to improve the approximation
over a ﬁx rank manifold. We prove that our Hybrid
method of ADMM and NT (HADMNT) converges to
an optimum of NNLS at least quadratically. The experiments on large-scale collaborative ﬁltering datasets
demonstrate very competitive performance of these fast
hybrid methods compared to the state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
Low Rank Matrix Recovery (LRMR) aims to estimate a low
rank structure by its noisy observations. There are many important applications in which the problem under study can
naturally be modeled as a LRMR, such as collaborative ﬁltering (Jaggi and Sulovsk 2010), multitask learning (Pong et
al. 2010), multivariate regression (Mishra 2014), and image
inpainting (Lu et al. 2015). Commonly, LRMR can be cast
as Nuclear Norm penalized Least Square problem (NNLS):
1
min A(X) − b2 + λX∗  F (X)
X 2

(1)

where A : Rm×n → Rp is a linear operator, b ∈ Rp
stores noisy linear measurements of an unknown low rank
matrix XG , λ > 0 is regularizer parameter, and X∗ =
min{m,n}
σi (X) is the nuclear norm (in which σi (X) is
i=1
the i-th singular value of matrix X).
Theoretically XG can be recovered by solving NNLS
under mild conditions (Negahban and Wainwright 2012).
∗

Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1444

