Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bayesian Matrix Completion via
Adaptive Relaxed Spectral Regularization
†

Yang Song† and Jun Zhu‡

Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, yang.song@zoho.com
Department of Computer Science & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys.; CBICR Center;
Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science and Tech., Tsinghua University, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
‡

Though P1 is convex, the deﬁnition of nuclear norm
makes the problem still not easy to solve. Based on a variational formulation of the nuclear norm, it has been popular to
solve an equivalent and easier low-rank matrix factorization
(MF) form of P1:

Abstract
Bayesian matrix completion has been studied based on a lowrank matrix factorization formulation with promising results.
However, little work has been done on Bayesian matrix completion based on the more direct spectral regularization formulation. We ﬁll this gap by presenting a novel Bayesian
matrix completion method based on spectral regularization.
In order to circumvent the difﬁculties of dealing with the orthonormality constraints of singular vectors, we derive a new
equivalent form with relaxed constraints, which then leads us
to design an adaptive version of spectral regularization feasible for Bayesian inference. Our Bayesian method requires
no parameter tuning and can infer the number of latent factors automatically. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets
demonstrate encouraging results on rank recovery and collaborative ﬁltering, with notably good results for very sparse
matrices.

1
λ
2
2
2
PΩ (X − AB  )F + (AF + BF ). (1)
2
A,B 2σ
2

min

Though not joint convex, this MF formulation can be solved
by alternately optimizing over A and B for local optima.
As the regularization terms of MF are friendlier than
the nuclear norm, many matrix factorization methods have
been proposed to complete matrices, including maximummargin matrix factorization (M3 F) (Srebro, Rennie, and
Jaakkola 2004; Rennie and Srebro 2005) and Bayesian probabilistic matrix factorization (BPMF) (Lim and Teh 2007;
Salakhutdinov and Mnih 2008). Furthermore, the simplicity
of the MF formulation helps people adapt it and generalize it; e.g., (Xu, Zhu, and Zhang 2012; 2013) incorporate
maximum entropy discrimination (MED) and nonparametric Bayesian methods to solve a modiﬁed MF problem.
In contrast, there are relatively fewer algorithms to directly solve P1 without the aid of matrix factorization. Such
methods need to handle the spectrum of singular values.
These spectral regularization algorithms require optimization on a Stiefel manifold (Stiefel 1935; James 1976), which
is deﬁned as the set of k-tuples (u1 , u2 , · · · , uk ) of orthonormal vectors in Rn . This is the main difﬁculty that has
prevented the attempts, if any, to develop Bayesian methods
based on the spectral regularization formulation.
Though matrix completion via spectral regularization is
not easy, there are potential advantages over the matrix factorization approach. One of the beneﬁts is the direct control
over singular values. By imposing various priors on singular values, we can incorporate abundant information to help
matrix completion. For example, Todeschini et al. (Todeschini, Caron, and Chavent 2013) put sparsity-inducing priors
on singular values, naturally leading to hierarchical adaptive nuclear norm (HANN) regularization, and they reported
promising results.
In this paper, we aim to develop a new formulation of
the nuclear norm, hopefully having the same simplicity as
MF and retaining some good properties of spectral regularization. The idea is to prove the orthonormality insigniﬁ-

Introduction
Matrix completion has found applications in many situations, such as collaborative ﬁltering. Let Zm×n denote
the data matrix with m rows and n columns, of which
only a small number of entries are observed, indexed by
Ω ⊂ [m] × [n]. We denote the possibly noise corrupted
observations of Z on Ω as PΩ (X), where PΩ is a projection operator that retains entries with indices from Ω and
replaces others with 0. The matrix completion task aims
at completing missing entries of Z based on PΩ (X), under
the low-rank assumption rank(Z)  min(m, n). When a
squared-error loss is adopted, it can be written as solving:
1
2
PΩ (X − Z)F + λ rank(Z),
(P0)
2σ 2

2
where PΩ (A)F = (i,j)∈Ω a2ij ; λ is a positive regularization parameter; and σ 2 is the noise variance.
Unfortunately, the term rank(Z) makes P0 NP-hard.
Therefore, the nuclear norm Z∗ has been widely adopted
as a convex surrogate (Fazel 2002) to the rank function to
turn P0 to a convex problem:
min
Z

min
Z

1
2
PΩ (X − Z)F + λ Z∗ .
2σ 2

(P1)

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2044

