Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Complex Behaviour Modeling at 90Hz
Xiangyu Kong, Yizhou Wang

Tao Xiang

Nat’l Eng. Lab. for Video Technology
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
{kong, Yizhou.Wang}@pku.edu.cn

Queen Mary,
University of London,
London E1 4NS,
United Kingdom
t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Modeling complex crowd behaviour for tasks such as rare
event detection has received increasing interest. However, existing methods are limited because (1) they are sensitive to
noise often resulting in a large number of false alarms; and
(2) they rely on elaborate models leading to high computational cost thus unsuitable for processing a large number of
video inputs in real-time. In this paper, we overcome these
limitations by introducing a novel complex behaviour modeling framework, which consists of a Binarized Cumulative Directional (BCD) feature as representation, novel spatial and
temporal context modeling via an iterative correlation maximization, and a set of behaviour models, each being a simple
Bernoulli distribution. Despite its simplicity, our experiments
on three benchmark datasets show that it signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art for both temporal video segmentation and rare event detection. Importantly, it is extremely efﬁcient — reaches 90Hz on a normal PC platform using MATLAB.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Examples of simple and salient crowd events (a)
vs. complex and subtle events (b).

2011; Hospedales, Gong, and Xiang 2012; Song et al. 2014;
Wang and Mori 2009; Wang, Ma, and Grimson 2009;
Zhou, Wang, and Tang 2012; Ricci et al. 2013) focus on
more subtle and complex behavioural anomalies. An example is shown in Fig. 1(b) where a ﬁre engine interrupts the
normal trafﬁc ﬂow at a junction. This type of events are more
difﬁcult to detect, yet they are more common in reality. They
are thus the focus of this paper.
Modeling complex crowd behaviour for detecting subtle events is challenging because both individual object behaviour and their behavioural context need to be modeled.
In particular, the behaviour of an object involved in a complex and subtle event may look perfectly normal. It is abnormal only when put in context – it occurs in the wrong
place and/or wrong time in relation to other objects in the
scene. For example, when the ﬁre engine in Fig. 1(b) moves
horizontally, there are also vertical trafﬁc which should not
co-occur for obvious reasons. Therefore to detect such subtle events, one must model both object behaviour and their
spatial, temporal and correlation behavioural context.
With dozens of objects to model at any given time as
well as their behavioural context, existing approaches to
complex crowd behaviour modeling rely on complex models with the hierarchical probabilistic topic models (PTMs)
or other forms of graphical models being the most popular choice (Li, Gong, and Xiang 2012; Hospedales et al.
2011; Hospedales, Gong, and Xiang 2012; Wang and Mori
2009; Wang, Ma, and Grimson 2009; Zhou, Wang, and
Tang 2012). Other non-parametric Bayesian models such
as Dirichlet Process Mixture models (Emonet, Varadarajan,

Introduction
The past two decades have witnessed an accelerated expansion of closed-circuit television (CCTV) surveillance
for public safety and security applications. This coincides
with a growing interest in automatic visual analysis of object behaviours captured by surveillance videos in public
spaces, with a particular focus on crowd behaviour modeling for rare/abnormal event detection. Existing approaches
fall into two categories depending on what crowd events
are of interest. The ﬁrst category of approaches (Li, Mahadevan, and Vasconcelos 2014; Cong, Yuan, and Liu 2011;
Lu, Shi, and Jia 2013; Zhao, Fei-Fei, and Xing 2011; Antic
and Ommer 2011; Cui et al. 2011; Kratz and Nishino 2009;
Kwon and Lee 2012; Mahadevan et al. 2010; Mehran,
Oyama, and Shah 2009; Roshtkhari and Levine 2013;
Saligrama and Chen 2012) seek to detect well-deﬁned behaviour patterns that stand out in terms of both appearance
and motion. For example, Fig. 1(a) shows that a person riding a bicycle is detected as an anomaly due to his distinctive
appearance and motion (speed) among the normal walking
pedestrians in the scene. In contrast, the second category of
approaches (Li, Gong, and Xiang 2012; Hospedales et al.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3516

