Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

EKNOT: Event Knowledge from News and Opinions in Twitter
Min Li1∗ , Jingjing Wang1∗ , Wenzhu Tong1 , Hongkun Yu1 ,
Xiuli Ma2 , Yucheng Chen1 , Haoyan Cai1 and Jiawei Han1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
1
{minli3, jwang112, wtong8, hyu50, ychen233, hcai6, hanj}@illinois.edu, 2 xlma@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
We present the E KNOT system that automatically discovers
major events from online news articles, connects each event
to its discussion in Twitter, and provides a comprehensive
summary of the events from both news media and social media’s point of view. E KNOT takes a time period as input and
outputs a complete picture of the events within the given time
range along with the public opinions. For each event, E KNOT
provides multi-dimensional summaries: a) a summary from
news for an objective description; b) a summary from tweets
containing opinions/sentiments; c) an entity graph which illustrates the major players involved and their correlations; d)
the time span of the event; and e) an opinion (sentiment) distribution. Also, if a user is interested in a particular event,
he/she can zoom into this event to investigate its aspects (subevents) summarized in the same manner. E KNOT is built on
real-time crawled news articles and tweets, allowing users to
explore the dynamics of major events with minimal delays.

1

Figure 1: System Architecture. The red background indicates news side and the purple background indicates Twitter
side.

Introduction

Massive information from news media and social media
is more easily accessible than ever in this big data era.
News agencies deliver real-time status of major events, covering every aspect with fairly formal news articles. In the
meantime, people post their comments and raise discussions
via social media sites such as Twitter. The different natures of these two sources provide a complementary view
of an event: A reasonably objective and accurate presentation of an event, and a view full of opinions and sentiments from the public. With such observation, we develop
the system E KNOT which effectively discovers events from
news and connects each event to its discussion in Twitter. Given a time period, we intend to answer the following questions: 1) What are the major events; 2) who are
the key players in each event; 3) how do people talk about
each event and what are their opinions; 4) when is the event
and how long does the event last; 5) what are the multiple aspects (sub-events) if the event is rather big and inﬂuential? And what are the answers to the above questions
for each aspect? By summarizing news and Twitter simultaneously, E KNOT provides informative and comprehensive

summaries on the event level for users to digest the information effectively, which advances existing related research
(systems)(Guo et al. 2013; Shi, Ifrim, and Hurley 2014;
Tsagkias, de Rijke, and Weerkamp 2011).

2

System Overview

Figure 1 illustrates the system architecture of E KNOT containing four major modules: data collection, event/aspect
discovery, tweets linking and joint summarization. The system requires a time period as input and outputs the summaries for the events and aspects within the time range.
In data collection module, E KNOT constantly crawls data
from Google news. For each news article, the module extracts the keywords and queries the twitter API to obtain an
initial pool of relevant tweets. Entities of the type person, organization or place are also extracted to further characterize
the corpus.
Upon user query, the event/aspect discovery phase
will identify major events/aspects and represent them by
event/aspect descriptors containing word/time/entity distributions. A dynamic hierarchical entity-aware discovery
model proposed in our recent work (Wang et al. 2015) is em-

∗

equal contribution
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4367

