Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Transductive Zero-Shot Recognition via Shared Model Space Learning
Yuchen Guo, Guiguang Ding, Xiaoming Jin and Jianmin Wang
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com, {dinggg,xmjin,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,

Abstract

 




Zero-shot Recognition (ZSR) is to learn recognition models for novel classes without labeled data. It is a challenging task and has drawn considerable attention in recent years.
The basic idea is to transfer knowledge from seen classes via
the shared attributes. This paper focus on the transductive
ZSR, i.e., we have unlabeled data for novel classes. Instead
of learning models for seen and novel classes separately as
in existing works, we put forward a novel joint learning approach which learns the shared model space (SMS) for models such that the knowledge can be effectively transferred between classes using the attributes. An effective algorithm is
proposed for optimization. We conduct comprehensive experiments on three benchmark datasets for ZSR. The results
demonstrates that the proposed SMS can signiﬁcantly outperform the state-of-the-art related approaches which validates
its efﬁcacy for the ZSR task.

݂୅ ࢞

 
 








 

Figure 1: Attribute-based zero-shot recognition.
data to target classes. Two widely used intermediates are attributes (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014) and label semantic representations (Socher et al. 2013). The basic framework of attribute-based1 ZSR is illustrated in Figure 1. Each class (both source and target) is represented by
the attributes (e.g., “black”, “water”). At training stage, the
attribute recognition models are learned using the source
images from source classes and the corresponding attribute
representations. At test stage, given an image from target
class, we ﬁrst generate its attribute representation using the
attribute models. Because the attributes are shared among
classes, the models learned from source classes also work
for target classes. Then by comparing the similarity between
the attribute representation of this image and the representations of each target class, the recognition result is generated.
Based on the shared attributes, the knowledge can be transferred from source classes to target classes, and thus effective recognition models can be constructed for target classes.
This paper focuses on ZSR with the transductive setting (Rohrbach, Ebert, and Schiele 2013; Fu et al. 2014a) in
which the unlabeled (target) images from the target classes
are available. Although the target images have no label information, we can still discover some class structures from
them which can promote the recognition accuracy. For example, Rohrbach et al. proposed a label propagation method

Introduction
Learning a recognition model, e.g., a SVM classiﬁer that
tells an object is a dog or not, always requires sufﬁcient
manually labeled data for the target class (Bishop and others
2006). However, with the explosive growth of visual data
and the huge number of potential classes, such as the images and the annotated tags in Flickr, it is expensive and
burdensome to collect well-labeled training data for new
classes (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014). To tackle
this problem, few-shot recognition (Mensink et al. 2013;
Habibian, Mensink, and Snoek 2014), and the extreme situation zero-shot recognition (Palatucci et al. 2009; Lampert,
Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Akata et al. 2013; Yu et
al. 2013; Jayaraman and Grauman 2014; Fu et al. 2014b;
Romera-Paredes and Torr 2015), have been proposed and attracted considerable interest from academia in recent years.
The goal of zero-shot recognition is to learn models with
no labeled data for novel (target) class. We can notice that
there is no labeled data for target class, but the recognition
models are generally built in a supervised way. To address
this critical problem for ZSR, an intermediary space which
is shared among classes is utilized for transferring knowledge from seen (source) classes that have sufﬁcient labeled

1

Both intermediates represent class labels in a shared space.
The only difference is how the representations are constructed. We
consistently use the notation attribute when there is no ambiguity.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3494

