Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Text Simpliﬁcation Using Neural Machine Translation
Tong Wang and Ping Chen and John Rochford and Jipeng Qiang
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Boston, tongwang0001@gmail.com
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts Boston
Eunice Kennedy Shriver Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School
Department of Computer Science, Hefei University of Technology

tence correct. However, the LS system is not able to simplify
a complex syntactic structure.
Rule-based systems use handcrafted rules for syntactic
simpliﬁcation, and substitute difﬁcult words using predeﬁned vocabulary (Siddharthan and Mandya 2014). Through
analyzing syntactic structure, a sentence with a particular
structure can be transformed into a simple structure. For
example, if a long sentence contains “not only” and “but
also”, it could be split into two sentences. The disadvantages
are that this kind of simpliﬁcation system needs signiﬁcant
human-involvement to manually deﬁne rules; and that it is
hopeless to write an exhaustive set of rules.
Machine Translation (MT) approaches for TS are showing very good performance. Original English and simpliﬁed
English can be thought of as two different languages. TS
would be the process to translate English to simpliﬁed English (Some call it Monolingual Machine Translation) (Zhu,
Bernhard, and Gurevych 2010). The English Wikipedia and
the Simple English Wikipedia can be used to create a parallel corpus of aligned sentences to train the system.
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is a newly proposed
MT approach. It achieves very impressive results on MT
tasks (Cho et al. 2014) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014).
Instead of operating on small components separately, as with
a traditional MT system, the NMT system attempts to build
a single large neural network such that every component is
tuned based upon training sentence pairs. In this paper, we
propose to apply the NMT model to the TS task. To the best
of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst work to apply Neural Machine Translation to text simpliﬁcation. Contrary to previous
approaches, NMT systems do not rely upon similarity measures or heavily handcrafted rules. The deep neural network
can learn all simpliﬁcation rules by itself.

Abstract
Text simpliﬁcation (TS) is the technique of reducing the lexical, syntactical complexity of text. Existing automatic TS systems can simplify text only by lexical simpliﬁcation or by
manually deﬁned rules. Neural Machine Translation (NMT)
is a recently proposed approach for Machine Translation
(MT) that is receiving a lot of research interest. In this paper,
we regard original English and simpliﬁed English as two languages, and apply a NMT model–Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) encoder-decoder on TS to make the neural network to
learn text simpliﬁcation rules by itself. Then we discuss challenges and strategies about how to apply a NMT model to the
task of text simpliﬁcation.

Introduction
Text simpliﬁcation (TS) aims to simplify the lexical, grammatical, or structural complexity of text while retaining its
semantic meaning. It can help various groups of people, including children, non-native speakers, the functionally illiterate, and people with cognitive disabilities, to understand
text better. Moreover, TS relates to many Natural Language
Processing tasks, such as parsing, machine translation, and
summarization (Chandrasekar, Doran, and Srinivas 1996).
Many simpliﬁcation approaches are used to create simpliﬁed text, including substituting, adding, or removing words;
and shortening, splitting, dropping, or merging sentences.
Different simpliﬁcation approaches are applied based upon
context, length, and syntactic structure of source words and
sentences (Petersen and Ostendorf 2007). Usually, multiple simpliﬁcation approaches work together to simplify text.
Research into automatic text simpliﬁcation has been ongoing for decades. It is generally divided into three systems:
lexical simpliﬁcation, rule-based, and machine translation.
A lexical simpliﬁcation (LS) system simpliﬁes text
mainly by substituting infrequently-used and difﬁcult words
with frequently-used and easier words. The general process
for lexical simpliﬁcation includes: identiﬁcation of difﬁcult
words; ﬁnding synonyms or similar words by various similarity measures (Glavaš and Štajner 2015); ranking and selecting the best candidate word based on criteria such as language model; and keeping the grammar and syntax of a sen-

NMT Model on Text Simpliﬁcation
This section introduces the RNN encoder-decoder NMT
model; explains differences between TS and MT tasks;
and discusses challenges and strategies for applying RNN
encoder-decoder on text simpliﬁcation.

RNN Encoder-Decoder Model
We deﬁne Vs and Vt as the vocabulary of the source language and the target language; and Vs∗ and Vt∗ as all sequences (sentences) over Vs and Vt respectively. Given a

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4270

