Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Incremental Stochastic Factorization for Online Reinforcement Learning
André M. S. Barreto and Rafael L. Beirigo

Joelle Pineau and Doina Precup

Laboratório Nacional de Computação Cientı́ﬁca
Petrópolis, RJ, Brazil
{amsb, rafaelb}@lncc.br

School of Computer Science, McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada
{jpineau, dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca

in this case a stochastic matrix P ∈ Rn×n is represented
as the product of two stochastic matrices D ∈ Rn×m and
K ∈ Rm×n , with m < n.
In the context of reinforcement learning, one is interested in Markov decision processes (MDPs) whose transition matrices can be well approximated by SFs. This interest was originally triggered by an intriguing property of SF:
if we swap the factors of the factorization, we obtain another stochastic matrix P̄ = KD that retains some important properties of the Markov chain represented by P (Barreto and Fragoso 2011). By replacing the transition matrices
of an MDP with their reduced counterparts, one can derive
a smaller MDP whose value function can be used to recover
the corresponding function of the original model (Barreto,
Pineau, and Precup 2014). This strategy of replacing P with
P̄ is sometimes referred to as the “SF trick.”
One difﬁculty in applying the SF trick in practice is the
need to compute the factorization itself, which has been
shown to be an NP-hard problem (Vavasis 2009). In a recent paper we have suggested looking at the problem from
a different perspective: instead of assuming one knows the
transition matrix P and wants to compute the factors D and
K, we consider the scenario where one only has access to
transitions sampled from P (Barreto et al. 2015). In this case
one could of course compute an estimate of P by counting
the occurrences of transitions, which would take us back to
the original scenario. Instead, we proposed an approach to
compute D and K directly from data, without ever computing an explicit estimate of P. One obvious advantage of this
strategy is that the number of parameters to be estimated is
reduced from n2 to 2nm; since m is a parameter of the algorithm, it serves as a practical device to control the trade
off between the estimation and approximation errors in the
model DK ≈ P (Györﬁ et al. 2002). Thus, besides the SF
trick, the possibility of using SF to speed up learning further
motivates our interest on this model.
The algorithm to compute an SF from data is an
expectation-maximization (EM) method called expectationmaximization stochastic factorization (EMSF) (Barreto et
al. 2015). In this paper we take a closer look at EMSF.
First, by exploiting the assumptions underlying the algorithm, we show that it is possible to reduce its original update
rules to simple multiplicative rules similar to the ones that
helped popularize non-negative factorization (NMF) (Lee

Abstract
A construct that has been receiving attention recently in reinforcement learning is stochastic factorization (SF), a particular case of non-negative factorization (NMF) in which the
matrices involved are stochastic. The idea is to use SF to approximate the transition matrices of a Markov decision process (MDP). This is useful for two reasons. First, learning the
factors of the SF instead of the transition matrices can reduce
signiﬁcantly the number of parameters to be estimated. Second, it has been shown that SF can be used to reduce the number of operations needed to compute an MDP’s value function. Recently, an algorithm called expectation-maximization
SF (EMSF) has been proposed to compute a SF directly from
transitions sampled from an MDP. In this paper we take a
closer look at EMSF. First, by exploiting the assumptions underlying the algorithm, we show that it is possible to reduce it
to simple multiplicative update rules similar to the ones that
helped popularize NMF. Second, we analyze the optimization
process underlying EMSF and ﬁnd that it minimizes a modiﬁed version of the Kullback-Leibler divergence that is particularly well-suited for learning a SF from data sampled from
an arbitrary distribution. Third, we build on this improved understanding of EMSF to draw an interesting connection with
NMF and probabilistic latent semantic analysis. We also exploit the simpliﬁed update rules to introduce a new version
of EMSF that generalizes and signiﬁcantly improves its precursor. This new algorithm provides a practical mechanism to
control the trade-off between memory usage and computing
time, essentially freeing the space complexity of EMSF from
its dependency on the number of sample transitions. The algorithm can also compute its approximation incrementally,
which makes it possible to use it concomitantly with the collection of data. This feature makes the new version of EMSF
particularly suitable for online reinforcement learning. Empirical results support the utility of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

It is widely recognized that efﬁcient learning is only possible if one exploits some kind of regularity in the problem (Györﬁ et al. 2002). In reinforcement learning, a structural regularity that has been receiving attention recently
is a particular case of non-negative factorization (NMF)
called stochastic factorization (SF). As the name suggests,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1468

