Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Exploiting an Oracle That Reports AUC Scores
in Machine Learning Contests
Jacob Whitehill
Ofﬁce of the Vice Provost for Advances in Learning
Harvard University
125 Mt. Auburn St., Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
jacob whitehill@harvard.edu
a ﬁxed maximum number of times per day, a set of guesses
for the labels in the testing set. The oracle will then reply
with the accuracy of the contestant’s guesses on a (possibly randomized) subset of the test data. There are several
ways in which these oracle answers can be exploited, including: (1) If some contestants were able to circumvent the
daily maximum number of accuracy queries they can submit to the oracle (e.g., by illegally registering multiple accounts on the competition’s website), then they could use
those extra oracle responses to perform additional parameter or hyperparameter optimization over the test set and potentially gain a competitive edge. (2) The accuracy reported
by the oracle, even though it is an aggregate performance
metric over the entire test set (or a large subset), could convey information about the labels of individual examples in
the test set. Contestants could use this information to reﬁne
their guesses about the test labels. Given that the difference
in accuracy between contestants is often tiny – in KDD Cup
2015, for example, the #1 and #2 contestants’ accuracies differed by 0.0003 AUC (KDD Cup Organizers 2015) – even
a small edge achieved by exploiting the AUC oracle can be
perceived as worthwhile.
To date, attacks of type (1) have already been implemented and documented (Simonite 2015). However, to the
best of our knowledge, attacks of type (2) have not previously been investigated. In this paper, we consider how an
attacker could orchestrate attacks of type (2) on an oracle
that reports the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve (AUC), which is one of the most common
performance metrics for binary classiﬁers. Speciﬁcally, we
make the following contributions:

Abstract
In machine learning contests such as the ImageNet
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (Russakovsky et al. 2015) and the KDD Cup, contestants can
submit candidate solutions and receive from an oracle
(typically the organizers of the competition) the accuracy of their guesses compared to the ground-truth labels. One of the most commonly used accuracy metrics
for binary classiﬁcation tasks is the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve (AUC). In this
paper we provide proofs-of-concept of how knowledge
of the AUC of a set of guesses can be used, in two different kinds of attacks, to improve the accuracy of those
guesses. On the other hand, we also demonstrate the intractability of one kind of AUC exploit by proving that
the number of possible binary labelings of n examples
for which a candidate solution obtains a AUC score of
c grows exponentially in n, for every c ∈ (0, 1).

Introduction
Machine learning and data-mining competitions such as
the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(Russakovsky et al. 2015), KDD Cup (KDD Cup Organizers 2015), and Facial Expression Recognition and Analysis
(FERA) Challenge (Valstar et al. 2015) have helped to advance the state-of-the-art of machine learning, deep learning, and computer vision research. By establishing common
benchmarks and setting a clearer boundary between training
and testing datasets – participants typically never gain access to the testing labels directly – these competitions help
researchers to estimate the performance of their classiﬁers
more reliably. However, the beneﬁt of such contests depends
on the integrity of the competition and the generalizability
of performance to real-world contexts. If contestants could
somehow “hack” the competition to learn illegitimately the
labels of the test set and increase their scores, then the value
of the contest would diminish greatly.
One potential window that data-mining contestants could
exploit is the accuracy “oracle” set up by the competition
organizers to give contestants a running estimate of their
classiﬁer’s performance: In many data-mining contests (e.g.,
those organized by Kaggle), contestants may submit, up to
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(a) We describe an attack whereby an attacker whose classiﬁer already achieves high AUC and who knows the prevalence of each class can use the oracle to infer the labels of
a few test examples with complete certainty.
(b) We provide a proof-of-concept of how the AUC score c
of a set of guesses constrains the set of possible labelings
of the entire test set, and how this information can be harnessed, using standard Bayesian inference, to improve the
accuracy of those guesses.
(c) We show that a brute-force attack of type (b) above is
computationally tractable only for very small datasets.
Speciﬁcally, we prove that the number of possible binary

1345

