Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Alternative Filtering for the Weighted Circuit Constraint:
Comparing Lower Bounds for the TSP and Solving TSPTW
Sylvain Ducomman and Hadrien Cambazard and Bernard Penz
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, G-SCOP, F-38000 Grenoble, France
CNRS, G-SCOP, F-38000 Grenoble, France
{ﬁrstname.name}@g-scop.grenoble-inp.fr

1-tree relaxation by Held and Karp (Held and Karp 1970;
1971) but has not been used for the TSPTW. Our paper is
based on the work of (Benchimol et al. 2012). We propose
different ﬁltering algorithms, all based on a relaxation
of the TSP taking into account different aspects that are
relevant for asymmetric or time-constrained cases such as
the TSPTW. A second contribution is to show that the three
bounds are incomparable and in particular the two bounds
based on Lagrangian relaxation.

Abstract
Many problems, and in particular routing problems, require
to ﬁnd one or many circuits in a weighted graph. The weights
often express the distance or the travel time between vertices. We propose in this paper various ﬁltering algorithms
for the weighted circuit constraint which maintain a circuit
in a weighted graph. The ﬁltering algorithms are typical cost
based ﬁltering algorithms relying on relaxations of the Traveling Salesman Problem. We investigate three bounds and
show that they are incomparable. In particular we design
a ﬁltering algorithm based on a lower bound introduced in
1981 by Christophides et al.. This bound can provide stronger
ﬁltering than the classical Held and Karp’s approach when
additional information, such as the possible positions of the
clients in the tour, is available. This is particularly suited for
problems with side constraints such as time windows.

Problem deﬁnition: Let G = (N, E) be a complete directed graph without loops with vertex set N = {0, . . . , n +
1}, the vertex 0 (resp. n + 1) corresponds to the start
(resp. the end) of the route (N s = {0, . . . , n} and N e =
{1, . . . , n + 1}). We denote by dij the distance (or cost) of
arc (i, j). A salesman tour is deﬁned as a path in G from
vertex 0 to vertex n + 1, visiting each vertex 1, . . . , n exactly once. The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) consists
in ﬁnding a salesman tour of minimum distance in G. In
presence of time constraints, each vertex i is associated to a
time windows [ai , bi ], and each arc (i, j) to a traveling time
tij . The service time of customer i is included in tij . The
Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Windows (TSPTW)
consists in identifying a shortest salesman tour visiting each
vertex within its time window. Note that the problem has
n + 1 cities: n clients plus one depot where the tour starts
and ends. In the following, we denote by D(x), the domain
of variable x and by x (resp. x) the upper (resp. lower)
bound of x.

Baseline CP for TSP/TSPTW
Many problems, and in particular routing problems, require
to ﬁnd one or many circuits in a weighted graph. For
example, the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) consists
in ﬁnding a circuit of minimum total weight that visits all
vertices of the graph. Time Windows are often added to the
formulation to express the fact that a vertex or ‘a client’
can be visited only when available (TSPTW). To the best
of our knowledge, the state-of-the-art to solve this problem
is based on dynamic programming combined with column
generation (Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti 2012).
Related work: In Constraint Programming (CP), two
approaches have been developed to tackle the TSPTW.
The ﬁrst approach (Pesant et al. 1998) uses redundant
constraints in order to reduce the search space. In particular, a constraint to reduce the domains of the time
windows is added as well as an arc elimination constraint
for ﬁltering possible direct successors of a vertex. But the
objective function is propagated independently of the circuit
constraint which leads to poor global lower bounds. The
second approach (Focacci, Lodi, and Milano 2002) adds
a lower bound computed with an assignment relaxation.
Additionally, an effective ﬁltering for weighted circuit
was proposed in (Benchimol et al. 2012) based on the

Model
This section presents a Constraint Programming (CP) model
for the TSPTW. The model is based on a set of variables
nexti ∈ N for each vertex i ∈ N representing the immediate successor of the vertex i in the tour (for convenience nextn+1 = 0). We also add the opposite variable
predi ∈ N for each vertex i ∈ N representing the immediate predecessor of i (pred0 = n + 1). Let disti for each
vertex i ∈ N be the cumulated distance of the tour when
reaching vertex i. For time windows constraints, we add the
variable starti ∈ [ai , bi ] representing the cumulated traveling time along the route to reach vertex i. So starti can
be seen as the starting time of the service for client i and its
initial domain is deﬁned by the corresponding time window.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3390

