Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Towards Safe Semi-Supervised Learning
for Multivariate Performance Measures∗
1

Yu-Feng Li1,2

James T. Kwok3

Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023
3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
liyf@nju.edu.cn jamesk@cse.ust.hk zhouzh@nju.edu.cn
2

data only (Blum and Chawla 2001; Chapelle, Schölkopf, and
Zien 2006; Chawla and Karakoulas 2005; Cozman, Cohen,
and Cirelo 2002; Li and Zhou 2011a; 2015; Nigam et al.
2000; Zhang and Oles 2000). This phenomenon seriously
affects the use of SSL in many applications. The development of safe SSL has thus been considered as an important
issue in SSL (Zhou and Li 2010; Li and Zhou 2015). In
other words, besides being able to improve performance,
SSL should not be worse than simple supervised learning
in the worst case.
There are some studies (Cozman, Cohen, and Cirelo
2002; Balcan and Blum 2010; Singh, Nowak, and Zhu 2009;
Yang and Priebe 2011; Li and Zhou 2011a; 2015) about
the quality of unlabeled data, providing some insights about
how to exploit unlabeled data in better ways. However, safe
SSL remains challenging. Moreover, in many practical applications, the performance measures are often diverse. For
example, in text categorization, the F1-score and precisionrecall breakeven point are often used; in information retrieval, precision and recall are more preferred; in ranking
applications, the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) and
Top-k precision are more popular. To this end, one needs
to develop a safe SSL method which can work with such a
diversity of performance measures.
To alleviate this problem, we propose in this paper the
UMVP (safe semi-sUpervised learning for MultiVariate Performance measure) method, which produces the ﬁnal SSL
prediction by integrating multiple semi-supervised learners. Without sufﬁcient knowledge in distinguishing multiple semi-supervised learners, UMVP models the safe SSL
problem as a maximin optimization problem. Speciﬁcally,
the performance gain (with respect to various multivariate
performance criteria) is maximized relative to the baseline
supervised model in the worst-case scenario. However, the
multivariate performance measure is typically discontinuous
and non-convex, and thus difﬁcult to optimize. In this paper, a tight minimax convex relaxation technique is adopted,
which relaxes the original optimization problem into a convex one with a global solution. We show that when the performance measure is the Top-k Precision, Fβ score or AUC,
this convex relaxation problem can be solved efﬁciently by
closed-form solutions and small linear programs. Experimental results on a number of data sets show that the proposed method effectively improves the safeness of SSL un-

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an important research
problem in machine learning. While it is usually expected
that the use of unlabeled data can improve performance, in
many cases SSL is outperformed by supervised learning using only labeled data. To this end, the construction of a
performance-safe SSL method has become a key issue of
SSL study. To alleviate this problem, we propose in this
paper the UMVP (safe semi-sUpervised learning for MultiVariate Performance measure) method, because of the need
of various performance measures in practical tasks. The proposed method integrates multiple semi-supervised learners,
and maximizes the worst-case performance gain to derive
the ﬁnal prediction. The overall problem is formulated as a
maximin optimization. In oder to solve the resultant difﬁcult
maximin optimization, this paper shows that when the performance measure is the Top-k Precision, Fβ score or AUC, a
minimax convex relaxation of the maximin optimization can
be solved efﬁciently. Experimental results show that the proposed method can effectively improve the safeness of SSL
under multiple multivariate performance measures.

Introduction
In many real-world tasks, labeled data are expensive to
collect and so supervised learning may not be able to attain good performance. In contrast, large amounts of unlabeled data are often readily available. It is now well-known
that by using both labeled and unlabeled data, much better performance can be obtained by semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien 2006; Zhu 2007;
Zhou and Li 2010). Over the past decades, SSL has received
a lot of attention, and played a signiﬁcant role in many applications. Examples include image classiﬁcation, text categorization, bioinformatics, and information retrieval.
In the past, one usually expects SSL to have improved
performance whenever labeled data are few. However, recent studies have shown that in many cases, not only is
SSL unable to improve performance, it may even be outperformed by supervised learning with the use of labeled
∗

This research was supported by the NSFC (61333014,
61403186), 863 Program (2015AA015406), JiangsuSF (BK2014
0613) and Hong Kong RGC (614012).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1816

