Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Building End-to-End Dialogue Systems
Using Generative Hierarchical Neural Network Models
Iulian V. Serban, † Alessandro Sordoni,† Yoshua Bengio,†1 Aaron Courville,† Joelle Pineau,††
†Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
{iulian.vlad.serban,alessandro.sordoni,yoshua.bengio,aaron.courville} AT umontreal.ca
††School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
jpineau AT cs.mcgill.ca

2014), yet such approaches still require either hand-crafted
features or large corpora of annotated task-speciﬁc simulated conversations.
On the other end of the spectrum are the non-goaldriven systems (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011; Banchs
and Li 2012; Ameixa et al. 2014). Most recently Sordoni et al. (2015b) and Shang et al. (2015) have drawn inspiration from the use of neural networks in natural language modeling and machine translation tasks (Cho et al.
2014). There are several motivations for developing nongoal-driven systems. First, they may be deployed directly
for tasks which do not naturally exhibit a directly measurable goal (e.g. language learning) or simply for entertainment. Second, if they are trained on corpora related to the
task of a goal-driven dialogue system (e.g. corpora which
cover conversations on similar topics) then these models
can be used to train a user simulator, which can then train
the POMDP models discussed earlier (Young et al. 2013;
Pietquin and Hastie 2013). This would alleviate the expensive and time-consuming task of constructing a large-scale
task-speciﬁc dialogue corpus. In addition to this, the features extracted from the non-goal-driven systems may be
used to expand the state space representation of POMDP
models (Singh et al. 2002). This can help generalization to
dialogues outside the annotated task-speciﬁc corpora.
Our contribution is in the direction of end-to-end trainable, non-goal-driven systems based on generative probabilistic models. We deﬁne the generative dialogue problem
as modeling the utterances and interactive structure of the
dialogue. As such, we view our model as a cognitive system, which has to carry out natural language understanding, reasoning, decision making and natural language generation in order to replicate or emulate the behavior of the
agents in the training corpus. Our approach differs from
previous work on learning dialogue systems through interaction with humans (Young et al. 2013; Gasic et al. 2013;
Cantrell et al. 2012; Mohan and Laird 2014), because it
learns off-line through examples of human-human dialogues
and aims to emulate the dialogues in the training corpus instead of maximize a task-speciﬁc objective function. Contrary to explanation-based learning (Mohan and Laird 2014)
and rule-based inference systems (Langley et al. 2014), our
model does not require a predeﬁned state or action space
representation. These representations are instead learned

Abstract
We investigate the task of building open domain, conversational dialogue systems based on large dialogue corpora using generative models. Generative models produce system
responses that are autonomously generated word-by-word,
opening up the possibility for realistic, ﬂexible interactions.
In support of this goal, we extend the recently proposed hierarchical recurrent encoder-decoder neural network to the dialogue domain, and demonstrate that this model is competitive with state-of-the-art neural language models and backoff n-gram models. We investigate the limitations of this and
similar approaches, and show how its performance can be improved by bootstrapping the learning from a larger questionanswer pair corpus and from pretrained word embeddings.

Introduction
Dialogue systems, also known as interactive conversational
agents, virtual agents and sometimes chatterbots, are used
in a wide set of applications ranging from technical support services to language learning tools and entertainment
(Young et al. 2013; Shawar and Atwell 2007). Dialogue systems can be divided into goal-driven systems, such as technical support services, and non-goal-driven systems, such as
language learning tools or computer game characters. Our
current work focuses on the second case, due to the availability of large corpora of this type, though the model may
eventually prove useful for goal-driven systems also.
Perhaps the most successful approach to goal-driven systems has been to view the dialogue problem as a partially
observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Young et al.
2013). Unfortunately, most deployed dialogue systems use
hand-crafted features for the state and action space representations, and require either a large annotated task-speciﬁc
corpus or a horde of human subjects willing to interact with
the unﬁnished system. This not only makes it expensive and
time-consuming to deploy a real dialogue system, but also
limits its usage to a narrow domain. Recent work has tried
to push goal-driven systems towards learning with few examples using constraints on the POMDP (Gasic et al. 2013)
as well as learning the observed features themselves with
neural network models (Henderson, Thomson, and Young
1

Y.B. is a CIFAR senior Fellow
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3776

