Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robustness of Bayesian Pool-Based Active
Learning Against Prior Misspeciﬁcation
Nguyen Viet Cuong,1 Nan Ye,2 Wee Sun Lee3
1
2

Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, nvcuong@nus.edu.sg
Mathematical Sciences School & ACEMS, Queensland University of Technology, Australia, n.ye@qut.edu.au
3
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore, leews@comp.nus.edu.sg
queries, and the minimum cost problem which aims to minimize the expected number of queries needed to identify the
true labeling of all examples. We focus on approximate algorithms because previous works have shown that, in general,
it is computationally intractable to ﬁnd the optimal strategy for choosing the examples, while some commonly used
AL algorithms can achieve good approximation ratios compared to the optimal strategies (Golovin and Krause 2011;
Chen and Krause 2013; Cuong et al. 2013; Cuong, Lee,
and Ye 2014). For example, with the version space reduction utility, the maximum Gibbs error algorithm achieves
a (1 − 1/e)-approximation of the optimal expected utility
(Cuong et al. 2013), while the least conﬁdence algorithm
achieves the same approximation of the optimal worst-case
utility (Cuong, Lee, and Ye 2014).
Our work shows that many commonly used AL algorithms are robust. In the maximum coverage setting, our
main result is that if the utility function is Lipschitz continuous in the prior, all α-approximate algorithms are robust,
i.e., they are near α-approximate when using a perturbed
prior. More precisely, their performance guarantee on the
expected or worst-case utility degrades by at most a constant factor of the 1 distance between the perturbed prior
and the true prior. It follows from this result that the maximum Gibbs error and the least conﬁdence algorithms are
near (1 − 1/e)-approximate. Our result also implies the robustness of the batch and generalized versions of the maximum Gibbs error algorithm. If the utility is non-Lipschitz,
we show that even an optimal algorithm for the perturbed
prior may not be robust. This suggests we should use a
Lipschitz continuous utility for AL in order to achieve robustness. Similarly, we prove a robustness result for the
minimum cost setting that implies the robustness of the
generalized binary search AL algorithm (Dasgupta 2004;
Nowak 2008).
We also address the difﬁculty of choosing a good prior
in practice. Practically, it is often easier to come up with a
set of distributions and combine them using a mixture. Our
theoretical results imply robustness when the mixture prior
is close to the true prior. In the mixture setting, another interesting question is robustness when the true prior is one
of the components of the mixture. In this case, the mixture
prior may not necessarily be close to the true prior in terms
of 1 distance. We prove that for the uniform mixture prior,

Abstract
We study the robustness of active learning (AL) algorithms
against prior misspeciﬁcation: whether an algorithm achieves
similar performance using a perturbed prior as compared to
using the true prior. In both the average and worst cases of the
maximum coverage setting, we prove that all α-approximate
algorithms are robust (i.e., near α-approximate) if the utility
is Lipschitz continuous in the prior. We further show that robustness may not be achieved if the utility is non-Lipschitz.
This suggests we should use a Lipschitz utility for AL if
robustness is required. For the minimum cost setting, we
can also obtain a robustness result for approximate AL algorithms. Our results imply that many commonly used AL
algorithms are robust against perturbed priors. We then propose the use of a mixture prior to alleviate the problem of
prior misspeciﬁcation. We analyze the robustness of the uniform mixture prior and show experimentally that it performs
reasonably well in practice.

1

Introduction

In pool-based active learning (AL), training examples are
sequentially selected and labeled from a pool of unlabeled
data, with the aim of obtaining a good classiﬁer using as
few labeled examples as possible (McCallum and Nigam
1998). To achieve computational efﬁciency, most commonly
used methods greedily select one example at a time based on
some criterion.
In this paper, we consider Bayesian pool-based AL that
assumes data labels are generated from a prior distribution. In theory, the true prior is generally assumed to be
known (Golovin and Krause 2011; Cuong et al. 2013;
Cuong, Lee, and Ye 2014). In practice, it is often unknown
and misspeciﬁed; that is, the prior used is different from the
true one. This work is the ﬁrst one investigating the robustness of AL algorithms against prior misspeciﬁcation – that
is, whether an algorithm achieves similar performance using
a perturbed prior as compared to using the true prior.
We focus on the analysis of approximate algorithms for
two commonly studied problems: the maximum coverage
problem which aims to maximize the expected or worstcase utility of the chosen examples given a ﬁxed budget of
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1512

