Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

What’s Hot in Intelligent User Interfaces
Shimei Pan

Oliver Brdiczka

Giuseppe Carenini

University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA

Vectra Networks
San Jose, CA 95128, USA

University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada

Duen Horng Chau

Per Ola Kristensson

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA

University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB2 1TN, UK

Abstract
The ACM Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI) is
the annual meeting of the intelligent user interface community and serves as a premier international forum for reporting
outstanding research and development on intelligent user interfaces. ACM IUI is where the Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI) community meets the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) community. Here we summarize the latest trends in IUI based on
our experience organizing the 20th ACM IUI Conference in
Atlanta in 2015.

At ACM IUI, we address the complex interactions between
machine intelligence and human intelligence by leveraging
solutions from machine learning, knowledge representation
and new interaction technologies. Although submissions focusing on only Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) or Human Computer Interaction (HCI) will be considered, we give strong
preferences to submissions that discuss research from both
AI and HCI simultaneously. Typical IUI topics include intelligent input technologies (e.g., interpretation of speech, gesture, eye gaze, posture and physiological signs), smart data
presentation technologies (e.g., visualization, text summarization and multimedia content generation), adaptive and
personalized user interfaces, intelligent assistant for complex tasks, interactive data analysis (e.g. interactive machine
learning and information retrieval), and intelligent interfaces
for ubiquitous computing, wearable computing, affective
computing, human robot interaction and recommender systems. In the following, we present some recent advances and
main challenges in IUI.

Figure 1: Take a Selﬁe with Hairware
paradigms have emerged. For example, at IUI 2015, conductive hair extensions were used to send messages, record
conversations and control cameras (Vega, Cunha, and Fuks
2015) (Figure 1). Also, the availability of new body-tracking
devices such as Microsoft Kinect have contributed significantly to the development of Natural User Interfaces that
use touchless hand gestures (Erazo and Pino 2015). Ambient sounds captured with a wrist-mounted device were used
to detect the type and amount of food consumed for dietary
self-monitoring (Thomaz et al. 2015). Surface electromyography (sEMG) signals were used to capture subtle gestures
to improve the accessibility of mobile devices for users with
visual impairments (Costa 2015). In addition, sensors built
in commodity smartphones were used to recognize gestures
(Zhang et al. 2015), and detect physiological signs (e.g, heart
rate) (Fan and Wang 2015).
We expect this trend to continue. Recently, Google has
teamed up with Levis to announce Project Jacquard, an effort to create clothing items that can alert wearers of weight
gain. The sensors used are so thin that they can be directly
woven into garments. Users can use body gestures such as
leg crossing, swiping and lifting to interact with devices
(e.g., smart phones).

New Trends in IUI
Since the topics in IUI are quite diverse, here we only highlight a few recent trends.

Sensor-based New Interaction Paradigms
Previously, the primary modes of human-computer interaction include voice, keyboard, GUI, simple gesture on
touch screens, and eye tracking. With the recent advancement of build-in sensors that support high deﬁnition image
and audio processing, motion detection, location detection
and gesture detection, innovative sensor-based interaction

Human-Centered Data Analysis
While signiﬁcant advances in machine learning and data
mining continue in improving the accuracy and efﬁciency of
data analysis algorithms, another equally important goal has
garnered less attention: usability. For example, many data
analysis algorithms are difﬁcult to understand, hard to use

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4333

