Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fast Asynchronous Parallel Stochastic Gradient Descent:
A Lock-Free Approach with Convergence Guarantee
Shen-Yi Zhao and Wu-Jun Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
zhaosy@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Zhang 2013; Mairal 2013; Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2013;
Liu et al. 2014; Nitanda 2014; Zhang and Kwok 2014) have
recently attracted much attention to solve machine learning
problems like that in (1). Many works have proved that SGD
and its variants can outperform traditional batch learning algorithms such as gradient descent or Newton methods in real
applications.
In many real-world problems, the number of instances
n is typically very large. In this case, the traditional sequential SGD methods might not be efﬁcient enough to
ﬁnd the optimal solution for (1). On the other hand, clusters and multicore systems have become popular in recent
years. Hence, to handle large-scale problems, researchers
have recently proposed several distributed SGD methods
for clusters and parallel SGD methods for multicore systems. Although distributed SGD methods for clusters like
those in (Zinkevich, Smola, and Langford 2009; Duchi,
Agarwal, and Wainwright 2010; Zinkevich et al. 2010;
Zhang, Zheng, and T. Kwok 2015) are meaningful to handle very large-scale problems, there also exist a lot of problems which can be solved by a single machine with multiple cores. Furthermore, even in distributed settings with
clusters, each machine (node) of the cluster typically have
multiple cores. Hence, how to design effective parallel SGD
methods for multicore systems has become a key issue to
solve large-scale learning problems like that in (1).
There have appeared some parallel SGD methods for multicore systems. The round-robin scheme proposed in (Zinkevich, Smola, and Langford 2009) tries to order the processors and then each processor update the variables in order.
Hogwild! (Recht et al. 2011) is an asynchronous approach
for parallel SGD. Experimental results in (Recht et al. 2011)
have shown that Hogwild! can outperform the round-robin
scheme in (Zinkevich, Smola, and Langford 2009). However, Hogwild! can only achieve a sub-linear convergence
rate. Hence, Hogwild! is not efﬁcient (fast) enough to
achieve satisfactory performance. PASSCoDe (Hsieh, Yu,
and Dhillon 2015) and CoCoA (Jaggi et al. 2014) are also
asynchronous approaches for parallel SGD. However, both
of them are formulated from the dual coordinate descent (ascent) perspective, and hence it can only be used for problems whose dual functions can be computed. Although some
works, such as Hogwild! and PASSCoDe, have empirically
found that in some cases the lock-free strategies are much

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants have become more and more popular in machine learning due to
their efﬁciency and effectiveness. To handle large-scale problems, researchers have recently proposed several parallel
SGD methods for multicore systems. However, existing parallel SGD methods cannot achieve satisfactory performance
in real applications. In this paper, we propose a fast asynchronous parallel SGD method, called AsySVRG, by designing an asynchronous strategy to parallelize the recently proposed SGD variant called stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG). AsySVRG adopts a lock-free strategy which is
more efﬁcient than other strategies with locks. Furthermore,
we theoretically prove that AsySVRG is convergent with a
linear convergence rate. Both theoretical and empirical results show that AsySVRG can outperform existing state-ofthe-art parallel SGD methods like Hogwild! in terms of convergence rate and computation cost.

Introduction
Assume we have a set of labeled instances
{(xi , yi )|i = 1, . . . , n}, where xi ∈ Rd is the feature
vector for instance i, d is the feature size and yi ∈ {1, −1}
is the class label of xi . In machine learning, we often
need to solve the following regularized empirical risk
minimization problem:
1
fi (w),
n i=1
n

min
w

(1)

where w is the parameter to learn, fi (w) is the loss function deﬁned on instance i which is often with a regularization term to avoid overﬁtting. For example, fi (w) can be
T
log(1 + e−yi xi w ) + λ2 w2 which is known
as the logistic


loss plus a regularization term, or max 0, 1 − yi xTi w +
λ
2
2 w which is known as the regularized hinge loss in sup2
port vector machine (SVM). Besides λ2 w , the regularization term can also be λ w1 or some other forms.
Due to their efﬁciency and effectiveness, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants (Xiao 2009; Duchi and
Singer 2009; Roux, Schmidt, and Bach 2012; Johnson and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2379

