Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning for Decentralized Control of Multiagent Systems in
Large, Partially-Observable Stochastic Environments
Miao Liu

Christopher Amato

Emily P. Anesta, J. Daniel Grifﬁth Jonathan P. How

LIDS, MIT
CS Dept., Univ. New Hampshire
Cambridge, MA
Durham, NH
miaoliu@mit.edu
camato@cs.unh.edu

Lincoln Laboratory, MIT
Lexington, MA
{eanesta, dan.grifﬁth}@ll.mit.edu

AeroAstro Dept., MIT
Cambridge, MA
jhow@mit.edu

have made signiﬁcant progress on numerous related applications, including transportation (Amato et al. 2015b), extraplanetary exploration (Bernstein et al. 2001), and trafﬁc control (Wu, Zilberstein, and Jennings 2013). However, current
Dec-POMDP methods have limited scalability.
Recent research has addressed the more scalable macroaction based Dec-POMDP (MacDec-POMDP) case where
each agent has macro-actions (temporally-extended actions), which may require different amounts of time to execute (Amato, Konidaris, and Kaelbling 2014; Amato et
al. 2015a). However, current MacDec-POMDP methods require knowing domain models a priori. Unfortunately, for
many real-world problems, such as SAR, the domain model
may not be available.
To solve Dec-POMDPs when domain models are unavailable or access to simulators is limited (due to high cost or
security reasons), previous work (Wu, Zilberstein, and Jennings 2013; Liu et al. 2015) adopted model-free reinforcement learning (RL) strategies and EM algorithms (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977) to optimize ﬁnite-state controllers (FSCs). However, these methods are designed for
solving primitive action based problems; directly applying
them to learn policies from macro-action level data does
not guarantee that learned controllers are executable because
neither the differing execution times nor the initial conditions of the macro-actions are considered.
To learn policies in the macro-action case, we propose
a novel policy-based RL approach to generate valid FSCs
from the macro-action level trajectories collected by previous interactions with the environment (e.g. demonstration).
Our method ﬁrst constructs a validity map (VM) which deﬁnes the valid macro-actions based on histories that have
been seen. Then, a policy-based expectation maximization
(PoEM) algorithm, is developed that optimizes the policy
subject to the validity map constraints. Our methods adopt a
special type of FSC, a Mealy machine (Amato, Bonet, and
Zilberstein 2010), for policy representations. The Mealy machine offers a natural representation of the macro-action validity information while also being concise.
Our proposed algorithm is linear in the number of agents
and at most quadratic in the problem size, making it scalable to large domains. In practice, these trajectories can be
generated by a simulator or a set of real-world experiences
that can be provided. This batch data scenario is general and

Abstract
Decentralized partially observable Markov decision
processes (Dec-POMDPs) provide a general framework
for multiagent sequential decision-making under uncertainty. Although Dec-POMDPs are typically intractable
to solve for real-world problems, recent research on
macro-actions (i.e., temporally-extended actions) has
signiﬁcantly increased the size of problems that can be
solved. However, current methods assume the underlying Dec-POMDP model is known a priori or a full simulator is available during planning time. To accommodate
more realistic scenarios, when such information is not
available, this paper presents a policy-based reinforcement learning approach, which learns the agent policies
based solely on trajectories generated by previous interaction with the environment (e.g., demonstrations).
We show that our approach is able to generate valid
macro-action controllers and develop an expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm (called Policy-based EM
or PoEM), which has convergence guarantees for batch
learning. Our experiments show PoEM is a scalable
learning method that can learn optimal policies and improve upon hand-coded “expert” solutions.

Introduction
Multi-agent and multi-robot systems represent important solutions to many real-world problems. For example, in disaster situations, such as earthquakes, hurricanes, or terrorist attacks, it is urgent that trapped survivors can be found
and rescued within 48 hours. Otherwise, the chance of ﬁnding victims alive decreases substantially (Grayson 2014). To
solve a search and rescue (SAR) problem efﬁciently, a team
of ground and aerial vehicles have to be deployed to locate, rescue and medically stabilize survivors trapped in hazardous spaces. This SAR problem, in its most general form,
can be formulated as a decentralized partially observable
Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek 2012;
Amato et al. 2013), where a team of agents must cooperate to optimize some global objective in the presence of
uncertainty. Moreover, each agent has to make decisions
based on its own local observations when there are no other
agents in the effective communication range. Researchers
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2523

