Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Connecting the Dots Using Contextual
Information Hidden in Text and Images
Md Abdul Kader,1 Sheikh Motahar Naim,1 Arnold P. Boedihardjo,2 M. Shahriar Hossain1
1

The University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX 79968, Phone: (915) 747-5000
2
U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Alexandria, VA 22315
{mkader, snaim}@miners.utep.edu, arnold.p.boedihardjo@usace.army.mil, mhossain@utep.edu

1

Introduction

and (3) summarization of events that leverages text and images to explain events as chains of documents over time giving an idea about how the story evolved.

The publicly available data feeds are increasing exponentially providing a massive source of intelligence, ironically
this plethora of information is what makes succinct details
hidden during the analysis of an event of interest. Traditional
search engines help narrow down the scope of analysis to a
speciﬁc event but it is not an easy task for an analyst to study
massive amount of relevant documents and get a complete
understanding of how each sub-event compose a complex
set of interactions between the actors involved in a major
event. Here, we describe a framework called Storyboarding
that provides summarizations of an event as chains of coherent documents and relevant image objects using publicly
available data. Summarization of an event involves the task
of identifying relevant entities (e.g., person and location),
discovering non-obvious connections between the entities to
construct a coherent story – a task which sometimes is referred in the literature as “connecting the dots”, and providing relevant information (e.g., images) to explain the connections better. Our approach provides a mechanism to build
a story between two news articles published at two different
times using a sequence of intermediate published articles.
The storyboarding framework builds a knowledge base
ﬁrst, which helps in providing an image context for each
story. A straightforward way to incorporating images during
summarization of events is to generate the story using only
a similarity network of news articles, as done in Storytelling
(Hossain et al. 2012), and then attach images to enrich the
presentation of the story. This straightforward approach does
not take contents of the images into account whereas the images are likely to carry vital information for a story-building
process. In our Storyboarding framework, we leverage image objects (e.g., faces) as added pieces of information to
the text content. As an example of our Storyboarding output,
Figure 1 and Section 3.3 explain a sub-event of the Boston
Marathon Bombing tragedy.
The main contributions of the storyboarding framework
are (1) a knowledge base that connects textual information with facial features using a probabilistic technique, (2)
a Frontalization mechanism that enhances face feature extraction by complementing conventionally used techniques,

2

Methodology

The Storyboarding framework has three operational stages
that are described in the following subsections.

2.1

Knowledge Base, κ

The knowledge base κ = {D, E κ , F} is constructed using
images and textual context of Wikipedia pages that are related to politics and terrorism. D, E κ , and F are the set of
text content of pages in Wikipedia, the set of person entities in D, and the set of faces extracted from the images of
Wikipedia pages respectively. We represent the person entities using vector space modeling: the weight W (e, d) of entity e ∈ E κ in the document d ∈ D is a variant of tf-idf modeling with cosine normalization. To detect faces from images we used Viola-Jones algorithm (Viola and Jones 2001)
with trained cascade classiﬁcation model. Since many of
the faces are side-facing, we use a frontalization method to
be able to capture positions of some key facial points in a
projected plane where a side-faced photo represents a corresponding front-posing face. We detect ﬁve facial key points
– two eye centers, nose and two mouth corners – using a pretrained convolutional neural network (Sun, Wang, and Tang
2013). The detected facial key points are then frontalized. To
extract facial features of length L for each face, we combine
Eigenface with all possible angles between every three of
ﬁve frontalized points and relative distances between every
pair of frontalized points.

2.2

Context Modeling

The context of a face f ∈ F is a ranked list of person entities ordered by relevance to f , and expressed as a probability
distribution over the set of entities E κ . The contexts of the
faces are leveraged to generate chains of contextual documents in Section 2.3. The probability of an entity e ∈ E κ for
the given face f is calculated as
⎛
⎛
⎞⎞
log(P (e|f )) ∝ log(P (e)) −

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

+

L

l=1

4220

⎛

L


⎝f l × log ⎝

d∈D e

l=1

⎛

⎝f l × log ⎝




d∈D e

W (e, d)⎠⎠
⎞⎞

P (f |d) × W (e, d)⎠⎠
l

(1)

