Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Representing Sets of Instances for Visual Recognition
1

Jianxin Wu,1 Bin-Bin Gao,1 Guoqing Liu2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
∗
wujx2001@nju.edu.cn, gaobb@lamda.nju.edu.cn
2
Minieye, Youjia Innovation LLC, China
guoqing@minieye.cc

models the distribution of instance vectors in training entities using a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Then, one
training or testing entity is modeled generatively, by a vector which describes how the GMM can be modiﬁed to generate the instance vectors inside that entity. A GMM with
K components has three sets of parameters (wi , μi , Σi ),
1 ≤ i ≤ K. VLAD (Jégou et al. 2012), another popular visual representation, can be regarded as a special case of FV,
by using only the μ parameters. The classic bag-of-visualwords (BOVW) (Csurka et al. 2004) representation is also a
special case of FV, using only the w parameters.
However, FV and VLAD share two major limitations.
First, recognition performance based on them are not robust.
For some tasks, FV may have high accuracy but VLAD has
poor performance, while the trend may be reversed in other
tasks (cf. the experimental results section). Since we do not
know a priori which representation (FV or VLAD) is better
for a speciﬁc task, we prefer a novel representation which is
robust (i.e., always has high accuracy) in all tasks. Second,
they both focus on modeling how one entity or one distribution is generated. Given the fact that the task in hand is
recognition, we argue that we need to pay more attention to
how two entities or two distributions are separated. In other
words, we need a visual representation that pays more attention to the discriminative side.
In this paper, we propose a discriminative distribution distance (D3) representation that converts a set of instance vectors into a vector representation. D3 explicitly considers two
distributions: a density T which is estimated from the training set as a reference model, and one entity forms another
distribution X. D3 then uses the distribution distance between T and X as a discriminative representation for the entity X. Technically, D3 has the following contributions.
• We propose DTVD, a directional total variation distance,
to measure the distance between two distributions, which
contains more discriminative information than classic
distribution distances by considering the direction;
• Directly calculating DTVD is problematic because T or
X may be non-Gaussian or only contains few items. We
propose to estimate DTVD in a discriminative manner,
by calculating robust misclassiﬁcation rates when we try
to classify every dimension of T from X;
• We show by experiments that D3 has robustly achieved
high accuracy. We also show that D3 and FV are com-

Abstract
In computer vision, a complex entity such as an image or
video is often represented as a set of instance vectors, which
are extracted from different parts of that entity. Thus, it is
essential to design a representation to encode information
in a set of instances robustly. Existing methods such as FV
and VLAD are designed based on a generative perspective,
and their performances ﬂuctuate when difference types of instance vectors are used (i.e., they are not robust). The proposed D3 method effectively compares two sets as two distributions, and proposes a directional total variation distance
(DTVD) to measure their dissimilarity. Furthermore, a robust
classiﬁer-based method is proposed to estimate DTVD robustly, and to efﬁciently represent these sets. D3 is evaluated
in action and image recognition tasks. It achieves excellent
robustness, accuracy and speed.

Introduction
In visual recognition, a complex entity (e.g., image or video)
is usually represented as a set of instance vectors. Each instance vector is extracted using part of the entity (e.g., a local window extracted from an image or a time-space subvolume from a video). Various features have been used to
extract instance vectors, such as dense SIFT (Lowe 2004)
and CNN features for images (Jia et al. 2014), or improved dense trajectory features (Wang and Schmid 2013)
for videos (Gkioxari and Malik 2015). Recent works have
shown that if a set of CNN features are extracted from entities and classify images or videos based on these sets, higher
accuracy can be obtained (Gong et al. 2014; Cimpoi, Maji,
and Vedaldi 2015; Xu, Yang, and Hauptmann 2015).
Because most existing learning algorithms assume that an
entity is represented as a single vector instead of a set of
vectors, we need to ﬁnd a suitable visual representation that
encodes the set of instance vectors into one single vector. It
is desirable that the representation will capture useful (i.e.,
discriminative) information from the set.
Fisher Vector (FV) and VLAD are the most widely used
representations for this task. FV (Sánchez et al. 2013) is
based on the idea of Fisher kernel in machine learning. It
∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61422203.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2237

