Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Solving Transition-Independent Multi-Agent MDPs with Sparse Interactions
Joris Scharpff

Diederik M. Roijers

Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Frans A. Oliehoek

Matthijs T. J. Spaan and Mathijs M. de Weerdt

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
University of Liverpool, United Kingdom

Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

value function can be ruled out in general: by observing the
full state, agents can predict the actions of others better than
when only observing a local state. This directly implies that
the value function depends on the full state.
A class of problems that exhibits particular structure is
that of task-based planning problems, such as the maintenance planning problem (MPP) from (Scharpff et al. 2013).
In the MPP every agent needs to plan and complete its own
set of road maintenance tasks at minimal (private) maintenance cost. Each task is performed only once and may delay
with a known probability. As maintenance causes disruption
to trafﬁc, agents are collectively ﬁned relative to the (superadditive) hindrance from their joint actions. Although agents
plan autonomously, they depend on others via these ﬁnes and
must therefore coordinate. Still, such reward interactions are
typically sparse: they apply only to certain combinations of
maintenance tasks, e.g., in the same area, and often involve
only a few agents. Moreover, when an agent has performed
its maintenance tasks that potentially interfere with others, it
will no longer interact with any of the other agents.
Our main goal is to identify and exploit such structure
in centralised models, for which we consider transition independent MMDPs (TI-MMDPs). In TI-MMDPS, agent rewards depend on joint states and actions, but transition probabilities are individual. Our key insight is that we can exploit
the reward structure of TI-MMDPs by decomposing the returns of all execution histories (i.e., all possible state/action
sequences from the initial time step to the planning horizon)
into components that depend on local states and actions.
We build on three key observations. 1) Contrary to the
optimal value function, returns can be decomposed without
loss of optimality, as they depend only on local states and
actions of execution sequences. This allows for a compact
representation of rewards and efﬁciently computable bounds
on the optimal policy value via a data structure we call the
conditional return graph (CRG). 2) In TI-MMDPs agent interactions are often sparse and/or local, for instance in the
domains mentioned before, typically resulting in very compact CRGs. 3) In many (e.g., task-modelling) problems the
state space is transient, i.e., states can only be visited once,
leading to a directed, acyclic transition graph. With our ﬁrst
two key observations this often gives rise to conditional reward independence, i.e. the absence of further reward interactions, and enables agent decoupling during policy search.

Abstract
In cooperative multi-agent sequential decision making under uncertainty, agents must coordinate to ﬁnd an optimal
joint policy that maximises joint value. Typical algorithms exploit additive structure in the value function, but in the fullyobservable multi-agent MDP (MMDP) setting such structure
is not present. We propose a new optimal solver for transitionindependent MMDPs, in which agents can only affect their
own state but their reward depends on joint transitions. We
represent these dependencies compactly in conditional return graphs (CRGs). Using CRGs the value of a joint policy and the bounds on partially speciﬁed joint policies can
be efﬁciently computed. We propose CoRe, a novel branchand-bound policy search algorithm building on CRGs. CoRe
typically requires less runtime than available alternatives and
ﬁnds solutions to previously unsolvable problems.

Introduction
When cooperative teams of agents are planning in uncertain domains, they must coordinate to maximise their
(joint) team value. In several problem domains, such as
trafﬁc light control (Bakker et al. 2010), system monitoring (Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002), multi-robot planning
(Messias, Spaan, and Lima 2013) or maintenance planning
(Scharpff et al. 2013), the full state of the environment is assumed to be known to each agent. Such centralised planning
problems can be formalised as multi-agent Markov decision
processes (MMDPs) (Boutilier 1996), in which the availability of complete and perfect information leads to highlycoordinated policies. However, these models suffer from exponential joint action spaces as well as a state that is typically exponential in the number of agents. In this paper, we
identify a signiﬁcant MMDP sub-class whose structure we
compactly represent and exploit via locally-computed upper
and lower bounds on the optimal policy value.
In problem domains with local observations, sub-classes
of decentralised models exist that admit a value function
that is exactly factored into additive components (Becker et
al. 2003; Nair et al. 2005; Witwicki and Durfee 2010) and
more general classes admit upper bounds on the value function that are factored (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Witwicki 2015).
In centralised models however, the possibility of a factored
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3174

