Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Knowledge Graph Completion
with Adaptive Sparse Transfer Matrix
Guoliang Ji, Kang Liu, Shizhu He, Jun Zhao
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
{guoliang.ji, kliu, shizhu.he, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

2015; Ji et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2015). Tensor factorization
approaches regard a knowledge graph as a three-way adjacency tensor, such as RESCAL. It factorizes the adjacency
tensor into a core tensor and a factor matrix. Each entry in
the factorization result would be regarded as a measure to
indicate whether a corresponding triplet exists or not. Neural network approaches often deﬁne a score function with
parameters and a margin-based training objective to punish
negative triplets, such as Trans(E, H, R, and D).
Although these methods have strong ability to model
knowledge graphs, it remains challenging for the reason that
the objects (entities and relations) in a knowledge graph are
heterogeneous and unbalanced. Speciﬁcally, (1) some relations link many entity pairs (called complex relations) and
others do not (called simple relations); (2) some relations
link many head (tail) entities and fewer tail (head) entities,
such as the relation gender which can link many person
names at head and only link male, female at tail. Figure 1
shows the statistics of the subgraph FB15k. From Figure 1,
we can see that: (1) the complexities of different relations
vary widely; and (2) unbalanced relations occupy a large
proportion in a knowledge graph. All previous work including Trans(E, H, R, and D) do not consider the two issues,
and they model each relation in the same way. Heterogeneity
may lead to overﬁtting on simple relations or underﬁtting on
complex relations. Meanwhile, imbalance of the two sides
(head and tail) indicates that it is unreasonable to treat them
(the two sides) equally.
Therefore, we argue that the relations with different complexities need different expressive models to learn, and the
two sides should be modeled separately. In this paper, we
use sparse matrices (another selection may be low-rank matrix, we will explain why we do not choose it later) to
model the relations. To overcome the heterogeneity, we propose a model TranSparse(share), in which the sparse degrees of transfer matrices are determined by the number of
entity pairs linked by relations and the two sides of relations share the same transfer matrices. More speciﬁcally, the
transfer matrices of complex relations would be less sparse
than that of simple relations. Furthermore, to deal with the
problem of imbalance of relations, we make a modiﬁcation on TranSparse(share) and propose the second model
TranSparse(separate), in which each relation has two separate sparse transfer matrices, one for head and the other for

Abstract
We model knowledge graphs for their completion by encoding each entity and relation into a numerical space. All previous work including Trans(E, H, R, and D) ignore the heterogeneity (some relations link many entity pairs and others do not) and the imbalance (the number of head entities
and that of tail entities in a relation could be different) of
knowledge graphs. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
TranSparse to deal with the two issues. In TranSparse, transfer matrices are replaced by adaptive sparse matrices, whose
sparse degrees are determined by the number of entities (or
entity pairs) linked by relations. In experiments, we design
structured and unstructured sparse patterns for transfer matrices and analyze their advantages and disadvantages. We
evaluate our approach on triplet classiﬁcation and link prediction tasks. Experimental results show that TranSparse outperforms Trans(E, H, R, and D) signiﬁcantly, and achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs are directed graphs composed of entities
as nodes and relations as edges. They store factual information in the form of triplet (head, relation, tail) (abbreviated
as (h, r, t)), where head and tail are entities and relation represents the relationship from head to tail. Although the current knowledge graphs consist of large amounts of triplets,
they are far from completeness, which is a pivotal parameter that determines the availability of a knowledge graph.
This paper aims to provide an efﬁcient, scalable approach to
model knowledge graphs for their completion.
Recently, the volumes of existing knowledge graphs grow
fast, which results in that the traditional logic-based approaches are intractable. To this end, embedding based approaches that encode each object in knowledge graphs into
a continuous vector space show strong feasibility and robustness. Thus, this kind of approach has been attracting
widespread attention. In general, existing embedding based
approaches could be roughly divided into two groups, one is
tensor factorization (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011; 2012;
Nickel and Tresp 2013a; 2013b; Nickel et al., 2015), the
other is neural network models (Bordes et al., 2011; 2012;
2014; Socher et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014; Lin et al.,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

985

