Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Shakeout: A New Regularized Deep
Neural Network Training Scheme
Guoliang Kang, Jun Li, Dacheng Tao
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney
{Guoliang.Kang@student, Jun.Li@, Dacheng.Tao@}uts.edu.au

intriguing effect has drawn great attention from the research
community, and found applications in wider range of problems (Chen et al. 2014). Theoretical research from the viewpoint of statistical learning has pointed out the connections
between the Dropout operations and model regularization,
which is the de facto recipe of reducing over-ﬁtting for complex models in practical machine learning. For example, Wager et al. (Wager, Wang, and Liang 2013) have shown that
Dropout implicitly imposes L2 regularization on the network weights.

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the success of deep neural networks in dealing with a plenty of practical problems. The
invention of effective training techniques largely contributes
to this success. The so-called "Dropout" training scheme is
one of the most powerful tool to reduce over-ﬁtting. From the
statistic point of view, Dropout works by implicitly imposing
an L2 regularizer on the weights. In this paper, we present a
new training scheme: Shakeout. Instead of randomly discarding units as Dropout does at the training stage, our method
randomly chooses to enhance or inverse the contributions of
each unit to the next layer. We show that our scheme leads to
a combination of L1 regularization and L2 regularization imposed on the weights, which has been proved effective by the
Elastic Net models in practice. We have empirically evaluated
the Shakeout scheme and demonstrated that sparse network
weights are obtained via Shakeout training. Our classiﬁcation
experiments on real-life image datasets MNIST and CIFAR10 show that Shakeout deals with over-ﬁtting effectively.

In this paper, we propose a new regularized deep neural
network training scheme: Shakeout. It is straightforward and
simple to implement: instead of randomly discarding units
as Dropout does at the training stage, our method randomly
chooses to enhance or inverse the contributions of each unit
to the next layer. These operations can lead to a profound
change to the regularization effect. We have proved that the
new training scheme imposes a combination of L1 regularization and L2 regularization on the weights of the model.
We call our scheme “Shakeout” because of the randomly
“shaking” process and the L1 regularization effect pushing
network weights to zero. The combination of L1 and L2 regularization on the model parameters has been shown effective in statistical learning: the Elastic Net (Zou and Hastie
2005; Zhou, Tao, and Wu 2011) has the desirable properties
of producing sparse models which generalize well and have
good interpretability.

Introduction
Deep neural network has recently achieved impressive success in a number of machine learning and pattern recognition tasks and been under intensive research. Hierarchical
neural network has been known for decades, and there are a
number of essential factors contributing to its recent rising,
such as large volume of data and powerful computational resources. However, arguably the most important contributor
to the success of deep neural network is the discovery of efﬁcient training methods (Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006;
Bengio 2009; Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013; Vincent
et al. 2008; 2010).
A particular interesting advance in this strand of research
is the invention of the Dropout training scheme (Hinton et al.
2012). At the operational level, Dropout adjusts the network
evaluation step (feed-forward) at the training stage, where a
portion of units are randomly discarded. The empirical effect of this seemingly trivial trick is impressive. Dropout enhances the generalization performance of neural networks
considerably, and is behind many record-holders of widely
recognized benchmarks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; Lin, Chen, and Yan 2013; Szegedy et al. 2014). The

Our Shakeout scheme has been applied to training deep
neural networks for image classiﬁcation. The scheme can
produce models with expected statistical attributes. Those
models generalize better than the standardly trained networks. In adverse training conditions, such as with scarce
data, the new training scheme outperforms Dropout training.
The organization of this paper is as follows. After reviewing related background in the next section, we introduce our
Shakeout scheme in a simpliﬁed context of training generalized linear models. We then apply Shakeout to train multilayer neural networks. In the experiment section, we show
that Shakeout can produce sparse neural network weights.
Moreover we demonstrate the results of classiﬁcation experiments on MNIST and CIFAR-10. Finally, our work is
concluded.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1751

