Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Sparse Conﬁdence-Weighted Classiﬁer on Very High Dimensional Data
Mingkui Tan†, Yan Yan‡, Li Wang§, Anton Van Den Hengel†, Ivor W. Tsang‡, Qinfeng (Javen) Shi†
†ACVT, The University of Adelaide, Australia
‡QCIS, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
§Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA

†{mingkui.tan, anton.vandenhengel, javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au, ‡{yan.yan,ivor.tsang}@uts.edu.au, §liwang8@uic.edu

viewed as a random variable that follows a univariate
Gaus
sian distribution: M ∼ N yi (μ xi ), x
i Σxi . Then the
probability of a correct prediction (when M ≥ 0) is given
by Pr[M ≥ 0] = Prw∼N (μ,Σ) [yi (μ xi ) ≥ 0].
To ensure good generalization performance, it is essential to maintain a large margin on the example. This can
be achieved by ensuring that the probability of a correct
prediction for a training example is no smaller than a
conﬁdence level δ (Crammer, Dredze, and Pereira 2012):
Pr[yi (μ xi ) ≥ 0] ≥ δ. Given Φ the cumulative function of
a normal distribution and let φ = Φ−1 (δ), this probabilistic
constraint can be written explicitly as

(1)
yi (μ xi ) ≥ φ xi  Σxi .

Abstract
Conﬁdence-weighted (CW) learning is a successful online
learning paradigm which maintains a Gaussian distribution
over classiﬁer weights and adopts a covariance matrix to represent the uncertainties of the weight vectors. However, there
are two deﬁciencies in existing full CW learning paradigms,
these being the sensitivity to irrelevant features, and the poor
scalability to high dimensional data due to the maintenance of
the covariance structure. In this paper, we begin by presenting an online-batch CW learning scheme, and then present a
novel paradigm to learn sparse CW classiﬁers. The proposed
paradigm essentially identiﬁes feature groups and naturally
builds a block diagonal covariance structure, making it very
suitable for CW learning over very high-dimensional data.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed methods over state-of-the-art counterparts on classiﬁcation and feature selection tasks.

To update μ and Σ, CW classiﬁer tries to make the least
changes to previous distribution N (μi , Σi ). Using the KL
divergence to measure the distribution difference (Dredze,
Crammer, and Pereira 2008), the update can be made by

Introduction

(μi+1 , Σi+1 ) = arg min DKL (N (μ, Σ)||N (μi , Σi )),
μ ,Σ
(2)

Σx
,
s.t. yi (μ xi ) ≥ φ x
i
i

Online learning, which starts from the perceptron and relies on few statistical assumptions, has been successfully applied to many applications (Rosenblatt 1958; Cesa-Bianchi
and Lugosi 2006; Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011; Crammer
et al. 2006; Crammer and Singer 2003; Ma et al. 2009b).
It is one of the most popular topics in machine learning
community in the past decades (Yang, Jin, and Ye 2009;
Wang, Zhao, and Hoi 2012; Xu et al. 2014; Zhang et
al. 2015). Conﬁdence-weighted (CW) learning (Crammer,
Dredze, and Pereira 2008; Dredze, Crammer, and Pereira
2008; Wang, Zhao, and Hoi 2012), which generalizes the
margin-based learning methods, has become a very powerful
online learning paradigm for constructing linear classiﬁers.
Operating with a passive-aggressive rule (Crammer et al.
2006), CW learning receives a d-dimensional example xi
and its label yi in the round i, and seeks to make the smallest possible change to the weight vector μ. Different from
traditional margin-based learning methods like PA (Crammer et al. 2006), CW learning maintains a probabilistic constraint over classiﬁer weights. Basically, the classiﬁer weight
w in CW learning is assumed to be drawn from a multivariate Gaussian distribution N (μ, Σ), and the label of xi
is assigned by sign(w xi ). In this sense, the margin M is

wherefunction
 DKL can be formulated explicitly as: DKL :=
detΣi
1
1
d
 −1
log
+ 12 Tr(Σ−1
i Σ)+ 2 (μi −μ) Σi (μi −μ)− 2 .
2
detΣ
Applying the KKT conditions of the problem w.r.t. μ and Σ,
we obtain the updating rules of μ and Σ:
μi+1 = μi + αi yi Σi xi , Σi+1 = Σi + βi Σi xi x
i Σi .
(3)
where αi is the Lagrangian multiplier w.r.t. the constraint,
and βi is a scalar related to αi . In last several years,
many variants of CW method have been proposed (Crammer, Dredze, and Pereira 2008; Crammer, Kulesza, and
Dredze 2009a; 2009b; Crammer, Dredze, and Pereira 2012;
Wang, Zhao, and Hoi 2012) (see Section 2 for more details),
but most of the them follow the above rules in (3) to update
μi+1 and Σi+1 , and the difference lies on different calculations of αi and βi .
By modeling a full covariance structure, CW learning provides signiﬁcant advantages for classiﬁcation tasks (Crammer, Dredze, and Pereira 2012; Ma et al. 2010; Wang, Zhao,
and Hoi 2012). However, there are two deﬁciencies in existing full CW learning methods. First, it is computationally

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2080

