Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Complex Stand-Up Motion for Humanoid Robots
Heejin Jeong and Daniel D. Lee
Department of Electrical and System Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
{heejinj, ddlee}@seas.upenn.edu

Elements of RL for Stand-up Motions

Abstract

Similar to humans, we considered stand-up situations of humanoid robots into two cases - standing up from body positions with chest down, right or left lateral recumbent (case
1), and from body positions with back down(case 2).

In order for humanoid robots to complete various assigned
tasks without any human assistance, they must have the ability to stand up on their own. In this abstract, we introduce
complex stand-up motion of humanoid robots learned by using Reinforcement Learning.

Constructing A Discrete State Space using EM
One of the challenges faced in applying RL to robotics is
high-dimensional and continuous state space. Several methods have been used to deﬁne a state in a continuous domain
such as the Fourier basis method (George Konidaris 2011).
However, humanoid robots have a large number of joints,
and thus a state space deﬁned by such methods still has high
dimensionality. In this research, we deﬁned a continuous
state space with a continuous state vector, u, consisting of its
joint positions (qi ∈ [−π, π], i = 1, · · · , 18) and its body roll
and pitch (ϕ, θ ∈ [−π, π]). Then we discretized the space using one of the clustring methods, Expectation-Maximization
(EM) algorithm for Gaussian Mixtures.
Using the EM method with initial spherical covariance
and priors in uniform frequency, we constructed 30 clusters
from continuous state data obtained by generating random
motions from different falling down poses of the robot. Including each of motion sequences in HS as a cluster, we
deﬁned a discrete state space, S, of the model with two subspaces, S1 and S2 , corresponding to case1 and case2, respectively. Two ﬁnalization states are in S1 ∩ S2 so that they can
be reached in the both cases. At each step, a robot perceives
its state s(i) ∈ S from a continuous state vector, ut as follow:

Introduction
In the current robotics ﬁeld, there are a number of small-size
humanoid robots with the ability to stand up after they fall
down (Jörg Stuückler 2003). However, most of their standup motions consist of several motion sequences in a ﬁxed
order with speciﬁc sets of joint angles. In these cases, since
a robot always has to move to the desired pose of the ﬁrst sequence regardless of its initial pose after falling, such standup motions can lead to time delays in standing or cause damage to the robots from hitting the ground or receiving high
torque forces. Adult-size humanoid robots can become even
more seriously damaged by these motions since they are
much heavier and have more servo motors than small-size
humanoid robots in general. During the Defense Advanced
Research Project Agency (DARPA) Robotics Challenge Final in 2015, many robots fell down multiple times, but only
one robot managed to stand up. This shows that the ability
to stand up from various poses in different environments becomes increasingly important to robots as they start to work
in human environments or alongside humans.
In this research, we studied stand-up motions of a humanoid robot using reinforcement learning (RL). As an initial approach, we considered an obstacle-free environment
with ﬂat and even ground, and we discussed its scalability to complicated environment in the last section. We used
a DARWIN-OP robot, which already has a hand-designed
stand-up motion (HS), for the application platform. An optimal policy was learned in Webot simulation program. The
policy has been applied to the real robot and we showed that
the motion generated by the policy has a better result than
previously hand designed motions.

st = s(i)

where i = argmax1≤k≤Ns zk − ut 2

where zk is the centroid vector of kth cluster and Ns = 40 is
the number of discrete states.

Action
We deﬁne a discrete action space, A, with ak ∈ A (k =
1, · · · , Ns ) corresponding to the clusters. It also has two subspaces, A1 and A2 , the s ame as the state space. Joint position
values of each centroid vector of the clusters deﬁnes desired
joint positions in each action.

Reward
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In order to design an appropriate reward function, we considered the following ﬁve factors as the variables of the func-

4218

