Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Scalable Training of Markov Logic Networks Using Approximate Counting
Somdeb Sarkhel,1 Deepak Venugopal,2 Tuan Anh Pham,1 Parag Singla,3 Vibhav Gogate1
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas
{sxs104721, txp112330, vxg112130}@utdallas.edu
2
Department of Computer Science, The University of Memphis, dvngopal@memphis.edu
3
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India, parags@cse.iitd.ac.in
cur a complexity of O(nm2 ) where n is number of documents and m is the number of authors.
Currently, the most prevalent approach for achieving scalability is to use background knowledge, which is incorporated in the MLN as hard evidence. Hard evidence substantially reduces the complexity of solving the # SG problem, reducing it from O(sk ) to O(rk ) where r << s.
This is because most ground formulas that contain evidence atoms will evaluate to either TRUE or FALSE, and they
can be deleted from consideration. For example, in the entity resolution domain, Singla et al. (Singla and Domingos
2006) achieve scalability by adding hard evidence, setting
all atoms that are likely to be false (true) with high probability to FALSE (TRUE). These atoms are identiﬁed using the
canopy approach of McCallum et al. (McCallum, Nigam,
and Ungar 2000) – a cheap, domain-speciﬁc heuristic. The
main drawbacks of using background knowledge are: (1) the
added evidence may be incorrect and thus the approach introduces errors, and (2) the approach will not scale to large
domains if the number of evidence atoms is small.
In this paper, we present a principled approach, which can
scale seamlessly to large domains, even when background
knowledge is not available. Our contributions are three-fold:

Abstract
In this paper, we propose principled weight learning algorithms for Markov logic networks that can easily scale to
much larger datasets and application domains than existing
algorithms. The main idea in our approach is to use approximate counting techniques to substantially reduce the complexity of the most computation intensive sub-step in weight
learning: computing the number of groundings of a ﬁrst-order
formula that evaluate to true given a truth assignment to all
the random variables. We derive theoretical bounds on the
performance of our new algorithms and demonstrate experimentally that they are orders of magnitude faster and achieve
the same accuracy or better than existing approaches.

Markov logic networks (MLNs) (Domingos and Lowd
2009) compactly represent a large family of Markov networks using a set of weighted ﬁrst-order logic formulas.
They are routinely used in a wide variety of application domains including natural language understanding, social networks, and computer vision for modeling relational and uncertain knowledge. A key task that impacts their success in
these applications is weight learning: given data and formulas, ﬁnd a setting of weights such that the likelihood or
an approximation to it (e.g., contrastive divergence (Hinton
2002), pseudo log-likelihood (Besag 1975), etc.) is maximized. Unfortunately, existing weight learning approaches
(Singla and Domingos 2005; Lowd and Domingos 2007;
Huynh and Mooney 2009) are extremely time consuming
and are unable to scale “out of the box” to large domains
such as information extraction (Poon and Domingos 2007).
The main reason for the poor scalability of existing techniques is the high polynomial complexity of algorithms
used for computing the gradient. Speciﬁcally, a sub-step in
gradient computation is computing the number of groundings of a ﬁrst-order formula that evaluate to T RUE given
a truth assignment to all the ground predicates. Exact algorithms for solving this # SG (short for #SatisﬁedGroundings) problem have high polynomial complexity. For example, given a formula ∀d∀a1 ∀a2 HasAuthor(d, a1 ) ∧
HasAuthor(d, a2 ) ⇒ Coauthor(a1 , a2 ) (if a1 and a2
are authors of document d, then they are likely to be coauthors), even an advanced, exact algorithm such as the one
proposed in (Venugopal, Sarkhel, and Gogate 2015) will in-

• We propose new objective functions for weight learning
that approximate well known functions such as likelihood,
psuedo likelihood and contrastive divergence. The key
idea in these new functions is to use approximate instead
of exact approaches for solving the # SG problem. We analyze the complexity of our new algorithms and show that
they are highly scalable.
• We provide theoretical bounds on how far our solutions are
from the solutions obtained using existing exact methods.
• We demonstrate experimentally that our new algorithms
are superior to existing weight learning algorithms implemented in Alchemy (Kok et al. 2008) and Tuffy (Niu et al.
2011), two state-of-the-art systems for learning and inference in Markov logic. More importantly, our results show
that our new methods do not require background knowledge to scale to large domains.

Background and Preliminaries
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs). MLNs soften the constraints expressed by a ﬁrst-order knowledge base by attaching a weight to each formula in the knowledge base. Higher

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1067

