Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Abstracting Complex Domains Using Modular
Object-Oriented Markov Decision Processes
Shawn Squire and Marie desJardins
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, MD 21250
ssquire1, mariedj@umbc.edu

Background

Abstract

A Markov decision process (MDP) is a stochastic model
that describes the states of a domain and the transition
model between the states. An MDP is represented as a 4tuple, {S, A, P (·, ·) , R (·, ·)}, respectively consisting of a
set of states, a set of actions, the transition probability function, and a reward function. The agent selects an action
from state s by following a policy function, π(s), which attempts to maximize the reward over multiple steps. Since
the transition probability function and reward function may
be stochastic, an MDP allows for reliability in probabilistic
domains.
An Object-Oriented MDP (OO-MDP) (Diuk, Cohen, and
Littman 2008) is designed to facilitate learning in domains
with large state spaces. It extends the traditional MDP model
by representing the domain as a set of object classes, C, each
with a set of pre-deﬁned attributes, Att(C). An object, o,
belongs to a single object class and has values assigned for
each attribute associated with the class. The state, s, of a
domain is deﬁned as the union of the attribute values for
O
all objects in the domain, s = i=1 state (oi ) where O =
{o1 , o2 , . . . , on } for n objects in the domain.
This representation gives several beneﬁts over an MDP
that represents state as a single vector of features. First, it
provides a capability of attribute the relevance of objects or
object classes to speciﬁc goals and actions. Second, objects
that are instantiated differently but with equal values (i.e.,
given objects o1 and o2 of object class c, o1 = o2 ⇐⇒
∀a ∈ Att(c) : o1 .a = o2 .a) are considered equivalent, so
they may be handled interchangeably.

We present an initial proposal for modular objectoriented MDPs, an extension of OO-MDPs that abstracts complex domains that are partially observable
and stochastic with multiple goals. Modes reduce the
curse of dimensionality by reducing the number of attributes, objects, and actions into only the features relevant for each goal. These modes may also be used as an
abstracted domain to be transferred to other modes or to
another domain.

Introduction
Complex domains that approach the scale of the real world
have many hurdles for an intelligent agent to overcome.
First, a state may be partially observable, leading to uncertainty with hundreds of state features which may be either
observable or latent. The agent may also have dozens of actions available at any given opportunity, leading to a large
branching factor and myriad potential paths to a solution. Finally, the agent may possess multiple goals that must be satisﬁed, some of which may be directly contradictory (Natarajan and Tadepalli 2005). Many, if not most, of these variables and actions can be irrelevant in the accomplishment of
one particular goal. For example, an automated car equipped
with multiple sensors should ignore variables such as current
temperature and also ignore actions for lane changing if its
goal is to navigate cars in a parking lot.
In this paper, we propose a method to automatically divide and ﬁlter an Object-Oriented Markov Decision Process
into distinct modes, allowing the agent to handle smaller
sub-problems that are directly related to ﬁnding the optimal
solution for a speciﬁc goal. Each mode contains the most
relevant features, actions, and objects for reaching a goal,
ignoring irrelevant details that would increase learning time.
Additionally, these modes may be easily isolated for training
an agent on a speciﬁc task, or abstracted to facilitate learning transfer between modes in the same or different domains
(Topin et al. 2015). One of the key beneﬁts of using modular
OO-MDPs is in domains where the designer can not fully
deﬁne a set of predicates or structures for hierarchical learning.

Modular Object-Oriented MDP
A mode in an OO-MDP is an abstracted representation of
the domain for a speciﬁc goal g where a subset of relevant attributes, objects, and actions for that goal are considered. The relevance of an attribute, object, or action is
deﬁned as the perceived necessity of the respective value
for reaching g from any state. Therefore, a mode for goal g
is deﬁned as the function M ode(g) = {Att(C) , O , A }.
Att(C) ⊆ Att(C) is the set of relevant attributes for g
across all object classes. O is an abstracted set of k relevant
objects such that O = {o1 , o2 , . . . , ok }, and oi is the union
of abstracted attributes Att(oi .class) . Finally, A ⊆ A is
the set of relevant actions for g.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4264

