Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Complexity of Shift Bribery in Committee Elections
Robert Bredereck1 , Piotr Faliszewski2 , Rolf Niedermeier1 , and Nimrod Talmon1
1

Institut für Softwaretechnik und Theoretische Informatik, TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
{robert.bredereck, rolf.niedermeier}@tu-berlin.de, nimrodtalmon77@gmail.com
2
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

candidate would want to convince the HR department of her
or his qualities.
We study the standard, ordinal model of voting, where
each voter ranks the candidates from the one he or she likes
best to the one he or she likes least. We focus on rules that
are based either on the Borda scores of the candidates or on
their t-Approval scores (brieﬂy put, if we have m candidates,
then a voter gives Borda score m − 1 to his or her most
preferred candidate, score m − 2 to the next one, and so on;
a voter gives t-Approval score 1 to each of his or her top-t
candidates and score 0 to the other ones).
The most basic multiwinner rules simply pick k candidates with the highest scores (for example, SNTV uses 1Approval scores, Bloc uses k-Approval scores, and k-Borda
uses Borda scores). While such rules may be good for
short-listing tasks, they do not seem to perform well for
cases where the committee needs to be varied (or represent the voters proportionally; see the work of Elkind et
al. (2014)). In this case, we may prefer other rules, such
as the Chamberlin–Courant family of rules (Chamberlin and
Courant 1983), which try to ensure that every voter is represented well by some member of the committee (see the
Preliminaries section for an exact deﬁnition).
Unfortunately, while the winners of SNTV, Bloc, and
k-Borda rules are polynomial-time computable, this is not
the case for the Chamberlin–Courant rules (Procaccia et
al. (2008) and Lu and Boutilier (2011) show NP-hardness).
We deal with this problem in two ways. First, there are
FPT algorithms for computing Chamberlin–Courant winners (for example, for the case of few voters). Second,
there are good approximation algorithms (due to Lu and
Boutilier (2011) and Skowron et al. (2015)). Following
Caragiannis et al. (2014) and Elkind et al. (2014), we consider these approximation algorithms as voting rules in their
own right (societies may use them in place of the original,
hard-to-compute ones).
The idea of the S HIFT B RIBERY problem is as follows.
We are given an election and a preferred candidate p, and we
want to ensure that p is a winner (in our case, is a member
of a winning committee) by shifting him or her forward in
some of the votes, at an appropriate cost, without exceeding
a given budget. The costs of shifting p correspond to investing resources into convincing the voters that our candidate
is of high quality. For example, if a company is choosing

Abstract
We study the (parameterized) complexity of S HIFT B RIBERY
for multiwinner voting rules. We focus on the SNTV, Bloc,
k-Borda, and Chamberlin–Courant rules, as well as on approximate variants of the Chamberlin–Courant rule, since the
original rule is NP-hard to compute. We show that S HIFT
B RIBERY tends to be signiﬁcantly harder in the multiwinner setting than in the single-winner one by showing settings where S HIFT B RIBERY is easy in the single-winner
cases, but is hard (and hard to approximate) in the multiwinner ones. We show that the non-monotonicity of those
rules which are based on approximation algorithms for the
Chamberlin–Courant rule sometimes affects the complexity
of S HIFT B RIBERY.

Introduction
We study the complexity of campaign management—
modeled as the S HIFT B RIBERY problem—for the case
of multiwinner elections. In the S HIFT B RIBERY problem we want to ensure that our candidate is in a winning
committee by convincing some of the voters—at a given
price—to rank him or her more favorably. In particular,
this models campaigns based on direct meetings with voters, in which the campaigner presents positive features of
the candidate he or she works for. While the complexity of campaign management is relatively well-studied for
single-winner elections, it has not been studied for the multiwinner setting yet (there are, however, studies of manipulation and control for multiwinner elections (Meir et al. 2008;
Aziz et al. 2015b)).
Based on the preferences of the voters, the goal of a multiwinner election is to pick a committee of k candidates.
These k candidates might, for example, form the country’s
next parliament, be a group of people short-listed for a job
opening, or be a set of items a company offers to its customers (see the papers of Lu and Boutilier (2011), Skowron
et al. (2015), and Elkind et al. (2014) for a varied description
of applications of multiwinner voting). Since the election
results can affect the voters and the candidates quite significantly, we expect that they will run campaigns to achieve
the most desirable results: a person running for parliament
would want to promote her or his political platform; a job
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2452

