Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Aggregating Inter-Sentence Information to Enhance Relation Extraction
Hao Zheng , Zhoujun Li , Senzhang Wang , Zhao Yan , Jianshe Zhou†


State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment,
Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
†
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Imaging Technology,
Capital Normal University, 100048, China
{zhenghao35, lizj, szwang, yanzhao}@buaa.edu.cn, zhoujs@cnu.edu.cn
Entity pair
Gold relation
from
knowledge bases

Abstract
Previous work for relation extraction from free text is mainly
based on intra-sentence information. As relations might be
mentioned across sentences, inter-sentence information can
be leveraged to improve distantly supervised relation extraction. To effectively exploit inter-sentence information , we
propose a ranking-based approach, which ﬁrst learns a scoring function based on a listwise learning-to-rank model and
then uses it for multi-label relation extraction. Experimental
results verify the effectiveness of our method for aggregating information across sentences. Additionally, to further improve the ranking of high-quality extractions, we propose an
effective method to rank relations from different entity pairs.
This method can be easily integrated into our overall relation
extraction framework, and boosts the precision signiﬁcantly.

Relation instances
from
free text

(Steven Spielberg, Saving Private Ryan)
Film-director (Steven Spielberg, Saving Private Ryan)

S1: Steven Spielberg’s ﬁlm Saving Private Ryan is
loosely based on the brothers story.
S2: Allison co-produced the Academy Award-winning
Saving Private Ryan, directed by Steven Spielberg ...

Table 1: Labeled instances by distant supervision, using
the relation Film-director (Steven Spielberg, Saving Private
Ryan) in knowledge bases

lation a sentence that mentions the entity pair should be labeled by.
In their efforts to address these limits, researchers have
followed two fundamentally different lines, which we call
entity-level learning and sentence-level learning , respectively. The original work (Mintz et al. 2009; Riedel, Yao,
and McCallum 2010) in DS for RE fell into the entitylevel learning, which aggregated features from multiple sentences to directly make entity-level extraction (not assign
relation labels to individual sentences). However their approaches ignored detailed sentence-level information, and
could not deal with the multi-label problem. The subsequent work (Hoffmann et al. 2011; Surdeanu et al. 2012;
Ritter et al. 2013) used the latent-variable to explicitly model
the sentence-level relation which is assigned to a single sentence. These approaches all assign certain labels to individual sentences, which intrinsically fell into the sentencelevel learning. While they have improved precision and recall in relation extraction, they are all based on the inaccurate built-in assumption that a sentence expresses either
one certain relation or no relation. As relations also can be
mentioned across sentences, this assumption may not always
hold, which partly causes the loss of some indicative information about the types of relation. For example, Mintz et
al. (2009) showed that combining information in different
matched sentences for the same entity pair can help predict
its relations.
From Table 1, we can see that relying on the sentence
S1 alone cannot certainly decide the Film-director relation,

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) aims to generate structured relational knowledge from unstructured natural language text.
Traditional supervised approaches for relation extraction
(RE), based on hand-labeled corpora, cannot satisfy the demand for web-scale relation extraction due to the expensive
and laborious annotation. To address this issue, Mintz et al.
(2009) proposed a distant supervision (DS) based approach
to automatically generate labeled data by heuristically aligning a database of relational facts (e.g., Freebase) with free
text (e.g., New York Times corpora). An example accounting
for this process is shown in Table 1. In this paper, we deﬁne
that a instance is a sentence mentioning a certain entity pair
in knowledge bases. There might exist multiple matched instances for the same entity pair and this case is called “multiinstance”. In Table 1, we label the matched instances for the
entity pair (Steven Spielberg, Saving Private Ryan) using the
gold standard relation coming from knowledge bases Filmdirector (Steven Spielberg, Saving Private Ryan).
However, distant supervision still faces the following
problems. First, a sentence that mentions two entities participating in a relation in knowledge bases would not necessarily express this relation explicitly. Also, there may be
multiple relations holding for the same pair of entities (this
is called “multi-label”) and it’s hard to make out which rec 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3108

