Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Who Can Win a Single-Elimination Tournament?
Michael P. Kim, Warut Suksompong, and Virginia Vassilevska Williams
Computer Science Department
Stanford University

on the initial seeding. A series of works (Lang et al. 2007;
Hazon, Dunne, and Wooldridge 2007; Hazon et al. 2008;
Vu, Altman, and Shoham 2009; Vassilevska Williams 2010;
Stanton and Vassilevska Williams 2011a; 2011b; Mattei,
Goldsmith, and Klapper 2012; Aziz et al. 2014; Kim and
Vassilevska Williams 2015) have investigated how easily the
winner of SE tournaments can be manipulated simply by adjusting the seeding of the tournament. Formally, the problem
is called the tournament ﬁxing problem (TFP), or the agenda
control problem for balanced knockout tournaments. In TFP,
we are given a set of players V , information for each pair of
players (u, w) about whether u or w would win in a headto-head matchup, and a player of interest v; then, we are
asked the following question: is there a seeding to a balanced SE tournament where v wins? TFP is known to be
NP-Hard (Aziz et al. 2014) with the best-known algorithm
running in 2n poly(n) time (Kim and Vassilevska Williams
2015). Thus, unless P = NP, in general, it is intractable to
determine which players can win an SE tournament. Nevertheless, a number of works on TFP have produced “structural results,” which argue that for certain classes of instances, one can ﬁnd a winning seeding for v in polynomial (and often linear) time (Vassilevska Williams 2010;
Stanton and Vassilevska Williams 2011b; Kim and Vassilevska Williams 2015). These structural results suggest
that in many practical settings, the winner of an SE tournament is susceptible to manipulation, because many players have winning seedings that can be found efﬁciently. Furthermore, under reasonable probabilistic models for generating tournaments, these structural results have been shown
to occur with high probability (Vassilevska Williams 2010;
Stanton and Vassilevska Williams 2011a), further suggesting
that the worst-case hardness results may not apply to realworld instances. In other words, in many actual tournaments,
it is completely feasible for SE tournament organizers to rig
the outcome of the competition. Experimental results (Russell 2010) investigate this ﬁnding in practical settings.

Abstract
A single-elimination (SE) tournament is a popular way to select a winner in both sports competitions and in elections.
A natural and well-studied question is the tournament ﬁxing
problem (TFP): given the set of all pairwise match outcomes,
can a tournament organizer rig an SE tournament by adjusting the initial seeding so that their favorite player wins? We
prove new sufﬁcient conditions on the pairwise match outcome information and the favorite player, under which there
is guaranteed to be a seeding where the player wins the tournament. Our results greatly generalize previous results. We
also investigate the relationship between the set of players
that can win an SE tournament under some seeding (so called
SE winners) and other traditional tournament solutions. In addition, we generalize and strengthen prior work on probabilistic models for generating tournaments. For instance, we show
that every player in an n player tournament generated by the
Condorcet Random Model will be an SE winner even when
the noise is as small as possible,
p = Θ(ln n/n); prior work
only had such results for p ≥ Ω( ln n/n). We also establish
new results for signiﬁcantly more general generative models.

1

Introduction

A single-elimination (SE) tournament, also known as a
binary-cup election, is a popular way to select a winner
among multiple candidates/players. In an SE tournament,
pairs of players are matched according to an initial seeding,
the winners of these pairs advance to the next round, and
the losers are eliminated after a single loss. Play continues
according to the seeding until a single player, the winner,
remains. SE tournaments are popular in sports competitions,
both among fans due to their exciting “do-or-die” nature, and
among tournament organizers due to their efﬁciency. In contrast with a round-robin tournament, which requires Θ(n2 )
matches to be played between n players, the winner of an
SE tournament is decided after a total of n − 1 matches.
In tournaments like the NCAA March Madness or the US
Open Tennis Championships, involving more than 64 teams
each, the difference between a linear and quadratic number
of matches is quite pronounced.
While the efﬁciency of SE tournaments is desirable, the
winner of a given SE tournament can depend signiﬁcantly

While TFP can be seen as a way to understand manipulation in competition and elections, studying conditions under
which players can and cannot win SE tournaments can also
be seen as part of a larger study of tournament solutions:
different ways to deﬁne the winners of a round-robin tournament. The input to TFP can be viewed as a tournament
T = (V, E), or a complete, oriented graph where for all

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

516

