Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Security Game Combining Patrolling and Alarm–Triggered
Responses Under Spatial and Detection Uncertainties
Nicola Basilico

Giuseppe De Nittis and Nicola Gatti

University of Milan
Via Comelico, 39/41
Milano, Italy
nicola.basilico@unimi.it

Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
Milano, Italy
{giuseppe.denittis, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it
been raised? (Munoz de Cote et al. 2013) is the ﬁrst attempt to tackle this problem. Each sensor is affected by detection uncertainty (i.e., false negatives and false positives)
and covers exactly one single target. The best strategy to respond to an alarm signal is easily computable, reducing to
the rush to a target once its sensor detected an attack. On the
other hand, ﬁnding the best patrolling strategy is hard and
the proposed techniques to approximate the best patrolling
strategy are strongly intractable even with few targets (e.g.,
even with 5 targets). (Basilico and Gatti 2014) studies sensors without detection uncertainty, but the single–target deployment assumption is relaxed allowing sensors to be spatially imperfect. This means that an alarm signal is raised
if and only if an attack is performed, but the Defender is
uncertain on the actual attacked location, as in border patrolling (Agmon, Kraus, and Kaminka 2008). In this case,
the best patrolling strategy is easily tractable, being placement based, i.e., place a guard in a location, wait for an
alarm signal, and then respond to it at best. Instead, ﬁnding the best response to an alarm signal is computationally
hard. However, the proposed techniques scale with a high
number of targets (i.e., beyond 50). In the present paper, we
bridge together the above two approaches towards a more
general framework and propose the ﬁrst security game that
combines sensors detection uncertainty together with spatial
imperfection, tackling the challenge of designing tractable
algorithms for real–life scenarios.

Abstract
Motivated by a number of security applications, among which
border patrolling, we study, to the best of our knowledge,
the ﬁrst Security Game model in which patrolling strategies
need to be combined with responses to signals raised by an
alarm system, which is spatially uncertain (i.e., it is uncertain over the exact location the attack is ongoing) and is affected by false negatives (i.e., the missed detection rate of
an attack may be positive). Ours is an inﬁnite–horizon patrolling scenario on a graph where a single patroller moves.
We study the properties of the game model in terms of computational issues and form of the optimal strategies and we
provide an approach to solve it. Finally, we provide an experimental analysis of our techniques.

Introduction
The paradigm of Security Games, modeling the problem
of protecting physical environments as a non–cooperative
game between a Defender and an Attacker, is one of the successful applications of game theory in the real world (Jain,
An, and Tambe 2012). Such paradigm aims at maximizing
the protection of targets by scheduling the Defender’s resources (like canine units or guards) during time. A long–
standing literature focuses on a number of issues involved in
Security Games such as studying different observation models for the Attacker (An et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2014) and
incorporating realistic aspects of infrastructures to be protected (Blum, Haghtalab, and Procaccia 2014).
Besides scheduling mobile resources (a.k.a. patrolling),
real security settings can adopt sensors, capable to trigger
alarms when attacks are detected. This approach is of high
prominence in practice, since sensors can be cheap devices
that are deployed over the environment with high capillarity,
allowing remarkable improvements of the protecting task.
Indeed, it can be showed that patrolling strategies exploiting
an alarm system may be arbitrarily better than strategies that
do not and this pushed for considering this feature in Security Games. With an alarm system, two questions must be
answered simultaneously: which is the best patrolling strategy in absence of any alarm signal? and, which is the best
strategy to respond to an attack once an alarm signal has

Original contributions We formalize our game model,
whose resolution’s complexity is APX –hard in the case
without false negatives (Basilico, De Nittis, and Gatti 2015)
and PSPACE–hard in the case without alarm systems (Ho
and Ouaknine 2015), and we prove that placement–based
strategies may be arbitrarily worse than patrolling–based
ones. This motivates the need for strategies in which the
Defender both patrols over some targets and responds at
best once an alarm signal is raised, thus requiring innovative and more involved techniques w.r.t. the case without false negatives. We formulate the problem of searching
for the best Defender’s strategy as a mixed–integer–non–
linear mathematical program whose resolution can be done
in practice only by means of local–search techniques based
on non–linear mathematical programming. Furthermore, if
non–Markovian patrolling strategies are used, the size of

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

397

