Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unsupervised Feature Selection on Networks: A Generative View
∗

Xiaokai Wei∗ , Bokai Cao∗ and Philip S. Yu∗†
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
†
Institute for Data Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{xwei2,caobokai,psyu}@uic.edu

useful technique since it can help alleviate the curse of dimensionality, speed up the learning process and provide better interpretability. However, not much research effort exists
to explore feature selection on networks, especially in unsupervised scenario.
Depending on the availability of class labels, feature selection algorithms can be categorized into supervised methods and unsupervised methods. In the supervised setting,
class labels provide a clear guidance to the feature selection process. In the unsupervised setting, feature selection
becomes more challenging due to the lack of class labels.
In this paper, we focus on unsupervised feature selection as
class labels are usually expensive to obtain. State-of-the-art
approaches introduce the notion of pseudo labels (Yang et
al. 2011) (Li et al. 2012) (Qian and Zhai 2013) to guide the
feature selection process. The basic idea is to imitate supervised methods by generating pseudo-labels via certain clustering methods (e.g., spectral clustering and non-negative
matrix factorization), and performing sparse regression towards these cluster labels. However, the generated pseudo
labels are usually inaccurate and could further mislead the
feature selection process.
Moreover, traditional feature selection approaches assume that data instances are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d). In the network data, however, instances are
implicitly or explicitly related with certain correlations and
dependencies. For example, in research collaboration networks, researchers who collaborate with each other (i.e.,
connections in the network) tend to share more similar research topics (i.e., close distances in the feature space) than
researchers without such collaboration. Most existing feature selection approaches fail to exploit the rich information
contained in the links.
Motivated by the importance of feature selection on networks and the deﬁciency of existing approaches, we propose
a novel unsupervised feature selection method from a generative point of view. Our aim is to effectively incorporate
information from both link structures and node attributes
in the network data. Rather than using potentially inaccurate pseudo labels to guide the feature selection process, we
assume that link structures and node attributes are generated by an oracle set of features. We propose a probabilistic
model for this generative process. By performing inference
using the linkage and attribute information, we can recover

Abstract
In the past decade, social and information networks have become prevalent, and research on the network data has attracted much attention. Besides the link structure, network
data are often equipped with the content information (i.e,
node attributes) that is usually noisy and characterized by
high dimensionality. As the curse of dimensionality could
hamper the performance of many machine learning tasks on
networks (e.g., community detection and link prediction),
feature selection can be a useful technique for alleviating such
issue. In this paper, we investigate the problem of unsupervised feature selection on networks. Most existing feature selection methods fail to incorporate the linkage information,
and the state-of-the-art approaches usually rely on pseudo labels generated from clustering. Such cluster labels may be
far from accurate and can mislead the feature selection process. To address these issues, we propose a generative point of
view for unsupervised features selection on networks that can
seamlessly exploit the linkage and content information in a
more effective manner. We assume that the link structures and
node content are generated from a succinct set of high-quality
features, and we ﬁnd these features through maximizing the
likelihood of the generation process. Experimental results on
three real-world datasets show that our approach can select
more discriminative features than state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Network data have become increasingly popular in the past
decade, because of the proliferation of various social and information networks. Social networks such as Facebook and
Twitter have millions of users all across the world. Different forms of information networks, e.g., co-author networks,
citation networks and protein interaction networks, also attract considerable research attention (Newman and Girvan
2004) (Backstrom and Leskovec 2011). In addition to the
link structure, these network data are usually accompanied
with content information on the nodes. For example, one can
extract thousands of proﬁling features for users in social networks or ontology features for genes in protein interaction
networks. However, redundant and irrelevant features might
be included in the high-dimensional feature space. Feature
selection (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2005) (Nie et al. 2010) is a
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2215

