Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unsupervised Feature Selection with Structured Graph Optimization∗
1

Feiping Nie1 and Wei Zhu1 and Xuelong Li 2
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P.R. China
2
Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an, 710119, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{feipingnie@gmail.com, zwvews@gmail.com, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn}
2007), wrapper method (Tabakhi, Moradi, and Akhlaghian
2014), and embedded method (Cai, Zhang, and He 2010;
Zhao, Wang, and Liu 2010; Hou et al. 2014; Li et al. 2012;
Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015). Embedded methods are superior to others in many respects, and have received more and
more attentions. Since local manifold structure is considered
better than global structure, most of embedded methods try
to discover local structure. The classical graph based methods contain two independent steps. First, construct similarity
matrix by exploring the local structure. Then, select valuable
features by sparsity regularization.
However, there are at least two issues for conventional
embedded methods. First, conventional spectral based feature selection methods construct similarity matrix and select
features independently. Therefore, the similarity matrix is
derived from original data and remains constant for the subsequent process, but real world data always contain lots of
noise samples and features, which make the similarity matrix unreliable (Wang, Nie, and Huang 2015). The unreliable
similarity matrix will damage the local manifold structure,
and ultimately lead to suboptimal result. Second, similarity matrix obtained by conventional method is usually not
an ideal neighbor assignment. The optimal similarity matrix
should have exact c connected components, where c is the
number of cluster. However, simply using k-nearest neighbors assignment hardly achieves the ideal state.
To mitigate the impact of above problems, we propose an
unsupervised feature selection approach, called Structured
Optimal Graph Feature Selection (SOGFS). It is worthwhile
to highlight the main contributions of this paper as follows:

Abstract
Since amounts of unlabelled and high-dimensional data
needed to be processed, unsupervised feature selection has
become an important and challenging problem in machine
learning. Conventional embedded unsupervised methods always need to construct the similarity matrix, which makes
the selected features highly depend on the learned structure.
However real world data always contain lots of noise samples and features that make the similarity matrix obtained by
original data can’t be fully relied. We propose an unsupervised feature selection approach which performs feature selection and local structure learning simultaneously, the similarity matrix thus can be determined adaptively. Moreover,
we constrain the similarity matrix to make it contain more
accurate information of data structure, thus the proposed approach can select more valuable features. An efﬁcient and
simple algorithm is derived to optimize the problem. Experiments on various benchmark data sets, including handwritten
digit data, face image data and biomedical data, validate the
effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Introduction
Due to large amounts of data produced by rapid development of technology, the processing of high-dimensional data
has become a big problem in many ﬁelds, such as computer vision, data mining, and pattern recognition. Highdimensional data often contain quite a lot noise features,
which are detrimental to data processing. As one of the
typical method to alleviate this problem, feature selection
attracts more and more attentions. Feature selection aims
at obtaining a subset of features which are selected from
original feature space. Feature selection mainly uses three
approaches: supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised.
Obviously, unsupervised feature selection is more difﬁcult
than the others for absence of label information, however,
the large amount of unlabelled data makes the unsupervised
feature selection practical.
Various methods of unsupervised feature selection have
been proposed, and can be classiﬁed into three distinct types,
i.e. ﬁlter method (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2005; Zhao and Liu

1. A novel embedded unsupervised feature selection approach is proposed. The approach performs feature selection and local structure learning simultaneously. It adaptively learns local manifold structure, and thus can select
more valuable features.
2. A reasonable constraint is introduced to the approach. The
similarity matrix obtained by local structure can be more
accurate when we constrain similarity matrix to make it
contain exact c connected components.
3. Comprehensive experiments on benchmark data sets
show the effectiveness of the proposed approach, and
demonstrate the advantage over other state-of-the-art
methods.

∗
This work is supported by the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities (Grant no. 3102015BJ(II)JJZ01).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1302

