Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Expressive Recommender Systems through
Normalized Nonnegative Models
Cyril J. Stark
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, 6-304
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA
cyril@mit.edu
movie Jurassic Park?”. Each measurement probes our taste
(e.g., movie taste) and measuring sufﬁciently many diverse
questions allows to get an idea of the preferences/opinion
of a person. In the natural sciences and engineering the
system is oftentimes described in terms a sample space,
the state of the system is probability distribution on that
sample space and a measurement is a random variable.
Hence, ideally, to adopt that picture, we need to compute the
following building blocks: (1) an effective sample space,
(2) a probability distribution for each user to describe that
user’s taste, (3) a random variable for each item to describe
questions like “How do you rate the movie Ex Machina?”.
To arrive at NNMs we simply convexify the third of
these building blocks, i.e., the space of random variables.
This convex relaxation will allow us to compute NNMs
through alternating convex optimization. In this manner,
approximate inference of NNMs becomes computationally
tractable.
The main strength of NNMs are highly interpretable user
and item representations. The way we represent users allows
us to regard users as normalized mixtures of a small number
of user stereotypes. We provide strategies to characterize
those stereotypical users in words so that those stereotypes
can be understood intuitively by people who are unfamiliar with data analysis. Hence, NNMs allow everybody to
interpret users’ behaviors as mixtures of well-characterized
stereotypical behaviors. On the other hand, the way we represent items allows us to infer hierarchical orderings of item
categories like movie genres or topics of documents. This
is how we address the criterion interpretability. Of course,
topic models like those based on latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) have also been used to derive said expressive descriptions of users and items. We explain this in much more detail
when discussing related work towards the end of this paper.
Finally, we evaluate the last remaining criterion predictive
power in numerical experiments. We show that in meanaverage-error, NNMs outperform methods like SVD++ (Koren 2008) on MovieLens datasets. This indicates that the
high level of interpretability of NNMs comes not at the price
of sacriﬁcing predictive power.
Throughout the paper we introduce NNMs through their
application in item recommendation. But we hope that our
presentation will be clear enough to convince the reader that
the scope of NNMs is not limited to recommendation—in

Abstract
We introduce normalized nonnegative models (NNM)
for explorative data analysis. NNMs are partial convexiﬁcations of models from probability theory. We
demonstrate their value at the example of item recommendation. We show that NNM-based recommender
systems satisfy three criteria that all recommender systems should ideally satisfy: high predictive power, computational tractability, and expressive representations of
users and items. Expressive user and item representations are important in practice to succinctly summarize
the pool of customers and the pool of items. In NNMs,
user representations are expressive because each user’s
preference can be regarded as normalized mixture of
preferences of stereotypical users. The interpretability of item and user representations allow us to arrange
properties of items (e.g., genres of movies or topics of
documents) or users (e.g., personality traits) hierarchically.

Introduction
Recommender systems are algorithms designed to recommend items to users. Good recommender systems address
the following three partially conﬂicting objectives: (1) predictive power (despite very sparse and noisy data), (2) computational tractability (despite quickly growing numbers of
users and items), (3) interpretability (to allow for feedback,
market analysis and visual representations). Here, to address those difﬁculties, we are going to adopt the systemstate-measurement paradigm in the form of a class of models which we call normalized nonnegative models (NNM).
Adopting the system-state-measurement paradigm
amounts to making a clear distinction between the ‘state
of a system’ and the ‘measurement device’ used to probe
that system. The success of this paradigm in science and
engineering motivates its application in item recommendation and beyond. In the study of recommendation the
system is that abstract part of our thinking that determines
whether we like or dislike an item. The state of that system
varies from person to person; it forms the description of the
individual preferences. The measurements that we perform
on the system are questions of the form “Do you like the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1081

