Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Embedding Ethical Principles in Collective Decision Support Systems
Joshua Greene

Francesca Rossi

John Tasioulas

Harvard University, USA

University of Padova, Italy
and IBM T.J. Watson, USA

King’s College London, UK

Kristen Brent Venable

Brian Williams

Tulane University and IMHC, USA

MIT, USA
We claim that there is a need to adapt current logicbased modelling and reasoning frameworks, such as soft
constraints, CP-nets, and constraint-based scheduling under uncertainty, to model safety constraints, moral values,
and ethical principles. More precisely, we study how logicbased preference modelling frameworks can be adapted to
model both (explicit) ethical principles and (implicit) moral
values, as sophisticated constraints over possible actions.
The constraints may be unconditional (“hard”) constraints,
or soft, overridable if the consequences of an individual
bad action can still lead to overall good. We propose to replace preference aggregation with an appropriately developed value/ethics/preference fusion, an operation designed
to ensure that agents’ preferences are consistent with their
moral values and do not override ethical principles
For ethical principles, we use hard constraints specifying
the basic ethical “laws”, plus some form of common-sense
morality expressed as sophisticated prioritised and possibly context-dependent constraints over possible actions,
equipped with a conﬂict resolution engine. To avoid reckless
behavior in the face of uncertainty, we proposed to bound
the risk of violating these ethical laws in the form of chance
constraints, and we propose to develop stochastic constraint
solvers that propose solutions that respect these risk bounds,
based on models of environmental uncertainty. We also propose to replace preference aggregation with an appropriately
developed constraint/value/ethics/preference fusion, an operation designed to ensure that agents’ preferences are consistent with the system’s safety constraints, the agents’ moral
values, and the ethical principles. We will leverage previous experience in developing single and multi-agent preference/constraint reasoning engines.
Today, techniques exist to enable agents to make decisions, such as scheduling activities, while satisfying some
safety concerns, e.g. by using techniques from constraintbased optimization. For instance, in many critical scenarios,
such as space missions where a malfunction can endanger
the whole mission, activities are scheduled in such a way to
maximise robustness against possible problems. We believe
that these techniques can provide an inspiration to handle
ethical concerns. However, we think that a much more explicit model and reasoning engine for ethical principles and
moral values is needed in order to deal with them satisfactorily and allow them to evolve over time.

Abstract
The future will see autonomous machines acting in the same
environment as humans, in areas as diverse as driving, assistive technology, and health care. Think of self-driving cars,
companion robots, and medical diagnosis support systems.
We also believe that humans and machines will often need to
work together and agree on common decisions. Thus hybrid
collective decision making systems will be in great need.
In this scenario, both machines and collective decision making systems should follow some form of moral values and ethical principles (appropriate to where they will act but always
aligned to humans’), as well as safety constraints. In fact,
humans would accept and trust more machines that behave
as ethically as other humans in the same environment. Also,
these principles would make it easier for machines to determine their actions and explain their behavior in terms understandable by humans. Moreover, often machines and humans
will need to make decisions together, either through consensus or by reaching a compromise. This would be facilitated
by shared moral values and ethical principles.

Introduction
We believe it is important to study the embedding of safety
constraints, moral values, and ethical principles in agents,
within the context of collective decision making systems in
societies of agents and humans.
Collective decision making involves a collection of agents
who express their preferences over a shared set of possible
outcomes, and a preference aggregation rule which chooses
one of the options to best satisfy the agents’ preferences.
However, aggregating just preferences may lead to outcomes
that do not follow any ethical principles or safety constraints.
To embed such principles/constraints in a collective decision
making system, we need to understand how to model them,
how to reason with them at the level of a single agent, and
how to embed them into collective decision making.
Just like individual humans, each agent that operates in a
multi-agent context needs to be have an internal representation of moral values and ethical principles, as well as an
ethical reasoning engine. Otherwise it would not able to explain its behaviour to others.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4147

