Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fast ADMM Algorithm for Distributed
Optimization with Adaptive Penalty
Changkyu Song, Sejong Yoon and Vladimir Pavlovic
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
110 Frelinghuysen Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019
{cs1080, sjyoon, vladimir}@cs.rutgers.edu
ever, the nature of distributed learning models, particularly
in the fully distributed setting where no network topology
is presumed, inherently requires repetitive communications
between the device nodes. Therefore, it is desirable to reduce the amount of information exchanged and simultaneously improve computational efﬁciency through faster convergence of such distributed algorithms. Our methods can be
applied to any arbitrary distributed settings as well as parallel computation that requires a certain centralized connection (e.g. a star topology).
To this end, the contributions of this paper are three
folds: (a) We propose two variants of ADMM for the
consensus-based distributed learning faster than the standard
ADMM. Our method extends an acceleration approach for
ADMM (He, Yang, and Wang 2000) by an efﬁcient variable
penalty parameter update strategy. This strategy results in
improved convergence properties of ADMM and also works
in a fully distributed fashion. (b) We extend our proposed
method to automatically determine the maximum number
of iterations allocated to successive updates by employing a
budget management scheme. This strategy results in adaptive parameter tuning for ADMM, removing the need for
arbitrary parameter settings, and effectively induces a varying network communication topology. (c) We apply the proposed method to a prototypical vision and learning problem, the distributed PPCA for structure-from-motion, and
demonstrate its empirical utility over the traditional ADMM.

Abstract
We propose new methods to speed up convergence of the
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM), a
common optimization tool in the context of large scale and
distributed learning. The proposed method accelerates the
speed of convergence by automatically deciding the constraint penalty needed for parameter consensus in each iteration. In addition, we also propose an extension of the method
that adaptively determines the maximum number of iterations
to update the penalty. We show that this approach effectively
leads to an adaptive, dynamic network topology underlying
the distributed optimization. The utility of the new penalty
update schemes is demonstrated on both synthetic and real
data, including an instance of the probabilistic matrix factorization task known as the structure-from-motion problem.

Introduction
The need for algorithms and methods that can handle large
data in a distributed setting has grown signiﬁcantly in recent
years. Speciﬁcally, such settings may arise in two prototypical scenarios: (a) induced distributed data: distribute and
parallelize computationally demanding optimization tasks
to connected computational nodes using a data distributed
model and (b) intrinsically distributed data: data is collected
across a connected network of sensors (e.g., mobile devices,
camera networks), where some or all of the computation
can be performed in individual sensor nodes without requiring centralized data pooling. Several distributed learning approaches have been proposed to meet these needs.
In particular, the alternating direction method of multiplier
(ADMM) (Boyd et al. 2010) is an optimization technique
that has been very often used in computer vision and machine learning to handle model estimation and learning
in either of the two large data settings (Liu et al. 2012;
Zhuang et al. 2012; Elhamifar et al. 2013; Zeng et al. 2013;
Wang et al. 2014; Lai et al. 2014; Boussaid and Kokkinos
2014; Miksik et al. 2014).
In the distributed optimization setting, the distributed
nodes process data locally by solving small optimization
problems and aggregate the result by exchanging the (possibly compressed) local solutions (e.g., local model parameter estimates) to arrive at a consensus global result. How-

Problem Description and Related Works
The problem we consider in this paper can be formulated
as a consensus-based optimization problem (Bertsekas and
Tsitsiklis 1989). A general consensus-based optimization
problem can be written as
arg min
θi

J


fi (θi ),

s.t.

θi = θj , ∀i = j

(1)

i=1

where we want to ﬁnd the set of optimal parameters θi , i =
1..J that minimizes the sum of convex objective functions
fi (θi ), where J denotes the total number of the functions.
This problem is typically a reformulation of a centralized optimization task arg min f (θ) with a decomposable objective
J
f (θ) = i=1 fi (θ). Given the consensus formulation, the

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

753

