Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting Readers’ Sarcasm
Understandability by Modeling Gaze Behavior
Abhijit Mishra, Diptesh Kanojia, Pushpak Bhattacharyya
Center for Indian Language Technology
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India,
{abhijitmishra, diptesh, pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in
online courses can be instructed to be more attentive if they
show impatience while reading.
We introduce a novel way of predicting the sarcasm understandability of a reader. Our proposed system takes readers’
eye-gaze parameters as input along with textual features
to determine whether the reader has understood the underlying sarcasm or not. This way of addressing the problem is plausible due to two reasons: (a) Cognitive processes in
the brain are related to eye-movement activities (Parasuraman
and Rizzo 2006). Hence, considering readers’ eye-movement
patterns for detection of sarcasm understandability offers a
more natural setting that does not interrupt the reader. This is
unlike an explicit mode of evaluation ,say, by judging through
questionnaires. (b) Availability of inexpensive embedded eyetrackers on hand-held devices has come close to reality now.
For instance, Cogisen2 has a patent (ID: EP2833308-A1) on
eye-tracking using inexpensive mobile web-cameras. Thus,
we can soon expect to gather the eye-movement data of a
large number of online readers. This builds a strong use-case
for our application.
Terminology: In the subsequent sections, we use the terms
sarcasm hit and sarcasm miss, for the conditions of sarcasm
being understood and sarcasm not being understood by the
reader.

Abstract
Sarcasm understandability or the ability to understand textual
sarcasm depends upon readers’ language proﬁciency, social
knowledge, mental state and attentiveness. We introduce a
novel method to predict the sarcasm understandability of a
reader. Presence of incongruity in textual sarcasm often elicits distinctive eye-movement behavior by human readers. By
recording and analyzing the eye-gaze data, we show that eyemovement patterns vary when sarcasm is understood vis-à-vis
when it is not. Motivated by our observations, we propose a
system for sarcasm understandability prediction using supervised machine learning. Our system relies on readers’ eyemovement parameters and a few textual features, thence, is
able to predict sarcasm understandability with an F-score of
93%, which demonstrates its efﬁcacy.
The availability of inexpensive embedded-eye-trackers on mobile devices creates avenues for applying such research which
beneﬁts web-content creators, review writers and social media
analysts alike.

1

Introduction

Sarcasm is an intensiﬁed and complex way of expressing
a negative remark that involves mocking, contemptuous, or
ironic language1 . Understanding it demands carefully orchestrated sequences of complicated cognitive activities in the
brain (Shamay, Tomer, and Aharon 2005). This may depend
on readers’ language proﬁciency, social knowledge, mental
state and attentiveness while reading textual sarcasm. Failure
in understanding sarcasm can be attributed to lack of any of
these factors.
Can machines predict whether a reader has understood the
intended meaning of a sarcastic text? We refer to this problem
as Sarcasm Understandability Prediction. The importance
of this problem can be felt in multiple scenarios such as:
(a) Online review construction and analysis, where knowing
sarcasm understandability of the target audience can help
prepare and organize reviews more effectively, (b) Language
learning, say, monitoring the progress of a second language
learner where sarcasm understandability can be a factor in
determining the level of proﬁciency, and, (c) Attentiveness
testing, where readers, especially children, learning from

2

Related Work

Sarcasm processing and understanding has been studied for
quite some time. A few pioneering works in this area include
that of Jorgensen, Miller, and Sperber (1984), who believe
that sarcasm arises when a ﬁgurative meaning is used opposite to the literal meaning of the utterance. According to
Clark and Gerrig (1984), sarcasm processing involves canceling the indirectly negated message and replacing it with
the implicated one. Giora (1995), on the other hand, deﬁne
sarcasm as a mode of indirect negation that requires processing of both negated and implicated messages. Ivanko
and Pexman (2003) study the inherent complexity of sarcasm and its effect on sarcasm processing time. From the
computational linguistic perspective, several automatic sarcasm detection systems have been proposed and implemented
using rule based and statistical techniques considering (a)
Unigrams and Pragmatic features (Carvalho et al. 2009;

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Source: The Free Dictionary

2

3747

http://www.sencogi.com

