Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Scalable Sequential Spectral Clustering
Yeqing Li1 , Junzhou Huang1∗ , Wei Liu2
1

University of Texas at Arlington, Texas, USA
2
Didi Research, Bejing, China
{yeqing.li@mavs.uta.edu, jzhuang@uta.edu, weiliu@didichuxing.com}

the eigendecomposition computation. Given n data points
and each data point represented by a feature vector with d
dimensions, the time complexity of computing a pairwise
similarity matrix is O(n2 d) and that of the worst-case eigendecomposition of a full graph Laplacian is O(kn2 ), where
k is the number of classes. Given the rapid growth in the
amount of user-generated data, such a quadratic complexity
makes SC inapplicable in handling big data encountered in
real-world problems.
Many approaches have been proposed to reduce the computational cost of spectral clustering. They can be roughly
divided into two classes. The algorithms of the ﬁrst class
focus on reducing the computational cost of eigendecomposition. Given a similarity matrix of n data points, these algorithms accelerate the eigendecomposition by faster approximation approaches (Fowlkes et al. 2004; Chen et al. 2006;
Liu et al. 2007; Khoa and Chawla 2012; Liu et al. 2013b;
Zhang and Kwok 2010). Although promising results have
been achieved, the construction of the similarity matrix still
takes quadratic running time, which limits their usage. The
algorithms of the second class try to reduce the computational cost of graph construction and eigendecomposition
simultaneously by approximating the original graph (Shinnou and Sasaki 2008; Sakai and Imiya 2009; Yan, Huang,
and Jordan 2009; Chen and Cai 2011; Li et al. 2015). In
general, algorithms in the second class are more practical
than those in the ﬁrst class since they reduce the cost of all
stages of spectral clustering. However, these algorithms are
all in-memory algorithms, which assume that all data and
intermediate results can be accessed in main memory. This
assumption signiﬁcantly limits the scale of data that they can
handle.
It is a challenging research problem to efﬁciently handle data beyond the memory capacity. In this context, we
could split the algorithm running time into two parts: 1)
time for processing data in memory; 2) time for transferring data from/to disk. Most of the previous large-scale
spectral clustering algorithms assume that the transfer time
is negligible, which makes them impractical for big data.
Other researchers try to reduce the second part by developing algorithms in distributed systems (Chen et al. 2011;
Miao et al. 2008). However, not only is writing programs on
a distributed system a challenging task, but also deploying
and tuning a distributed program require specialized skills.

Abstract
In the past decades, Spectral Clustering (SC) has become one
of the most effective clustering approaches. Although it has
been widely used, one signiﬁcant drawback of SC is its expensive computation cost. Many efforts have been devoted to
accelerating SC algorithms and promising results have been
achieved. However, most of the existing algorithms rely on
the assumption that data can be stored in the computer memory. When data cannot ﬁt in the memory, these algorithms
will suffer severe performance degradations. In order to overcome this issue, we propose a novel sequential SC algorithm
for tackling large-scale clustering with limited computational
resources, e.g., memory. We begin with investigating an effective way of approximating the graph afﬁnity matrix via
leveraging a bipartite graph. Then we choose a smart graph
construction and optimization strategy to avoid random access to data. These efforts lead to an efﬁcient SC algorithm
whose memory usage is independent of the number of input data points. Extensive experiments carried out on large
datasets demonstrate that the proposed sequential SC algorithm is up to a thousand times faster than the state-of-thearts.

Introduction
Clustering is one of the most important problems in computer vision and pattern recognition. In the past decades,
spectral clustering methods, e.g., (Shi and Malik 2000;
Von Luxburg 2007; Ng et al. 2002; Zelnik-Manor and Perona 2004; Yu and Shi 2003; Chang et al. 2015), which
are based on eigendecompositions over graph Laplacians of
data, have shown superior performance to traditional methods like K-Means. The effectiveness of spectral clustering
methods is mainly due to its capability of capturing nonlinear cluster structures, while many other clustering methods
rely on Euclidean geometry and explicit or implicit assumptions of convex shapes of clusters (Yan, Huang, and Jordan 2009). However, conventional spectral clustering algorithms are not applicable to large-scale data because of their
quadratic computational complexity. This is mainly due to
the expensive cost of the similarity graph construction and
∗

Corresponding
author:
Junzhou
Huang.
Email:
jzhuang@uta.edu. This work was partially supported by NSF
IIS-1423056, CMMI-1434401, CNS-1405985.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1809

