Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

SAND: Semi-Supervised Adaptive Novel
Class Detection and Classiﬁcation over Data Stream
Ahsanul Haque and Latifur Khan

Michael Baron

Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, Texas 75080
Email: {ahsanul.haque, lkhan}@utdallas.edu

Department of Mathematical Sciences
The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, Texas 75080
Email: mbaron@utdallas.edu
by a user or a human annotator. Therefore, given the constraint of time and resource, it is not feasible to have true
labels for all instances in a data stream available. Concept
Evolution occurs when a new class emerges in any data
stream (Masud et al. 2011). It has received less attention
than concept drift problem in the literature. Therefore, most
approaches misclassify novel class instances as one of the
existing classes, and increase the classiﬁcation error.
We propose a framework in this paper which addresses
all of the above challenges. A change detection technique
(CDT) is used in the framework to detect any concept drift
and chunk boundary immediately. However, unlike existing approaches, it employs two unsupervised estimators
(namely, Purity and Association) to calculate classiﬁer conﬁdence in predictions, and applies the CDT on conﬁdence
scores. Therefore, the proposed CDT is fully unsupervised.
To further reduce the execution time, we have proposed two
strategies to execute CDT selectively without losing classiﬁcation accuracy.
The proposed framework maintains an ensemble of
clustering-based classiﬁer models, each trained on a different dynamically determined partially labeled chunk of data.
Motivated by the principle of Uncertainty Sampling (Settles 2009), our framework reuses classiﬁer conﬁdence scores
calculated during prediction to select a few data instances
for labeling. The classiﬁer is then updated using this limited
amount of labeled data without adding any extra overhead.
Our framework incorporates a novel class detector for
handling concept evolution. The detector assumes appearance of a single novel class at a time. Any instance falling
outside of decision boundary of the ensemble classiﬁer is
identiﬁed as an outlier. The framework interprets presence
of sufﬁciently large number of outliers with strong cohesion
among themselves as emergence of a novel class.
Primary contributions of our work are as follows: 1) We
present an unsupervised technique to estimate classiﬁer conﬁdence in predicting labels of data instances. We theoretically justify choice of the estimators. 2) We design a suitable change detection technique for this speciﬁc scenario. 3)
To update the classiﬁer, we use a limited amount of labeled
data selected without any extra overhead by reusing classiﬁer conﬁdence scores calculated during prediction. 4) We
present a semi-supervised framework which uses dynamically determined chunks to address both of concept drift

Abstract
Most approaches to classifying data streams either divide
the stream into ﬁxed-size chunks or use gradual forgetting.
Due to evolving nature of data streams, ﬁnding a proper size
or choosing a forgetting rate without prior knowledge about
time-scale of change is not a trivial task. These approaches
hence suffer from a trade-off between performance and sensitivity. Existing dynamic sliding window based approaches
address this problem by tracking changes in classiﬁer error
rate, but are supervised in nature. We propose an efﬁcient
semi-supervised framework in this paper which uses change
detection on classiﬁer conﬁdence to detect concept drifts, and
to determine chunk boundaries dynamically. It also addresses
concept evolution problem by detecting outliers having strong
cohesion among themselves. Experiment results on benchmark and synthetic data sets show effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

As technological advancement continues to pave the path
for Internet of Things (IoT), mining data streams is becoming increasingly important. However, data stream mining is challenging due to large volume and high velocity of
data. Furthermore, certain properties of data streams distinguish themselves from traditional data mining, namely inﬁnite length, concept drift, concept evolution, limited amount
of labeled data etc. (Haque, Khan, and Baron 2015b).
Inﬁnite length problem of data streams is typically addressed by dividing the stream into ﬁxed-size chunks,
e.g., (Parker and Khan 2015) or using gradual forgetting,
e.g., (Klinkenberg 2004). Since data streams are evolving in
nature, without prior knowledge of the time-scale of change,
both strategies suffer from a trade-off between performance
and sensitivity. Concept drift occurs when the target class
or concept evolves within the feature space in such a way
that the class encroaches or crosses previously deﬁned decision boundaries. This challenge is addressed by updating the
classiﬁer periodically, e.g., (Masud et al. 2011) or by using
an explicit change detector, e.g., (Bifet and Gavald 2007) to
decide when an update is necessary. These approaches assume that true labels for all data instances are readily available. However, typically true labels are provided manually
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1652

