Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Accelerated Sparse Linear Regression via Random Projection
∗

Weizhong Zhang∗ , Lijun Zhang† , Rong Jin‡ , Deng Cai∗ , Xiaofei He∗

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
†
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
‡
Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA
{zhangweizhongzju, dengcai, xiaofeihe}@gmail.com, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com

in statistics (Tibshirani 1996),

Abstract

min

In this paper, we present an accelerated numerical method
based on random projection for sparse linear regression. Previous studies have shown that under appropriate conditions,
gradient-based methods enjoy a geometric convergence rate
when applied to this problem. However, the time complexity of evaluating the gradient is as large as O(nd), where
n is the number of data points and d is the dimensionality,
making those methods inefﬁcient for large-scale and highdimensional dataset. To address this limitation, we ﬁrst utilize random projection to ﬁnd a rank-k approximator for the
data matrix, and reduce the cost of gradient evaluation to
O(nk + dk), a signiﬁcant improvement when k is much
smaller than d and n. Then, we solve the sparse linear regression problem via a proximal gradient method with a homotopy strategy to generate sparse intermediate solutions. Theoretical analysis shows that our method also achieves a global
geometric convergence rate, and moreover the sparsity of all
the intermediate solutions are well-bounded over the iterations. Finally, we conduct experiments to demonstrate the efﬁciency of the proposed method.

1

β∈Rd 2n

||y − X T β||22 + λ||β||1

(1)

where λ is the regularization parameter that controls the
sparsity of the model. Here || · ||2 denotes the standard 2
d
norm for a vector, and ||β||1 =
i |βi | is the 1 norm.
1 -LS problem has been studied extensively due to its important applications in machine learning, signal processing
and statistics. Plenty of algorithms (Figueiredo, Nowak, and
Wright 2007; Kim et al. 2007; Nesterov 2013; Xiao and
Zhang 2013) have been developed for efﬁciently solving the
optimization problem (1). For instance, in (Xiao and Zhang
2013), the authors propose a proximal gradient homotopy
method to solve this problem by solving a sequence of optimization problems in form (1) with the regularization parameter λ decreasing along the sequence. They prove that
under some common assumptions, they can obtain a global
geometric convergence rate and the intermediate solutions
over the iterations are always sparse. However, despite the
provable fast convergence rates, most of these algorithms
need to compute XX T βt for gradient evaluation at each
iteration, where βt is the intermediate solution at the t-th
iteration. It costs O(nd) ﬂops for generic dense matrix X,
leading to a high computational cost when both n and d are
large.
In this study, we adopt the key idea in randomized matrix algorithms (Mahoney 2011; Zhang et al. 2013; 2014)
to develop a novel efﬁcient algorithm for the sparse linear regression problem, due to their high efﬁciency in data
intensive problems. Various of random matrix algorithms
(Drineas et al. 2004; Frieze, Kannan, and Vempala 2004;
Sarlos 2006; Drineas, Kannan, and Mahoney 2006; Drineas,
Mahoney, and Muthukrishnan 2008; Mahoney and Drineas
2009; Drineas et al. 2011; Lu et al. 2013) have been developed in these years to accelerate the corresponding algorithms in large-scale data analysis. They typically construct a randomized sketch of the input matrix X to downsize the scale of the original problem. And then they solve
the downsized problem to obtain a approximate solution.
Based on the way they construct the sketch they can be
categorized into two categories roughly, i.e., random sampling based methods and random projection based methods.
In random sampling based methods (Drineas, Mahoney, and

Introduction
In this study, we focus on developing an efﬁcient algorithm based on random projection for sparse linear regression (Huang, Ma, and Zhang 2008), which is closely related
to sparse recovery (Becker, Bobin, and Candès 2011) and
compressed sensing(Candes and Tao 2006). Suppose we observe the data matrix X = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ Rd×n and the
corresponding response vector y = (y1 , . . . , yn )T ∈ Rn ,
where each xi ∈ Rd is a vector representation for the i-th
observation and yi is its response value. The goal of sparse
linear regression is to ﬁnd a sparse linear prediction function
f (x) = xT β such that each yi can be well approximated by
f (xi ), where β ∈ Rd is a sparse vector composed of the
model coefﬁcients. In this work, we are interested in estimating β in a special case when the dimension d of xi is
very high, which can be much larger than the sample size,
i.e. d > n, thus the problem here is under-determined.
One common approach is to learn β by solving a 1 regularized Least-Square (1 -LS) problem, known as Lasso
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2337

