Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Improving Twitter Sentiment Classiﬁcation Using
Topic-Enriched Multi-Prototype Word Embeddings
Yafeng Ren1 , Yue Zhang2 , Meishan Zhang3∗ and Donghong Ji1∗
1. Computer School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2. Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3. School of Computer Science and Technology, Heilongjiang University, Harbin, China
{renyafeng, dhji}@whu.edu.cn
{yue zhang, meishan zhang}@sutd.edu.sg
from the SemEval 2013 dataset are given below, with the
word “offensive” appearing in different sentiment polarities.
• Monday before I leave Singapore, I am going to post
something that might be offensive. (NEGATIVE)
• #Patriots Tom Brady wins AFC offensive player of the
week for 22nd time.... http://t.co/WlFHyQ0I – #NFL
(POSITIVE)
The same opinion expression “offensive” demonstrates different sentiment polarities in the above two tweets, because
the topics are different.
In this paper, we show that signiﬁcant improvements can
be achieved by using topic-enriched multi-prototype word
embeddings. First, we build a baseline system using neural
network, which has been shown to give competitive results
compared with traditional linear models (Socher et al. 2013;
dos Santos and Gatti 2014). The baseline model learns word
embedding features by incorporating both local (n-gram)
and global context (sentiment and topic distribution). It gives
comparable results to the best models in the literature. Second, we extend the baselines system to learn multiple embeddings for each word, which gives better performance. Finally, performance can be further improved by integrating
our proposed model and the current best model using diverse
word representations.
Compared with the baseline, the ﬁnal system improves
two-category classiﬁcation performance on the standard Semeval 2013 dataset from 82.17% to 87.97% in macro-F
score. The result is signiﬁcantly higher compared with the
best results from the SemEval 2013 participants (84.73%)
and the best reported result on the same dataset (84.98%).

Abstract
It has been shown that learning distributed word representations is highly useful for Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation.
Most existing models rely on a single distributed representation for each word. This is problematic for sentiment classiﬁcation because words are often polysemous and each word
can contain different sentiment polarities under different topics. We address this issue by learning topic-enriched multiprototype word embeddings (TMWE). In particular, we develop two neural networks which 1) learn word embeddings
that better capture tweet context by incorporating topic information, and 2) learn topic-enriched multiple prototype embeddings for each word. Experiments on Twitter sentiment
benchmark datasets in SemEval 2013 show that TMWE outperforms the top system with hand-crafted features, and the
current best neural network model.

Introduction
Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation, which classiﬁes the sentiment polarity of a tweet as positive, neutral or negative,
has received much research attention in recent years (Jiang
et al. 2011; Liu 2012; Hu et al. 2013; Tang et al. 2014).
Most existing work follows Pang et al. (2002) and Go et
al. (2009), treating Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation as a special case of text classiﬁcation, and investigating the use of
effective features (Pang and Lee 2008; Maas et al. 2011;
Owoputi et al. 2012; Labutov and Lipson 2013). In particular, Mohammad et al. (2013) build the top-performing system in the Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation track of SemEval
2013 (Nakov et al. 2013), using diverse sentiment lexicons
and a variety of hand-crafted features. Tang et al. (2014) propose sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding, which gives better
performance compared with the current best system using
diverse word representations.
Existing word embedding models for Twitter sentiment
classiﬁcation, however, have two limitations. On the one
hand, one embedding is generated for each word, despite
that sentiment-baring words may be polysemous. On the
other hand, most methods ignore topic information of the
tweet in the word embedding space, which determines the
meaning of polysemous words. For example, two tweets

Related Work
Existing methods on Twitter sentiment analysis focus on
feature engineering. The performance of a sentiment classiﬁer is heavily dependent on the choice of feature representations. Pang et al. (2002) pioneer this ﬁeld by using
bag-of-word feature representations. Many different feature
learning methods are proposed subsequently to obtain better performance (Pang and Lee 2008; Liu 2012; Owoputi et
al. 2012; Feldman 2013; Mohammad, Kiritchenko, and Zhu
2013).
Recent studies investigate learning low-dimensional,
dense and real-valued word embedding vectors for senti-

∗

corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3038

