Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Look, Listen and Learn — A Multimodal LSTM for Speaker Identiﬁcation
Jimmy Ren,1 Yongtao Hu,2 Yu-Wing Tai,1 Chuan Wang,2
Li Xu,1 Wenxiu Sun,1 Qiong Yan1
SenseTime Group Limited1
{rensijie, yuwing, xuli, sunwenxiu, yanqiong}@sensetime.com
The University of Hong Kong2
{herohuyongtao, wangchuan2400}@gmail.com
Project page: http://www.deeplearning.cc/mmlstm

dations (e.g. blur and occlusion) and unconstrained content variations (e.g. illumination and expression) in reallife videos are not uncommon. These effects signiﬁcantly
degrade the performance of many existing CNN based
methods. Second, the state-of-the-art convolutional network
based face model is trained with still images. Its application in sequential data as well as its connection to recurrent
networks is less explored and it is not straightforward to extend CNN based methods to the multimodal learning setting.
Third, a practical system should be robust enough to reject
distractors, the faces of non-speaking persons indicated by
the red bounding boxes in ﬁgure 1b, which adds additional
challenges to the task.

Abstract
Speaker identiﬁcation refers to the task of localizing the
face of a person who has the same identity as the ongoing voice in a video. This task not only requires collective perception over both visual and auditory signals,
the robustness to handle severe quality degradations and
unconstrained content variations are also indispensable.
In this paper, we describe a novel multimodal Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture which seamlessly uniﬁes both visual and auditory modalities from
the beginning of each sequence input. The key idea
is to extend the conventional LSTM by not only sharing weights across time steps, but also sharing weights
across modalities. We show that modeling the temporal
dependency across face and voice can signiﬁcantly improve the robustness to content quality degradations and
variations. We also found that our multimodal LSTM is
robustness to distractors, namely the non-speaking identities. We applied our multimodal LSTM to The Big
Bang Theory dataset and showed that our system outperforms the state-of-the-art systems in speaker identiﬁcation with lower false alarm rate and higher recognition accuracy.

Despite the rich potential of both CNN and RNN for facial
and auditory data, it is still unclear if these two networks can
be simultaneously and effectively adopted in the context of
multimodal learning. In this paper, we proposed a novel multimodal Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997), a specialized type of Recurrent Neural Network, to address this problem. We show that modeling temporal dependency for facial sequences by LSTM performs much better than CNN based methods in terms of robustness to image degradations. More importantly, by sharing weights not only across time steps but also across different modalities, we can seamlessly unify both visual and auditory modalities from the beginning of each sequence input,
which signiﬁcantly improves the robustness to distractors.
This is because the cross-modal shared weights can learn
to capture temporal correlation between face and voice sequences. Note that our multimodal LSTM did not assume
the the random variables from different modal are correlated.
Instead, our multimodal LSTM is capable to learn such correlation if there is any temporal correlation across different
modal in their sequences. In the speaker identiﬁcation task,
we believe such temporal correlation exists in the respective
face and voice sequences. In this work, we assume the face
of the speaker appears in a video when they speak, and there
is only one speaker at the same time during the voice over.
Multiple speakers in the same video clip can be identiﬁed as
far as their speaks do not overlap.

Speaker identiﬁcation is one of the most important building
blocks in many intelligent video processing systems such as
video conferencing, video summarization and video surveillance, etc. It aims to localize the face of the speaker associated with the ongoing voices. To achieve this task, collective perception over both visual and auditory signals is
indispensable.
In the past few years, we observe the rapid advances
in face recognition and speech recognition respectively
by using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) (Schroff,
Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Sun et al. 2014a) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Graves, Mohamed, and
Hinton 2013; Hannun et al. 2014). Notwithstanding the recent ground breaking results in processing facial and auditory data, speaker identiﬁcation (ﬁgure 1b) remains challenging for the following reasons. First, severe quality degrac 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3581

