Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Towards Domain Adaptive Vehicle Detection in Satellite Image
by Supervised Super-Resolution Transfer
†

Liujuan Cao†,‡ , Rongrong Ji†,‡ , Cheng Wang†,‡ , Jonathan Li†,‡
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, 361005, China
‡
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005, China
{caoliujuan,rrji,cwang,junli}@xmu.edu.cn

ages, the spatial resolution of vehicles in satellite images
are lower by an order of magnitude, i.e. typically ≤ 10
inch for satellite images. Therefor, it is almost infeasible to reuse features and detectors originally designed for
the aerial image domain(Cheng, Weng, and Chen 2012a;
Hinz and Baumgartner 2011; Choi and Yang 2009; Lin et
al. 2008) in the satellite image domain. Second, as such
data source is newly pervasive, there are few labels available, neither for moving vehicles (Cheng, Weng, and Chen
2012b) or still vehicles (Holt et al. 2009), in the satellite
image domain to train vehicle detectors (Holt et al. 2009;
Cheng, Weng, and Chen 2012b). While manual labeling
might mitigate such a limitation, it is very labor-intensive
due to the low resolution.
In this paper, we present a domain-adaptive vehicle detection framework for satellite image, which addresses both
challenges by supervised, super-resolution transfer learning.
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed framework. First, we adopt
super-resolution to transfer the target region into high resolution to “augment” its visual appearance. This is achieved
by a coupled dictionary learning, which jointly learns the
feature encoding of both low- and high-resolution images
to map image regions from satellite to aerial image domain.
Notably, supervised labels are embedded into this transfer:
We embed a linear detector loss to the objective function of
dictionary learning, which enforces the augmented region to
be more discriminative for the subsequent detector training.
Second, we detect vehicles from the augmented regions
in the high-resolution aerial image domain. In this domain,
there exist extensive vehicle detection algorithms, as well
as rich labels. However, the detector robustness is still challenged by domain variations. We address this challenge by
adopting Exemplar Support Machines (E-SVMs), which is a
robust nearest neighbor classiﬁer with instance-wised metric
learning. As above, linear kernel is adopted to link E-SVMs
loss into the previous coupled dictionary learning, forming
a joint optimization between detection and super-resolution.
The proposed vehicle detection framework has been extensively evaluated in several large-scale satellite image data
sets. We compare it to a set of state-of-the-art algorithms to
demonstrate the signiﬁcant performance gains.
The rest of this paper is organized as below: Section 2
reviews the related work. Section 3 presents the proposed
supervised coupled dictionary learning algorithm. Section 4

Abstract
Vehicle detection in satellite image has attracted extensive research attentions with various emerging applications. However, the detector performance has been signiﬁcantly degenerated due to the low resolutions of satellite images, as well
as the limited training data. In this paper, a robust domainadaptive vehicle detection framework is proposed to bypass
both problems. Our innovation is to transfer the detector
learning to the high-resolution aerial image domain, where
rich supervision exists and robust detectors can be trained.
To this end, we ﬁrst propose a super-resolution algorithm using coupled dictionary learning to “augment” the satellite image region being tested into the aerial domain. Notably, linear detection loss is embedded into the dictionary learning,
which enforces the augmented region to be sensitive to the
subsequent detector training. Second, to cope with the domain changes, we propose an instance-wised detection using
Exemplar Support Vector Machines (E-SVMs), which well
handles the intra-class and imaging variations like scales, rotations, and occlusions. With comprehensive experiments on
large-scale satellite image collections, we demonstrate that
the proposed framework can signiﬁcantly boost the detection
accuracy over several state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Coming with the era of digital earth, nowadays have witnessed the explosive growth of satellite images, which opens
a gate for various applications ranging from commercial to
military. At the core of such applications lies the need to detect vehicles, which typically reside on the roadway from a
high-angle shot. While extensive research has been done on
vehicle detection in the aerial image domain (Hinz 2004;
Holt et al. 2009; D.Lenhart et al. 2008; Kozempel and
Reulke 2009; Kembhavi, Harwood, and Davis 2011), there
is limited work on low-resolution satellite domain. However,
with the evolution of imaging techniques, the recent satellite
platforms have provided 0.5∼1m resolutions by which vehicles are recognizable, for instance IKONOS (1m), QuickBird (0.61m), WordView (0.5m) etc. It is therefore emerging
to detect vehicles in satellite images, which merit in high
conﬁdentiality comparing to using aerial images.
However, it is not an easy task at all. Key challenges
mainly fall in two folds: First, comparing to aerial imc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1138

