Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Pseudo-Tree Construction Heuristics for
DCOPs with Variable Communication Times
Atena M Tabakhi

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
amtabakh@cs.nmsu.edu

Abstract
Empirical evaluations of DCOP algorithms are typically done
in simulation and under the assumption that the communication times between all pairs of agents are identical, which is
unrealistic in many real-world applications. In this abstract,
we incorporate non-uniform communication times in the default DCOP model and propose heuristics that exploit these
communication times to speed up DCOP algorithms that operate on pseudo-trees.

Non-Root
Variables

hmws
hmwa
hmus

Root Variable
hmws hmwa hmus
h1
h2
h3
h4
h5
h6
h7
h8
h9

Table 1: Pseudo-tree Generation Heuristics
D = {Dx }x∈X is a set of ﬁnite domains, each variable
x ∈ X takes values from the set Dx ∈ D; F = {fi }m
i=1
is a set of utility functions, each deﬁned over a mixed set
of decision variables: fi : x∈xfi Dx → R+ ∪ {⊥}, where
xfi ⊆ X is the scope of fi and ⊥ is a special element used to
denote that a given combination of values for the variables
in xfi is not allowed; α : X → A is a function that associates each decision variable to one agent; and C = {ci }m
i=1
is the set of communication times, where ci ∈ C speciﬁes
the communication time for agents in the scope xfi of utility function fi ∈ F to communicate with one another. The
objective is to ﬁnd an optimal complete solution that maximizes the sum over all utility functions.

Introduction
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) are
well-suited for modeling multi-agent coordination problems
where the primary interactions are between local subsets of
agents (Modi et al. 2005; Yeoh and Yokoo 2012).
Unfortunately, empirical evaluations of DCOP algorithms
are typically done in simulation and under the assumption
that the communication time between any pair of agents
is identical for all pairs. In many coordination problems,
this assumption is unrealistic. For example, in a distributed
sensor network problem, communication between pairs of
sensors may rely on factors such as the distance between
the sensors and the topology of the environment. Therefore, in this abstract, we extend the DCOP model to include communication-related information, speciﬁcally, the
communication times for each constraint as well as propose heuristics that make use of this information to speed
up DCOP algorithms that operate on pseudo-trees.
We evaluate our heuristics in random graphs with communication times that depend on physical distances sampled
from two distributions (uniform and Gaussian). Our experimental results show that our heuristics ﬁnd pseudo-trees
with smaller depths than the existing max-degree heuristic
by up to 20%.

Pseudo-tree Generation Heuristics
A DFS pseudo-tree arrangement for G is a spanning tree
T = X, ET  of G such that if fi ∈ F and {x, y} ⊆ xfi , then
x and y appear in the same branch of T . Edges of G that
are in ET are called tree edges and edges that are not are
called backedges. Tree edges connect a node with its parent
and its children, while backedges connect a node with its
pseudo-parents and its pseudo-children. We use N (ai ) =
{aj ∈ A | {xi , xj } ∈ E} to denote the neighbors of agent
ai ; and P (ai ), C(ai ), P P (ai ), and P C(ai ) to denote the
parent, the set of children, the set of pseudo-parent, and the
set of pseudo-children of agent ai in the pseudo-tree.
Since constructing optimal pseudo-trees is NP-hard, one
typically uses greedy approaches like the Distributed DFS
algorithm (Hamadi, Bessière, and Quinqueton 1998) to construct pseudo-trees. Additionally, since the edges of pseudotrees are now weighted by the communication times for each
edge, we deﬁne the generalized depth of pseudo-trees to take
these communication times into account.
Deﬁnition 1 (Generalized Depth) The generalized depth
of a pseudo-tree is the largest sum of communication times
ci ∈ C across all constraints over all branches of the

DCOPs with Variable Communication Times
We extend the DCOP model to include communicationrelated information, speciﬁcally, the communication times
for each constraint. Therefore, this new DCOP is deﬁned
by a tuple A, X, D, F, C, α, where A = {ai }pi=1 is a
set of agents; X = {xi }ni=1 is a set of decision variables;
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4238

