Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Active Learning with Cross-Class Knowledge Transfer
Yuchen Guo, Guiguang Ding, Yuqi Wang, and Xiaoming Jin
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{yuchen.w.guo,wangyuqi10}@gmail.com, {dinggg,xmjin}@tsinghua.edu.cn,

fully labeled. It is related but not the same as the target domain. So we can transfer the supervised information in auxiliary domain into the target domain. By alleviating the inﬂuence of marginal and conditional distribution difference
between domains, it is demonstrated that we can train accurate classiﬁers without labeled target data (Long et al. 2014).
The power of active learning and transfer learning motivates researchers to develop methods to combine them for
better performance. By simultaneously transferring knowledge from auxiliary labeled domain and selecting the most
informative samples from target domain to label, a.k.a.,
transfer active learning, some promising results have been
achieved (Shi, Fan, and Ren 2008; Li et al. 2012; 2013;
Chattopadhyay et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2013). However, existing works assume that the source domain and target domain must have the same classes, while little attention is
paid to the more general and challenging case where the
classes in source domain are related but different from target
domain classes, i.e., cross-class transfer active learning. In
fact, the cross-class problem is more practical in real-world
scenario. For example, if the target domain contains hundreds of uncommon classes, such as “lophius litulon” and
“euchoreutes naso”, it is very difﬁcult to collect auxiliary
data for all classes exactly and not miss any class. On the
other hand, collecting data for common classes, like “ﬁsh”
and “mouse” is very easy. Therefore if the learning algorithm can transfer knowledge from the common classes in
source domain to the uncommon ones in target domain, the
effort to collect the auxiliary data can be markedly reduced.
There are two key problems in cross-class transfer active
learning. Firstly, because the source domain and target domain do not directly share any class, how to transfer knowledge between different classes? Secondly, how to measure
the uncertainty of samples in this task so that the learning
algorithm can select samples for labeling? The recent development of attribute-based zero-shot learning (Farhadi et
al. 2009; Socher et al. 2013; Norouzi et al. 2013; Lampert,
Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014) shows that by building an
intermediary layer shared between source domain and target domain, i.e., attributes, the knowledge can be transferred
across classes. Following this idea, in this paper we propose
a novel usage of attributes. Instead of treating attributes as
the intermediate during classiﬁcation, we regard attributes
as the seed parameters to build the classiﬁer. Speciﬁcally, we

Abstract
When there are insufﬁcient labeled samples for training a
supervised model, we can adopt active learning to select
the most informative samples for human labeling, or transfer learning to transfer knowledge from related labeled data
source. Combining transfer learning with active learning has
attracted much research interest in recent years. Most existing
works follow the setting where the class labels in source domain are the same as the ones in target domain. In this paper,
we focus on a more challenging cross-class setting where the
class labels are totally different in two domains but related to
each other in an intermediary attribute space, which is barely
investigated before. We propose a novel and effective method
that utilizes the attribute representation as the seed parameters to generate the classiﬁcation models for classes. And we
propose a joint learning framework that takes into account
the knowledge from the related classes in source domain, and
the information in the target domain. Besides, it is simple to
perform uncertainty sampling, a fundamental technique for
active learning, based on the framework. We conduct experiments on three benchmark datasets and the results demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the proposed method.

Introduction
Sometimes, it is expensive and exhaustive to label sufﬁcient
samples for training a classiﬁer. For example, training object classiﬁers for natural images from thousands of categories may require millions of well-labeled samples (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014). It is expected that we
can use as few labeled samples as possible to train a classiﬁer which can achieve satisfactory performance. The researchers have exploited two lines to achieve this goal. The
ﬁrst line is active learning (Settles 2009). The basic idea
of active learning is that training samples have different information, and if the learning algorithm can, and is allowed
to, select the most informative samples to label, even a few
labeled samples can lead to an effective classiﬁer. Existing
works have demonstrated that active learning can signiﬁcantly reduce the human labeling efforts (Joshi, Porikli, and
Papanikolopoulos 2009; Zhuang et al. 2012). The second
line is transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2010). In transfer
learning, an auxiliary domain is available which is always
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1624

