Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Random Composite Forests
Giulia DeSalvo

Mehryar Mohri

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
251 Mercer St.
New York, NY 10012
desalvo@cims.nyu.edu

Courant Institute and Google Research
251 Mercer St.
New York, NY 10012
mohri@cs.nyu.edu

To achieve a higher accuracy in some difﬁcult tasks, more
complex decision trees are needed, with leaf classiﬁers (or
node questions) selected out of richer hypothesis sets than
those commonly used by RFs. We will consider a broad
family of decision trees, Composite Trees, whose leaf classiﬁers are selected out of a hypothesis set composed of p subfamilies with different complexities. Of course, trees with
leaf classiﬁers consistently picked from a rich hypothesis set
would be prone to overﬁtting. However, when the leaf classiﬁers are selected more rarely from more complex subfamilies and more frequently from the less complex ones, then
learning can be successful, while providing the ﬂexibility of
using richer hypotheses when needed. We will present new
data-dependent learning guarantees in the multi-class setting
that provide a quantitative guidance for the choice of the hypotheses at each leaf of a composite tree. Our bounds are
given in terms of the Rademacher complexities of the p subfamilies and, remarkably, depend on the fraction of correctly
classiﬁed points at each leaf.
Previous empirical papers have examined the performance of decision trees whose leaves have a speciﬁc classiﬁer, but little theoretical analysis of this problem has been
developed. The classiﬁers used at the leaves have been
generated from various algorithms: neural nets (Zhou and
Chen 2002), linear regression and nearest neighbor algorithm (Seewald, Petrak, and Widmer 2001), and Gaussian
processes (Kohavi 1996; Frohlich et al. 2013; Seewald, Petrak, and Widmer 2001). Moreover, several papers combine decision trees with the SVM algorithm, but none provide generalization bounds or any other strong theoretical
justiﬁcation (Chang et al. 2010; Bennet and Blue 1998;
Takahashi and Abe 2002; Dong and Chen 2008; Madjarov
and Gjorgjevikj 2012; Arreola, Fehr, and Burkhardt 2006;
2007; Rodriguez-Lujan, Cruz, and Huerta 2012; Kumar and
Gopal 2010; Wang and Saligrama 2012). One paper that is
close to our theoretical analysis is by Golea et al. (1997).
They provide generalization bounds for decision trees in
terms of the VC dimension, but they assume boolean leaf
functions under the setting of binary classiﬁcation.
We also deﬁne randomized versions of composite trees.
As already mentioned, randomization appears in the deﬁnition of RFs in two principle ways: through bagging and
randomized node optimization (RNO) (Ho 1995; Amit and
Geman 1997; Ho 1998; Dietterich et al. 2000). Bagging gen-

Abstract
We introduce a broad family of decision trees, Composite
Trees, whose leaf classiﬁers are selected out of a hypothesis set composed of p subfamilies with different complexities. We prove new data-dependent learning guarantees for
this family in the multi-class setting. These learning bounds
provide a quantitative guidance for the choice of the hypotheses at each leaf. Remarkably, they depend on the Rademacher
complexities of the sub-families of the predictors and the
fraction of sample points correctly classiﬁed at each leaf. We
further introduce random composite trees and derive learning guarantees for random composite trees which also apply
to Random Forests. Using our theoretical analysis, we devise
a new algorithm, R ANDOM C OMPOSITE F OREST (RCF), that
is based on forming an ensemble of random composite trees.
We report the results of experiments demonstrating that RCF
yields signiﬁcant performance improvements over both Random Forests and a variant of RCF in several tasks.

Introduction
Random Forests (RFs) are ensemble learning models introduced by Breiman (2001) combining the bagging approach
(Breiman 1996) and the random subspace method (Ho 1995;
Amit and Geman 1997). They are used in a variety of applications for classiﬁcation and regression tasks ranging from
computer vision and medical imaging to ﬁnance (Criminisi, Shotton, and Konukoglu 2012), often outperforming existing methods (Schroff, Criminisi, and Zisserman 2008;
Shotton et al. 2011; Montillo et al. 2011; Xiong et al. 2012).
In contrast with their empirical success, the theoretical analysis of RFs is still subject to several questions, as
pointed out by Denil, Matheson, and de Freitas (2014).
There has been considerable work seeking to prove consistency results for RFs under some simplifying assumptions (Biau, Devroye, and Lugosi 2008; Biau 2012) including more recent work presenting a ﬁner analysis (Denil,
Matheson, and de Freitas 2014), but few theoretical publications have focused on deriving ﬁnite-sample generalization bounds for these models. It is worth mentioning that a
by-product of our analysis is a new data-dependent ﬁnitesample learning guarantee for RFs using the random subspace method.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1540

