Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Joint Model for Entity Set Expansion
and Attribute Extraction from Web Search Queries
Zhenzhong Zhang, Le Sun, Xianpei Han
State Key Laboratory of Computer Sciences, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
{zhenzhong, sunle, xianpei}@nfs.iscas.ac.cn

method, which first extracted entities from web documents
using two lexical patterns and then leveraged these entities
to extract attributes from query log. However, such pipeline architecture often suffers from error propagation.
Moreover, ESE and AE tasks are tightly coupled and
they can benefit from the information provided by the other. For instance, on one hand, AE systems often suffer
from data sparseness (Alfonseca et al., 2010), which can be
mitigated by providing more entities of the given class
using an ESE system. On the other hand, ESE systems
often suffer from the semantic drift problem, that is, the
expansion category may change during the new entity discovery step (e.g., expanding “New York” to the “country”
class). The attributes mined by AE systems can provide
critical information to resolve the semantic drift problem.
For example, if a set of attributes (e.g., “capital”, “president”, and “embassy”) of a given class (e.g., “country”) are
learned by an AE system, we can infer that an entity (e.g.,
“New York”) without these important attributes is unlikely
to belong to the given class.
Based on the above observation, this paper proposes a
joint model for ESE and AE, which can effectively improve both tasks by exploiting the relationship between
entities and attributes using a graph reinforcement algorithm. The intuition behind our approach is that an attribute
is important to a given class if it is shared by many typical
entities of this class, and an entity is typical if it owns
many important attributes of the class. Based on the above
intuition, this paper first proposes a graph representation to
model the relationship between entities and attributes. To
resolve the data sparseness problem, the graph is extended
with the relationship between entities and the relationship
between attributes. Based on the graph representation, we
propose a graph based reinforcement algorithm for better
ESE and AE, which can jointly mine entities and attributes
by exploiting the relationships captured by the graph.
We conducted large-scale experiments on the AOL
search data set (Pass et al., 2006). Experimental results

Abstract
Entity Set Expansion (ESE) and Attribute Extraction (AE)
are usually treated as two separate tasks in Information Extraction (IE). However, the two tasks are tightly coupled,
and each task can benefit significantly from the other by leveraging the inherent relationship between entities and
attributes. That is, 1) an attribute is important if it is shared
by many typical entities of a class; 2) an entity is typical if it
owns many important attributes of a class. Based on this observation, we propose a joint model for ESE and AE, which
models the inherent relationship between entities and
attributes as a graph. Then a graph reinforcement algorithm
is proposed to jointly mine entities and attributes of a specific class. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
our method for discovering both new entities and new
attributes.

Introduction
Entity Set Expansion (ESE) aims at acquiring new entities
of a particular class using a few seed entities. Attribute
Extraction (AE) aims at acquiring a set of relevant
attributes which can capture the most prominent properties
of a given class (e.g., “capital” for the “country” class).
ESE and AE are useful in many applications such as dictionary construction (Cohen and Sarawagi, 2004), word
sense disambiguation (Pantel and Lin, 2002), query refinement (Hu et al., 2009) and query expansion (Bellare et
al., 2007).
Numerous methods have been proposed to ESE (Cucchiarelli and Velardi, 2001; Etzioni et al., 2005; Pasca,
2007a; Riloff and Jones, 1999; Wang and Cohen, 2007,
Wang and Cohen, 2008) and AE (Tokunaga et al., 2005;
Yoshinaga and Torisawa, 2007; Cui et al., 2009; Pasca and
Durme, 2007; Pasca and Durme, 2008). Traditional methods mostly treat ESE and AE as two separate tasks. For
example, Pasca and Durme (2008) employed a pipeline
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3101

