Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Assignment and Pricing in Roommate Market
Pak Hay Chan

Xin Huang

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, HK

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, HK

Zhengyang Liu

Chihao Zhang

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Shengyu Zhang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, HK
One important extension of stable matching problem is
stable roommate problem (Gale and Shapley 1962). In a
given instance of the roommates problem, each of 2n participants ranks the others in strict order of preference. A matching is stable if there is no pair of participants such that both
prefer the other to their current partners. Irving (Irving 1985)
gave an efﬁcient algorithm to decide whether there exists a
stable solution and to output one if existing.
In a different vein, roommate market can be considered
as a two sided market if we consider how to assign pairs of
roommates into rooms based on their evaluations to rooms.
A classic model for this is assignment game, in which each
seller has a unique item to sell and each buyer has a unit
demand (Shapley and Shubik 1971). The goal of assignment
game is to compute a matching μ along with a vector of
prices p. An desirable output is a price vector and a feasible
assignment at which each seller maximizes revenues, each
buyer maximizes net valuations, and markets clear.
In this paper, we propose a novel roommate market model
that takes both room sharing and pricing into consideration.
In this model, each participant i ∈ I has a valuation vir
of all the rooms r and, at the same time, has a happiness
valuation hij of all the other participants j as the potential
roommate. An assignment is set of triples μ = {(i, j, r) :
i, j ∈ I, r ∈ R}, with person i and j assigned to room r
speciﬁes the
for each (i, j, r) ∈ μ. A rent vector p ∈ RI∪R
+
amount of rent pi that each person i ∈ I should pay and also
the room rent pr for each room r. If (i, j, r) ∈ μ, then it
holds that pi + pj = pr . For each (i, j, r) ∈ μ, the utility
of person i is her happiness hij plus her evaluation vir of
the room r, minus the price pi she pays. The social welfare
of assignment μ is deﬁned as the summation of utilities of
all participants plus the prices of all rooms, or equivalently
the summation of the happiness of all participants and the
evaluations of all rooms induced by the assignment μ. 1 For
the problems studied in this paper vir and hij are given as
input, and the task is to ﬁnd a solution, including the assignment and rent vector, to satisfy certain desirable properties.

Abstract
We introduce a roommate market model, in which 2n
people need to be assigned to n rooms, with two people
in each room. Each person has a valuation to each room,
as well as a valuation to each of other people as a roommate. Each room has a rent shared by the two people living in the room, and we need to decide who live together
in which room and how much each should pay. Various solution concepts on stability and envy-freeness are
proposed, with their existence studied and the computational complexity of the corresponding search problems
analyzed. In particular, we show that maximizing the
social welfare is NP-hard, and we give a polynomialtime algorithm that achieves at least 2/3 of the maximum social welfare. Finally, we demonstrate a pricing
scheme that can achieve envy-freeness for each room.

1

Introduction

Resource allocation is concerned with how to distribute
available resources for different users. The practical applications of resource allocation include activities scheduling,
project management, distribution of income in public ﬁnance, human resources management in strategic planning,
etc..
One natural measurement for the quality of an outcome
of a resource allocation mechanism is social welfare, which
is the summation of utilities of all agents. However, the optimization of social welfare is not always the unique objective, and stability is usually another important concern. An
allocation is stable if no coalition can devise new trades that
made them better off. The stability is a central notion in cooperative game theory.
The stable matching problem has attracted a lots of researchers’ attention since the seminal work (Gale and Shapley 1962). A line of work propose many variants and develop
many efﬁcient algorithms (Irving, Manlove, and Scott 2000;
2003; Baıou and Balinski 2000; Bansal, Agrawal, and Malhotra 2003; Malhotra 2004). Besides the theoretical interest,
some algorithms have been successfully applied to matching
systems such as National Resident Matching Program in the
US and kidney exchange (Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2005).

1
Here we include the room prices in the social welfare because
in canonical two-sided market (Roth and Sotomayor 1992), the social welfare includes the utility of agents from both sides. In our
case, the utility of a room is its price, and the total price of all
rooms can be viewed as the utility of the property owner (such as
the university).

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

446

