Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Recognizing Actions in 3D Using Action-Snippets and Activated Simplices
Chunyu Wang,1 John Flynn,2 Yizhou Wang,1 Alan L. Yuille2
1

Nat’l Eng. Lab. for Video Technology, Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), Sch’l of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
{wangchunyu, Yizhou.Wang}@pku.edu.cn
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), USA
{john.ﬂynn,yuille}@stat.ucla.edu
Abstract
Pose-based action recognition in 3D is the task of recognizing an action (e.g., walking or running) from a sequence of
3D skeletal poses. This is challenging because of variations
due to different ways of performing the same action and inaccuracies in the estimation of the skeletal poses. The training data is usually small and hence complex classiﬁers risk
over-ﬁtting the data. We address this task by action-snippets
which are short sequences of consecutive skeletal poses capturing the temporal relationships between poses in an action.
We propose a novel representation for action-snippets, called
activated simplices. Each activity is represented by a manifold which is approximated by an arrangement of activated
simplices. A sequence (of action-snippets) is classiﬁed by selecting the closest manifold and outputting the corresponding
activity. This is a simple classiﬁer which helps avoid overﬁtting the data but which signiﬁcantly outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on standard benchmarks.

?

Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of Activated Simplices
and their use for classiﬁcation. The yellow and gray structures approximate the manifolds (of action-snippets) of two
action classes. Each manifold is represented by an arrangements of simplices (e.g., the triangles). The representation is
tight, in the sense that action-snippets are close to one of the
simplices of the manifold of the correct class (and not close
to those of the wrong classes). The dots are action-snippets.
We classify an action sequence by calculating the average
distances of its action-snippets to the manifolds and classify
by the closest manifold. Note that the manifolds may be disconnected and have simplices of varying dimensions.

Action recognition is an important computer vision task with
many real-world applications. But here are serious challenges if the input is 2D images because there is considerable variation in the appearance of people (Laptev 2005;
Schuldt, Laptev, and Caputo 2004) and the 2D images will
also be very dependent on viewpoint.
The use of depth cameras makes the task easier because
depth maps are more robust to appearance and viewpoint
variations. Action recognition accuracy has substantially improved using 3D poses derived from depth maps (Shotton et
al. 2013) (Li, Zhang, and Liu 2010). Our paper assumes that
full 3D pose information is available.
But there remain challenges. First, poses of the same action can have large variations due to: (a) humans performing
the same action in different styles, (b) inaccuracies in the estimated 3D poses. Second, most benchmarks (Li, Zhang, and
Liu 2010; Seidenari et al. 2013) only provide a few hundred
sequences, which makes it risky to train complex classiﬁers.
In this paper, we represent an action sequence by a set
of action-snippets which consist of a short sequence of consecutive 3D poses. A similar idea was used in (Schindler
and Van Gool 2008) and we discuss the relations later. We
represent the action-snippets by a new representation which

we call activated simplices which give a tight approximation to the manifold of action snippets for each action class
by an arrangement of simplices, see Figure 1. Simplices
are points, line segments, triangles, and higher dimensional
analogs, see Figure 2. The activated simplices are learnt by a
novel variant of sparse coding which we describe later. They
are able to deal with variations in the data because actionsnippets which project to the same simplex are treated the
same during classiﬁcation. In other words, the simplices provide a quantization of the manifold which reduces its sensitivity to the style variations discussed above.
Note that activated simplices can be used to represent activities in terms of 3D poses instead of action-snippets (a
3D pose is an action-snippet of length one). We introduce
our method by describing it for poses, for simplicity, but our
best results are achieved by using action-snippets of ten or
more 3D poses (as quantiﬁed in our experiments).
We classify an action sequence by projecting its actionsnippets to the manifolds (i.e. the arrangements of simplices). More speciﬁcally, we project the action-snippets
onto the simplices of each manifold separately and ﬁnd the
action class that has the smallest average projection error.
This simple classiﬁer has no parameters to tune which re-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3604

