Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deep Contextual Networks for Neuronal Structure Segmentation
†

Hao Chen†,∗ , Xiaojuan Qi†,∗ , Jie-Zhi Cheng‡ , Pheng-Ann Heng†,§
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡
School of Medicine, Shenzhen University, China
§
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Electron Microscopy (ssTEM) images for neuronal structure segmentation (Cardona et al. 2010). To illustrate the image complexity, a 2D example of original ssTEM image and
corresponding segmentation by expert are illustrated in Figure 1. It can be found that the neuronal structures depicted
in the ssTEM images are very complex and hence require
the further segmentation of each structure to elucidate the
interconnection relation.
However, this is a non-trivial task. The ssTEM images can
depict more than tens of thousands of neurons where each
neuron may have thousands of synaptic connections. Thus,
the size of ssTEM images is usually formidably large in a
terabyte scale. Accordingly, the extremely complicated interconnections of neuronal structures and sheer image volume are far beyond the human capability for annotation,
as the manual labeling of all neuronal structures may take
decades to ﬁnish (White et al. 1986; Bock et al. 2011;
Wu 2015). In this case, automatic segmentation methods are
highly demanded to assist the parsing of the ssTEM images into concrete neurological structures for further analysis (Seung 2011). However, as can be observed in Figure 1,
the segmentation problem for the neuronal structures can be
very challenging in threefold. First, the image deformation
during the acquisition may blur the membrane boundaries
between neighboring neurons as shown in Figure 1 (left).
Second, the variation of neuron membrane in terms of image
contrast and membranal thickness can be very large. Particularly for the thickness, it can range from solid dark curves to
grazed grey swaths (Jurrus et al. 2010). Third, the presence
of intracellular structures makes edge detection and region
growing based methods ineffective for the identiﬁcation of
neuron membrane. Some confounding micro-structures may
also mislead the merging of regions or incorrect splitting of
one region into several sections. Meanwhile, the imaging artifacts and image alignment errors can impose difﬁculties on
the design of effective segmentation algorithm as well.

Abstract
The goal of connectomics is to manifest the interconnections of neural system with the Electron Microscopy
(EM) images. However, the formidable size of EM image data renders human annotation impractical, as it
may take decades to fulﬁll the whole job. An alternative
way to reconstruct the connectome can be attained with
the computerized scheme that can automatically segment the neuronal structures. The segmentation of EM
images is very challenging as the depicted structures
can be very diverse. To address this difﬁcult problem,
a deep contextual network is proposed here by leveraging multi-level contextual information from the deep hierarchical structure to achieve better segmentation performance. To further improve the robustness against the
vanishing gradients and strengthen the capability of the
back-propagation of gradient ﬂow, auxiliary classiﬁers
are incorporated in the architecture of our deep neural
network. It will be shown that our method can effectively parse the semantic meaning from the images with
the underlying neural network and accurately delineate
the structural boundaries with the reference of low-level
contextual cues. Experimental results on the benchmark
dataset of 2012 ISBI segmentation challenge of neuronal structures suggest that the proposed method can
outperform the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin with respect to different evaluation measurements.
Our method can potentially facilitate the automatic connectome analysis from EM images with less human intervention effort.

Introduction
In neuroscience, the neuronal circuit reconstruction, also
termed as connectome, from biological images can manifest the interconnections of neurons for more insightful
functional analysis of the brain and other nervous systems (Sporns, Tononi, and Kötter 2005; Laptev et al. 2012).
For instance, the 2D serial high resolution Electron Microscopy (EM) imaging is commonly used for the visualization of micro neural circuits and hence is a very informative imaging tool for the connectome analysis. In this paper, we focus on the widely used serial section Transmission

Related Work
Because of the anisotropic nature of ssTEM data, most previous methods were devised under the framework of initial
2D membrane detection and latter 3D linking process (Jurrus et al. 2010). Although considerable progress has been
made over the last decade, earlier studies achieved a limited accuracy of segmentation and often failed to suppress

∗

Authors contributed equally.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1167

