Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Quantitative Extensions of the Condorcet
Jury Theorem with Strategic Agents
Lirong Xia
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, USA
xial@cs.rpi.edu

but it only received due attention in the 20th century after Condorcet’s manuscript was discovered by Black (1958).
Since then, many extensions have been obtained to relax the
i.i.d. assumption, initiated by Nitzan and Paroush (1984),
Shapley and Grofman (1984), and Grofman, Owen, and
Feld (1983); and to consider strategic agents, initiated
by Austen-Smith and Banks (1996) and Feddersen and Pesendorfer (1997).
However, most previous extensions of the Jury Theorem
focused on two alternatives (more details below). In modern
applications of social choice, the number of alternatives is
often much larger. Moreover, we are not aware of an extension that quantitatively measures the effect of agents’
strategic behavior on a mechanism’s truth-revealing power.
Such measures are important for us to choose an “optimal”
truth-revealing mechanism when agents are strategic. Therefore, the following important question is still largely open:
“Quantitatively to what extent does the Condorcet Jury Theorem hold for strategic agents with more than two alternatives?”
Our contributions. To answer the question we initiate a research agenda of quantitatively extending the Jury Theorem
by studying the Bayesian price of anarchy (PoA) (Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou 1999), which evaluates the worstcase social welfare loss caused by agents’ strategic behavior, and the Bayesian price of stability (PoS) (Anshelevich
et al. 2004), which evaluates the social welfare loss in the
best equilibrium, of the common interest Bayesian voting
games (Austen-Smith and Banks 1996) under a wide range
of statistical models including Mallows’ model (Mallows
1957). We study three classes of mechanisms: the plurality
rule, maximum a posteriori estimators (MAPs), and probability mixtures of random dictatorship rRD and the uniform
rule rUni . Our results are summarized in Table 1.
These PoA and PoS results help us understand and measure the effect of agents’ strategic behavior on mechanisms’s
truth-revealing power and thus provide a new angle of quantitatively comparing mechanisms. It follows that in the best
case plurality and MAPs are better because they have lower
PoS’s, but the third class is more robust against agents’
strategic behavior because it has a lower PoA. MAPs might
be the best from the information aggregation perspective,
but the other two classes of mechanisms may satisfy more
desirable axiomatic properties and may be easier to use in

Abstract
The Condorcet Jury Theorem justiﬁes the wisdom of crowds
and lays the foundations of the ideology of the democratic
regime. However, the Jury Theorem and most of its extensions focus on two alternatives and none of them quantitatively evaluate the effect of agents’ strategic behavior on the
mechanism’s truth-revealing power.
We initiate a research agenda of quantitatively extending the
Jury Theorem with strategic agents by characterizing the
price of anarchy (PoA) and the price of stability (PoS) of the
common interest Bayesian voting games for three classes of
mechanisms: plurality, MAPs, and the mechanisms that satisfy anonymity, neutrality, and strategy-proofness (w.r.t. a set
of natural probability models). We show that while plurality
and MAPs have better best-case truth-revealing power (lower
PoS), the third class of mechanisms are more robust against
agents’ strategic behavior (lower PoA).

Introduction
Social choice theory studies how to aggregate agents’ preferences to make a join decision. In many new applications
of social choice, especially in multi-agent systems and electronic commerce, the main goal is to reveal the ground
truth or to make an objectively optimal decision. Examples
of such applications include meta-search engines (Dwork
et al. 2001), recommender systems (Ghosh et al. 1999),
crowdsourcing (Mao, Procaccia, and Chen 2013), semantic webs (Porello and Endriss 2013), and peer grading for
MOOC (Raman and Joachims 2014). These are not purely
statistical problems, as agents are often strategic and may
have incentive to misreport their preferences to obtain a
more preferable outcome.
The (Condorcet) Jury Theorem (Condorcet 1785) has
been widely recognized as the ﬁrst approach towards truthrevealing social choice. It states that when there are two alternatives, agents’ signals are generated i.i.d. from a simple
statistical model, and the agents report sincerely, then the
probability for the majority rule to reveal the ground truth
goes to 1 as the number of agents goes to inﬁnity. The Jury
Theorem has been very inﬂuential in economics and political science as it “lays, among other things, the foundations
of the ideology of the democratic regime” (Paroush 1998),
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

644

