Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient PAC-Optimal Exploration in Concurrent,
Continuous State MDPs with Delayed Updates
Jason Pazis

Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
jpazis@mit.edu

In many real world problems value function updates are
not instantaneous. Consider the following two examples: 1)
A fast-paced realtime system, whose time-step is too short to
allow updating the value function between every step. 2) A
mobile system where instead of computing the value function locally we send new samples to a remote platform which
then returns the updated value function with some delay. Delayed value function updates are the norm rather than the exception in real life, yet they are not adequately addressed by
current PAC-optimal exploration methods. As we will show
in our analysis, the worst case sample complexity of our algorithm degrades gracefully with increasing value function
update delays.
Another situation that appears often in real life is when
we want to explore in multiple MDPs at the same time. This
scenario encompasses exploring in multiple “copies” of the
same MDP simultaneously, or exploring in multiple MDPs
with varying degrees of similarity. While both of these problems are interesting, the second one presents additional difﬁculties. It might be tempting to try to cluster MDPs into
discrete clusters, and then treat each cluster as if all MDPs
in the cluster are identical. Unfortunately this approach runs
into the same scalability issues as discrete state-action exploration algorithms that lack the ability to generalize. There
are many cases where we are dealing with MDPs that are different enough that we don’t want to treat them as identical,
but we would still like to be able to take advantage of any
similarities present. Consider for example the case where
we have multiple MDPs that are similar in most of the stateaction space, but differ drastically in a small but important
section. One of the ways this situation can occur is when we
have multiple MDPs with the same dynamics but different
goals. As we will see, generalizing over MDPs is no different than generalizing over state-actions. Our approach to
generalization will allow us to handle multiple MDPs seamlessly, taking advantage of any degree of similarity present.
Our focus in this paper is on the online, discounted exploration setting. The most commonly used metric in this
setting is the number of time-steps t such that V π (st ) <
V ∗ (st ) − , commonly referred to as “sample complexity” (Kakade 2003). One of the main drawbacks of sample
complexity is that it is very coarse: It only counts the number of signiﬁcantly suboptimal steps, and does not discriminate between the magnitude of different errors. In addition

Abstract
We present a new, efﬁcient PAC optimal exploration algorithm that is able to explore in multiple, continuous or discrete state MDPs simultaneously. Our algorithm does not assume that value function updates can be completed instantaneously, and maintains PAC guarantees in realtime environments. Not only do we extend the applicability of PAC optimal exploration algorithms to new, realistic settings, but even
when instant value function updates are possible, our bounds
present a signiﬁcant improvement over previous single MDP
exploration bounds, and a drastic improvement over previous
concurrent PAC bounds. We also present TCE, a new, ﬁne
grained metric for the cost of exploration.

1

Ronald Parr
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
parr@cs.duke.edu

Introduction and Motivation

PAC-optimal exploration algorithms have received signiﬁcant attention from the Reinforcement learning (RL) community over the last few years. Considering how important efﬁcient exploration is for RL, this attention is well deserved. Unlike non-sequential machine learning, in RL it is
often the case that samples have to be obtained by sequential interaction with a Markov decision process (MDP). As a
result, sampling certain regions that the optimal policy visits
often can be quite improbable unless we are actively trying
to reach those regions. Furthermore, even in cases where we
have a generative model of the environment, it may be the
case that only a tiny percentage of the state space is reachable from the starting state; in that situation, learning by collecting samples from the entire space would be inefﬁcient.
The ﬁrst major roadblock preventing most PAC-optimal
exploration methods from being applicable in practice is that
they scale poorly to domains of realistic size. Not only do
they assume that the state-action space is discrete and ﬁnite, which renders them inapplicable to continuous space
domains, but their sample complexity becomes prohibitive
in all but the smallest problems. Both of these drawbacks
are a result of their inability to generalize, a weakness that
our algorithm does not share.
∗

This research was performed while the ﬁrst author was a graduate student with the computer science department at Duke University.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1977

