Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Optimizing Trading Assignments in Water Right Markets∗
Yicheng Liu and Pingzhong Tang

Tingting Xu and Hang Zheng

Institute of Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

State Key Lab of Hydro-science and Engineering
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

been proved worldwide, such as in Australia, United States,
South Africa, Chile and China (Bjornlund and McKay 2002;
Grafton et al. 2011). Previous study found that in an active
water market, agents with higher marginal product tend to
buy water from lower ones(Bjornlund and McKay 1998).
On the one hand, the existence of opportunity costs encourage water users to improve water use efﬁciency. (Nieuwoudt
and Armitage 2004; Turral et al. 2005). On the other hand, in
dry years, high-marginal-product agents can buy water from
markets to fulﬁll their demand and low-marginal-product
ones earn money by selling water. In this way, agents suffer lower risks in drought years. (Ashton et al. 2009)
However, water markets typically do not work as well as
expected. One major cause is transaction costs which signiﬁcantly reduce the incentive for trading. (Carey, Sunding,
and Zilberman 2002; Archibald and Renwick 1998) Different countries’ water markets meet different restrictions because of local policies and cultures. Our study focuses on
the water market in Xiying Irrigation in Northwestern China,
which was established in 2008 and is one of the most successful water markets in China. Some properties of the studied area are as follows.
• Water is allocated to villages for each 2-month period.
• Water trades are conducted between villages.
• Most villages are only willing to trade with whose close
to them because the agents from close villages are usually
familiar with and trust each other.
• Villages are not willing to trade a tiny amount of water because of transaction costs (time costs, transportation costs,
human costs).
• Because of short trading period, high transaction costs and
small price differences, straddle has never been observed.
• Villages are not willing to abdicate the rights for deciding
prices, making it impractical to propose a mechanism with
pricing rule in the current market.
• Based on all the above properties, currently, villages propose their bids or asks to the center for trading and the
center recommends sellers to buyers. When a buyer and a
seller reach an agreement on volume and price, they need
to sign a contract.
In light of these observations, we model a water right market (water market for short) as a directed bipartite graph con-

Abstract
Over the past two decades, water markets have been successfully ﬁelded in countries such as Australia, the United
states, Chile, China, etc. Water users, mainly irrigators, have
beneﬁted immensely from water markets. However, the current water market design also faces certain serious barriers.
It has been pointed out that transaction costs, which exists
in most markets, induce great welfare loss. For example, for
water markets in western China discussed in this paper, the
inﬂuence of transaction costs is signiﬁcant. Another important barrier is the locality of trades due to geographical constraints. Based on the water market at Xiying Irrigation, one
of the most successful water market in western China, we
model the water market as a graph with minimum transaction
thresholds on edges. Our goal is to maximize the transaction
volume or welfare. We prove that the existence of transaction
costs results in no polynomial time approximation scheme
(PTAS) to maximize social welfare (MAX SNP-hard). The
complexities on special graphs are also presented. From a
practical point of view, however, optimal social welfare can
be obtained via a well-designed mixed integer linear program
and can be approximated near optimally at a large scale via a
heuristic algorithm. Both algorithms are tested on data sets
generated from real historical trading data. Our study also
suggests the importance of reducing transaction costs, for example, institutional costs in water market design. Our work
opens a potentially important avenue of market design within
the agenda of computational sustainability.

Introduction
Water markets provide an efﬁcient approach for water reallocation (Rosegrant and Binswanger 1994). The discussion on water markets dates back to 1980s, followed by
heated debates (Howe, Schurmeier, and Shaw 1986; Saliba 1987). Whereafter, the advantages of water markets have
∗

This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China Grant 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301, the project
funded by Ministry of Science and Technology (2013BAB05B03);
the Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61033001,
61361136003, 61561146398, 61303077, The national nature science foundation projects 91125018 and 51479089; a Tsinghua
Initiative Scientiﬁc Research Grant and a China Youth 1000talent program. The Program of Water Resources Ministry China
(201401031). Thanks to John Dickerson for helpful discussions.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

551

