Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient Spatio-Temporal Tactile Object Recognition with Randomized Tiling
Convolutional Networks in a Hierarchical Fusion Strategy
Lele Cao,1,2 ∗ Ramamohanarao Kotagiri,2 Fuchun Sun,1 Hongbo Li, 1
Wenbing Huang, 1 and Zay Maung Maung Aye 2
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science and Technology (TNList), Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Parkville 3010 VIC, Australia

Abstract
Robotic tactile recognition aims at identifying target objects
or environments from tactile sensory readings. The advancement of unsupervised feature learning and biological tactile
sensing inspire us proposing the model of 3T-RTCN that performs spatio-temporal feature representation and fusion for
tactile recognition. It decomposes tactile data into spatial and
temporal threads, and incorporates the strength of randomized tiling convolutional networks. Experimental evaluations
show that it outperforms some state-of-the-art methods with
a large margin regarding recognition accuracy, robustness,
and fault-tolerance; we also achieve an order-of-magnitude
speedup over equivalent networks with pretraining and ﬁnetuning. Practical suggestions and hints are summarized in the
end for effectively handling the tactile data.

Figure 1: The tactile sequences obtained by a robotic hand.

branch in the domain of information fusion (Khaleghi et al.
2013) that has 4 categories (Kokar, Tomasik, and Weyman
2004): data fusion, feature fusion, decision fusion, and relational information fusion; the spatio-temporal tactile recognition is actually a practice of the last category, on which researchers have put increasing emphasis recently, attempting
to improve recognition ratio and robustness. With a thorough
literature survey, we suggest that nearly any spatio-temporal
tactile recognition methods could fall into either category of
micro-fusion or macro-fusion. The micro-fusion approaches
(Schneider et al. 2009; Taylor et al. 2010; Le et al. 2011;
Bekiroglu et al. 2011; Pezzementi, Reyda, and Hager 2011;
Liu et al. 2012; Soh, Su, and Demiris 2012; Ji et al. 2013;
Drimus et al. 2014; Madry et al. 2014; Xiao et al. 2014; Ma
et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2015b) strive to build spatio-temporal
joint representation, while macro-fusion approaches (Pezzementi et al. 2011; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) often
construct spatial and temporal features separately, and fuse
them in later phases. However, as summarized in (Cao et al.
2015), existing models may suffer from problems such as
task-speciﬁc settings, variance sensitiveness, scale-up limitations, manual selection of feature descriptors and distance
measures, and inferior robustness/fault-tolerance ability. To
address these problems (at least in part), we propose a hybrid
architecture that is universal for tactile recognition tasks and
has the following advantages over previous work:

Introduction and Related Work
Recent advances of machine learning techniques and lowercost sensors have propelled the multidisciplinary research
of robotic recognition. The sensory input plays an essential
role in hotspot research areas of robotic recognition and dexterous manipulation; tactile sensation is crucial in particular
if visual perception is impaired or non-discriminative. The
tactile sensor is a device for measuring spatial and temporal
property of a physical contact event (Tegin and Wikander
2005). For example (Figure 1), when a robotic hand with
tactile sensitivity grasps an object, its tactile sensors output tactile data (a.k.a. tactile sequences), whose consecutive frames are correlated over time. Tactile data have been
explored extensively in object identiﬁcation (e.g. Madry et
al. 2014), stability estimation (e.g. Bekiroglu et al. 2011),
slip detection (e.g. Teshigawara et al. 2010), and material
awareness (e.g. Chitta, Piccoli, and Sturm 2010). In this paper, we will emphasize tactile object recognition, which is
to identify target objects from tactile data.
As the foundation of tactile recognition, spatio-temporal
tactile feature representation and fusion is an active research
∗

Corresponding author (caoll12@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• spatio-temporal decomposition: considering the nature of
tactile data, we invent spatial (individual frames) and tem-

3337

