Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Understanding City Trafﬁc Dynamics
Utilizing Sensor and Textual Observations
Pramod Anantharam, Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan,
Surendra Marupudi, Amit Sheth, Tanvi Banerjee
Kno.e.sis, Wright State University, Dayton OH, USA
{pramod,tkprasad,surendra,amit,tanvi}@knoesis.org

ited and opaque, and do not explain the reasons for trafﬁc ﬂow variations. Increasingly, observations of real-world
systems span Physical, Cyber and Social (PCS) domains
with heterogeneous and multi-modal observations (Sheth,
Anantharam, and Henson 2013). For example, observations related to trafﬁc spans both sensor and textual modality. We believe that social media data (Goodchild 2007;
Nagarajan, Sheth, and Velmurugan 2011) can provide better understanding of speed dynamics by providing information complementary to sensor data. While social data has
played a major role in interpreting situations and applications such as political debates, civil unrest, crime prediction, disaster relief and coordination (Crooks et al. 2013;
Boulos et al. 2011; Sakaki, Okazaki, and Matsuo 2010), it
has been under-utilized in understanding PCS systems. Extracting trafﬁc related information from social data has been
carried out by some studies (Wanichayapong et al. 2011;
Zeng et al. 2013).
Important challenges in modeling and explaining speed
and travel time variations, collectively called trafﬁc dynamics, include: i) Modeling nonlinear trafﬁc dynamics due to
various city events, temporal landmarks such as peak-hour
and off-peak hour trafﬁc, and random noise that inﬂuence
trafﬁc, ii) Integration of heterogeneous data sources spanning both social and sensor data, iii) Scalability issue involving large data size due to continuous data collection from
sensors, iv) Identiﬁability of trafﬁc events due to limited
modality of trafﬁc related observations. E.g., many events
effect the average speed of vehicles passing through a road
link, so: can we even identify various events by just studying
trafﬁc dynamics? and v) Uncertain impact due to contextual
dependency. E.g., events may manifest in speed variations
only when a road link has high enough trafﬁc volume.
We address the challenging task of modeling non-linear
trafﬁc dynamics utilizing a Restricted Switching Linear Dynamical System (RSLDS) for learning normalcy models.
RSLDS captures the non-linearity of speed and travel-time
dynamics by segmenting speed and travel-time observations into simpler components amenable to description using linear models such as Linear Dynamical System (LDS)
(Bishop 2006). We provide a rationale for using LDS to
model trafﬁc dynamics by motivating the modeling needs
and connecting it to the capabilities of LDS. We address
the heterogeneity challenge by using events extracted from

Abstract
Understanding speed and travel-time dynamics in response to various city related events is an important and
challenging problem. Sensor data (numerical) containing average speed of vehicles passing through a road
link can be interpreted in terms of trafﬁc related incident reports from city authorities and social media data
(textual), providing a complementary understanding of
trafﬁc dynamics. State-of-the-art research is focused on
either analyzing sensor observations or citizen observations; we seek to exploit both in a synergistic manner.
We demonstrate the role of domain knowledge in capturing the non-linearity of speed and travel-time dynamics by segmenting speed and travel-time observations
into simpler components amenable to description using linear models such as Linear Dynamical System
(LDS). Speciﬁcally, we propose Restricted Switching
Linear Dynamical System (RSLDS) to model normal
speed and travel time dynamics and thereby characterize anomalous dynamics. We utilize the city trafﬁc
events extracted from text to explain anomalous dynamics. We present a large scale evaluation of the proposed
approach on a real-world trafﬁc and twitter dataset collected over a year with promising results.

Introduction
There is an increasing body of research on understanding
trafﬁc ﬂow for efﬁcient management of mobility in a city.
Currently, there are over 1 billion cars on roads and this
number is expected to double by 2020 (IBM 2014). Vehicular trafﬁc increased by 236% from 1981 to 2001 while the
world population grew only by 20% (IBM 2014). Increased
urbanization has impacted the mobility of people in cities.
Zero trafﬁc fatalities and minimizing trafﬁc delays are some
of the grand challenges in Cyber-Physical Systems (Rajkumar et al. 2010). To overcome these challenges, we need
a deeper understanding of the interactions between various
events in a city and its impact on trafﬁc. Current trafﬁc assessment techniques focus on analysis of ﬁne grained sensor observations to predict delays (Ko and Guensler 2005;
Anderson and Bell 1997; De Fabritiis, Ragona, and Valenti
2008; Sun, Zhang, and Yu 2006). However, these are limc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3793

