Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Toward a Taxonomy and Computational Models of Abnormalities in Images
Babak Saleh ∗

Ahmed Elgammal

Jacob Feldman

Ali Farhadi

Dept. of Computer Science
Rutgers University
New Jersey , USA

Dept. of Computer Science
Rutgers University
New Jersey , USA

Center for Cognitive Science,
Dept. of Psychology
Rutgers University
New Jersey , USA

Allen Institute for AI, &
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Washington
Washington , USA

Less Abnormal

More Abnormal
Object-centric

Abstract



Scene-centric

Context-centric

The human visual system can spot an abnormal image, and
reason about what makes it strange. This task has not received
enough attention in computer vision. In this paper we study
various types of atypicalities in images in a more comprehensive way than has been done before. We propose a new dataset
of abnormal images showing a wide range of atypicalities. We
design human subject experiments to discover a coarse taxonomy of the reasons for abnormality. Our experiments reveal
three major categories of abnormality: object-centric, scenecentric, and contextual. Based on this taxonomy, we propose a
comprehensive computational model that can predict all different types of abnormality in images and outperform prior
arts in abnormality recognition.

Figure 1: We conducted human subject experiments and
found a collection of abnormality reasons that can be clustered into three main categories: Object-centric, Contextcentric and Scene-centric. In each row of this ﬁgure, we focus on one of these categories and sort abnormal images of
cars (from a novel dataset that we propose) based on their
surprise scores. These scores are the output of the computational models that we build based on the adopted taxonomy.

Introduction
Humans begin to form categories and abstractions at an
early age (Murphy 2002). The mechanisms underlying human category formation are the subject of many competing
accounts, including those based on prototypes (Minda and
Smith 2001), exemplars (Nosofsky 1984), density estimation (Ashby and Alfonso-Reese 1995), and Bayesian inference (Goodman et al. 2008). But all modern models agree
that human category representations involve subjective variations in the typicality or probability of objects within categories. For example, bird category includes both highly typical examples such as robins, as well as extremely atypical
examples like penguins and ostriches, which while belonging to the category seem like subjectively “abnormal” examples. Visual images can seem abnormal, in that they can
exhibit features that depart in some way from what is typical for the categories to which they belong. In this paper, we
ask what makes visual images seem abnormal with respect
to their apparent categories, something that human observers
can readily judge but is difﬁcult to capture computationally.
Abnormality detection plays a substantial role in broad
range of tasks: learning visual concepts (Saleh, Farhadi,
and Elgammal 2013), natural languages processing (Hampton 2007), human perception and cognition (Biederman
1987), human action recognition (Mahadevan et al. 2010),

etc. In computer vision, abnormality in the context of object and scene categorization is an under-studied problem.
In contrast to humans ability to generalize and successfully categorize atypical instances (Rosch and Mervis 1975;
Keselman and Dickinson 2005), state-of-the-art computer
vision algorithms fail to achieve similar generalization. Table 1 shows categorization results of several state-of-theart approaches (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Sermanet et al. 2014; Jia et al. 2014; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) when tested on our dataset of abnormal images. This highlights the lack of generalization of these approaches and the importance of studying the problem of
abnormality. In this paper we focus on understanding the
causes of abnormality and reasoning about it. We address
the problem of abnormalities in images and present computational models to detect atypical instances of categories,
where the model is trained only on normal images.

∗

Corresponding author: babaks@cs.rutgers.edu
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Challenges: There are several issues and concerns in abnormality detection. First, researchers are not in an agree-

3588

