Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning the Preferences of Ignorant, Inconsistent Agents
Owain Evans

Andreas Stuhlmüller

Noah D. Goodman

University of Oxford

Stanford University

Stanford University

invert a model of rational choice based on sequential decision making given a real-valued utility function (Russell and
Norvig 1995). This approach is known as Inverse Reinforcement Learning (Ng and Russell 2000) in an RL setting and
as Bayesian Inverse Planning (Baker, Saxe, and Tenenbaum
2009) in the setting of probabilistic generative models.
This kind of approach usually assumes that the agent
makes optimal decisions up to “random noise” in action selection (Kim et al. 2014; Zheng, Liu, and Ni 2014). However, human deviations from optimality are more systematic.
They result from persistent false beliefs, sub-optimal planning, and from biases such as time inconsistency and framing effects (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). If such deviations are modeled as unstructured errors, we risk mistaken
preference inferences. For instance, if an agent repeatedly
fails to choose a preferred option due to a systematic bias,
we might conclude that the option is not preferred after all.
Consider someone who smokes every day while wishing to
quit and viewing their actions as regrettable. In this situation, a model that has good predictive performance might
nonetheless fail to identify what this person values.
In this paper, we explicitly take into account structured
deviations from optimality when inferring preferences. We
construct a model of sequential planning for agents with inaccurate beliefs and time-inconsistent biases (in the form
of hyperbolic discounting). We then do Bayesian inference
over this model to jointly infer an agent’s preferences, beliefs and biases from sequences of actions in a simple
Gridworld-style domain.
To demonstrate that this algorithm supports accurate preference inferences, we ﬁrst exhibit a few simple cases where
our model licenses conclusions that differ from standard approaches, and argue that they are intuitively plausible. We
then test this intuition by asking impartial human subjects to
make preference inferences given the same data as our algorithm. This is based on the assumption that people have
expertise in inferring the preferences of others when the domain is simple and familiar from everyday experience. We
ﬁnd that our algorithm is able to make the same kinds of
inferences as our human judges: variations in choice are explained as being due to systematic factors such as false beliefs and strong temptations, not unexplainable error.
The possibility of false beliefs and cognitive biases means
that observing only a few actions often fails to identify a

Abstract
An important use of machine learning is to learn what
people value. What posts or photos should a user be
shown? Which jobs or activities would a person ﬁnd
rewarding? In each case, observations of people’s past
choices can inform our inferences about their likes and
preferences. If we assume that choices are approximately optimal according to some utility function, we
can treat preference inference as Bayesian inverse planning. That is, given a prior on utility functions and some
observed choices, we invert an optimal decision-making
process to infer a posterior distribution on utility functions. However, people often deviate from approximate
optimality. They have false beliefs, their planning is
sub-optimal, and their choices may be temporally inconsistent due to hyperbolic discounting and other biases. We demonstrate how to incorporate these deviations into algorithms for preference inference by constructing generative models of planning for agents who
are subject to false beliefs and time inconsistency. We
explore the inferences these models make about preferences, beliefs, and biases. We present a behavioral
experiment in which human subjects perform preference inference given the same observations of choices
as our model. Results show that human subjects (like
our model) explain choices in terms of systematic deviations from optimal behavior and suggest that they
take such deviations into account when inferring preferences.

Keywords: Bayesian learning, cognitive biases, preference
inference

Introduction
The problem of learning a person’s preferences from observations of their choices features prominently in economics
(Hausman 2011), in cognitive science (Baker, Saxe, and
Tenenbaum 2011; Ullman et al. 2009), and in applied machine learning (Jannach et al. 2010; Ermon et al. 2014). To
name just one example, social networking sites use a person’s past behavior to select what stories, advertisements,
and potential contacts to display to them. A promising approach to learning preferences from observed choices is to
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

323

