Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Shortest Path Based Decision
Making Using Probabilistic Inference
Akshat Kumar
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg

NP-Hard variants) can be reformulated as a likelihood maximization inference problem in an appropriately constructed
mixture of simple Bayesian networks. We can then use several existing approaches for likelihood maximization (LM)
such as the well known expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977) and other variational inference approaches (Liu and Ihler 2013) for solving
shortest path based decision making (SPDM) problems. We
also address the crucial issue of extracting the integral solution for SPDM problems from their LM-based continuous
solution. We propose an entropy-based penalty term that encourages deterministic solutions within the LM framework
and eliminates the need for ad-hoc approaches for rounding
the continuous solution. We show that the resulting entropyaugmented LM can be solved using the difference-of-convex
functions (DC) programming approach (Yuille and Rangarajan 2001). To summarize, our work introduces a promising
new framework which combines SPDM with probabilistic
inference, and opens the door to the application of rich inference and optimization-based techniques to solve SPDM
problems.

Abstract
We present a new perspective on the classical shortest
path routing (SPR) problem in graphs. We show that the
SPR problem can be recast to that of probabilistic inference in a mixture of simple Bayesian networks. Maximizing the likelihood in this mixture becomes equivalent to solving the SPR problem. We develop the well
known Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm for
the SPR problem that maximizes the likelihood, and
show that it does not get stuck in a locally optimal solution. Using the same probabilistic framework, we then
address an NP-Hard network design problem where the
goal is to repair a network of roads post some disaster within a ﬁxed budget such that the connectivity between a set of nodes is optimized. We show that our
likelihood maximization approach using the EM algorithm scales well for this problem taking the form of
message-passing among nodes of the graph, and provides signiﬁcantly better quality solutions than a standard mixed-integer programming solver.

1

Introduction

Recently, there is an increasing interest in solving sequential decision making problems under uncertainty, such
as Markov decision processes (MDPs), partially observable MDPs (POMDPs) and its multiagent variants using
the probabilistic inference based viewpoint (Toussaint and
Storkey 2006; Toussaint, Charlin, and Poupart 2008; Kumar and Zilberstein 2010; Ghosh, Kumar, and Varakantham 2015; Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2015). Our
approach for SPDM is different from such previous applications of the LM framework for planning. Most of the
previous planning-as-inference approaches work for inﬁnite
horizon problems with reward discounting, whereas in the
SPDM problem, there is no future cost discounting. Previous inference-based approaches do computation (in the
form of message-passing) on a time-indexed representation
of the problem to take into account the sequential nature of
(PO)MDP models (Toussaint, Charlin, and Poupart 2008).
However, explicitly taking into account the number of planning steps in SPDM problems would make the underlying
graph extremely large leading to computational intractability
as SPDM problems have indeﬁnite-horizon (i.e., the length
of the shortest path is not known a priori). The network ﬂow
constraints that arise in SPDM problems also require differ-

The shortest path routing (SPR) problem entails ﬁnding the
shortest path between two given vertices of the graph that
minimizes the total sum of weights of the involved edges
in the path (Dijkstra 1959; Cormen et al. 2001). Shortest
path based approaches have found several applications in
diverse ﬁelds such as transportation models (Pallottino and
Scutella 1998), telecommunication network design (Pioro et
al. 2002) and in ecology for analyzing landscape connectivity for conservation planning (Bunn, Urban, and Keitt 2012;
Minor and Urban 2008). The classical shortest path problem, which is tractable, is typically solved using dynamic
programming based approaches such as Dijkstra’s or Floyd–
Warshall’s algorithm (Cormen et al. 2001) and their variants.
In our work, we take a different approach by developing a novel graphical models based probabilistic perspective
on the SPR problem. Recently, there has been tremendous
progress in variational approaches for inference in graphical models (Yanover et al. 2006; Sontag et al. 2008; Sontag and Jaakkola 2007; Wainwright and Jordan 2008). Our
goal is to show how the SPR problem (more importantly, its
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3849

