Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Personalized Alert Agent for Optimal User Performance
Avraham Shvartzon1 , Amos Azaria2 , Sarit Kraus1 ,
Claudia V. Goldman3 , Joachim Meyer4 and Omer Tsimhoni3
1

Dept. of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel
Dept. of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
3
General Motors Advanced Technical Center, Herzliya 46725, Israel
4
Dept. of Industrial Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel
{shvarta,sarit}@cs.biu.ac.il, azariaa@cs.cmu.edu, {claudia.goldman, omer.tsimhoni}@gm.com, jmeyer@tau.ac.il
2

to perform a maintenance task (according to the user manual), people often either forget or procrastinate. 2. Nonoptimal recommendations: Occasionally it is not optimal
for the user to perform all maintenance tasks as required
by the manual. Performing maintenance for all devices according to their manual may be tedious and not cost effective. Users may actually beneﬁt, in terms of time and cost,
from performing maintenance less often than requested by
the manual. 3. Non-personalized recommendations: The instructions which appear in manuals are not personalized and
thus do not account for people who have different values of
time or different costs associated with performing maintenance and repairs. Therefore performing maintenance tasks
according to the manual may not be the optimal behavior for
a speciﬁc user.
In an attempt to increase people’s awareness to perform
maintenance, and solve the problem of procrastination and
forgetfulness, many devices include alert systems or reminders which recommend performing maintenance activities. For example, an air conditioning system may turn on
a warning light when it is recommended to change its ﬁlter. A car may have similar warning lights, which are set
to go on when an oil change or other periodic treatments
are recommended. There are also software programs which
alert users when a computer system has not been backed-up
for some time, recommending them to back-up their system.
Reminders and alerts have been shown to have a positive
impact on people’s tendency to perform a task (Barreau and
Nardi 1995).
We model the problem of providing maintenance alerts,
taking into account the fact that performing maintenance and
repairing malfunctions are both wealth and time consuming.
Inspired by the Bellman Equation, we solve the optimal policy for the user, i.e., the optimal timing for a user to perform
maintenance. It is important to note that in order to accurately capture the cost of time consuming actions, the model
must take into account the value of time for each user (or
user performance). Therefore, our solution depends on this
value of time, and thus the optimal performance time varies
from user to user and may change over time.
We present a simpliﬁed version of the spaceship game
(Shvartzon et al. 2015), which allows us to evaluate people’s
tendency to perform maintenance and repairs, with and without recommendations obtained from a maintenance alert

Abstract
Preventive maintenance is essential for the smooth operation
of any equipment. Still, people occasionally do not maintain their equipment adequately. Maintenance alert systems
attempt to remind people to perform maintenance. However,
most of these systems do not provide alerts at the optimal
timing, and nor do they take into account the time required
for maintenance or compute the optimal timing for a speciﬁc
user. We model the problem of maintenance performance,
assuming maintenance is time consuming. We solve the optimal policy for the user, i.e., the optimal timing for a user to
perform maintenance. This optimal strategy depends on the
value of user’s time, and thus it may vary from user to user
and may change over time. Based on the solved optimal strategy we present a personalized maintenance agent, which, depending on the value of user’s time, provides alerts to the user
when she should perform maintenance. In an experiment using a spaceship computer game, we show that receiving alerts
from the personalized alert agent signiﬁcantly improves user
performance.

Introduction
In our daily life we rely on various types of mechanical
equipment and electrical devices such as our computers,
cars or bicycles, smartphones, washing machines, dryers,
heating and air conditioning systems and so on. These devices are very important to us, but they tend to malfunction occasionally, which can greatly disrupt our lives. Most
devices come with maintenance recommendations, which,
if followed, aim to decrease the probability and frequency
of such malfunctions. Unfortunately, performing maintenance actions is both costly and time consuming. Therefore many people fail to perform these maintenance actions
in a timely manner, and consequently they suffer the consequences, when necessary devices suddenly malfunction (occasionally when they are most needed).
This non-optimal behavior with regards to performing
maintenance may be attributed to the following reasons: 1.
Procrastination and forgetfulness: People are known to forget and procrastinate, especially in regard to tasks for which
the consequences are not immediately evident (Ariely and
Wertenbroch 2002; Weber 2006). Therefore, when it is time
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

857

