Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Social Role-Aware Emotion Contagion
in Image Social Networks
Yang Yang, Jia Jia, Boya Wu, and Jie Tang
sherlockbourne@gmail.com, jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,
stella.1991@163.com, jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Tsinghua University, China
son or group, which was previously studied by psychologists
through interviews with small groups of participants. For example, Fowler and Christakis (Fowler, Christakis, and others 2008) presented the theory of three degree of inﬂuence.
They ﬁnd that when one feels happy, her/his friends will
have a higher probability than chance to become happy. Existing research on Facebook also has demonstrated that emotion contagion does occur via text-based computer-mediated
communication (Guillory et al. 2011). Comparing with text,
image is a more subjective and ambiguous media for people
to communicate. Besides text-based communications, will
emotion contagion occur in image social networks? This is
the ﬁrst question we aim to justify in this work.
Moreover, researchers ﬁnd that users occupying different
positions in the social network play very different roles when
spreading information (Yang et al. 2015). For example, 1%
of users acting as opinion leaders (Page et al. 1999), who
are taking central positions within communities, post 50%
of URLs on Twitter (Wu et al. 2011). In the meantime, 1%
of users serving the role of structural hole spanners, who
are bridges between otherwise disconnected communities in
a network (Burt 2009), control 25% of information diffusion (Lou and Tang 2013). Comparing with propagating a
piece of information, will these users have different patterns
when propagating emotional status? This is the second question we aim to answer.
Recently, the problem of emotional status inference has
attracted considerable research effort. For example, (Yang et
al. 2014) studied the problem of inferring emotions from images by jointly modeling images posted by users and comments added by their friends. The problem was also studied
in mobile social networks, using users’ attributes like posted
blogs, locations and calling logs to infer their emotional
status (Tang et al. 2012). In the meantime, a public report
on Facebook data suggests that images drive event engagement 100 times faster (e.g., clicking “like” or adding comment) than text (Wang et al. 2015). However, these methods
treat each individual independently and ignore the correlations/inﬂuence among them. How to better infer the emotional status of users in social networks by considering emotion contagion, or more precisely, the social-role aware emotion contagion, is our ﬁnal goal in this work.
In this paper, to answer the three questions above, we
conduct several analysis and experiments by employing a

Abstract
Psychological theories suggest that emotion represents the
state of mind and instinctive responses of one’s cognitive system (Cannon 1927). Emotions are a complex state of feeling
that results in physical and psychological changes that inﬂuence our behavior. In this paper, we study an interesting problem of emotion contagion in social networks. In particular,
by employing an image social network (Flickr) as the basis
of our study, we try to unveil how users’ emotional statuses
inﬂuence each other and how users’ positions in the social
network affect their inﬂuential strength on emotion. We develop a probabilistic framework to formalize the problem into
a role-aware contagion model. The model is able to predict
users’ emotional statuses based on their historical emotional
statuses and social structures. Experiments on a large Flickr
dataset show that the proposed model signiﬁcantly outperforms (+31% in terms of F1-score) several alternative methods in predicting users’ emotional status. We also discover
several intriguing phenomena. For example, the probability
that a user feels happy is roughly linear to the number of
friends who are also happy; but taking a closer look, the
happiness probability is superlinear to the number of happy
friends who act as opinion leaders (Page et al. 1999) in the
network and sublinear in the number of happy friends who
span structural holes (Burt 2001). This offers a new opportunity to understand the underlying mechanism of emotional
contagion in online social networks.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of online social networks such
as Facebook1 , Twitter2 , and Flickr3 , it becomes easier for
people to connect with each other and share life experiences
by posting messages online. In the meantime, statistics show
that 10% of the tweets on Twitter contain an emotion icon.
Thus an interesting question here is: will one’s emotional
status inﬂuence others around them? For instance, when you
feel happy, will the happiness spread through your social
network?
Emotion contagion is a process in which a person or
group inﬂuences the emotions or behavior of another perc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://facebook.com
2
http://twitter.com
3
http://ﬂickr.com

65

