Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Energy- and Cost-Efﬁcient Pumping Station Control
Timon V. Kanters

Frans A. Oliehoek

Michael Kaisers

Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam
tvkanters@tvkdevelopment.com

Informatics Institute, Univ. of Amsterdam
Dept. of CS, University of Liverpool
fao@liverpool.ac.uk

Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
michael.kaisers@cwi.nl

Stan R. van den Bosch

Joep Grispen

Jeroen Hermans

Nelen & Schuurmans
stan.vandenbosch@nelen-schuurmans.nl

Nelen & Schuurmans
joep.grispen@nelen-schuurmans.nl

HH Hollands Noorderkwartier
j.hermans@hhnk.nl

of maintaining desired water levels in the future; operation
of pumping stations is energy intensive and, with the advent of more renewable energy sources such as wind and
solar, the amount of available energy and thus its price is expected to vary more (Würzburg, Labandeira, and Linares
2013). As with other applications that rely greatly upon
energy availability (De Nijs, Spaan, and De Weerdt 2015;
Rogers, Ramchurn, and Jennings 2012), controlling pumping stations without taking the availability into account will
become very expensive and challenging. On the other hand,
this yields an opportunity: optimising when to pump can save
costs. Moreover, better scheduling may lead to reduced peak
load and thus a positive effect on the entire energy network
by reducing the amount of additional energy required to be
generated (Ketter, Peters, and Collins 2013).
While there has been considerable research into the conceptually related topic of controllers for irrigation networks
(Cantoni et al. 2007), these networks rely on gravity rather
than pumps, meaning that the energy efﬁciency question is
much less pressing in this domain. In this paper, we present
an initial investigation into whether AI planning techniques
can be used to improve coordination and energy use in pumping station control. In particular, we present a detailed yet
lightweight simulation of an existing polder system in The
Netherlands, and discuss how a state-of-the-art AI planning
technique, UCT (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006), can be applied to it. We validate the proposed simulation model by
comparing it with more detailed industrial models, discuss
domain-speciﬁc modiﬁcations of UCT, and report on an empirical evaluation that demonstrates that the resulting technique has the potential to signiﬁcantly reduce costs when
compared to the solutions currently used in practice.

Abstract
With renewable energy becoming more common, energy
prices ﬂuctuate more depending on environmental factors such
as the weather. Consuming energy without taking volatile
prices into consideration can not only become expensive,
but may also increase the peak load, which requires energy
providers to generate additional energy using less environmentfriendly methods. In the Netherlands, pumping stations that
maintain the water levels of polder canals are large energy
consumers, but the controller software currently used in the industry does not take real-time energy availability into account.
We investigate if existing AI planning techniques have the potential to improve upon the current solutions. In particular, we
propose a light weight but realistic simulator and investigate
if an online planning method (UCT) can utilise this simulator to improve the cost-efﬁciency of pumping station control
policies. An empirical comparison with the current control
algorithms indicates that substantial cost, and thus peak load,
reduction can be attained.

Introduction
The Netherlands contains many areas that lie below sea level.
To prevent these areas, called polders, from ﬂooding, they
are surrounded by dikes and allow their water levels to be
controlled. This is done through mechanical devices such
as windmills or, nowadays usually, pumping stations. When
rain falls and the water levels in the polders rise too high, the
water is pumped out into canals that act as a drainage system.
The operation of the pumps in these systems falls under the
responsibility of water boards and has evolved from manual
control to the use of automatic controllers.
The design of pumping station controllers can be complex due to the need to reason about probabilities of rainfall
and energy prices, and the way that the actions of different
pumping stations will interact. While current state-of-theart controllers of our industrial partner, Nelen & Schuurmans (N&S), do reason about projected amounts of rain,
they do not explicitly consider the interaction of actions
taken at different pumping stations, nor do they reason about
energy prices and their uncertainty. This latter point is expected to be particularly problematic for the affordability

The Problem Domain
The pumping station control problem is a sequential decision
problem under uncertainty. The main difﬁculty is the requirement to coordinate between multiple pumping stations, while
taking into account the uncertainty of how circumstances
(such as rain and energy prices) will develop. In this paper,
we focus on the polder system called Vereenigde Raaksmaatsen Niedorperkoggeboezem (VRNK) (Figure 1), which is located in The Netherlands and administered by the water board

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3842

