Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Completeness of Best-First Search Variants
That Use Random Exploration
Richard Valenzano

Fan Xie

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
rvalenzano@cs.toronto.edu

University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
fxie2@ualberta.ca

Abstract
While suboptimal best-ﬁrst search algorithms like Greedy
Best-First Search are frequently used when building automated planning systems, their greedy nature can make them
susceptible to being easily misled by ﬂawed heuristics. This
weakness has motivated the development of best-ﬁrst search
variants like -greedy node selection, type-based exploration,
and diverse best-ﬁrst search, which all use random exploration to mitigate the impact of heuristic error. In this paper,
we provide a theoretical justiﬁcation for this increased robustness by formally analyzing how these algorithms behave on
inﬁnite graphs. In particular, we show that when using these
approaches on any inﬁnite graph, the probability of not ﬁnding a solution can be made arbitrarily small given enough
time. This result is shown to hold for a class of algorithms
that includes the three mentioned above, regardless of how
misleading the heuristic is.

1

(a) Problem graph for GBFS.

(b) As a subgraph.

Figure 1: Graphs demonstrating the weaknesses of GBFS.

Introduction

search in the right direction. For example, consider the more
representative graph shown in Figure 1b in which the initial
node is u and the graph in Figure 1a appears as a subproblem. In this new graph, the heuristic provides imperfect, but
useful guidance along the path from u to v. As such, the
greediness of GBFS will get the search near the goal node
much more quickly than a less greedy algorithm such as A∗
or breadth-ﬁrst search. It is only when the search reaches v
that the progress of GBFS will “stall” because it must exhaustively search the plateau under v.
Several recent approaches have augmented GBFS with
random exploration with the aim of maintaining the beneﬁts of greediness, while also making the algorithm more
robust to heuristic error. These techniques work by encouraging the search to occasionally ignore the advice of the
heuristic. For example, consider -greedy node selection
(Valenzano et al. 2014). On every iteration of a GBFS that
uses this technique, the algorithm will expand the node with
the lowest heuristic value with probability (1 − ), where 
is a parameter such that 0 ≤  ≤ 1. Otherwise, a node is
selected for expansion uniformly at random from amongst
those in the open list. Because the resulting algorithm is still
greedy for a fraction (1 − ) of the time, the search will
still beneﬁt from the value of greediness and quickly pass
through areas of the state-space — like from u to v in Figure
1b – in which the heuristic provides useful guidance. How-

Greedy best-ﬁrst search (GBFS) (Doran and Michie 1966)
is a popular suboptimal search algorithm that is often used
in planning systems. GBFS takes a greedy approach to explore a state-space as it always prioritizes the node with the
lowest heuristic value without any consideration of the cost
to get to that node. While this greedy approach can be effective in practice, it can also make GBFS susceptible to being
misled by an arbitrary amount if the heuristic is wrong. For
example, consider the task of ﬁnding a path from node v
to node g in the graph shown in Figure 1a. In this graph,
all nodes in the left subtree below v down to some depth d
have a heuristic value of 4. Because GBFS considers only
the heuristic when evaluating nodes, the algorithm must exhaustively search the entire subtree (or heuristic plateau)
before expanding n and ﬁnding g. The more misleading the
heuristic (ie. the larger the plateau), the longer it will take
to solve this problem. For example, if d = 10, GBFS will
expand a total of 1, 024 nodes before n, while it will need to
expand a million nodes in the plateau if d = 20.
However, heuristics are not typically wrong everywhere
in a given state-space, and the greediness of GBFS often allows the algorithm to quickly progress through large areas
of the problem in which the heuristic generally guides the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

784

