Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Intelligent Habitat Restoration Under Uncertainty
Tommaso Urli,1 Jana Brotánková,2 Philip Kilby,1 and Pascal Van Hentenryck1
1

Optimisation Research Group, NICTA Canberra Research Lab,
7 London Circuit, Canberra, 2601 ACT, Australia
2
ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, James Cook University,
1 James Cook Drive, Townsville, 4811 QLD, Australia

evolve over time according to complex laws depending on
natural growth rates, carrying capacity of habitats, threat factors, etc. The variety of different species, the complexity of
their interactions, and the ever stringent budget limitations,
make it very difﬁcult for a human decision maker to design
an plan for the habitat restoration operations which takes
into account all of the available data. As a consequence, conservation managers are calling for the development of intelligent decision support systems, aimed at assisting them in
the planning of these activities. The ordering of actions is
also important, as their efﬁcacy depends on the population
levels at the location and time at which they are applied.
This research project is instigated by, and conducted in
cooperation with, two agencies: the Queensland Parks and
Wildlife Service and the Western Australian Department of
Parks and Wildlife. The main aim of the study is to replace
ad-hoc decision making with a more disciplined and defensible approach. It also serves as a tool to investigate and show
the effect of various budgeting scenarios on the conservation objectives. The focus of protection were islands off the
coast of Australia, in Queensland (in the Southern part of
the Great Barrier Reef) and Western Australia (near the Pilbara region). Islands are, in many ways, ideal locations for
restoration activities. They are often remote, and so access
to the areas can be restricted. Also, they offer the possibility
of completely eradicating a threat with a reduced probability of re-introduction. This gives long-term beneﬁts to the
protected features. Finally, islands are often less attractive
locations for development, and hence the economic impact
of restoration activities is rather limited.
The main contributions of this paper are: i) a formulation of the habitat restoration planning (HRP) as a constrained optimisation problem, featuring a population dynamics model based on real-world data being currently
elicited by the conservation managers involved in this
project, ii) a formal proof of complexity, showing that the
HRP problem belongs to the NP class, iii) a constraint programming (CP) model built upon robust optimisation principles, and iv) a large neighbourhood search (LNS) scheme
to efﬁciently ﬁnd solutions to the problem.

Abstract
Conservation is an ethic of sustainable use of natural
resources which focuses on the preservation of biodiversity, i.e., the degree of variation of life. Conservation
planning seeks to reach this goal by means of deliberate actions, aimed at the protection (or restoration) of
biodiversity features. In this paper we present an intelligent system to assist conservation managers in planning habitat restoration actions, with focus on the activities to be carried out in the islands of the Great Barrier Reef (QLD) and the Pilbara (WA) regions of Australia. In particular, we propose a constrained optimisation formulation of the habitat restoration planning
(HRP) problem, capturing aspects such as population
dynamics and uncertainty. We show that the HRP is NPhard, and develop a constraint programming (CP) model
and a large neighbourhood search (LNS) procedure to
generate activity plans under budgeting constraints in a
reasonable amount of time.

Introduction
Conservation planning has always relied on the establishment of natural reserves (spatial prioritisation) as the principal means of enacting conservation. However, the clash
with the economic interests in the areas to be preserved,
and the increasing scarcity of the latter, are rendering this
practice more and more difﬁcult to justify. For this reason,
habitat restoration and biodiversity offsetting practices have
recently gained popularity (Maron et al. 2012) among conservation managers. These approaches try to balance out the
effects of development activities by promoting environmental recovery in other areas, alleviating at least partially the
negative effects of economic development on biodiversity.
Habitat restoration consists of selecting actions to perform
at particular locations in order to reduce speciﬁc threats to
the biodiversity features. For instance, poison baits may be
placed to reduce the number of cats predating on migratory
birds, or herbicide may be sprayed to reduce the occurrence
of a speciﬁc weed and thus encourage the return of a particular type of grassland. One of the main sources of complexity, when making conservation management decisions in this
context, is represented by population dynamics. Populations

Related work

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Conservation planning has been traditionally a manual task
carried out by conservation managers. In the last three

3908

