Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Increasing Nogoods in Restart-Based Search∗
Jimmy H. M. Lee,† Christian Schulte,‡ and Zichen Zhu†
†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
{jlee,zzhu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
‡
School of ICT, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
cschulte@kth.se

The incNGs global constraint ﬁltering algorithm (Lee and
Zhu 2014) supports dynamic addition of nogoods to the increasing nogoods set which is required for dynamic symmetry breaking. There is no such need for nogoods computed from restarts. To trade pruning power for efﬁciency,
a lightweight version of the incNGs global constraint ﬁltering algorithm is proposed. Without the requirement to
be dynamic for restarts, this ﬁltering algorithm further utilizes dynamic subscriptions (dynamic event sets (Schulte
and Stuckey 2008), also known as dynamic triggers (Gent,
Jefferson, and Miguel 2006)), an adaptation of watched literals (Moskewicz et al. 2001), to improve efﬁciency. Dynamic subscriptions decrease unnecessary activations of the
ﬁltering algorithm during constraint propagation. While the
lightweight version requires fewer subscriptions, it has the
same consistency level as GAC on each nogood.
Lecoutre et al. (2007) also propose minimal reduced nldnogoods with respect to an inference operator. Minimal reduced nld-nogoods are shorter and hence offer more propagation. Unfortunately, minimal reduced nld-nogoods generated from a restart are not increasing. We therefore introduce an efﬁcient approximation to reduced-nld nogood minimization such that all shortened reduced nld-nogoods from
the same restart are a set of increasing nogoods. Experimental evaluation demonstrates the advantage of our global constraint ﬁltering algorithm and shortening method.

Abstract
Restarts are an important technique to make search more robust. This paper is concerned with how to maintain and propagate nogoods recorded from restarts efﬁciently. It builds on
reduced nld-nogoods introduced for restarts and increasing
nogoods introduced for symmetry breaking. The paper shows
that reduced nld-nogoods extracted from a single restart are
in fact increasing, which can thus beneﬁt from the efﬁcient
propagation algorithm of the incNGs global constraint. We
present a lighter weight ﬁltering algorithm for incNGs in the
context of restart-based search using dynamic event sets (dynamic subscriptions). We show formally that the lightweight
version enforces GAC on each nogood while reducing the
number of subscribed decisions. The paper also introduces
an efﬁcient approximation to nogood minimization such that
all shortened reduced nld-nogoods from the same restart are
also increasing and can be propagated with the new ﬁltering
algorithm. Experimental results conﬁrm that our lightweight
ﬁltering algorithm and approximated nogood minimization
successfully trade a slight loss in pruning for considerably
better efﬁciency, and hence compare favorably against existing state-of-the-art techniques.

Introduction
Restarts are an important technique to make search more robust (Dechter 1990; Frost and Dechter 1994; Schiex and
Verfaillie 1994). The beneﬁt of restarts can be considerably enhanced by recording nogoods generated at the end
of each search run (restart point) and propagating them in
future search runs to avoid repeating erroneous search decisions. Lecoutre et al. (2007) extract a set of reduced nldnogoods at each restart point and show how such a set of
reduced nld-nogoods can be propagated using watched literals (Moskewicz et al. 2001). However, such reduced nldnogoods are abundant and weak in constraint propagation.
In this paper we exploit the observation that reduced nldnogoods collected from a restart are in fact increasing, allowing all such nogoods to be processed by one incNGs
global constraint (Lee and Zhu 2014). We also prove that
the structure of a set of increasing nogoods can be obtained
from a restart-based search engine for free.

Background
A constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) P is a tuple
(X, D, C) where X is a ﬁnite set of variables, D is a ﬁnite set of domains such that each x ∈ X has a domain
D(x) and C is a set of constraints, each is a subset of the
Cartesian product D(xi1 ) × · · · × D(xik ) of the domains
of the involved variables (scope). A constraint is generalized arc consistent (GAC) iff when a variable in the scope of
a constraint is assigned any value in its domain, there exist
compatible values (called supports) in the domains of all the
other variables in the scope of the constraint. A CSP is GAC
iff every constraint is GAC. An assignment assigns a value v
to a variable x. A full assignment is a set of assignments, one
for each variable in X. A solution to P is a full assignment
that satisﬁes every constraint in C.
A decision can be either +ve or -ve. A +ve decision is an
equality constraint x = v and a -ve decision has the form

∗
This research has been supported by the grant CUHK413713
from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong SAR.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3426

