Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Stage Multi-Task Learning with Reduced Rank
1

2

Lei Han1 and Yu Zhang2∗

Department of Statistics, Rutgers University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
1
lhan@stat.rutgers.edu, leihan.cs@gmail.com; 2 yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com

Luo 2008), speech recognition (Parameswaran and Weinberger 2010), age estimation (Zhang and Yeung 2010b), disease progression predication (Zhou et al. 2011), and so on.
One common assumption in MTL is that all the learning
tasks share some common structure including, for example, hidden units in neural networks, probabilistic priors in
Bayesian model (Zhang, Ghahramani, and Yang 2005; Yu,
Tresp, and Schwaighofer 2005), and feature representations
(Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2008; Liu, Ji, and Ye 2009;
Zhang, Yeung, and Xu 2010).
In many real-world MTL problems, challenge arises with
high-dimensional data. To address this issue, several approaches (Chen, Zhou, and Ye 2011; Chen, Liu, and Ye
2012) have been proposed to learn the low-rank structure
on the weight matrix which stores the model parameters of
all tasks. Then the objective functions are usually formulated by minimizing the empirical loss as well as the rank of
the weight matrix, which is also known as the reduced rank
regression problem (Reinsel and Velu 1998) if the learning tasks solve regression problems. Unfortunately, the rank
minimization problem is NP-hard due to the combinatorial
nature of the rank function. A commonly used approach to
overcome the computational infeasibility is to resort to minimizing the trace norm, the sum of the singular values of a
matrix, which is shown as the tightest convex lower bound
of the rank function (Recht, Fazel, and Parrilo 2010). As a
consequence, the trace norm regularization has been widely
used in MTL literature and empirical results have shown
that the trace norm regularization leads to improved performance.
For a matrix, its rank is determined by the number of its
singular values being 0. So in order to obtain low-rank matrices, the small singular values should be penalized to approach zero but the large ones can take any positive value.
In other words, to achieve low-rank, only part of the singular values but not all of them should be penalized. Unfortunately, all the existing MTL methods to seek for the lowrank structure use the trace norm regularization to penalize
all the singular values of the weight matrix simultaneously,
and thus the estimation may not recover the underlying lowrank structure well, leading to the suboptimal performance.
Recently, the capped norms (Zhang 2009; 2010; 2011;
Gong, Ye, and Zhang 2012; Sun, Xiang, and Ye 2013)
have gained the popularity since those norms are capable

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) seeks to improve the generalization performance by sharing information among multiple
tasks. Many existing MTL approaches aim to learn the lowrank structure on the weight matrix, which stores the model
parameters of all tasks, to achieve task sharing, and as a consequence the trace norm regularization is widely used in the
MTL literature. A major limitation of these approaches based
on trace norm regularization is that all the singular values
of the weight matrix are penalized simultaneously, leading
to impaired estimation on recovering the larger singular values in the weight matrix. To address the issue, we propose a
Reduced rAnk MUlti-Stage multi-tAsk learning (RAMUSA)
method based on the recently proposed capped norms. Different from existing trace-norm-based MTL approaches which
minimize the sum of all the singular values, the RAMUSA
method uses a capped trace norm regularizer to minimize
only the singular values smaller than some threshold. Due to
the non-convexity of the capped trace norm, we develop a
simple but well guaranteed multi-stage algorithm to learn the
weight matrix iteratively. We theoretically prove that the estimation error at each stage in the proposed algorithm shrinks
and ﬁnally achieves a lower upper-bound as the number of
stages becomes large enough. Empirical studies on synthetic
and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
RAMUSA method in comparison with the state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana 1997) seeks to improve
the generalization performance of multiple learning tasks
by sharing common information among those tasks. Many
MTL methods have been proposed by learning common
feature representations (Caruana 1997; Argyriou, Evgeniou,
and Pontil 2008; Liu, Ji, and Ye 2009; Zhang, Yeung, and Xu
2010), learning task groups (Han and Zhang 2015a), learning task relations (Zhang and Yeung 2010a; Zhang 2013;
Zhang and Yeung 2014), utilizing or learning tree structure
among tasks (Han et al. 2014; Han and Zhang 2015b), and
so on. MTL has been successfully applied to a wide range
of applications including medical risk evaluation (Caruana,
Baluja, and Mitchell 1996), image annotation (Fan, Gao, and
∗

Both authors contributed equally.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1638

