Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

PEAK: Pyramid Evaluation via Automated Knowledge Extraction
Qian Yang

Rebecca J. Passonneau

Gerard de Melo

IIIS, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
laraqianyang@gmail.com

CCLS, Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
becky@ccls.columbia.edu

IIIS, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
gdm@demelo.org

ROUGE (Lin and Hovy 2004) is widely used to assess
content selection of automated summarizers (Nenkova and
McKeown 2011; Gupta and Lehal 2007) because it is fully
automated, easy to use, and evaluation of sets of summaries
correlates well with human scores. It is often supplemented
with pyramid scores due to their greater reliability and better
diagnostic properties (Nenkova and McKeown 2011). Since
human-written summaries typically share some content, but
are unlikely to have identical content, both methods compare
each assessed summary to a set of multiple reference summaries written by humans. ROUGE compares n-grams from
the target summaries to the reference summaries and computes a recall measure. It cannot capture similarity of meaning when there is little lexical overlap, and cannot recognize
when lexical overlap does not correspond to similar meaning. The pyramid method not only avoids these problems,
but also distinguishes levels of importance among content
through a wisdom-of-the-crowd method that is inherently
semantic and pragmatic. When assessing individual summaries, ROUGE scores are not accurate (Louis and Nenkova
2009), while pyramid scores provide accurate and diagnostically valuable scores. Application of the method has, however, largely depended on manual annotation.
The pyramid method relies on an emergent importance
weighting. Annotators identify content that recurs across a
set of human-written reference summaries and create clusters of similar phrases to represent Summary Content Units
(SCU). Each SCU must have no more than one contribution from each reference summary.1 Each SCU, which is
given a mnemonic label by the annotators, then has a weight
corresponding to the number of contributing reference summaries to represent the relative importance of the content.
Note that assigning differential importance to source content has often been used in studies of student summaries as a
reading or writing intervention (Brown and Day 1983). The
method captures alternate forms that express the same meaning, which can be as various as a nominalization versus a
clause, as in “the condensation of water vapor into droplets”
versus “the water vapor condenses into water drops,” as well
as lexical variation, as in “Indian sovereignty allows them to
run casinos” versus “Reservations can set up casinos.” The

Abstract
Evaluating the selection of content in a summary is important both for human-written summaries, which can be a useful
pedagogical tool for reading and writing skills, and machinegenerated summaries, which are increasingly being deployed
in information management. The pyramid method assesses a
summary by aggregating content units from the summaries
of a wise crowd (a form of crowdsourcing). It has proven
highly reliable but has largely depended on manual annotation. We propose PEAK, the ﬁrst method to automatically
assess summary content using the pyramid method that also
generates the pyramid content models. PEAK relies on open
information extraction and graph algorithms. The resulting
scores correlate well with manually derived pyramid scores
on both human and machine summaries, opening up the possibility of wide-spread use in numerous applications.

1

Introduction

The capability to summarize one or more documents is a
vital skill for people, and a signiﬁcant research goal in natural language processing (NLP). Summarization is important in education, as it has been found to be one of the
best instruction strategies to improve students’ reading and
writing skills (Graham and Perin 2007). The importance of
automated summarization is reﬂected in the rate of papers
on summarization at four major NLP conferences (ACL,
EACL, EMNLP and NAACL) over the past six years, which
has consistently been around 5% of the total. Reliable assessment of summaries is therefore beneﬁcial both for people learning to summarize, and for progress in automated
summarization methods. A deﬁning characteristic of a summary is that it should condense the source text, retain important information, and avoid redundancy. Thus content assessment is critical. This paper presents a method to automate a pre-existing summary content assessment technique called the Pyramid method (Nenkova, Passonneau,
and McKeown 2007), that was developed to evaluate abstractive summarization (where the source text is rewritten),
that has often been used to evaluate extractive summarizers
(where source sentences are selected verbatim), and that has
been applied to student summaries.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Redundant information, which rarely appears in reference
summaries, is ignored.

2673

