Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Online Spatio-Temporal Matching in Stochastic and Dynamic Domains
Meghna Lowalekar, Pradeep Varakantham, Patrick Jaillet†
†

School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
meghnal.2015@phdis.smu.edu.sg, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu

In this paper, we are speciﬁcally interested in considering
such dependence (ex: assignment for a taxi in second round
is dependent on the assignment in ﬁrst round) in matching
across multiple steps in an online fashion in domains where
(a) customer demand is uncertain and time dependent, with
data available about past customer demand; (b) problems are
at a societal scale with thousands of customers and services
with a need to make online decisions; and (c) there is a need
to optimize revenue or quality of service (ex: time to pick up
customers or time to delivery);
Given the challenging nature of the problems (stochasticity, dynamism, societal scale, online, multi-step), most existing work on relevant problems (described in Section 2)
has focussed on myopic algorithms like bipartite matching,
greedy and randomised ranking. While these approaches
have good competitive ratios, they have obvious inefﬁciencies due to myopic nature of matching. To address these,
there has been research on two-stage stochastic models that
consider samples of expected demand for the next stage.
However, these approaches have been limited to small scale
problems and in restricted settings. In this work, we also employ two-stage stochastic models to represent future uncertain and time dependent customer demand. Speciﬁcally, we
make the following key contributions:
(1) After formalizing the online spatio-temporal matching
problem, we ﬁrst provide a two stage stochastic optimization formulation, which considers expected future customer
demand (typically obtained from historial data) for ﬁnding
assignment of taxis to customers.
(2) Given the large scale problems of interest, we provide
a decomposition of the above formulation to improve parallelism in handling expected future demand.
(3) Apart from considering randomly generated problems,
we also evaluated our approach on datasets of two major taxi
companies. We compare against myopic algorithms (typically employed by standard taxi matching applications) such
as greedy and one step bipartite optimal assignment. We
show that two-stage problems can be solved in times that
are competitive to the myopic approaches, while providing
signiﬁcantly better solutions.

Abstract
Spatio-temporal matching of services to customers online is
a problem that arises on a large scale in many domains associated with shared transportation (ex: taxis, ride sharing, super shuttles, etc.) and delivery services (ex: food, equipment,
clothing, home fuel, etc.). A key characteristic of these problems is that matching of services to customers in one round
has a direct impact on the matching of services to customers
in the next round. For instance, in the case of taxis, in the second round taxis can only pick up customers closer to the drop
off point of the customer from the ﬁrst round of matching.
Traditionally, greedy myopic approaches have been adopted
to address such large scale online matching problems. While
they provide solutions in a scalable manner, due to their myopic nature the quality of matching obtained can be improved
signiﬁcantly (demonstrated in our experimental results). In
this paper, we present a two stage stochastic optimization formulation to consider expected future demand. We then provide multiple enhancements to solve large scale problems
more effectively and efﬁciently. Finally, we demonstrate the
signiﬁcant improvement provided by our techniques over myopic approaches on two real world taxi data sets.

1

Introduction

In shared transportation (Agatz et al. 2011; Ghosh et al.
2015; Santos and Xavier 2013) which includes taxis, ride
sharing, super shuttles, etc., customers have to be assigned to
services in an online fashion to optimize revenue or quality
of service. Also in case of emergency services (Saisubramanian, Varakantham, and Lau 2015) such as ambulances, ﬁre
trucks, etc. and delivery services (Yang, Jaillet, and Mahmassani 2004; Ritzinger, Puchinger, and Hartl 2015) involving pickup and delivery of food, equipment, clothing, home
fuel etc., online matching of customers to services is essential. Speciﬁcally, in the case of taxis, the wide usage of applications such as Uber, Lyft, etc. is a testament to the importance of doing such matching. In these applications, a set
of available taxis are matched to customers that are looking
for taxis. An aspect that is typically not considered in such
applications and most existing work is that, after taking the
matched customer to their destination location, the taxi will
be available for another round of assignment to customers
around the destination location.

2

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

Most existing relevant research in online matching has focussed on online bipartite matching (Karp, Vazirani, and

3271

