Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Closed-Form Gibbs Sampling for Graphical Models with Algebraic Constraints
Hadi Mohasel Afshar

Scott Sanner

Christfried Webers

Research School of Computer Science
Australian National University
Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia
hadi.afshar@anu.edu.au

School of EE & Computer Science
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 973331, USA
scott.sanner@oregonstate.edu

National ICT Australia (NICTA)
Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia
christfried.webers
@nicta.com.au

Abstract
Probabilistic inference in many real-world problems requires
graphical models with deterministic algebraic constraints between random variables (e.g., Newtonian mechanics, Pascal’s law, Ohm’s law) that are known to be problematic for
many inference methods such as Monte Carlo sampling. Fortunately, when such constraints are invertible, the model can
be collapsed and the constraints eliminated through the wellknown Jacobian-based change of variables. As our ﬁrst contribution in this work, we show that a much broader class of
algebraic constraints can be collapsed by leveraging the properties of a Dirac delta model of deterministic constraints. Unfortunately, the collapsing process can lead to highly piecewise densities that pose challenges for existing probabilistic inference tools. Thus, our second contribution to address
these challenges is to present a variation of Gibbs sampling
that efﬁciently samples from these piecewise densities. The
key insight to achieve this is to introduce a class of functions
that (1) is sufﬁciently rich to approximate arbitrary models up
to arbitrary precision, (2) is closed under dimension reduction (collapsing) for models with (non)linear algebraic constraints and (3) always permits one analytical integral sufﬁcient to automatically derive closed-form conditionals for
Gibbs sampling. Experiments demonstrate the proposed sampler converges at least an order of magnitude faster than existing Monte Carlo samplers.

P1

In such problems, the posterior densities only have support on (non)linear sub-manifolds of the parameter space
(e.g. the manifold induced by (3) in the collision model).
Efﬁcient inference on such models is challenging (Pennec 2006). To evade these complications, state-of-the-art
MCMC based probabilistic inference tools suggest adding
noise to the deterministic constraints.1 Unfortunately, this
strategy can be problematic: if the added noise is large then
the approximation bounds can be arbitrarily large and if it is
small, the sampling mixing rate can be arbitrarily slow (Li,
Ramsundar, and Russell 2013; Chin and Cooper 1987).
The other potential solution is to reduce the dimensionality of the posterior via Jacobian-based variable transformations. Measure theoretic subtleties aside, such transformations are only applicable when the deterministic constraint is invertible with respect to at least one variable. Using the properties of the Dirac delta, our ﬁrst contribution
is to propose a dimension reduction (or collapsing) method
that is more general in the sense that the constraint is not
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The state-of-the-art probabilistic programming languages, disallow deterministic continuous random variables be observed. For
instance, in BUGS (Lunn et al. 2009), logical nodes cannot be
given data or initial values. In PyMC (Patil, Huard, and Fonnesbeck 2010) deterministic variables have no observed ﬂag. In Stan
(Stan Development Team 2014) if you try to assign an observation value to a deterministic variable, you will encounter an error
message: “attempt to assign variable in wrong block” while Anglican (Wood, van de Meent, and Mansinghka 2014) throws error “invalid-observe”, etc. Therefore, they cannot handle observed
constraints natively except by adding noise to the observation. E.g.
(in collision model) approximating Ptot = 3 with a normal distribution N (Ptot − 3, ση2 ) where the variance ση2 is the noise parameter.

(1)
(2)

Total momentum is observed to be 3.0 yielding constraints:
P1 = M1 V1 ,

P2 = M2 V2 ,

P2

Figure 1: Bayes net for the collision model. Shaded circles
correspond to random variables that are functions of other
variables.

Probabilistic inference in many real-world problems requires graphical models with deterministic algebraic constraints between random variables. Consider the following
running example from physics and the associated graphical
model of Figure 1:
Collision model. Masses M1 and M2 with velocities V1
and V2 collide to form a single mass (M1 + M2 ) with total
momentum Ptot = M1 V1 + M2 V2 (assuming that there is no
dissipation). Letting U(a, b) denote a uniform density with
support [a, b], the prior density of masses and velocities are:
p(M2 ) = U (0.1, 2.1)
p(V2 | V1 ) = U(−2, V1 )

M2

Ptot

Introduction

p(M1 ) = U(0.1, 2.1),
p(V1 ) = U(−2, 2),

V2

V1

M1

Ptot = P1 + P2 = 3.0 (3)

3287

