Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

College Towns, Vacation Spots, and Tech Hubs:
Using Geo-Social Media to Model and Compare Locations
Hancheng Ge, James Caverlee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University, USA, 77840
{hge,caverlee}@cse.tamu.edu

addition to marketing records that are created by companies
like Wal-Mart, Amazon, and Target.
In contrast, geo-social media offers a potentially low-cost,
scalable, and ﬁne-grained window into the spatio-temporal
activities of millions of people. Enabled by the widespread
adoption of GPS-enabled tagging of social media content
via smartphones and social media services (e.g., Facebook,
Twitter, Foursquare), these “footprints” open new possibilities for understanding the dynamics of human behavior and
the pulsation of social life from local to global levels. However, gleaning knowledge about human behaviors from geosocial media data is challenging as the data is usually unstructured and thematically diverse (Croitoru et al. 2013).
While we have recently witnessed many compelling new
studies to leverage large geo-spatial footprints to explore
dynamics of individuals or communities (Li et al. 2008;
Scellato et al. 2011; Yin et al. 2011), few studies focus on
exploring the dynamics of human behavior from the perspective of cities, which is a prototypical scenario of urban
computing (Zheng et al. 2014).
In this paper, our goal is to explore the viability of geosocial media to model, compare, and forecast the interestbased proﬁles of cities. Concretely, we explore the following questions: (1) how do we build interest-based proﬁles
of cities?; (2) are there coherent characteristics between
cities?; (3) which factors could be related to these interestbased proﬁles?; and (4) how can we predict the interestbased proﬁles of cities? To answer these questions, we propose a geo-located tweet-driven framework to model cities
by constructing city-based interest models over 14 highlevel interest categories (e.g., Sports, Technology, Politics).
Compared to prior work like ESRI’s Tapestry Segmentation
(ESRI 2014) (which breaks down US neighborhoods by socioeconomics and demographics) or efforts to segment regions of a city by human mobility (Yuan, Zheng, and Xie
2012), we focus on constructing interest models of cities
based solely on widespread GPS-tagged social media. These
interest models are important for multiple applications including: (i) proﬁling the revealed preferences of people in
a particular location for targeted social analytics; (ii) early
detection of shifting population interests, which can impact
urban planning; and (iii) new data-driven resources for social scientists to study evolving social structure and social
composition, among many others.

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the potential of geo-social
media to construct location-based interest proﬁles to
uncover the hidden relationships among disparate locations. Through an investigation of millions of geotagged Tweets, we construct a per-city interest model
based on fourteen high-level categories (e.g., technology, art, sports). These interest models support the discovery of related locations that are connected based on
these categorical perspectives (e.g., college towns or vacation spots) but perhaps not on the individual tweet
level. We then connect these city-based interest models to underlying demographic data. By building multivariate multiple linear regression (MMLR) and neural
network (NN) models we show how a location’s interest proﬁle may be estimated based purely on its demographics features.

Introduction
Urbanization in the past century has transformed the world.
Today, around 54% of the world’s population lives in urban areas, and projections estimate that by 2050 around twothirds of all people will live in cities (U.N. 2014). With this
growth, a key task for urban planners, economists, social scientists, and political entities is to understand the people who
live in these cities – for planning future development, building engaged communities, and so on.
Traditional approaches for collecting population data
have often relied on labor-intensive, expensive, and slow
collection methods. For example, the US census costs 13
billion dollars and provides in-depth data only every ten
years (Economist 2011). More frequent surveys have been
adopted in the past decade including the American Community Survey (in the US) and the National Household Survey
(in Canada); these surveys aim to collect data every year,
but only sample a few million households per year (Bureau 2014). In a separate direction, private corporations (and
some research institutions) have sought to collect and analyze proprietary datasets including cellphone call records
(Greenwald, MacAskill, and Ackerman 2013), search engine query logs (Boytsov, Dean, and Sercinoglu 2012), in
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

129

