Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning to Branch in Mixed Integer Programming
Elias B. Khalil1 , Pierre Le Bodic2 , Le Song1 , George Nemhauser2 , Bistra Dilkina1
1

School of Computational Science & Engineering
2
School of Industrial & Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
{ekhalil3, lebodic, song9, gn3, bdilkina6}@gatech.edu

Variable selection for branching is considered to be a
main component of modern MIP solvers (Linderoth and
Savelsbergh 1999; Achterberg and Wunderling 2013). As
part of the branch-and-bound algorithm for solving MIP
problems (Nemhauser and Wolsey 1988), nodes in a search
tree of partial assignments to variables must be expanded
into (two) child nodes by selecting one of the unassigned
variables and splitting its domain by adding additional constraints. Choosing good variables to branch on often leads to
a dramatic reduction in terms of the number of nodes needed
to solve an instance. In fact, a recent extensive computational study by researchers at IBM CPLEX, a leading commercial MIP solver, shows that using a naive variable selection strategy degrades performance by a factor of more than
8, compared to modern strategies (Achterberg and Wunderling 2013). However, in the same study, the authors note that
“the results show that some progress has been achieved in
branching variable selection since CPLEX 8.0 (2002 version), but certainly no break-through” (p. 458).
Traditional branching strategies fall into two main classes:
Strong Branching (SB) approaches exhaustively test variables at each node, and choose the best one with respect
to closing the gap between the best bound and the current
best feasible solution value. Achterberg (2009) shows that
SB can result in 65% fewer search tree nodes on average,
compared to the state-of-the-art “hybrid branching” strategy.
However, this comes at an increase of up to 44% in computation time, as more time is spent per node. On the other hand,
Pseudocost (PC) branching strategies are engineered to imitate SB using a fraction of the computational effort, typically
achieving a good trade-off between number of nodes and total time to solve a MIP. The design of such PC-based strategies has mostly been based on human intuition and extensive
engineering, requiring signiﬁcant manual tuning (initialization, statistical tests, tie-breaking, etc.). While that approach
is important and constructive, we depart from it and propose
to learn branching strategies directly from data.
We develop a novel framework for data-driven, on-theﬂy design of variable selection strategies. By leveraging research in supervised ranking, we aim to produce strategies
that gather the best of all properties: 1) using a small number
of search nodes, approaching the good performance of SB,
2) maintaining a low computation footprint as in PC, and 3)
selecting variables adaptively based on the properties of the

Abstract
The design of strategies for branching in Mixed Integer
Programming (MIP) is guided by cycles of parameter tuning and ofﬂine experimentation on an extremely heterogeneous testbed, using the average performance. Once devised,
these strategies (and their parameter settings) are essentially
input-agnostic. To address these issues, we propose a machine learning (ML) framework for variable branching in
MIP. Our method observes the decisions made by Strong
Branching (SB), a time-consuming strategy that produces
small search trees, collecting features that characterize the
candidate branching variables at each node of the tree. Based
on the collected data, we learn an easy-to-evaluate surrogate
function that mimics the SB strategy, by means of solving
a learning-to-rank problem, common in ML. The learned
ranking function is then used for branching. The learning is
instance-speciﬁc, and is performed on-the-ﬂy while executing
a branch-and-bound search to solve the instance. Experiments
on benchmark instances indicate that our method produces
signiﬁcantly smaller search trees than existing heuristics, and
is competitive with a state-of-the-art commercial solver.

Introduction
Recently, discrete optimization has been successfully leveraged to improve machine learning (ML) methodology (Roth
and Yih 2005; Bertsimas, King, and Mazumder 2015). We
will focus on the opposite direction of this fruitful crossfertilization. We explore ways to harness ML approaches
to improve the performance of branch-and-bound search for
Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MIP). ML techniques
have been successfully applied to a number of combinatorial search problems. For instance, UCT is a widely used
online learning algorithm for Monte Carlo tree search (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006), neural nets are used to combine
heuristics in single-agent search (Samadi, Felner, and Schaeffer 2008), and the EM algorithm is used for solving constraint satisfaction problems (Hsu et al. 2007). In the context of MIP, some recent works propose ML techniques
for constructing a portfolio of good parameter conﬁgurations for a MIP solver, and selecting the best conﬁguration
for a given instance (Hutter et al. 2009; Kadioglu et al. ;
Xu et al. 2011). Alvarez et al. propose an ML approach to
load balancing in parallel branch-and-bound for MIP (2015).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

724

