Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Combining Retrieval, Statistics, and Inference
to Answer Elementary Science Questions
Peter Clark, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot,
Ashish Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Turney
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
{peterc,orene,tushark,ashishs,oyvindt,petert}@allenai.org

Daniel Khashabi
Cognitive Computation Lab (CCG), Univ Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
khashab2@illinois.edu
Fourth graders are planning a roller-skate race. Which
surface would be the best for this race? (A) gravel (B)
sand (C) blacktop (D) grass
This question might be answered in several ways. There
may be a sentence on the Web that happens to state the answer explicitly (e.g., “Blacktop is a good surface for a rollerskating race”), and could be reliably retrieved to support the
correct answer (“blacktop”). Alternatively, corpus statistics
may reveal that “blacktop” is strongly associated with “roller
skating” and “race”, indicating that blacktop is the right answer. Finally, we might infer the answer from more general
knowledge, e.g., roller-skating requires a smooth surface, and
blacktop has a smooth surface, therefore blacktop is good for
roller-skating.
Similarly our system, called Aristo, solves non-diagram
multiple choice questions using ﬁve algorithms (“solvers”)
operating at different levels of structure. The combination
addresses some of the reported problems with the earlier
MLN systems. First, any system attempting reasoning over
text needs some fallback methods when reasoning fails. We
provide this using a baseline information retrieval (IR) solver.
Second, some simpler questions can be answered using just
statistical associations between questions and answer options,
but the MLN systems made no attempt to use that knowledge.
We address this using two solvers that exploit pointwise mutual information (PMI) and word embeddings (generating
features for an SVM) respectively. Third, for more complex
questions, we use a RULE solver that uses soft logical rules
extracted from text. We also include a solver that uses a structurally simpler knowledge representation (tables), applied
using integer linear programming (ILP). This provides an
additional reasoning method that avoids the noise and complexity of the extracted rules. This combination thus covers
a spectrum of representational levels, allowing questions to
be robustly answered using retrieval, statistics, and inference.
Solver scores are combined using logistic regression.
Our contributions are as follows:
• By combining solvers working at different levels of representation, our system Aristo achieves a signiﬁcantly higher
performance (71.3%) than the best previously published
method (Khot et al. 2015).

Abstract
What capabilities are required for an AI system to pass standard 4th Grade Science Tests? Previous work has examined
the use of Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) to represent the
requisite background knowledge and interpret test questions,
but did not improve upon an information retrieval (IR) baseline. In this paper, we describe an alternative approach that
operates at three levels of representation and reasoning: information retrieval, corpus statistics, and simple inference over
a semi-automatically constructed knowledge base, to achieve
substantially improved results. We evaluate the methods on
six years of unseen, unedited exam questions from the NY Regents Science Exam (using only non-diagram, multiple choice
questions), and show that our overall system’s score is 71.3%,
an improvement of 23.8% (absolute) over the MLN-based
method described in previous work. We conclude with a detailed analysis, illustrating the complementary strengths of
each method in the ensemble. Our datasets are being released
to enable further research.

Introduction
Our goal is a system that performs well on Elementary Science tests, a grand challenge for AI because of the wide
variety of knowledge and reasoning skills required (Clark
2015). Although not itself an application, Fourth Grade
test-taking requires question answering (QA) that goes significantly beyond retrieval techniques, yet is simple enough to
be accessible. In this sense, it is a simple embodiment of an
AI challenge requiring both language and reasoning, suitable
as part of a broader Turing Test (Clark and Etzioni 2016),
and with many potential applications if solved (e.g., tutoring
systems, a scientist’s assistant). This goal is hard, for example several Markov Logic Network (MLN) systems aimed
at this task were reported by Khot et al. (2015), but the best
MLN formulation still did not outperform an IR baseline.
Our approach is to use an ensemble of solvers operating at
different levels of representational structure, each capable of
answering different genres of question reliably. Consider a
question from the NY Regents 4th Grade Science Test:
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2580

