Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

SDDs Are Exponentially More Succinct than OBDDs
Simone Bova
Technische Universität Wien
Favoritenstraße 9–11
1040 Wien (Austria)

Introduced by Darwiche (2011), sentential decision diagrams (SDDs) are a most prominent candidate to narrow
the gap between DNNFs and OBDDs. They are designed by
strengthening the decomposability property (Pipatsrisawat
and Darwiche 2008) and further imposing a very strong form
of determinism (Pipatsrisawat and Darwiche 2010). The resulting language can implement decisions of the form

Abstract
Introduced by Darwiche (2011), sentential decision diagrams
(SDDs) are essentially as tractable as ordered binary decision
diagrams (OBDDs), but tend to be more succinct in practice.
This makes SDDs a prominent representation language, with
many applications in artiﬁcial intelligence and knowledge
compilation.
We prove that SDDs are more succinct than OBDDs also in
theory, by constructing a family of boolean functions where
each member has polynomial SDD size but exponential OBDD
size. This exponential separation improves a quasipolynomial
separation recently established by Razgon (2014a), and settles
an open problem in knowledge compilation (Darwiche 2011).

1

m


Pi (X) ∧ Si (Y ),

(1)

i=1

where X and Y are disjoint sets of variables nicely structured by an underlying variable tree, and the subcircuits
P1 , . . . , Pm , called primes,1 implement an exhaustive case
distinction into exclusive and consistent cases.2 Binary (or
Shannon) decisions in OBDDs boil down to very special
sentential decisions having the form

Introduction

The idea of knowledge compilation is to deal with the intractability of certain computational tasks on a knowledge
base by compiling it into a different data structure where
the tasks are feasible. The choice of the target data structure
involves an unavoidable trade-off between succinctness and
tractability.
Darwiche and Marquis (2002) systematically investigated
this trade-off in the fundamental case where the knowledge
bases are boolean functions and the data structures are classes
of boolean circuits (representation languages).
In their setting, decomposable negation normal forms
(DNNFs) and ordered binary decision diagrams (OBDDs)
arise as benchmark languages for succinctness and tractability respectively (Darwiche 2001; Darwiche and Marquis
2002). On the one hand, DNNFs are exponentially more
succinct than OBDDs; moreover, in contrast to OBDDs,
they implement efﬁciently conjunctive normal forms of
small treewidth (Darwiche 2001; Razgon and Petke 2013;
Oztok and Darwiche 2014; Razgon 2014b). On the other
hand, the vast applicability of OBDDs in veriﬁcation and synthesis relies on the tractability of equivalence testing (speeded
up by canonicity) and boolean combinations, which DNNFs
lack (Darwiche and Marquis 2002).
This gap between DNNFs (succinct but hard) and OBDDs
(verbose but tractable) led to the quest for intermediate languages exponentially more succinct than, but essentially as
tractable as, OBDDs.

(¬x ∧ S1 (Y )) ∨ (x ∧ S2 (Y )),
where the variable x is not in the variable set Y .
Indeed, SDDs properly contain OBDDs, and hence are
at least as succinct as OBDDs, while preserving tractability of all key tasks that are tractable on OBDDs. For this
reason, they have been used in a variety of applications
in artiﬁcial intelligence and probabilistic reasoning, as reported, for instance, by (Van den Broek and Darwiche 2015;
Oztok and Darwiche 2015).
Not only SDDs are as tractable as OBDDs, but they also
tend to be more succinct than OBDDs in practice; in fact,
knowledge compilers often produce much smaller SDDs than
OBDDs by heuristically leveraging the additional ﬂexibility
of variable trees in SDDs with respect to variable orderings
in OBDDs (Choi and Darwiche 2013; Oztok and Darwiche
2015).
Nonetheless, the basic theoretical question about the relative succinctness of OBDDs and SDDs has been open since
Darwiche introduced SDDs (Darwiche 2011; Razgon 2014a):
Are SDDs exponentially more succinct than OBDDs?
The results in the literature did not even exclude the possibility for OBDDs to polynomially simulate SDDs (Xue,
The Si ’s are called subs.
Formally, the models of P1 , . . . , Pm partition the set of assignments of X to {0, 1} into m nonempty blocks; see Section 2.
1

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

929

