Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Topical Analysis of Interactions Between News and Social Media
Ting Hua,∗ Yue Ning,∗ Feng Chen,† Chang-Tien Lu,∗ Naren Ramakrishnan∗
∗Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
Falls Church, VA 22043
†Department of Computer Science, University at Albany-SUNY
Albany, NY 12222

looked at the endogenous and exogenous factors based on
semantical or topical knowledge. They have either sought
to identify relevant tweets based on news articles (Hu et al.
2012b; Jin et al. 2011), or simply correlated the two data
sources through similar patterns in the changing data volume
(Tsytsarau, Palpanas, and Castellanos 2014). In fact, even
within the same data source, there could be various factors
that drive the evolution of information over time (Leskovec,
Backstrom, and Kleinberg 2009). Exogenous factors across
multiple datasets make analyzing the evolution and relationship among multiple data streams more difﬁcult (Lin et al.
2013a).
Monitoring social media and outside news data streams in
a united frame can be a practical way of solving this problem. In this paper, we propose a novel topic model, News
and Twitter Interaction Topic model (NTIT), that jointly
learns social media topics and news topics and subtly capture the inﬂuences between topics. The intuition behind this
approach is that before a user posts a message, he/she may
be inﬂuenced either by opinions from his/her online friends
or by articles from news agencies. In our new framework, a
word in a tweet can be responsive to the topical inﬂuences
coming either from endogenous factors (tweets) or from exogenous factors (news).
Figure 1 shows an example of our problem and goals. The
example introduced here is a protest happened in Mexico
(Hua et al. 2013). On January 7, local government arrested
26 dogs as suspects of a murder case. Twitter users angrily demanded the release of the animals that the hashtag
“#yosoycan26” (I am dog 26) became a trending topic in the
following day, which ﬁnally resulted in a real-world protest
on January 12. Using the new NTIT model, we attempt to
address the following questions: 1) Do Twitter and news
cover the same set of topics? As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the two datasets share some common topics (e.g., topic
“dog” and topic “yosoycan26”), but may also have some distinct topics of their own (e.g., topic “call for protest” only appears in the Twitter dataset). 2) For each topic, which came
ﬁrst, news or tweets? Topics may display different temporal patterns in different datasets. For example, at time t1
topic “yosoycan26” experienced a burst in the Twitter data
ﬁrst, followed by a news burst on the same topic shortly afterwards at time t2. 3) As time goes by, how do topics
affect each other? Intuitively, topic “yosoycan26” could

Abstract
The analysis of interactions between social media and traditional news streams is becoming increasingly relevant for a
variety of applications, including: understanding the underlying factors that drive the evolution of data sources, tracking
the triggers behind events, and discovering emerging trends.
Researchers have explored such interactions by examining
volume changes or information diffusions, however, most of
them ignore the semantical and topical relationships between
news and social media data. Our work is the ﬁrst attempt to
study how news inﬂuences social media, or inversely, based
on topical knowledge. We propose a hierarchical Bayesian
model that jointly models the news and social media topics
and their interactions. We show that our proposed model can
capture distinct topics for individual datasets as well as discover the topic inﬂuences among multiple datasets. By applying our model to large sets of news and tweets, we demonstrate its signiﬁcant improvement over baseline methods and
explore its power in the discovery of interesting patterns for
real world cases.

Introduction
Recently, online social media such as Twitter have served
as tools for organizing and tracking social events (Hua et
al. 2013). Understanding the triggers and shifts in opiniondriven mass social media data can provide useful insights
for various applications in academia, industry, and government (Lin et al. 2013b; Tumasjan et al. 2010). However, there remains a general lack of understanding of what
causes the hot spots in social media. Typically, the reasons behind the rapid spread of information can be summarized in terms of two categories: exogenous and endogenous factors (Kwak et al. 2010; Lehmann et al. 2012;
Lin et al. 2013a). Endogenous factors are the results of information diffusion inside the social network itself, namely,
users obtain information primarily from their online social
network. In contrast, exogenous factors mean that users get
information from outside sources ﬁrst, for example, traditional news media, and then bring it into their social network.
Although previous works have explored both the social
media and external news data datasets, few researchers have
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2964

