Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Egocentric Video Search via Physical Interactions
Taiki Miyanishi† , Jun-ichiro Hirayama† , Quan Kong†‡ ,
Takuya Maekawa†‡ , Hiroki Moriya† , and Takayuki Suyama†

‡

†
ATR Brain Information Communication Research Laboratory Group, Kyoto, Japan
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
{miyanishi, hirayama, kong, t.maekawa, moriyah, suyama}@atr.jp

human-physical world interactions, which usually associate
our daily activities and visual experience. For example, if
you drink a cup of coffee, you might ﬁrst look at your coffee
cup. Therefore, the question about incorporating physical
interactions into egocentric video retrieval is still open.
To address this question, in this paper, we propose a
gesture-based egocentric video search framework that uses
gesture motions as user queries. The underlying idea is
that most of our experience in daily life is not explicitly
verbalized but is associated with bodily behaviors. Body
gestures associated with activities will thus be a natural
modality for people to search for daily-life episodes. Moreover, body gestures can sometimes be easier to recall than
query words for memory- or language-impaired persons.
In fact, procedural memory, which involves the memory
of how to perform actions, is reportedly unaffected by
age when contrasted against semantic and episodic memories, which involve the memories of naming and autobiographical events (Hodges, Salmon, and Butters 1990;
Light et al. 1992). By using the proposed framework, we
can retrieve our past visual experience just by describing it
with gesture motions. For example, if you want to remember something you ate last evening, you could retrieve and
remember the past visual experience with an eating gesture.
To achieve the gesture-based retrieval system, we introduce
multimodal retrieval and re-ranking models.
Our proposed retrieval system works as in Fig. 1. First, the
system simultaneously records motion and egocentric video
about the daily activities of users on their personal digital
archives using wearable devices. Second, the system learns
the recorded motion and video matching using probabilistic
canonical correlation analysis (PCCA), which models humanphysical world interactions for indexing paired motions and
videos. Third, we retrieve a motion-video pair for any given
query using the similarity between motions in the learned
latent space. Moreover, we re-rank retrieved videos in latent
space to robustly improve retrieval performance. We assumed
that by incorporating physical interactions into the retrieval
models, we could solve the problems resulting from the variety of human motions related to daily activities, which leads
to decreasing search performance.
Our experiments using motion and egocentric videos about
daily activities collected in household settings reveal two
main ﬁndings. (i) The proposed gesture-based egocentric

Abstract
Retrieving past egocentric videos about personal daily life
is important to support and augment human memory. Most
previous retrieval approaches have ignored the crucial feature
of human-physical world interactions, which is greatly related
to our memory and experience of daily activities. In this paper, we propose a gesture-based egocentric video retrieval
framework, which retrieves past visual experience using body
gestures as non-verbal queries. We use a probabilistic framework based on a canonical correlation analysis that models
physical interactions through a latent space and uses them for
egocentric video retrieval and re-ranking search results. By incorporating physical interactions into the retrieval models, we
address the problems resulting from the variability of human
motions. We evaluate our proposed method on motion and
egocentric video datasets about daily activities in household
settings and demonstrate that our egocentric video retrieval
framework robustly improves retrieval performance when retrieving past videos from personal and even other persons’
video archives.

Introduction
Recent developments in wearable computing (Mann 1997)
allow us to digitally capture everything that we have ever
seen as well as our daily actions (Bell 2001). In particular, recorded egocentric images and videos of daily
activities from wearable cameras are important to assist
memory recollection for both memory-impaired and unimpaired persons (Berry et al. 2007; Hodges et al. 2006;
Kalnikaite et al. 2010; Sellen et al. 2007). Since egocentric
images and videos about daily activities are long and unstructured, the ability to retrieve past egocentric images and videos
could support and augment human memory. The current egocentric image and video retrieval methods use manually and
automatically labeled texts (Gemmell, Bell, and Lueder 2006;
Hori and Aizawa 2003; Nakayama, Harada, and Kuniyoshi
2009) or images as user queries (Chandrasekhar et al. 2014).
However, these approaches let users who need memory support describe what they forgot in their own words as user
queries or prepare image queries similar to the past visual
experience of what users want to remember. Furthermore,
most previous methods have ignored the valuable feature of
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

330

