Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Drosophila Gene Expression Pattern Annotations
via Multi-Instance Biological Relevance Learning
†

Hua Wang† , Cheng Deng , Hao Zhang† , Xinbo Gao , Heng Huang‡∗
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401, USA
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071, P. R. China
huawangcs@gmail.com, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn, hzhang@mines.edu,
xbgao@mail.xidian.edu.cn, heng@uta.edu

2006). These images are a treasure trove for identifying coexpressed and co-regulated genes and to trace the changes in
a gene’s expression over time (Tomancak et al. 2002; Lyne et
al. 2007; Grumbling, Strelets, and Consortium 2006). Such
spatial and temporal characterizations of expressions paved
the way for inferring regulatory networks based on spatiotemporal dynamics. Knowledge gained from analysis of the
Drosophila expression patterns is widely important, because
a large number of genes involved in fruit ﬂy development
are commonly found in humans and other species. Thus, research efforts into the spatial and temporal characteristics of
Drosophila gene expression images have been at the leadingedge of scientiﬁc investigations into the fundamental principles of different species development (Tomancak et al. 2002;
Walter et al. 2010; Osterﬁeld et al. 2013).

Abstract
Recent developments in biology have produced a large number of gene expression patterns, many of which have been annotated textually with anatomical and developmental terms.
These terms spatially correspond to local regions of the images, which are attached collectively to groups of images. Because one does not know which term is assigned to which region of which image in the group, the developmental stage
classiﬁcation and anatomical term annotation turn out to be
a multi-instance learning (MIL) problem, which considers
input as bags of instances and labels are assigned to the
bags. Most existing MIL methods routinely use the Bag-toBag (B2B) distances, which, however, are often computationally expensive and may not truly reﬂect the similarities
between the anatomical and developmental terms. In this paper, we approach the MIL problem from a new perspective
using the Class-to-Bag (C2B) distances, which directly assesses the relations between annotation terms and image panels. Taking into account the two challenging properties of
multi-instance gene expression data, high heterogeneity and
weak label association, we computes the C2B distance by introducing class speciﬁc distance metrics and locally adaptive
signiﬁcance coefﬁcients. We apply our new approach to automatic gene expression pattern classiﬁcation and annotation on
the Drosophila melanogaster species. Extensive experiments
have demonstrated the effectiveness of our new method.

The comparative analysis of gene expression patterns
need analyze a large number of digital images of individual
embryos. To facilitate the search and comparison of gene
expression patterns during Drosophila embryogenesis, it is
highly desirable to annotate the developmental stage and
tissue-level anatomical ontology terms for ISH images. This
annotation is of signiﬁcant importance in studying developmental biology, because it provides a direct way to reveal
the interactions and biological functions of genes based on
gene expressions and enhance gene regulatory networks research. Due to the rapid increase in the number of ISH images and the inevitable biased annotation by human curators,
it is necessary to develop an automatic system to classify the
developmental stage and annotate anatomical structure using controlled vocabulary.

The mRNA in situ hybridization (ISH) is crucial for gene
expression pattern visualization. The ISH technique can precisely record the localization of gene expression at the cellular level via visualizing the probe by colorimetric or ﬂuorescent microscopy to allow the production of high quality images recording the spatial location and intensity of the gene
expression (L’ecuyer et al. 2007; Fowlkes et al. 2008). In literature, more than one hundred thousand images of gene expression patterns from early embryogenesis are available for
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit ﬂy) (Tomancak et al. 2002;
Lyne et al. 2007; Grumbling, Strelets, and Consortium

Recently some bioinformatics research works have been
developed to solve the annotation and stage classiﬁcation
problems (Kumar et al. 2002; Peng et al. 2007; Puniyani,
Faloutsos, and Xing 2010; Ji et al. 2010; Shuiwang et al.
2009; Li et al. 2009; Ji et al. 2008). Kuma et al. (Kumar et al.
2002) developed an embryo enclosing algorithm to ﬁnd the
embryo outline and extract the binary expression patterns via
adaptive thresholding. Peng et al. (Peng et al. 2007) developed approaches to represent ISH images based on Gaussian
mixture models, principal component analysis and wavelet
functions. Besides, they also utilized min-redundancy maxrelevance to do the feature selection and automatically clas-

∗
To whom all correspondence should be addressed. This work
was partially supported by the following grants: NSF-IIS 1117965,
NSF-IIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NSF-IIS
1423591, NIH R01 AG049371.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1324

