Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Recognizing Complex Activities by a Probabilistic Interval-Based Model
Li Liu1 , Li Cheng1,2 , Ye Liu1 , Yongpo Jia1 , David S. Rosenblum1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117417
2
Bioinformatics Institute, A*STAR, Singapore 138671
{dcsliuli,liuye.cis}@gmail.com, chengli@bii.a-star.edu.sg, jiayongpo@nus.edu.sg, david@comp.nus.edu.sg

down, and drink from cup. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), modeling complex activities naturally requires the characterization of their temporal dependencies among atomic activities.
A complex activity recognition model should also represent
uncertainties associated with individual atomic activities as
well as their temporal dependencies. It is well known that
each individual often possesses a unique style of performing
the same complex activity, which may differ noticeably from
the others. To further complicate the matter, the same person
might perform differently at a different time or location. One
such example is provided in Fig. 1(b), where relax can also
be performed in an alternative manner with only two atomic
activities involved. This kind of inherit uncertainty or variability of complex activities usually manifest themselves in
terms of the types of the underlying atomic activities and
their temporal relationships (Kim et al. 2015).
Despite being a very challenging problem, in recent years
there has been a rapid growth of interest in modeling
and recognizing complex activities. Semantic-based models (Ryoo and Aggarwal 2009; Morariu and Davis 2011;
Helaoui, Riboni, and Stuckenschmidt 2013) have gained
attention in recent years for addressing complex activity
recognition problems, but they often lack the expressive
power to capture and propagate the uncertainties associated
with their temporal dependencies. Moreover, formulae and
their weights need to be carefully hand-crafted by domain
experts, which could be rather difﬁcult in many practical
scenarios. On the other hand, the most popular modeling
paradigm might be that of the graphical models, which include techniques such as hidden Markov models, Bayesian
networks, and conditional random ﬁelds (Bui et al. 2008;
Hospedales et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2015). While these graphical model-based approaches are capable of managing uncertainties, they are unfortunately rather limited in characterizing rich temporal relationships among activities. In fact, as
these models are mostly time-point based, only three relations (i.e. precedes, follows, equals) can be sufﬁciently captured. Moreover, the time-point based graphical models are
computationally expensive when the number of overlapping
activities grows (Pinhanez 1999).
The interval temporal Bayesian network (ITBN) (Zhang
et al. 2013) is the ﬁrst interval-based graphical model that
combines the Allen relations with the probabilistic description of Bayesian network. This model can capture 13 tem-

Abstract
A key challenge in complex activity recognition is the fact
that a complex activity can often be performed in several different ways, with each consisting of its own conﬁguration of
atomic actions and their temporal dependencies. This leads
us to deﬁne an atomic activity-based probabilistic framework
that employs Allen’s interval relations to represent local temporal dependencies. The framework introduces a latent variable from the Chinese Restaurant Process to explicitly characterize these unique internal conﬁgurations of a particular
complex activity as a variable number of tables. It can be analytically shown that the resulting interval network satisﬁes the
transitivity property, and as a result, all local temporal dependencies can be retained and are globally consistent. Empirical
evaluations on benchmark datasets suggest our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Activity recognition has become an important research ﬁeld,
given its role in facilitating a broad range of applications in
areas such as healthcare, sports, smart homes and product
recommendations (Padoy et al. 2008). Current techniques
are becoming mature to recognize basic actions and movements from cameras or other sensors (Frank, Mannor, and
Precup 2010; Gupta and Mooney 2010; Lara and Labrador
2013; Bulling, Blanke, and Schiele 2014; Yürüten, Zhang,
and Pu 2014). For example, actions like drink from cup can
be inferred by sensors attached to the user’s arms and the
cups, while movements like walk, lie down and sit can be
inferred by an accelerometer placed on the user’s waist. The
intervals of these actions and movements can also be obtained as the period of time over which the corresponding
sensor states remain unchanged. These actions and movements describe low-level activities that can be inferred from
sensors and cannot be further decomposed under application semantics (Saguna, Zaslavsky, and Chakraborty 2013),
and are referred to as atomic activities here. The main focus of this paper is on complex activities, where a complex
activity is a collection of temporally related atomic activities. For example, relax is a complex activity that may contain six atomic activities, i.e. walk, reach lazychair, sit, lie
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1266

