Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Breaking More Composition Symmetries Using Search Heuristics
Jimmy H. M. Lee and Zichen Zhu∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
{jlee,zzhu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

conditional symmetry breaking constraints dynamically, the
search order determines the set of symmetry breaking constraints to add, and thus affects the extra composition symmetries to be broken and makes an impact on node and solution pruning (McDonald and Smith 2006). We propose a
search order under which ParSBDS can break more composition symmetries. In this paper, we give the ﬁrst formal
characterization of the pruning behavior of ParSBDS and its
state-of-the-art variants (Lee and Zhu 2014a; 2014b). Relying on a generalization of (symmetry) dominance (Puget
2002; Fahle, Schamberger, and Sellmann 2001), we prove
that ParSBDS and variants prune all and only nodes that
are dominated. We introduce the notion of DominanceCompleteness (DC-ness), show that ParSBDS and variants
eliminate the symmetry group of the given subset of symmetries if the resultant search tree is DC, and give a situation where this happens. Unfortunately, building a DC
tree is not always possible. We approximate it using two
search heuristics. We propose the “Most Frequent Decision First” and “Most Symmetries Active” search heuristics with the aim of having more nodes dominated (thus
also pruned) during search. Unlike popular search heuristics that are either variable based (Bessiere and Régin 1996;
Boussemart et al. 2004), value based (Dechter and Pearl
1988; Frost and Dechter 1995) or a simple combination of
both, our proposed heuristics select a variable-value pair (decision) to assign. Extensive experimentation demonstrates
how our proposed heuristics and their combination can drastically reduce the solution set size, search space and runtime when compared against the state-of-the-art static and
dynamic symmetry breaking methods.

Abstract
The pruning power of partial symmetry breaking depends on
the given subset of symmetries to break as well as the interactions among symmetry breaking constraints. In the context of Partial Symmetry Breaking During Search (ParSBDS),
the search order determines the set of symmetry breaking
constraints to add and thus also makes an impact on node
and solution pruning. In this paper, we give the ﬁrst formal characterization of the pruning behavior of ParSBDS and
its improved variants. Introducing the notion of DominanceCompleteness (DC-ness), we show that ParSBDS and variants eliminate the symmetry group of the given subset of
symmetries if the resultant search tree is DC, and give an
example scenario. Unfortunately, building a DC tree is not
always possible. We propose two search heuristics with the
aim of having more nodes dominated and thus also pruned
during search. Extensive experimentation demonstrates how
the proposed heuristics and their combination can drastically
reduce the solution set size, search space and runtime when
compared against the state-of-the-art static and dynamic symmetry breaking methods.

Introduction
Symmetries are common in many constraint problems. They
can be broken statically (Crawford et al. 1996; Flener et al.
2002) or dynamically (Fahle, Schamberger, and Sellmann
2001; Roney-Dougal et al. 2004; Sellmann and Van Hentenryck 2005). Static methods alter the original problem by
adding new constraints to remove symmetric solutions. In
contrast, dynamic methods modify the search procedure to
exclude exploration of symmetric regions. Practical symmetry breaking methods often trade completeness for efﬁciency
by only breaking a subset of symmetries (Flener et al. 2002;
Grayland, Miguel, and Roney-Dougal 2009; Mears et al.
2014). The pruning power of partial symmetry breaking
depends on the given subset of symmetries (Jefferson and
Petrie 2011) to break as well as the extra composition symmetries that are broken by the interactions among symmetry
breaking constraints (Lee and Li 2012).
In the context of Partial Symmetry Breaking During
Search (ParSBDS) (McDonald and Smith 2006) that adds

Background
A constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) P is a tuple
(X, D, C) where X is a ﬁnite set of variables, D is a ﬁnite
set of domains such that each x ∈ X has a domain D(x)
and C is a set of constraints, each is a subset of the Cartesian
product D(xi1 )×· · ·×D(xik ) of the domains of the involved
variables (scope). We abuse notation to say that D ⊆ D iff
D(x) ⊆ D (x) for all x ∈ X. A constraint is generalized
arc consistent (GAC) iff when a variable in the scope of a
constraint is assigned any value in its domain, there exist
compatible values (called supports) in the domains of all the
other variables in the scope of the constraint. An assignment

∗
This research has been supported by the grant CUHK413713
from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong SAR.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3418

