Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Extracting Biomolecular Interactions Using Semantic Parsing of Biomedical Text
Sahil Garg, Aram Galstyan, Ulf Hermjakob, and Daniel Marcu
USC Information Sciences Institute
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
{sahil, galstyan, ulf, marcu}@isi.edu

single-sentence extraction, which makes them very susceptible to noise. And ﬁnally, owing to the enormous diversity
of research topics in biomedical literature and the high cost
of data annotation, there is often signiﬁcant mismatch between training and testing corpora, which reﬂects poorly on
generalization ability of existing methods (Tikk et al. 2010).
In this paper, we present a novel algorithm for extracting biomolecular interactions from unstructured text that
addresses the above challenges. Contrary to the previous
works, the extraction task considered here is less restricted
and spans a much more diverse corpus of biomedical articles. These more realistic settings present some important
technical problems for which we provide explicit solutions.
Our speciﬁc contributions are as follows:
• We propose a graph-kernel based algorithm for extracting
biomolecular interactions from Abstract Meaning Representation, or AMR. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the ﬁrst attempt of using deep semantic parsing for
biomedical knowledge extraction task.
• We provide a multi-sentence generalization of the algorithm by deﬁning Graph Distribution Kernels (GDK),
which enables us to perform document-level extraction.
• We suggest a hybrid extraction method that utilizes both
AMRs and syntactic parses given by Stanford Dependency Graphs (SDGs). Toward this goal, we develop a
linear algebraic formulation for learning vector space embedding of edge labels in AMRs and SDGs to deﬁne similarity measures between AMRs and SDGs.
We conduct an exhaustive empirical evaluation of the proposed extraction system on 45+ research articles on cancer (approximately 3k sentences), containing approximately
20,000 positive-negative labeled biomolecular interactions1 .
Our results indicate that the joint extraction method that
leverages both AMRs and SDGs parses signiﬁcantly improves the extraction accuracy, and is more robust to mismatch between training and test conditions.

Abstract
We advance the state of the art in biomolecular interaction extraction with three contributions: (i) We show that deep, Abstract Meaning Representations (AMR) signiﬁcantly improve
the accuracy of a biomolecular interaction extraction system
when compared to a baseline that relies solely on surfaceand syntax-based features; (ii) In contrast with previous approaches that infer relations on a sentence-by-sentence basis,
we expand our framework to enable consistent predictions
over sets of sentences (documents); (iii) We further modify
and expand a graph kernel learning framework to enable concurrent exploitation of automatically induced AMR (semantic) and dependency structure (syntactic) representations. Our
experiments show that our approach yields interaction extraction systems that are more robust in environments where
there is a signiﬁcant mismatch between training and test conditions.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in genomics and proteomics have significantly accelerated the rate of uncovering and accumulating new biomedical knowledge. Most of this knowledge
is available only via scientiﬁc publications, which necessitates the development of automated and semi-automated
tools for extracting useful biomedical information from unstructured text. In particular, there has been a signiﬁcant
body of research on identifying biological entities (proteins,
genes, chemical compounds) and interactions between those
entities from bio-medical papers (Krallinger et al. 2008;
Hakenberg et al. 2008; Tikk et al. 2010; Bunescu et al.
2005). Despite the recent progress, current methods for
biomedical knowledge extraction suffer from a number of
important shortcomings. First of all, existing methods rely
heavily on shallow analysis techniques that severely limit
their scope. For instance, most existing approaches focus
on whether there is an interaction between a pair of proteins while ignoring the interaction types (Airola et al. 2008;
Mooney and Bunescu 2005), whereas other more advanced
approaches cover only a small subset of all possible interaction types (Hunter et al. 2008; McDonald et al. 2005;
Demir et al. 2010). Second, most existing methods focus on

2

Problem Statement

Consider the sentence “As a result, mutant Ras proteins accumulate with elevated GTP-bound proportion”, which de-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The code and the data are available at https://github.com/
sgarg87/big mech isi gg

2718

