Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Scaling Relational Inference Using Proofs and Refutations
Ravi Mangal∗ , Xin Zhang∗ , Aditya Kamath∗ , Aditya V. Nori† , Mayur Naik∗
∗

†

Georgia Institute of Technology, USA

Abstract

∀n1 ,
∀n1 , n2 , n3 ,
1.5 : ∀n1 , n2 ,




Many inference problems are naturally formulated using hard
and soft constraints over relational domains: the desired solution must satisfy the hard constraints, while optimizing the
objectives expressed by the soft constraints. Existing techniques for solving such constraints rely on efﬁciently grounding a sufﬁcient subset of constraints that is tractable to solve.
We present an eager-lazy grounding algorithm that eagerly
exploits proofs and lazily refutes counterexamples. We show
that our algorithm achieves signiﬁcant speedup over existing
approaches without sacriﬁcing soundness for real-world applications from information retrieval and program analysis.

Microsoft Research, UK

p(n1 , n1 )
p(n1 , n2 ) ∧ e(n2 , n3 ) ⇒ p(n1 , n3 )
¬p(n1 , n2 )

(1)
(2)
(3)

Figure 1: Graph reachability using relational constraints.











Input facts:
e(0, 1) e(0, 2)
e(1, 3) e(1, 4)
e(2, 5) e(2, 6)

Output facts:
p(0, 0) p(0, 1)
p(0, 2) p(0, 3)
p(0, 4) p(0, 5)
...

Figure 2: Example graph reachability input and solution.

1

Introduction

Many inference tasks in diverse application domains such as
machine learning, information retrieval, mathematical optimization, and many others require optimizing certain objectives in addition to satisfying soundness conditions. A natural speciﬁcation for such tasks appears in the form of relational constraints with optional weights in logics such as
Markov Logic Networks (Richardson and Domingos 2006)
and Probabilistic Soft Logic (Kimmig et al. 2012). The relational inference problem in such logics seeks a solution
that satisﬁes all unweighted (“hard”) constraints while maximizing the sum of the weights of satisﬁed weighted (“soft”)
constraints. Hard constraints thus enable to express soundness conditions while soft constraints allow to express the
objectives to optimize.
Figure 1 shows an example that speciﬁes a graph reachability problem using such constraints. Input predicate
e(n1 , n2 ) is true if the graph has an edge from node n1 to
n2 . Derived predicate p(n1 , n2 ) is true if the graph has a
path from n1 to n2 . Hard constraints (1) and (2) enforce reﬂexivity and transitivity conditions, while soft constraint (3)
ensures that the number of paths derived is minimal. An example input and solution are shown in Figure 2.
Existing techniques reduce the relational inference
problem to the Weighted Partial Maximum Satisﬁability
(WPMS) problem (Papadimitriou 1994). This reduction
happens via grounding, which is the process of instantiating the predicates or relations over all constants in the cor-

responding input domains. The WPMS problem is computationally hard. To reduce the burden on the WPMS solver,
the key challenge is to efﬁciently ground a sufﬁcient subset
of constraints that is tractable to solve. For the example in
Figure 1, eagerly grounding constraint (2) entails instantiating n1 , n2 , n3 over all nodes in the graph, producing N 3
grounded constraints, where N is the number of nodes.
Several techniques have been proposed to lazily ground
constraints (Niu et al. 2011; Kok et al. 2007; Chaganty
et al. 2013; Noessner, Niepert, and Stuckenschmidt 2013;
Riedel 2008; 2009). For the scale of problems we consider, however, these techniques are either too lazy and
converge very slowly, or too eager and produce instances
that are beyond the reach of sound WPMS solvers. For instance, a recent technique (Chaganty et al. 2013) grounds
hard constraints too lazily and soft constraints too eagerly.
Speciﬁcally, for the graph reachability problem in Figure 1,
this technique takes L iterations to lazily ground hard constraint (2) (where L is the length of the longest path in the
input graph), and generates N 2 constraints upfront by eagerly grounding soft constraint (3).
In this paper, we propose an iterative eager-lazy algorithm
that strikes a balance between eager grounding and lazy
grounding. Our key underlying idea comprises two complementary optimizations: eagerly exploiting proofs and lazily
refuting counterexamples.
To eagerly exploit proofs, our algorithm uses an efﬁcient
procedure to upfront ground constraints that will necessarily
be grounded during the iterative process. As a concrete in-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3278

