Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Random Mixed Field Model for Mixed-Attribute Data Restoration
Qiang Li†, and Wei Bian† and Richard Yi Da Xu and Jane You and Dacheng Tao†
†

Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney

School of Computing and Communications, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
leetsiang.cloud@gmail.com
{wei.bian, yida.xu, dacheng.tao}@uts.edu.au
csyjia@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2005b; 2005a), the research on attribute-level data denoising has long been limited. One possible reason is that images usually have strong local smoothness which can beneﬁt denoising, but such local smoothness rarely exists in
general data, such as survey reports. To achieve good local smoothness, (Li et al. 2002) proposed to use cluster labels to rearrange all the instances in Ecoli dataset (Lichman
2013). Then a wavelet shrinkage method is employed to ﬁlter certain attribute across instances. Although such “ad hoc”
smoothness could make sense, it is intrinsically unfounded
and prone to random instability. Different from deterministic approaches, probabilistic models provide a more rational approach for handling noisy data. The key assumption
is the observed corrupted data are generated by adding random noise to latent noise-free data. Through such generative
models, one can exploit informative priors over latent variables so as to encode attribute correlations.
Data imputation aims at providing good estimates of
missing values. Deterministic approaches resort to modify
classical regressors/classiﬁers to impute missing attributes.
For example, K nearest neighbors imputation (KNNI) (Troyanskaya et al. 2001) imputes missing values with the
mean/mode of K nearest neighbors for continuous/discrete
attributes, as well as other techniques including local least
squares imputation (LLSI) (Kim, Golub, and Park 2005),
support vector machine imputation (SVMI) (Honghai et al.
2005), multiple kernel learning imputation (MKLI) (Zhu
et al. 2011), and random forest imputation (Stekhoven and
Bühlmann 2012). On the other hand, probabilistic latent
variable models are employed to ﬁnd the most probable imputation. For example, (Ghahramani and Jordan 1994) addressed the imputation problem by learning mixture models from an incomplete dataset. (Schneider 2001) designed
a regularized expectation-maximization imputation (REMI)
method by modelling the latent variables with multivariate
Gaussian. Singular value decomposition imputation (SVDI)
(Troyanskaya et al. 2001) combined principle component
(PC) regression and EM estimation to estimate missing values. Some researchers also developed Bayesian principle
component analysis based imputation (Oba et al. 2003),
which jointly conducts PC regression, Bayesian estimation
and EM learning.
Despite their effectiveness in exploiting attribute correlations and/or instance similarities, existing methods have two

Abstract
Noisy and incomplete data restoration is a critical preprocessing step in developing effective learning algorithms, which
targets to reduce the effect of noise and missing values in
data. By utilizing attribute correlations and/or instance similarities, various techniques have been developed for data
denoising and imputation tasks. However, current existing
data restoration methods are either speciﬁcally designed for a
particular task, or incapable of dealing with mixed-attribute
data. In this paper, we develop a new probabilistic model
to provide a general and principled method for restoring
mixed-attribute data. The main contributions of this study are
twofold: a) a uniﬁed generative model, utilizing a generic random mixed ﬁeld (RMF) prior, is designed to exploit mixedattribute correlations; and b) a structured mean-ﬁeld variational approach is proposed to solve the challenging inference
problem of simultaneous denoising and imputation. We evaluate our method by classiﬁcation experiments on both synthetic data and real benchmark datasets. Experiments demonstrate, our approach can effectively improve the classiﬁcation
accuracy of noisy and incomplete data by comparing with
other data restoration methods.

Introduction
Real world data usually contain noise and missing values,
which could severely degrade the performance of learning
algorithms (Maimon and Rokach 2010; Chen et al. 2015;
Wang and Oates 2015). The task of data restoration is to
reduce the effect of noise and missing values, and plays a
critical preprocessing step in developing effective learning
algorithms. Attribute-level noise and missing values are two
of the major concerns in data restoration. In the literature,
attribute-level noise refers to undesirable incorrect measurements in some speciﬁc attribute of all instances. Different
from the characteristics of noise, missing values are unavailable measurements. In practice, there are various reasons
leading to noise and missing values, such as incaution or unwillingness in manual data entry process, equipment failure
and high acquisition cost.
Data denoising targets to estimate the true value from
noisy measurements based on certain assumptions. Unlike
popular image denoising research (Buades, Coll, and Morel
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1244

