Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Convolution Kernels for Discriminative Learning from Streaming Text
Michal Lukasik

Trevor Cohn

Computer Science
The University of Shefﬁeld
m.lukasik@shef.ac.uk

Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne
t.cohn@unimelb.edu.au

This paper considers as its motivating case-study rumours
comprising of a series of posts in conversation channels on
social media. Lukasik, Cohn, and Bontcheva (2015) recently
considered a discriminative learning problem of predicting
rumour popularity, noting that rumour characteristics change
during their lifespan: typically a rumour is initially widely
discussed, but afterwards the discussion either rapidly terminates or else smoothly decays. Both the temporal dynamics
of the rumour spread and the text content of the posts contain important cues for determining the future spread of a
rumour. However, exploiting these two sources of information is difﬁcult. One approach is feature engineering, however these problems are not generally amenable to feature
selection, and thus result in large feature spaces with consequent high computational expense and problems of overﬁtting (Xing et al. 2011).
We address the problem of modeling time series of text by
adapting the general idea of convolution kernels (Haussler
1999). Convolution kernels avoid the effort of feature engineering and allow for using a rich data representation. We
demonstrate the proposed convolution kernels for discriminative learning from text time series on the range of problems: classiﬁcation, regression, Poisson regression and point
process modeling. Previous work focused on classiﬁcation
problems over time series (Xing, Pei, and Keogh 2010). Our
approach is based on Gaussian Processes (GP) (Rasmussen
and Williams 2005), which allows modelling of many different problem types, from regression modelling through to
point processes.
This paper makes the following contributions: 1. Introduces a method based on convolution kernels for discriminative modeling of time series composed of text over continuous time; 2. Demonstrates the proposed approach on a
range of discriminative learning problems: classiﬁcation, regression, Poisson regression and point process modeling;
3. Demonstrates the efﬁcacy of the method on three synthetic and two real datasets; and 4. Out-performs state of the
art methods for modeling rumour frequency proﬁles.

Abstract
Time series modeling is an important problem with many applications in different domains. Here we consider discriminative learning from time series, where we seek to predict
an output response variable based on time series input. We
develop a method based on convolution kernels to model discriminative learning over streams of text. Our method outperforms competitive baselines in three synthetic and two real
datasets, rumour frequency modeling and popularity prediction tasks.

Introduction
Modeling of time series is a foundational problem in the machine learning literature, which typically attempts to model
the dynamics of a signal into the future based on a history of
observations. This paper considers another, less well studied, problem of discriminative modeling from time series. In
this setting time series serve as inputs from which we seek
to model an arbitrary output variable (or several variables).
Direct modeling of time series can be viewed as a special
case of such an approach, in which the response variable is
the future value of the time series. However, discriminative
modeling allows application to other tasks where an output
variable is less closely related to the time series values. For
example, we may be interested if a particular stream of posts
in social media corresponds to a disaster event, or if variation
of CO2 across time in a given location indicates an alarming
problem for the environment. In both instances the response
variable is a classiﬁcation output not directly related to the
time series dynamics, however there are likely to be characteristics of the time series inputs which can be exploited in
modeling the response variable.
A key problem related to discriminative modeling from
time series is in capturing the similarities and differences
between time series in the presence of complex temporal
patterns, sporadically observed data, and non-stationarities.
For instance, many collections of text data exhibit complex
temporal phenomena, however these temporal dynamics are
typically omitted from models. Examples include journal articles which are released at speciﬁc dates and over time their
topical focus changes, or social media which exhibits trends,
burstiness and a changing vocabulary.

Related Work
Discriminative Learning From Time Series Time series
have been predominantly considered in settings where previous instances of a time series are used to predict the outputs
for future points (Shumway and Stoffer 2006). However,

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2757

