Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Discriminative Nonparametric Latent Feature
Relational Models with Data Augmentation
†

Bei Chen† , Ning Chen‡∗ , Jun Zhu†∗ , Jiaming Song† , Bo Zhang†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys., Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research,
‡
MOE Key lab of Bioinformatics, Bioinformatics Division and Center for Synthetic & Systems Biology,
TNList, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
{chenbei12@mails., ningchen@, dcszj@, sjm12@mails., dcszb@}tsinghua.edu.cn
data, based on which prediction models are developed for
link prediction. Although these models work well, one remaining problem is how to determine the unknown number
of latent classes or features. A typical way using model selection, e.g., cross-validation or likelihood ratio test (Liu and
Shao 2003), can be computationally prohibitive by comparing many candidate models. Bayesian nonparametrics has
shown promise in bypassing model selection by imposing an
appropriate stochastic process prior on a rich class of models (Antoniak 1974; Grifﬁths and Ghahramani 2005). For
link prediction, the inﬁnite relational model (IRM) (Kemp
et al. 2006) is class-based and uses Bayesian nonparametrics
to discover systems of related concepts. One extension is the
mixed membership stochastic blockmodel (MMSB) (Airoldi
et al. 2008), which allows entities to have mixed membership. (Miller, Grifﬁths, and Jordan 2009) and (Zhu 2012)
developed nonparametric latent feature relational models
(LFRM) by incorporating Indian Buffet Process (IBP) prior
to resolve the unknown dimension of a latent feature space.
Though LFRM has achieved promising results, exact inference is intractable due to the non-conjugacy of the prior and
link likelihood. One has to use Metropolis-Hastings (Miller,
Grifﬁths, and Jordan 2009), which may have low accept
rates if the proposal distribution is not well designed, or variational inference (Zhu 2012) with truncated mean-ﬁeld assumptions, which may be too strict in practice.

Abstract
We present a discriminative nonparametric latent feature relational model (LFRM) for link prediction to automatically
infer the dimensionality of latent features. Under the generic
RegBayes (regularized Bayesian inference) framework, we
handily incorporate the prediction loss with probabilistic inference of a Bayesian model; set distinct regularization parameters for different types of links to handle the imbalance issue in real networks; and unify the analysis of both
the smooth logistic log-loss and the piecewise linear hinge
loss. For the nonconjugate posterior inference, we present a
simple Gibbs sampler via data augmentation, without making restricting assumptions as done in variational methods.
We further develop an approximate sampler using stochastic
gradient Langevin dynamics to handle large networks with
hundreds of thousands of entities and millions of links, orders of magnitude larger than what existing LFRM models
can process. Extensive studies on various real networks show
promising performance.

Introduction
Link prediction is a fundamental task in statistical network
analysis. For static networks, it is deﬁned as predicting
the missing links from a partially observed network topology (and some attributes if exist). Existing approaches include: 1) Unsupervised methods that design good proximity/similarity measures between nodes based on network
topology features (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2003), e.g.,
common neighbors, Jaccard’s coefﬁcient (Salton and McGill
1983), Adamic/Adar (Adamic and Adar 2003), etc; 2) Supervised methods that learn classiﬁers on labeled data with
a set of manually designed features (Lichtenwalter, Lussier,
and Chawla 2010; Hasan et al. 2006; Shi et al. 2009); 3) others (Backstrom and Leskovec 2011) that use random walks
to combine the network structure information with node and
edge attributes. One possible limitation for such methods is
that they rely on well-designed features or measures, which
can be time demanding to get and/or application speciﬁc.
Latent variable models (Hoff, Raftery, and Handcock
2002; Hoff 2007; Chang and Blei 2009) have been widely
applied to discover latent structures from complex network

In this paper, we develop discriminative nonparametric latent feature relational models (DLFRM) by exploiting the
ideas of data augmentation with simpler Gibbs sampling
(Polson and Scott 2011; Polson, Scott, and Windle 2013)
under the regularized Bayesian inference (RegBayes) framework (Zhu, Chen, and Xing 2014). Our major contributions
are: 1) We use the RegBayes framework for DLFRM to deal
with the imbalance issue in real networks and naturally analyze both the logistic log-loss and the max-margin hinge loss
under a uniﬁed setting; 2) We explore data augmentation
techniques to develop a simple Gibbs sampling algorithm,
which is free from unnecessary truncation and assumptions
that typically exist in variational approximation methods; 3)
We develop an approximate Gibbs sampler using stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics, which can handle large networks with hundreds of thousands of entities and millions of
links (See Table 1), orders of magnitude larger than what the
existing LFRM models (Miller, Grifﬁths, and Jordan 2009;

∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1153

