Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Approximate K-Means++ in Sublinear Time
Olivier Bachem

Mario Lucic

S. Hamed Hassani

Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich
olivier.bachem@inf.ethz.ch

ETH Zurich
lucic@inf.ethz.ch

ETH Zurich
hamed@inf.ethz.ch

ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

k-means++. In the seeding step of k-means++, the cluster centers are sampled iteratively using D2 -sampling: First,
a cluster center is chosen uniformly at random from the data
points. Then, in each of k iterations, a data point is selected
as a new cluster center with probability proportional to its
distance to the already sampled cluster centers. Even without
assumptions on the data, the resulting solution is in expectation O(log k)-competitive with regards to the optimal solution (Arthur and Vassilvitskii, 2007). While k-means++
is easy to implement, it is non-trivial to apply it to large
problems. k-means++ has to make a full pass through
the data for every cluster center sampled. This leads to a
complexity of Θ(nkd) where n is the number of data points,
k the number of cluster centers and d the dimensionality of
the data. Even if k is moderate, this can be computationally
infeasible for massive datasets. This motivates our search
for a seeding method with a lower, potentially even sublinear, complexity in the number of data points that retains
both the empirical and theoretical beneﬁts of k-means++.

Abstract
The quality of K-Means clustering is extremely sensitive to proper initialization. The classic remedy is
to apply k-means++ to obtain an initial set of centers that is provably competitive with the optimal solution. Unfortunately, k-means++ requires k full passes
over the data which limits its applicability to massive
datasets. We address this problem by proposing a simple and efﬁcient seeding algorithm for K-Means clustering. The main idea is to replace the exact D2 -sampling
step in k-means++ with a substantially faster approximation based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling. We prove that, under natural assumptions on the
data, the proposed algorithm retains the full theoretical guarantees of k-means++ while its computational
complexity is only sublinear in the number of data
points. For such datasets, one can thus obtain a provably good clustering in sublinear time. Extensive experiments conﬁrm that the proposed method is competitive with k-means++ on a variety of real-world, largescale datasets while offering a reduction in runtime of
several orders of magnitude.

1

But is it even worth pursuing a fast seeding algorithm?
After all, both evaluating the quality of such a seeding and
running one iteration of Lloyd’s algorithm exhibit the same
Θ(nkd) complexity as the seeding step of k-means++.
Hence, one might argue that there is no beneﬁt in reducing
the complexity of the k-means++ seeding step as it is
dominated by these two other operations. There are two
shortcomings to this argument: Firstly, k-means++ is an
inherently sequential algorithm of k dependent iterations
and, as such, difﬁcult to parallelize in a distributed setting.
Evaluating the quality of a K-Means solution, however,
can be done in parallel using a single MapReduce step.
Similarly, Lloyd’s algorithm can also be implemented in
MapReduce (Zhao, Ma, and He, 2009). Secondly, there
are many use cases where one requires fast seeding without
evaluating the quality of the seeding or running Lloyd’s
algorithm subsequently. For example, the quality of such
a solution can be improved using fast algorithms such as
online (Bottou and Bengio, 1994) or mini-batch K-Means
(Sculley, 2010) which may be run for less than O(n) iterations in practice. Furthermore, various theoretical results
such as coreset constructions (Bachem, Lucic, and Krause,
2015) rely on the theoretical guarantee of k-means++.
Hence, a fast seeding algorithm with a strong theoretical
guarantee would have an impact on all these applications.

Introduction

The goal of K-Means clustering is to ﬁnd a set of k cluster
centers for a dataset such that the sum of squared distances
of each point to its closest cluster center is minimized. It is
one of the classic clustering problems and has been studied for several decades. Yet even today, it remains a relevant
problem: Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982), a local search algorithm for K-Means, is still one of the ten most popular
algorithms for data mining according to Wu et al. (2008)
and is implemented as a standard clustering method in most
machine learning libraries. In the last few years, K-Means
clustering has further been studied in various ﬁelds of machine learning such as representation learning (Coates, Lee,
and Ng, 2011; Coates and Ng, 2012) and Bayesian nonparametrics (Kulis and Jordan, 2012).
It is well-known that K-Means clustering is highly sensitive to proper initialization. The classical remedy is to use
a seeding procedure proposed by Arthur and Vassilvitskii
(2007) that together with Lloyd’s algorithm is known as
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1459

