Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Query Answering with Inconsistent Existential
Rules under Stable Model Semantics
Hai Wan1 , Heng Zhang2,∗ , Peng Xiao1 , Haoran Huang3 , and Yan Zhang4
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
hengzhang@hust.edu.cn
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
4
School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia
(2012; 2013; 2015) studied the data complexity and combined complexity of AR semantics under the main decidable classes of existential rules enriched with negative constraints.
However, observe that some rules might be unreliable if
they are extracted from ontology learning or written by unskillful knowledge engineer (Lehmann et al. 2011). Meyer
et al. (2006) proposed a tableau-like algorithm which yields
E XP T IME as upper bound for ﬁnding maximally conceptsatisﬁable terminologies represented in ALC. Kalyanpur et
al. (2006) provided solutions on repairing unsatisﬁable concepts in a consistent OWL ontology. Furthermore, usually
there exist preferences between rules, and rules with negation are often considered less preferred than rules without
negation. Scharrenbach et al. (2010) proposed that the original axioms must be preserved in the knowledge base under certain conditions and requires changing the underlying
logics for repair. Wang et al. (2014) proposed that when new
facts are added that contradict to the ontology, it is often desirable to revise the ontology according to the added data.
Therefore, this motivates us to consider another repair that
selects maximal components of the existential rules. We illustrate the motivation via the following example.
Example 1. Let D = {Bat(a), M ammal(a)} be a database and let Σ be the following rule set expressing that each
bat can ﬂy and has at least one cave to live in; and if one
creature lives in cave then it is a trogloxene; and if we do not
know one mammal can ﬂy then it can not ﬂy; if one creature
can ﬂy then it is a bird; additionally a bird can not be a
trogloxene at the same time; similarly a bird can not be a
mammal meanwhile.

Abstract
Classical inconsistency-tolerant query answering relies on selecting maximal components of an ABox/database which are
consistent with the ontology. However, some rules in ontologies might be unreliable if they are extracted from ontology
learning or written by unskillful knowledge engineers. In this
paper we present a framework of handling inconsistent existential rules under stable model semantics, which is deﬁned
by a notion called rule repairs to select maximal components
of the existential rules. Surprisingly, for R-acyclic existential
rules with R-stratiﬁed or guarded existential rules with stratiﬁed negations, both the data complexity and combined complexity of query answering under the rule repair semantics
remain the same as that under the conventional query answering semantics. This leads us to propose several approaches to
handle the rule repair semantics by calling answer set programming solvers. An experimental evaluation shows that
these approaches have good scalability of query answering
under rule repairs on realistic cases.

Introduction
Querying inconsistent ontologies is an intriguing new problem that gives rise to a ﬂourishing research activity in
the description logic (DL) and existential rules community.
Consistent query answering, ﬁrst developed for relational
databases (Arenas, Bertossi, and Chomicki 1999; Chomicki
2007) and then generalized as the AR and IAR semantics for
several DLs (Lembo et al. 2010), is the most widely recognized semantics for inconsistency-tolerant query answering.
These two traditional semantics are based upon the notion of
repair, deﬁned as an inclusion-maximal subset of the ABox
consistent with the TBox. Du, Qi, and Shen (2013) studied
query answering under weight-based AR semantics for DL
SHIQ. Bienvenu, Bourgaux, and Goasdoué (2014) studied
variants of AR and IAR semantics for DL-LiteR obtained
by replacing classical repairs with various preferred repairs.
Existential rules (also known as Datalog± ) are set to play a
central role in the context of query answering and information extraction for the Semantic Web. Lukasiewicz et al.

Bat(x) → CanF ly(x),
(1)
Bat(x) → ∃yLiveIn(x, y), Cave(y), (2)
LiveIn(x, y), Cave(y) → T rogloxene(x),
(3)
M ammal(x), not CanF ly(x) → CanN otF ly(x),
(4)
CanF ly(x) → Bird(x),
(5)
Bird(x), T rogloxene(x) → ⊥,
(6)
Bird(x), M ammal(x) → ⊥.
(7)

Clearly Σ, D is inconsistent under stable model semantics.
We assume P1 = {(1), (2), (3)} is more reliable (or preferred) than P2 = {(4), (5), (6), (7)} . Then we can delete

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1095

