Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Modal Learning over User-Contributed Content
from Cross-Domain Social Media
Wen-Yu Lee
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
majorrei@cmlab.csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
check-in

What is this?

The goal of the research is to discover and summarize
data from the emerging social media into information of
interests. Speciﬁcally, leveraging user-contributed data
from cross-domain social media, the idea is to perform multi-modal learning for a given photo, aiming to
present people’s description or comments, geographical information, and events of interest, closely related
to the photo. These information then can be used for
various purposes, such as being a real-time guide for
the tourists to improve the quality of tourism. As a result, this research investigates modern challenges of image annotation, image retrieval, and cross-media mining, followed by presenting promising ways to conquer
the challenges.

Any similar places?

learning

Image annotation
Taipei 101,
0DOO«

geo-tag retrieval
Image retrieval

Where am I?

25.03,
121.56

Taipei 101

What is
Light show,
interesting? )LUHZRUNV«
Query

Cross-domain
social media
comments
historical
data
Cross-media mining

Every day, millions of media data are uploaded to social
sharing websites. It is desirable to discover what the large
number of data can be used to make our lives better. In
our daily life, “what is this?” and “where am I?” are two
common questions that arise when people go out. Earlier, it
could be troublesome or even hard to ﬁnd the answers, especially when there is a language barrier, e.g., when travelling abroad. Moreover, people are often like to explore more
about the places they are visiting. “Are there special events
or festivals?” “What happened?” It is interesting to discover
a speciﬁc region from various perspectives, such as foods
and clothing.
As a solution, my dissertation attempts to build an effective social-media mining system for these questions, by
developing effective techniques of image annotation, image retrieval, and cross-media mining, considering modern challenges. Figure 1 illustrates the idea. Ideally, people
may upload a photo onto the system. The system then performs social-media information retrieval based on the photo.
Speciﬁcally, the system is expected to generate textual tags
that reﬂect the image content of the photo by image annotation, geo-tags that indicates where the photo might be taken
by image retrieval, and events of interests and/or various perspectives related to the photo by cross-media mining.

Figure 1: Illustration of the desired social-media mining system, including the components of image annotation, image
retrieval, and cross-media mining.

Problem Formulation
Although image annotation, image retrieval, and media mining, are classical problems, modern challenges have reshaped the problems. We focus on the following challenges
of these problems.
• Image annotation: graph-based semi-supervised learning
is a powerful technique to propagate tags from tagged
images to un-tagged images, where handling large-scale
image datasets and high-dimensional data are critical for
modern tag propagation.
• Image retrieval: most previous works were based on image clustering of visual features and geo-tags; however,
geo-tags of images might not be accurate enough and may
be limited on distinguishing buildings in a close proximity. In addition, images of image clusters may be noisy.
• Cross-media mining: most previous works summarized
events a single media stream, where the information could
be limited because different media streams have different
features. It is desirable to combine multiple media streams

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4301

