Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Affective Personalization of a Social Robot Tutor
for Children’s Second Language Skills
Goren Gordon,a,b,c Samuel Spaulding,a,c Jacqueline Kory Westlund,a,c Jin Joo Lee,a,c
Luke Plummer,a Marayna Martinez,a Madhurima Das,a Cynthia Breazeala,c
a

Personal Robots Group, MIT Media Lab,
20 Ames Street E15-468, Cambridge, MA 02139
b
Curiosity Lab, Industrial Engineering Department, Tel-Aviv Univerisity, 6997801, Israel
c
{ggordon,samuelsp,jakory,jinjoo,cynthiab}@media.mit.edu
sonalize the curriculum to each student (e.g., the order and
type of questions asked or the content presented), fewer have
addressed the equally critical aspect of personalizing the tutoring interaction to the affective state of the student. If a
student is discouraged by the material and disengages from
the tutoring system, personalization of the educational content may be ineffective - the student is not attending to it
all. Recent innovations in affective sensing technology, such
as McDuff, Kaliouby, and Picard (2012), have allowed researchers to begin using students’ affective responses as input to intelligent tutoring systems, such that the system can
respond to students’ affective states Woolf et al. (2009); Arroyo et al.; Vanlehn et al.. However, so far, these systems
generally incorporate simple rule-based extensions to deal
with students’ affective states, and are based on virtual tutors, not physically embodied robots Nye, Graesser, and Hu
(2014). Additional prior work has shown that a physically
embodied tutor may be more effective than a virtual tutor
Leyzberg, Spaulding, and Scassellati (2014).
In this work, we present an integrated affective tutoring
system that uses an integrated child-tablet-robot setup Gordon and Breazeal; Jeong et al. (2014); Kory and Breazeal.
The supportive affective behavior of a robotic tutor is autonomously learned and personalized to each student over
multiple interactive tutoring sessions. The system is composed of four primary components:

Abstract
Though substantial research has been dedicated towards using technology to improve education, no current methods are
as effective as one-on-one tutoring. A critical, though relatively understudied, aspect of effective tutoring is modulating
the student’s affective state throughout the tutoring session in
order to maximize long-term learning gains. We developed
an integrated experimental paradigm in which children play
a second-language learning game on a tablet, in collaboration with a fully autonomous social robotic learning companion. As part of the system, we measured children’s valence
and engagement via an automatic facial expression analysis
system. These signals were combined into a reward signal
that fed into the robot’s affective reinforcement learning algorithm. Over several sessions, the robot played the game
and personalized its motivational strategies (using verbal and
non-verbal actions) to each student. We evaluated this system with 34 children in preschool classrooms for a duration
of two months. We saw that (1) children learned new words
from the repeated tutoring sessions, (2) the affective policy
personalized to students over the duration of the study, and
(3) students who interacted with a robot that personalized its
affective feedback strategy showed a signiﬁcant increase in
valence, as compared to students who interacted with a nonpersonalizing robot. This integrated system of tablet-based
educational content, affective sensing, affective policy learning, and an autonomous social robot holds great promise for
a more comprehensive approach to personalized tutoring.

1. a novel, fully autonomous social robot platform (called
Tega), which was speciﬁcally designed to be engaging for
children, is robust enough to work continuously for several hours, and is portable in order to be deployed in the
ﬁeld;

Introduction
Socially assistive robotics (SAR) is an emerging ﬁeld which
strives to create socially interactive robots that aid people in
different areas of their lives, such as education and care for
the elderly Tapus, Maja, and Scassellatti (2007); Williams
(2012); Fasola and Mataric (2013). Educational assistive
robots are designed to support children’s learning and development, e.g., in the classroom Movellan et al. (2009); Chang
et al. (2010) or in one-on-one tutoring sessions Saerbeck et
al. (2010); Kory, Jeong, and Breazeal; Fridin (2014). However, children may learn in different ways and at different
paces. In order to teach children most effectively, one must
personalize the educational interaction to each child VanLehn (2011). While many intelligent tutoring systems per-

2. a novel, educational Android tablet app that allows for
general curriculum generation and seamless integration
with the social robot;
3. an Android smartphone that uses the commercial Affdex
SDK to automatically analyze facial expressions in realtime McDuff, Kaliouby, and Picard (2012); and
4. a cognitive architecture that integrates and feeds affective information from Affdex and educational information
from the tablet into an affective reinforcement learning algorithm, which determines the social robot’s verbal and
non-verbal behavior.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3951

