Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Semisupervised Autoencoder for Sentiment Analysis
Shuangfei Zhai, Zhongfei (Mark) Zhang
Computer Science Department, Binghamton University
4400 Vestal Pkwy E, Binghamton, NY 13902
szhai2@binghamton.edu zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

differs from most of the existing work as it naturally incorporates label information into its objective function, which
allow the learned representation to be directly coupled with
the task of interest.
In this paper we focus on a speciﬁc class of task in text
mining: Sentiment Analysis (SA). We further focus on a special case of SA as a binary classiﬁcation problem, where a
given piece of text is either of positive or negative attitude.
This problem is interesting largely due to the emergence of
online social networks, where people consistently express
their opinions about certain subjects. Also, it is easy to obtain a large amount of clean labeled data for SA by crawling
reviews from websites such as IMDB or Amazon. Thus, SA
is an ideal benchmark for evaluating text classiﬁcation models (and features).
Autoencoders have attracted a lot of attention in recent
years as a building block of Deep Learning (Bengio 2009).
They act as the feature learning methods by reconstructing
inputs with respect to a given loss function. In a neural network implementation of autoencoders, the hidden layer is
taken as the learned feature. While it is often trivial to obtain good reconstructions with plain autoencoders, much effort has been devoted on regularizations in order to prevent
them against overﬁtting (Bengio 2009; Vincent et al. 2008;
Rifai et al. 2011b). However, little attention has been devoted to the loss function, which we argue is critical for
modeling textual data. The problem with the commonly
adopted loss functions (squared Euclidean distance and
element-wise KL Divergence, for instance) is that they try to
reconstruct all dimensions of input independently and undiscriminatively. However, we argue that this is not the optimal
approach when our interest is text classiﬁcation. The reason
is two folds. First, it is well known that in natural language
the distribution of word occurrences follows the power-law.
This means that a few of the most frequent words will account for most of the probability mass of word occurrences.
An immediate result is that the Autoencoder puts most of
its effort on reconstructing the most frequent words well but
(to a certain extent) ignores the less frequent ones. This may
lead to a bad performance especially when the class distribution is not well captured by merely the frequent words. For
sentiment analysis, this problem is especially severe because
it is obvious that the truly useful features (words or phrases
expressing a clear polarity) only occupy a small fraction of

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the usage of autoencoders in
modeling textual data. Traditional autoencoders suffer from
at least two aspects: scalability with the high dimensionality
of vocabulary size and dealing with task-irrelevant words. We
address this problem by introducing supervision via the loss
function of autoencoders. In particular, we ﬁrst train a linear
classiﬁer on the labeled data, then deﬁne a loss for the autoencoder with the weights learned from the linear classiﬁer.
To reduce the bias brought by one single classiﬁer, we deﬁne a posterior probability distribution on the weights of the
classiﬁer, and derive the marginalized loss of the autoencoder
with Laplace approximation. We show that our choice of loss
function can be rationalized from the perspective of Bregman
Divergence, which justiﬁes the soundness of our model. We
evaluate the effectiveness of our model on six sentiment analysis datasets, and show that our model signiﬁcantly outperforms all the competing methods with respect to classiﬁcation
accuracy. We also show that our model is able to take advantage of unlabeled dataset and get improved performance. We
further show that our model successfully learns highly discriminative feature maps, which explains its superior performance.

Introduction
In machine learning, documents are usually represented as
Bag of Words (BoW), which nicely reduces a piece of
text with arbitrary length to a ﬁxed length vector. Despite
its simplicity, BoW remains the dominant representation in
many applications including text classiﬁcation. There has
also been a large body of work dedicated to learning useful representations for textual data (Turney and Pantel 2010;
Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003; Deerwester et al. 1990; Mikolov
et al. 2013; Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011). By exploiting
the co-occurrence pattern of words, one can learn a low dimensional vector that forms a compact and meaningful representation for a document. The new representation is often
found useful for subsequent tasks such as topic visualization
and information retrieval. In this paper, we investigate the
application of one of the most popular representation learning methods, namely autoencoders (Bengio 2009), to learn
task-dependent representations for textual data. Our model
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1394

