Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Extracting Topical Phrases
from Clinical Documents
Yulan He
School of Engineering and Applied Science
Aston University, UK
y.he@cantab.net

(El-Kishky et al. 2014) also operates LDA on the “bag-ofphrases”. But it decomposes each phrase and imposes a constraint in LDA inference that all the constituent words within
the same phrase should be assigned with the same topic.
However, their method cannot detect less frequent phrases
sharing common lower-order n-grams, for example, drugs
with different dosage levels such as “ciproﬂoxacin 500 mg”
and “ciproﬂoxacin 250 mg”. The second category of approaches is to extract topical phrases as a post-processing
step to unigram topic models (Blei and Lafferty 2009;
Danilevsky et al. 2014). Such approaches assume that words
which are simultaneously labeled with the same topic many
times can be grouped as a phrase. However, in unigram topic
models, words within the same phrase may not be assigned
with the same topic. Moreover, as topic models are typically run on data with stopwords removed, the post-process
approaches would have a difﬁculty in recognising phrases
which contain stopwords such as “short of breath”. The last
category of approaches combine phrase boundary detection
with topic inference into a uniﬁed model. Examples include
the Topic N-Gram (TNG) model (Wang, McCallum, and
Wei 2007), the phrase-discovering topic model (PDLDA)
(Lindsey, Headden III, and Stipicevic 2012) and the N-gram
Topic Segmentation model (Jameel and Lam 2013). But the
models are computationally too complex and the topical
phrases detected often have lower quality.
In this paper, we propose a new approach which lies
in between the aforementioned categories 1 and 3 of topical phrase extraction approaches. We ﬁrst extract the medical phrases from patient’s discharge summaries using an
off-the-shelf medical concept mention extraction tool. The
phrases extracted are guaranteed to be of high quality and
are also clinical-relevant. Then we learn a topic model which
takes a hierarchy of Pitman-Yor Processes (PYPs) as priors.
This allows the capture of n-grams of arbitrary length naturally by taking into account word orders within phrases. As
will be shown in our experimental results, the proposed approach outperforms the other topical phrase models in terms
of both perplexity and topic coherence measure and generates more interpretable topics.
We proceed to describe related work in topic modelling
of clinical documents and phrase discovery topic models.
We then discuss how we extract medical phrases and present
our proposed Topical Phrase Model (TPM) followed by ex-

Abstract
In clinical documents, medical terms are often expressed in
multi-word phrases. Traditional topic modelling approaches
relying on the “bag-of-words” assumption are not effective
in extracting topic themes from clinical documents. This paper proposes to ﬁrst extract medical phrases using an off-theshelf tool for medical concept mention extraction, and then
train a topic model which takes a hierarchy of Pitman-Yor
processes as prior for modelling the generation of phrases of
arbitrary length. Experimental results on patients’ discharge
summaries show that the proposed approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art topical phrase extraction model on both perplexity and topic coherence measure and ﬁnds more interpretable topics.

Introduction
Topics models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
(Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) have been extensively used to
automatically discover topical themes from text documents.
However, most of the topic models rely on the bag-of-words
assumption by ignoring word orders and the extracted topics are often listed as a sequence of word unigrams which
could hinder the interpretability of the discovered topics.
In clinical documents, medical terms are often expressed
in multi-word phrases, for example, “blood glucose” and
“white blood cell”. These two phrases, if split into unigrams, would lose their original semantic meanings. Also,
they might be grouped under the same topic by the unigram
topic models because of the common word “blood”. For
this reason, simply splitting documents into word unigrams
would generate ambiguous and spurious topics (Arnold and
Speier 2012).
There are in general three categories of approaches to topical phrase extraction. The ﬁrst one is to pre-process documents by extracting phrases, either based on some statistical
measures for word collocation terms detection or through
frequent pattern mining, and then run traditional topic models such as LDA on the “bag-of-phrases”. Since each extracted phrase is considered as a single term, the resulting
vocabulary is signiﬁcantly enlarged which leads to more
sparse data. The topical phrase mining method (ToPMine)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2957

