Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multitask Generalized Eigenvalue Program
Boyu Wang and Joelle Pineau

Borja Balle

School of Computer Science
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
boyu.wang@mail.mcgill.ca, jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
b.deballepigem@lancaster.ac.uk

knowledge so that learning performance is better than independently solving each single GEP. This issue is especially
important when the data for each GEP is insufﬁcient, resulting in unreliable estimates of A and B, and therefore a poor
estimate of the eigenvector w . Such a scenario may arise in
many machine learning applications, including but not limited to:

Abstract
We present a novel multitask learning framework called
multitask generalized eigenvalue program (MTGEP), which
jointly solves multiple related generalized eigenvalue problems (GEPs). This framework is quite general and can be
applied to many eigenvalue problems in machine learning
and pattern recognition, ranging from supervised learning to
unsupervised learning, such as principal component analysis
(PCA), Fisher discriminant analysis (FDA), common spatial
pattern (CSP), and so on. The core assumption of our approach is that the leading eigenvectors of related GEPs lie
in some subspace that can be approximated by a sparse linear combination of basis vectors. As a result, these GEPs
can be jointly solved by a sparse coding approach. Empirical evaluation with both synthetic and benchmark real world
datasets validates the efﬁcacy and efﬁciency of the proposed
techniques, especially for grouped multitask GEPs.

• Supervised learning: perform multitask classiﬁcation using FDA (Bishop 2006).
• Unsupervised learning: ﬁnd principal components for
multiple related datasets, yet each dataset consists of very
few instances (Jolliffe 2002).
• Spatial ﬁlter for signal processing: design subjectspeciﬁc spatial ﬁlters with a few electroencephalogram
(EEG) data using common spatial pattern (CSP) algorithm (Ramoser, Müller-Gerking, and Pfurtscheller 2000),
which is one of the most popular algorithms in braincomputer interface (BCI) research (Wolpaw et al. 2002).
More recently, this technique has also been applied for
discriminative feature construction (Karampatziakis and
Mineiro 2014).

Introduction
The generalized eigenvalue problem (GEP) requires ﬁnding
the solution of a system of equations:
Aw = λBw,

(1)

Some of these problems can be handled using existing
multitask learning techniques (Caruana 1997). However,
most previous work on multitask learning focuses only on
supervised learning (Evgeniou, Micchelli, and Pontil 2005;
Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2008; Xue et al. 2007), has
not been extended to the GEP setting.
On the practical side, our work is motivated by the need
to improve EEG signal classiﬁcation for Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) applications. Let X ∈ Rd×T be a segment of
multichannel EEG signals, where d is the number of channels and T is the number of sampled time points. The objective of a CSP algorithm is to design a series of spatial ﬁlters
W by simultaneous diagonalization of two covariance matrices of classes of EEG patterns for each subject (task):

with respect to the pair (λ, w), where λ is the generalized
eigenvalue, w ∈ Rd , w = 0, is the corresponding generalized eigenvector, and A, B ∈ Rd×d . The GEP is useful as
it provides an efﬁcient approach to optimize the Rayleigh
quotient
w Aw
,
(2)
max 
w=0 w Bw
which arises in several pattern recognition and machine
learning tasks. For example, both principal component analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe 2002) and Fisher discriminant analysis
(FDA) (Bishop 2006), can be formulated as special cases of
this problem. In most machine learning applications, A and
B are estimated from data; in PCA, B = I, the identity matrix, and A is the covariance matrix estimated from data.
Although the GEP has been well studied over the
years (Bie, Cristianini, and Rosipal 2005), to the best of
our knowledge no one has tackled the problem of how to
jointly solve multiple related GEPs, by sharing the common

W  Σ(+) W = Λ(+) ,


W Σ

(−)

W =Λ

(−)

(3)

,

such that Λ(+) and Λ(−) are diagonal
matrices and Λ(+) +

1
(−)
(c)
Λ
= I, where Σ
= |Ic | i∈Ic Xi Xi and Ic (c ∈
{+, −}) is the set of indices of two classes of EEG patterns
(e.g., left/right hand motor imagery). It can be shown that

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2115

