Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Short Text Representation for Detecting Churn in Microblogs
Hadi Amiri and Hal Daumé III
Computational Linguistics and Information Processing (CLIP) Lab
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland
{hadi,hal}@umiacs.umd.edu

Churn detection is a challenging task because of the following reasons (Amiri and Daume III 2015): First, the task is
target-dependent and therefore comparative micro-posts in
which users compare several brands against each other introduce a challenge to this task. Second, simple language constituents such as prepositions affect accurate churn detection. For example, consider the prepositions “to” and “from”
in “switch to Brand-1” vs. “switch from Brand-1”. Third,
negation has an important contextual effect on churn detection as it simply reverse the label of a micro-posts. Fourth,
churny keywords1 do not necessarily indicate churny contents. For example, the micro-posts “Brand-1 to give Brand2 customers up to $450 to switch” or “ I need a little Brand1’s #help b4 leaving the states” contain the terms “switch”
and “leaving” respectively but they are not churny with respect to the brands. Finally, churny contents can be expressed in subtle ways such as “debating if I should stay
with Brand-1” or “in 2 months, bye Brand-1” that contain
no obvious churny keywords.
One may suspect that an state-of-the-art sentiment analysis system can be used to identify churny contents. Therefore, it might be enough to rely on such a system and consider negative micro-posts about a target brand as churny
and positive or neutral ones as non-churny. However, this
approach fails because of the following three reasons: (a)
positive micro-posts could be churny, e.g. the tweet “hate
that i might end up leaving Brand-1 cuss they are the best
company ever” is churny even though it expresses positive
opinion about the brand, (b) neutral micro-posts could be
churny as well, e.g. the tweet “I am leaving Brand-1 on
March 7th” is churny while it’s of neutral orientation as it
does not explicitly express any positive or negative opinion
about the brand, and (c) negative micro-posts could be nonchurny, e.g. the tweet “Brand-1 cell coverage still sucks” expresses a negative opinion about the brand while it’s nonchurny as it does not indicate that the user is leaving the
brand 2 . In fact, our experiments shows that state-of-the-art
sentiment classiﬁers perform poorly on churn classiﬁcation

Abstract
Churn happens when a customer leaves a brand or stop using its services. Brands reduce their churn rates by identifying and retaining potential churners through customer retention campaigns. In this paper, we consider the problem of
classifying micro-posts as churny or non-churny with respect
to a given brand. Motivated by the recent success of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) in word representation, we propose to utilize RNNs to learn micro-post and churn indicator
representations. We show that such representations improve
the performance of churn detection in microblogs and lead
to more accurate ranking of churny contents. Furthermore, in
this research we show that state-of-the-art sentiment analysis
approaches fail to identify churny contents. Experiments on
Twitter data about three telco brands show the utility of our
approach for this task.

Introduction
Retaining customers is an important challenge for all businesses. Banks, telecommunication companies, airlines and
other businesses utilize customer churn or attrition rate as a
key business metric. Potential churners of a brand are those
customers who are at the high risk of leaving the brand and
its services. Identifying such customers, the ﬁrst step of retention campaigns (Huang, Kechadi, and Buckley 2012),
is crucial as the costs associated with retaining an existing
customer greatly exceed the costs of acquiring a new one.
This problem has been extensively studied on Call-Record
data (CRD) in the context of social graphs of telecommunication companies (Verbeke, Martens, and Baesens 2014;
Karnstedt et al. 2010) and to a lesser extent on online gaming (Kawale, Pal, and Srivastava 2009), chat and forum communities (Karnstedt et al. 2011; Oentaryo et al. 2012), and
more recently on microblogs (Amiri and Daume III 2015).
The task of churn detection can be deﬁned as follows:
Given a micro-post and a target brand, determine if the
micro-post is churny or non-churny with respect to the
brand. For example the following tweets are churny with respect to “Brand-1”: “my days with Brand-1 are numbered”,
“i am leaving Brand-1 for Brand-2!” , “Brand-1: will change
carriers as soon as contract is up.”.

such as: {leave, leaving, switch, switching, numbered, cancel,
canceling, discontinue, give up, call off, through with, get rid, end
contract, break up, , . . . }.
2
Note that, although churn and sentiment detection are different
tasks, sentiment signals could be useful for detecting churny contents as such contents may carry negative sentiment toward brands.
1

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2566

