Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Strategyproof Peer Selection: Mechanisms, Analyses, and Experiments
Haris Aziz

Omer Lev

Nicholas Mattei

Data61 and UNSW
Sydney, Australia
haris.aziz@nicta.com.au

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
omerl@cs.toronto.edu

Data61 and UNSW
Sydney, Australia
nicholas.mattei@nicta.com.au

Jeffrey S. Rosenschein

Toby Walsh

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
jeff@cs.huji.ac.il

Data61 and UNSW
Sydney, Australia
toby.walsh@nicta.com.au

The problem arising from using peer review to select contestants has been well known for millennia: people might report
untruthful valuations of others in order to improve their own
chances of selection. The problem has been referred to as
the peer selection problem. Various techniques have been
attempted to solve it, most of which focused on reducing the
inﬂuence of other participants on the selection of winners,
for example, by using lotteries to either replace selection or
to be a heavy part of the process (Mowbray and Gollmann
2007), or by using disinterested panels to prevent the participants of the contest from any inﬂuence at all.
Despite these measures, various settings in which each
participant is both a candidate and a voter persist, for example, in the academic review process, various funding settings (the National Science Foundation (NSF) in the US
is seeking to apply it to its funding allocation (Hazelrigg 2013)), and award decisions. Moreover, as the use
of crowdsourcing in the online world is growing—from
grading tasks in MOOCs to evaluating code in TopCoder
(Lakhani, Garvin, and Lonstein 2010)—the need for desirable peer selection mechanisms becomes more and more
important. All these settings can be captured by a simple

model: agents rate or rank one another (or some subset of
their peers), and based on these reports a speciﬁed number
of agents are selected. This problem has received much recent attention (Alon et al. 2011; Fischer and Klimm 2014;
Holzman and Moulin 2013; Kurokawa et al. 2015; Roos,
Rothe, and Scheuermann 2011). Since peer review can be
costly in terms of time and effort, each agent may be asked to
review only a subset of other agents (Kurokawa et al. 2015;
Merriﬁeld and Saari 2009).
The main challenge in the peer selection problem is to
propose strategyproof (also called impartial) mechanisms in
which agents cannot increase their chances of being selected
by misreporting.1 Natural approaches to solve the peer selection problem, such the application of a voting rule, are
not strategyproof (also called manipulable). A different approach to the selection problem is to use mechanisms similar to the Page Rank algorithm that use Markov chains to
compute a ranking of the agents (Walsh 2014). Unfortunately, these approaches are also manipulable. If a mechanism is manipulable, the normative properties of the mechanism (that hold under the assumption that agents do not
misreport) may not hold in general. Hence, we primarily focus on strategyproof mechanisms, although we also consider
some natural manipulable mechanisms as well to provide a
“best case” comparison.
Strategyproofness can be trivially satisﬁed by randomly
selecting k agents or selecting the best k agents according
to one particular agent (as do dictatorship mechanisms in
social choice), but as we wish to select “quality” winners,
we want to incorporate the views of all the agents. An established way to achieve strategyproofness is to partition the
agents into a set of clusters and then select a speciﬁed number of agents from each cluster based on the reports of agents
outside the cluster (Alon et al. 2011). We combine this partitioning principle with ideas from a fair division rule to divide
a dollar (Dollar for short) (de Clippel, Moulin, and Tideman
2008), to create a novel mechanism called Dollar Partition.
Contributions: We provide a comprehensive survey and
study of existing peer selection mechanisms. We show that

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A strict incentive to report truthfully is not possible in strategyproof mechanisms, so strictly better mechanisms are impossible.

Abstract
We study an important crowdsourcing setting where agents
evaluate one another and, based on these evaluations, a subset of agents are selected. This setting is ubiquitous when
peer review is used for distributing awards in a team, allocating funding to scientists, and selecting publications for conferences. The fundamental challenge when applying crowdsourcing in these settings is that agents may misreport their
reviews of others to increase their chances of being selected. We propose a new strategyproof (impartial) mechanism called Dollar Partition that satisﬁes desirable axiomatic
properties. We then show, using a detailed experiment with
parameter values derived from target real world domains, that
our mechanism performs better on average, and in the worst
case, than other strategyproof mechanisms in the literature.

1

Introduction

390

