Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

What’s Hot at RoboCup
(Extended Abstract)
Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

RoboCup 2016 in Leipzig, Germany will be the 20th annual international RoboCup competitions and symposium.
Since the inaugural event at IJCAI 1997 during which three
soccer competitions were held in half of a hotel ballroom,
RoboCup has grown to include various competitions beyond
soccer, and routinely ﬁlls a whole convention center. Accompanying the competition each year there has been a symposium with proceedings published in book format that include
refereed technical contributions related to RoboCup and often, invited papers from that year’s champion teams.
Full information about the history, mission, and organization of RoboCup is available at www.robocup.org. This
paper does not recap these items. Rather, in the spirit of the
AAAI “What’s Hot” track, the aim is to give an overview
of the latest and most innovative developments, as well as
highlighting some of the current and future challenges upon
which today’s RoboCup participants are focused.
By far the best way to experience what’s hot at RoboCup is
to attend in person. With routinely more than 2,000 registered
participants competing in more than ten different leagues and
subleagues, each with its own rules and technical challenges,
the four days of competition and subsequent symposium
leave hardly enough time to fully appreciate all of the details.
The reader with the time and resources is encouraged to
stop reading here, and instead plan to attend (or better yet,
participate in!) an upcoming RoboCup competition. One
would expect to see:
• Hundreds of fully autonomous robots all simultaneously
executing complex sensing, decision-making, and acting;
• Fast-moving, wheeled robots passing a ball with amazing
precision;
• Novel, award-winning, humanoid open platforms that can
walk on artiﬁcial grass and stand up by themselves;
• Innovative service robots communicating through speech
and manipulating objects in unstructured environments;
• Highly mobile rescue robots navigating over complex terrains in a NIST standard arena;
• Complex, learned individual and multi-robot behaviors;
• Many other technical AI and robotics achievements.
For those who are not so fortunate to get ﬁrsthand experience,
the remainder of this extended abstract, and accompanying
talk at AAAI, aim to serve as a pale substitute. There are
far too many RoboCup-related developments to cover all of

them in detail. What follows is a sampling.
Color-free Environments: SPL, HL. RoboCup includes
two soccer leagues that use humanoid robots. In the Standard Platform League (SPL), teams use identical robot hardware - currently the Aldebaran Nao robot. In the Humanoid
League (HL), teams build their own robots. Traditionally,
both leagues have used color-coded environments in order
to simplify the vision problem. Goals have been blue on one
side of the ﬁeld and yellow on the other, and the ball has been
orange. Both leagues have now moved to fully symmetric
ﬁelds with two white goals. Participating teams have risen
to the challenge by developing new, more robust vision and
cooperative localization algorithms.
Audio Communication: SPL. A perennial challenge at
RoboCup is that hundreds of robots in the same room are all
communicating over wiﬁ simultaneously. Inevitably chaos
ensues — or at least communication ﬂakiness. One SPL team
this year demonstrated audio-based communication using
high-pitched frequencies. The league is considering requiring
such communication in the future.
Push Recovery and High Jumping: HL. Robust, highly
dynamic walking is a major focus of the HL. This year, robots
were challenged to exhibit push recovery and were tested on
a high jump challenge.
Human Robot Interaction: @Home. One of the beyondsoccer leagues at RoboCup, RoboCup@Home, deals with
service robots in domestic environments. The robots exhibit
impressive human-aware navigation, behavior recognition,
gesture recognition, and speech-based interaction. Current
participants are developing intuitive user interfaces using
mobile phones, touch pads, or other such devices in order to
allow naive users to operate a robot without speech.
Manipulation: @Home, Logistics, @Work. Two other
beyond-soccer leagues are RoboCup@Work and the Logistics League. Both are joining @Home in encouraging research on manipulation. The 2015 RoboCup@Work competition featured a pick-and-place scenario.
Passing: SSL, 2DSIM, MSL, 3DSIM. Some soccer
leagues have exhibited fast, robust passing for years. In particular, the Small Size League (SSL), which features very
fast, small robots controlled remotely and perceived by an
overhead camera, has exhibited impressive, precise passing,
as has the 2D simulation league (2DSIM), which features

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4346

