Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Conquering Adversary Behavioral Uncertainty in Security Games:
An Efﬁcient Modeling Robust Based Algorithm
Thanh H. Nguyen, Arunesh Sinha, Milind Tambe
University of Southern California
SAL 300, 941 Bloom Walk, Los Angeles, California, 90089
{thanhhng, aruneshs, tambe}@usc.edu

Introduction

sent uncertainty in SSG (Kiekintveld, Islam, and Kreinovich
2013). Second, based on this game model, we propose a new
efﬁcient robust algorithm that computes the defender’s optimal strategy which is robust to the uncertainty.
Overall, the resulting robust optimization problem for
computing the defender’s optimal strategy against the worst
case of behavioral uncertainty is a non-linear non-convex
fractional maximin problem. Our algorithm efﬁciently
solves this problem based on the following key insights: 1)
it converts the problem into a single maximization problem
via a non-linear conversion for fractional terms and the dual
of the inner minimization in maximin; 2) a binary search is
then applied to remove the fractional terms; and 3) the algorithm explores extreme points of the feasible solution region
and uses a piece-wise linear approximation to convert the
problem into a Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP). Our
1
)-optimal solution where
new algorithm provides an O(+ K
 is the convergence threshold for the binary search and K
is the number of segments in the piecewise approximation.

Real-world deployed applications of Stackelberg Security
Games (Shieh et al. 2012; Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni
2009; Letchford and Vorobeychik 2011) have led to signiﬁcant research emphasis on modeling the attacker’s bounded
rationality (Yang et al. 2011; Nguyen et al. 2013). One key
assumption in behavioral modeling is the availability of a
signiﬁcant amount of data to obtain an accurate prediction.
However, in real-world security domains such as the wildlife
protection, this assumption may be inapplicable due to the
limited access to real-world data (Lemieux 2014), leading
to uncertainty in the attacker’s behaviors — a key research
challenge of security problems.
Recent research has focused on addressing uncertainty in
behavioral modeling, following two different approaches: 1)
one approach assumes a known distribution of multiple attacker types, each follows a certain behavioral model, and
attempts to solve the resulting Bayesian games (Yang et
al. 2014); and 2) another considers the existence of multiple attacker types of which behavioral models are perfectly
known, but without a known distribution over the types. It
then only considers the worst attacker type for the defender
(Brown, Haskell, and Tambe 2014). These two approaches
have several limitations. First, both still require a sufﬁcient
amount of data to precisely estimate either the distribution
over attacker types (the former approach) or the model parameters for each individual type (the latter approach). Second, solving the resulting Bayesian games in the former case
is computationally expensive. Third, the latter approach
tends to be overly conservative as it only focuses on the
worst-case attacker type.
This paper remedies these shortcomings of state-of-theart approaches when addressing behavioral uncertainty in
SSG by providing three key contributions. First, we present
a new game model with uncertainty in which we consider a
single behavioral model to capture decision making of the
whole attacker population (instead of multiple behavioral
models); uncertainty intervals are integrated with the chosen
model to capture behavioral uncertainty. The idea of uncertainty interval is commonly used in literature (Aghassi and
Bertsimas 2006) and has been shown to effectively repre-

Background
Stackelberg security games (SSG). SSG refer to a class of
defender-attacker games in which the defender attempts to
optimally allocate her limited security resources to protect a
set of T targets from being attacked by the attacker. The key
assumption of SSG is that the defender has to commit to a
(mixed) strategy ﬁrst and the attacker can observe that strategy and then attack one of the targets (Korzhyk, Conitzer,
and Parr 2010; Tambe 2011). Suppose that the defender has
R resources (R  T ) and x = {xi } is a defender’s mixed
strategy where xi is the defender’s coverage probability at
target i, the defender’s feasible 
strategy set is deﬁned as follows: X = {x : 0 ≤ xi ≤ 1, i xi = R}. Suppose that
the attacker attacks target i, he will obtain a reward Ria if the
defender is not protecting that target, otherwise he will get a
penalty Pia . Conversely, the defender receives a penalty Pid
and a reward Rid respectively. The expected utility for the
two players at target i can be computed as follows:
Uid (xi ) = xi Rid + (1 − xi )Pid
(1)
a
a
a
(2)
Ui (xi ) = xi Pi + (1 − xi )Ri
Adversarial behavioral models. Recent research in SSG
has focused on modeling the attacker’s bounded rationality and computing the defender’s optimal strategy, assuming

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4242

