Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Cold-Start Heterogeneous-Device Wireless Localization
Vincent W. Zheng† , Hong Cao‡ , Shenghua Gao , Aditi Adhikari† ,
Miao Lin , Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang
†

Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore;
McLaren Applied Technolgoies APAC, Singapore;

ShanghaiTech University, China;

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore;

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
‡

Accuracy

Abstract
In this paper, we study a cold-start heterogeneous-device
localization problem. This problem is challenging, because
it results in an extreme inductive transfer learning setting,
where there is only source domain data but no target domain data. This problem is also underexplored. As there is no
target domain data for calibration, we aim to learn a robust
feature representation only from the source domain. There is
little previous work on such a robust feature learning task;
besides, the existing robust feature representation proposals are both heuristic and inexpressive. As our contribution,
we for the ﬁrst time provide a principled and expressive robust feature representation to solve the challenging cold-start
heterogeneous-device localization problem. We evaluate our
model on two public real-world data sets, and show that it
signiﬁcantly outperforms the best baseline by 23.1%–91.3%
across four pairs of heterogeneous devices.

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

S -> S
S -> T
S=T43,
T=T60

S=N810,
T=D901C

S=N810,
T=N95

S=N810,
T=X61

Figure 1: Accuracy drops from same-device (S → S) to
heterogeneous-device (S → T ) localization, on four pairs
of devices. Data details are given in the experiment. We used
SVM (Chang and Lin 2011) as the localization model.
different sensing chips, these heterogeneous devices easily
receive different RSS values even in the same location, thus
failing the model f . Denote a surveyor device as S, on which
we collect labeled data for training the f . Denote a target device as T , on which we have test data to predict the labels.
In Figure 1, we show that the localization accuracy can drop
signiﬁcantly, if we apply the model trained on S’s training
data to T ’s test data (denoted as S → T ), other than the
same S’s test data (denoted as S → S).
In addition to the device heterogeneity, we face a more
challenging cold start scenario. Some pioneers have tried
to address the device heterogeneity, but they often assume
that the user is willing to help collect a sufﬁcient amount of
calibration data (Haeberlen et al. 2004; Zheng et al. 2008a;
Zhang et al. 2013) to tune their models before localization
service is provided. Such an assumption is impractical – in
fact, we often face the cold start, i.e., no calibration data is
available for a new device at a new place.
In this paper, we aim to solve the following problem:
Problem 1 (Cold-start heterogeneous-device localization).
Given a surveyor device S, by which we collect sufﬁcient
(i) (i)
labeled training data Ds = {(xs , ys )|i = 1, ..., ns }, we
aim to train a localization model f from Ds , such that f can
accurately predict locations for the online test data Dt =
(i)
{xt |i = 1, ..., nt } from a heterogeneous target device T .
As a cold start, there is no data from T to assist training f .
Problem 1 is challenging. Generally, we can characterize Problem 1 as an inductive transfer learning problem in

Introduction
Indoor localization using wireless signal strength has attracted increasing interests from both research and industrial communities (Haeberlen et al. 2004; Lim et al. 2006;
Zheng et al. 2008b; Xu et al. 2014). The state of the art in
wireless localization is learning-based approach (Haeberlen
et al. 2004; Zheng et al. 2008a). In an environment with
d1 ∈ Z+ access points (APs), a mobile device receives wireless signals from these APs. The received signal strength
(RSS) values at one location are used as a feature vector
x ∈ Rd1 , and the device’s location is a label y ∈ Y, where Y
is the set of possible locations in the environment. In an ofﬂine training stage, given sufﬁcient labeled data {(xi , yi )},
we learn a mapping function f : Rd1 → Y. In an online
testing stage, we use f to predict location for a new x.
Most of the existing models work under the data homogeneity assumption, which is impractical given the prevalent
device heterogeneity. Speciﬁcally, the assumption requires
the data used in training f to have the same distribution as
that used in testing. However, in practice, users carry a variety of heterogeneous mobile devices, which are different
from the device used to collect data in training f . Due to
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1429

