Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Building a Large Scale Dataset for Image Emotion Recognition:
The Fine Print and the Benchmark
Quanzeng You and Jiebo Luo

Hailin Jin

Jianchao Yang

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14623
{qyou, jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

Adobe Research
345 Park Avenue
San Jose, CA 95110
hljin@adobe.com

Snapchat Inc
64 Market St
Venice, CA 90291
jianchao.yang@snapchat.com

Abstract
Psychological research results have conﬁrmed that people can have different emotional reactions to different
visual stimuli. Several papers have been published on
the problem of visual emotion analysis. In particular, attempts have been made to analyze and predict people’s
emotional reaction towards images. To this end, different kinds of hand-tuned features are proposed. The results reported on several carefully selected and labeled
small image data sets have conﬁrmed the promise of
such features. While the recent successes of many computer vision related tasks are due to the adoption of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), visual emotion analysis has not achieved the same level of success. This may be primarily due to the unavailability of
conﬁdently labeled and relatively large image data sets
for visual emotion analysis. In this work, we introduce
a new data set, which started from 3+ million weakly
labeled images of different emotions and ended up 30
times as large as the current largest publicly available
visual emotion data set. We hope that this data set encourages further research on visual emotion analysis.
We also perform extensive benchmarking analyses on
this large data set using the state of the art methods including CNNs.

Amusement

Awe

Contentment

Excitement

Anger

Disgust

Fear

Sadness

Figure 1: Example images of eight different emotion categories. Top Row: four positive emotions and Bottom Row:
four negative emotions.

the problem of visual emotion prediction is more difﬁcult in
that we are trying to predict the emotional reactions given
a general visual stimulus, instead of using the collected signals from human’s physiological reactions of visual stimuli
as studied in affective computing.
The increasing popularity of social networks attracts more
and more people to publish multimedia content in online
social network platforms. Online users can easily add textual data, e.g., title, descriptions, tags, to their uploaded images and videos. However, these textual information can
only help the retrieval of multimedia content in the cognitive
level (Machajdik and Hanbury 2010), i.e., semantic level.
The meta text data has limited help in bridging the affective
semantic gap between images pixels and human feelings.
In (Hanjalic 2006), the authors call visual emotion prediction affective content analysis.
Inspired by the psychology and art theory, different
groups of manually crafted features are designed to study
the emotional reactions towards visual content. For example,
based on art theory (Itten and Van Haagen 1973; Valdez and
Mehrabian 1994), Machajdik and Hanbury (Machajdik and
Hanbury 2010) deﬁned eight different kinds of pixel level
features (e.g. color, texture and composition), which have
been empirically proved to be related to emotional reactions.
In another recent work (Zhao et al. 2014), principles-or-art
based features are extracted to classify emotions. Follow-

Introduction
Psychological studies have provided evidence that human emotions can be aroused by visual content, e.g. images (Lang 1979; Lang, Bradley, and Cuthbert 1998; Joshi
et al. 2011). Based on these ﬁndings, recently computer
scientists also started to delve into this research topic.
However, differently from psychological studies, which
mainly focus on studying the changes between physiological and psychological activities of human beings on visual stimuli, most of the works in computer science are
trying to predict the aroused human emotion given a particular piece of visual content. Indeed, affective computing, which aims to recognize, interpret and process human
affects (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affective computing),
has achieved signiﬁcant progress in recent years. However,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

308

