Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Model-Free Preference-Based Reinforcement Learning
Christian Wirth, Johannes Fürnkranz, Gerhard Neumann
Technische Universität Darmstadt
Germany

model-free approach is desirable. Additionally, directed exploration of the utility function is used often, which is hard
to perform if the model is unknown or the state-action space
is continuous and possibly high-dimensional.
In this paper, we show an algorithm for learning a continuous action policy without requiring knowledge of the model
or maintaining an explicit approximation of it. The preferences are used to estimate the expert’s utility function. In
contrast to traditional PBRL methods, our method is able to
use data from interactions with the environment in an online
fashion to improve the policy as well as the estimate of the
utility function. It can, nevertheless, achieve better performance. The utility function is learned using a Bayesian approach, estimating the uncertainty. An approach that could
be used for exploration. Additionally, we compare with a
computationally less expensive linear approximation based
on ideas of Ng and Russell (2000).

Abstract
Specifying a numeric reward function for reinforcement
learning typically requires a lot of hand-tuning from a human
expert. In contrast, preference-based reinforcement learning
(PBRL) utilizes only pairwise comparisons between trajectories as a feedback signal, which are often more intuitive to
specify. Currently available approaches to PBRL for control
problems with continuous state/action spaces require a known
or estimated model, which is often not available and hard to
learn. In this paper, we integrate preference-based estimation
of the reward function into a model-free reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm, resulting in a model-free PBRL algorithm. Our new algorithm is based on Relative Entropy Policy
Search (REPS), enabling us to utilize stochastic policies and
to directly control the greediness of the policy update. REPS
decreases exploration of the policy slowly by limiting the relative entropy of the policy update, which ensures that the algorithm is provided with a versatile set of trajectories, and
consequently with informative preferences. The preferencebased estimation is computed using a sample-based Bayesian
method, which can also estimate the uncertainty of the utility.
Additionally, we also compare to a linear solvable approximation, based on inverse RL. We show that both approaches
perform favourably to the current state-of-the-art. The overall
result is an algorithm that can learn non-parametric continuous action policies from a small number of preferences.

Preliminaries
MDP\R. Abbeel and Ng (2004) have introduced the
notion of Markov decision processes without rewards
(MDP\R). A MDP\R is deﬁned by a quadruple (S, A, δ, γ).
We are given states S ⊆ RDS and actions A ⊆ RDA , represented by feature vectors φ(s) ∈ RDφ(s) and ϕ(s, a) ∈
RDϕ(s,a) . The state transition function δ(s |s, a) is assumed
to be probabilistic. The parameter γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. A policy π(a|s) is a distribution that assigns
probabilities to actions choices based on the current state.
A trajectory is an alternating sequence of states and actions
τ = {s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , . . . , sn−1 , an−1 , sn } . In the following,
we assume that all trajectories start in the same start state
s0 . Multiple start states can be included by using a single,
virtual s0 with a null-action that has probabilistic transitions
to the true start states.

Introduction
One major limitation of reinforcement learning is that a numeric reward function needs to be speciﬁed by the user.
This is particularly true for complex control tasks as they
occur in robotics where the reward function often consists
of several hand-tuned terms. Hence, in recent years, the
community has worked on rendering reinforcement learning algorithms more applicable by avoiding a hand-coded
deﬁnition of the reward function. One of these approaches
is preference-based reinforcement learning (PBRL). PBRL
uses only pairwise preferences over policies, trajectories,
states or actions (Akrour, Schoenauer, and Sebag 2012;
Wirth and Frnkranz 2013b; Wilson, Fern, and Tadepalli
2012). Many PBRL approaches rely on a model of the system dynamics (Akrour et al. 2014), but often, accurate models are not available and are also hard to learn. Hence, a

Feature Expectations. A feature expectation is the (discounted) sum of features, expected to be realized by a certain
policy or trajectory (Puterman 2005; Abbeel and Ng 2004).
The feature averages of a trajectory τ i are

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

ψ(τ i ) =

|τ i |

t=0

2222

γ t φ(st,i ),

(1)

