Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

SAT-to-SAT: Declarative Extension of SAT Solvers with New Propagators
Tomi Janhunen and Shahab Tasharroﬁ

{tomi.janhunen,shahab.tasharroﬁ}@aalto.ﬁ
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University, FI-00076 AALTO, Finland

Eugenia Ternovska
ter@cs.sfu.ca
Computing Science Department
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada

solvers are less general (they apply only to problems with
certain structures) but more efﬁcient (for such problems).
To emphasize the importance of domain-speciﬁc propagation mechanisms, observe a few of such recent works: (1) In
(Bjørner 2012), the author extends Z3 Satisﬁability Modulo
Theories (SMT) solver (De Moura and Bjørner 2008) with
several new domain-speciﬁc reasoning mechanisms (called
theories in SMT solving community). (2) In (Liang et al.
2014), the authors extend CVC4 SMT solver (Barrett et al.
2011) (or any other DPLL(T) solver (Nieuwenhuis, Oliveras, and Tinelli 2004) in general) with reasoning mechanisms and propagation methods for the theory of strings and
regular expressions. (3) In (Gebser, Janhunen, and Rintanen
2014b; 2014c), the authors introduce several propagation
methods to avoid cyclic graphs. They show that their reasoning mechanisms hugely boost the performance of SAT
solvers on the problems whose solutions are acyclic graphs.
(4) Finally, in (Gebser, Janhunen, and Rintanen 2014a), the
authors use their acyclicity reasoning methods to solve answer set programs (ASP) using SAT solvers.
Problem. Despite the effectiveness of special-purpose propagators, developing new propagators still requires expert
knowledge of how a general-purpose solver works and how
one can extend such solvers with new reasoning methods.
Therefore, currently, when solving a declaratively modeled
problem, one is limited only to the general-purpose inference mechanisms provided by the solver and it is impossible to extend solvers with complex reasoning techniques that
take advantage of the problem’s structure.
Goals. In this paper, we introduce a framework to (1)
declaratively specify new reasoning methods and (2) automatically extend modern solvers with such reasoning methods so as to obtain fast problem-speciﬁc solvers.
Since SAT solvers form the core of many different stateof-the-art logic programming frameworks such as (Aavani
et al. 2012; Wittocx, Marién, and Denecker 2008; De Moura
and Bjørner 2008; Barrett et al. 2011), this paper focuses
on specifying new reasoning methods for modern conﬂictdriven clause learning (CDCL) SAT solvers. However, this
paper’s methods also apply to other modern solvers such as
ASP solvers. Extending our results to other logic programming frameworks such as Clingo (Gebser et al. 2008) is a
subject of future research.
Contributions. New Paradigm in Logic Programming: We

Abstract
Special-purpose propagators speed up solving logic programs
by inferring facts that are hard to deduce otherwise. However,
implementing special-purpose propagators is a non-trivial
task and requires expert knowledge of solvers.
This paper proposes a novel approach in logic programming
that allows (1) logical speciﬁcation of both the problem itself
and its propagators and (2) automatic incorporation of such
propagators into the solving process. We call our proposed
language P [R] and our solver SAT-to-SAT because it facilitates communication between several SAT solvers.
Using our proposal, non-specialists can specify new reasoning methods (propagators) in a declarative fashion and obtain
a solver that beneﬁts from both state-of-the-art techniques implemented in SAT solvers as well as problem-speciﬁc reasoning methods that depend on the problem’s structure. We
implement our proposal and show that it outperforms the existing approach that only allows modeling a problem but does
not allow modeling the reasoning methods for that problem.

Introduction
Motivation. Propagation mechanisms, i.e., reasoning methods that produce new information about a problem, are at
the heart of modern solver architectures. Different scientiﬁc communities that develop state-of-the-art solvers such
as SAT, ASP and CP solvers (Een and Sörensson 2005;
Gebser, Kaufmann, and Schaub 2012; de la Banda et al.
2006); have long understood the need for methods to extend the existing propagation mechanisms of their solvers.
For example, modern SAT solvers such as MiniSAT and its
descendants (Een and Sörensson 2005; Audemard and Simon 2009) can be easily extended with new special-purpose
propagation mechanisms (Gebser, Janhunen, and Rintanen
2014c). As another example, the ASP solver clasp (Gebser,
Kaufmann, and Schaub 2012) provides a “post propagator”
class designed to implement new inference mechanisms.
Due to the success of propagators in modern solvers, recently, many new domain-speciﬁc propagation mechanisms
have been proposed. That is, existing solvers are extended
with new mechanisms that are applicable only when the
problem has a speciﬁc structure. In this sense, such extended
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

978

