Domain-Constraint Transfer Coding for
Imbalanced Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai,1 Cheng-An Hou,2
Wei-Yu Chen,3 Yi-Ren Yeh,4 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
1

Research Center for IT Innovation,Academia Sinica,Taipei, Taiwan
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
3
Graduate Institute of Networking & Multimedia, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
4
Department of Mathematics, National Kaohsiung Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
{y.h.huberttsai, c.a.andyhou, wyharveychen}@gmail.com, yryeh@nknu.edu.tw, ycwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw
2

imbalanced cross-domain data. To be more precise, the label numbers across domains can be different, and the source
and/or target domain data can be collected from multiple
datasets (with unknown numbers).
As we discuss later in Section 2, most existing UDA
approaches are not designed to handle imbalanced crossdomain data (Kulis, Saenko, and Darrell 2011; Pan et al.
2011; Gong et al. 2012; Fernando et al. 2013; Baktashmotlagh et al. 2013; Long et al. 2014; Baktashmotlagh et
al. 2014). They typically assume that both source and target domains contain data with the same number of categories, and are not particularly designed to deal with mixeddomain problems (i.e., data in each domain are collected
from a single dataset or exhibit similar feature distributions). While some recent works like (Hoffman et al. 2012;
Gong, Grauman, and Sha 2013b; Xu et al. 2014) have been
proposed to address the above mixed-domain problems, they
either require the prior knowledge of the domain numbers
during the learning process. Nevertheless, existing UDA
works typically do not consider the scenario of imbalanced
label numbers across domains.
To solve UDA with imbalanced cross-domain data, we
propose Domain-constraint Transfer Coding (DcTC) in this
paper. As detailed in Section 3.2, our DcTC aims to derive a domain invariant space for aligning and representing cross-domain data, while sub-domain locality information can be properly preserved. We perform comprehensive
experiments on cross-domain classiﬁcation with three different settings: standard UDA with balanced cross-domain
data, UDA with mixed-domain data, and UDA with imbalanced cross-domain label numbers. Our experimental results
would verify the effectiveness of our DcTC in dealing with
different cross-domain classiﬁcation tasks.

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) deals with the task
that labeled training and unlabeled test data collected from
source and target domains, respectively. In this paper, we particularly address the practical and challenging scenario of imbalanced cross-domain data. That is, we do not assume the
label numbers across domains to be the same, and we also
allow the data in each domain to be collected from multiple
datasets/sub-domains. To solve the above task of imbalanced
domain adaptation, we propose a novel algorithm of Domainconstraint Transfer Coding (DcTC). Our DcTC is able to exploit latent subdomains within and across data domains, and
learns a common feature space for joint adaptation and classiﬁcation purposes. Without assuming balanced cross-domain
data as most existing UDA approaches do, we show that our
method performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods
on multiple cross-domain visual classiﬁcation tasks.

1

Introduction

For standard machine learning and pattern recognition problems, training and test data are typically collected from the
same domain. This allows the learning model observed by
training data to exhibit sufﬁcient generalization, so that the
test data can be recognized or ﬁt by the derived model. However, if the above data are collected from different domains,
i.e., if the feature distributions of training and test data are
very different across domains, one cannot expect the models
learned in one domain to be generalized to cope with data in
the target domain.
Domain adaptation (DA) deals with the problem in which
training and test data are collected from source and target
domains, respectively. With the goal to eliminating the domain bias, DA can be divided into two categories depending
on the availability of the labeled data in the target domain:
semisupervised and unsupervised domain adaptation. In this
paper, we address the task of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), which allows labeled data to be presented in the
source domain, while only unlabeled data can be observed
in the target domain. In particular, we focus on UDA with

2

Related Work

In general, two different strategies have been applied to
address the task of unsupervised domain adaptation: feature space learning (Pan et al. 2011; Long et al. 2013b;
Gong et al. 2012; Baktashmotlagh et al. 2013; Fernando et
al. 2013) and instance reweighting (Sugiyama et al. 2008;
Huang et al. 2006; Chattopadhyay et al. 2013). Some recent

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3597

