Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Stochastic Optimization for Kernel PCA∗
Lijun Zhang1,2 and Tianbao Yang3 and Jinfeng Yi4 and Rong Jin5 and Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, the University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
4
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA
5
Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA
{zhanglj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu, jinfengy@us.ibm.com, jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com
2

al. 2014) construct a low-rank approximator of the kernel
matrix, and use its eigensystems as an alternative. Due to
the low-rank structure, the approximator can be easily stored
and manipulated. The major limitation of approximate approaches is that there always exists a non-vanishing gap between their solution and that found by eigendecomposing
K directly. Iterative approaches (Kim, Franz, and Schölkopf
2005) use partial information of K in each round to estimate
the top eigenvectors, and thus do not need to keep the entire
matrix in memory. With appropriate initialization, the solution will converge to the groundtruth asymptotically. However, there is no guarantee of the convergence rate or the
global convergence property for general initial conditions.
Inspired by the recent progresses in stochastic optimization (Avron et al. 2012; Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan
2012), we develop a novel iterative algorithm for kernel
PCA that has a solid convergence guarantee. The staring
point is the following observation:

Abstract
Kernel Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a popular
extension of PCA which is able to ﬁnd nonlinear patterns
from data. However, the application of kernel PCA to largescale problems remains a big challenge, due to its quadratic
space complexity and cubic time complexity in the number
of examples. To address this limitation, we utilize techniques
from stochastic optimization to solve kernel PCA with linear space and time complexities per iteration. Speciﬁcally, we
formulate it as a stochastic composite optimization problem,
where a nuclear norm regularizer is introduced to promote
low-rankness, and then develop a simple algorithm based on
stochastic proximal gradient descent. During the optimization
process, the proposed algorithm always maintains a low-rank
factorization of iterates that can be conveniently held in memory. Compared to previous iterative approaches, a remarkable
property of our algorithm is that it is equipped with an explicit rate of convergence. Theoretical analysis shows that the
solution of our algorithm converges to the optimal one at an
O(1/T ) rate, where T is the number of iterations.

Since only the top eigensystems of K are used in kernel
 from
PCA, it is sufﬁcient to ﬁnd a low-rank matrix K
which we can recover the top eigensystems of K.
 as the low-rank matrix obtained
In this paper, we choose K
by applying Singular Value Shrinkage (SVS) operator (Cai,
Candès, and Shen 2010) to K. Thus, the problem becomes
 without constructing K explicitly. To
how to estimate K
this end, we formulate the SVS operation as a stochastic
composite optimization problem, and develop an efﬁcient
algorithm based on Stochastic Proximal Gradient Descent
(SPGD). The advantage of the stochastic formulation is that
only a low-rank estimate of K is needed during the optimization process. Since the SVS operation is applied in each
iteration, all the iterates are prone to be low-rank. Furthermore, the low-rankness of iterates in turn makes the SVS
operation very efﬁcient. As a result, in each iteration, both
space and time complexities are linear in n.
By exploiting the strong convexity of the objective, we
 at an
prove that the last iterate of SPGD converges to K
O(1/T ) rate, where T is the number of iterations. It implies
we can simply take the last iterate as the ﬁnal solution, and
thus avoid the averaging operation in the traditional algorithms (Hazan and Kale 2011; Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan 2012). Finally, we examine the empirical performance
of the proposed algorithm on two benchmark data sets.

Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a powerful dimensionality reduction method that has been widely used
in various applications including data mining, information
retrieval, and pattern recognition (Duda, Hart, and Stork
2000). While the classical PCA is limited to identifying linear structures, kernel PCA, a non-linear extension of PCA,
has been proposed for extracting non-linear patterns from
data (Schölkopf, Smola, and Müller 1998). The key idea is to
map the data into a kernel-induced Hilbert space, where dot
product between points can be computed efﬁciently through
the kernel evaluation. Given a set of n training examples,
kernel PCA needs to perform eigendecomposition of the
n × n kernel matrix K. As it takes O(n2 ) space to store K
and O(n3 ) time to eigendecompose it, kernel PCA is prohibitively expensive for big data, where n is very large.
Existing studies for reducing the computational cost of
kernel PCA can be classiﬁed into two categories: approximate and iterative. Approximate approaches (Lopez-Paz et
∗

This research was supported by NSFC (61333014, 61321491),
NSF (IIS-1463988, IIS-1545995), and MSRA collaborative research project (FY14-RES-OPP-110).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2316

