Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Using Convolutional Neural Networks
to Analyze Function Properties from Images
Yoad Lewenberg

Yoram Bachrach

Ian Kash

Peter Key

The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

approach to classifying functions, abstract mathematical objects, given their representation in the form on an image.
We provide algorithms for generating random functions
with properties of convexity and generalized symmetry, and
generate a large image dataset of function images, consisting
of 4,000 single-variable functions and 10,000 two-variable
functions. We then use the dataset to train a CNN-based classiﬁer and show it achieves a high performance.
To generate two-dimensional graphs, we ﬁrst draw n
random numbers from some distribution, which are used as
the values of the function at n points. Once we set the values of the function at these points, we use a linear interpolation to deﬁne the function on the rest of a interval [a, b].
To make the function smoother, we integrate the obtained
function twice.
We consider two mathematical properties:
Convexity: A twice-differentiable function f : [a, b] →
R is convex iff for all x ∈ [a, b] it holds that f  (x) ≥ 0. By
drawing the values of the second derivative from a positive
support distribution (e.g. U (α, β) where 0 < α < β), we
are guarantied that f is convex.
Generalized Symmetry: We consider symmetric functions which are stretching or translated. Let feven and fodd
be random generated even and odd functions. For some
θ ∈ (−π, π) and a function f , the stretching of f by θ is
fθ (x) = f (x) + x · tan (θ). Finally, given an even function
∗
feven we deﬁne feven,θ
as

feven (x) x ≤ 0
∗
(x) =
feven,θ
feven θ (x) x ≥ 0

Abstract
We propose a system for determining properties of
mathematical functions given an image of their graph
representation. We demonstrate our approach for twodimensional graphs (curves of single variable functions)
and three-dimensional graphs (surfaces of two variable
functions), studying the properties of convexity and
symmetry. Our method uses a Convolutional Neural
Network which classiﬁes functions according to these
properties, without using any hand-crafted features. We
propose algorithms for randomly constructing functions
with convexity or symmetry properties, and use the images generated by these algorithms to train our network.
Our system achieves a high accuracy on this task, even
for functions where humans ﬁnd it difﬁcult to determine
the function’s properties from its image.

Introduction
Consider the case when an experiment has been performed
for determining the inﬂuence of a single or multiple parameters on an outcome of interest. For example, we wish
to determine the impact of parameters of an algorithm on
its performance, or the inﬂuence of various parameters of
a simulation model on the result. In many cases one wants
to determine whether the relation between the parameters
and outcome exhibits various properties, such as convexity
or symmetry. One may present the results of the experiment
in a ﬁgure, however any additional parameter value would
result in a different ﬁgure. It would be very difﬁcult, costly
and time consuming to manually examine each ﬁgure to determine whether it exhibits the desired properties, so an automated method of achieving this is very desired.
The recent surge in research on neural networks has uncovered many domains where they have excellent performance. Approaches based on Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998; Simard, Steinkraus,
and Platt 2003) do well on many image and video classiﬁcation tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Ciresan, Meier, and Schmidhuber 2012; Karpathy et al.
2014), without relying on hand-crafted features.
In contrast to the above research, which focuses on images of real-world objects, we demonstrate a CNN based

∗
is deﬁned similarly.
fodd,θ
Our process for generating two-variable functions f :
R × R → R is more elaborate. We cannot simply randomly
draw values multiple points and perform linear interpolation
and integration, as the numerical integration is sensitive to
the direction of integration, resulting in “unnatural” functions. Instead, we randomly draw values for n2 points from
a distribution D. Next, we repeatedly smooth the function by
applying Gaussian kernel to achieve a more natural function,
and add noise to the function to increase the variety among
the returned functions.
We say that a function f : [−a, a] × [−a, a] → R is xeven if ∀x, y ∈ [−a, a] : f (x, y) = f (−x, y), and x-odd

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4363

