Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Boolean Functions with Ordered Domains in Answer Set Programming
Mario Alviano

Wolfgang Faber

Hannes Strass

University of Calabria, Italy
alviano@mat.unical.it

University of Huddersﬁeld, UK
wf@wfaber.com

Leipzig University, Germany
strass@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

It is important to observe that many of the semantics
proposed for interpreting ASP programs with aggregates
are not limited to common aggregation functions such as
COUNT , SUM , and AVG , but are instead deﬁned for Boolean
functions in general (Liu and Truszczynski 2006; Alviano
and Faber 2015). In fact, from a semantic viewpoint an
aggregate is seen as a black box whose relevant property
is the induced (partial) Boolean function mapping (partial) interpretations to Boolean truth values. For example,
SUM ({1 : p, −1 : q}) ≥ 0 maps to true any (partial) interpretation assigning true to p or false to q, and maps to false
any (partial) interpretation assigning false to p and true to q.
It is thanks to this association with Boolean functions that
the several semantics for ASP programs with aggregates are
deﬁned clearly and uniformly: stable models are deﬁned for
programs with Boolean functions in general, and any aggregation function can be added to the language by specifying
the associated Boolean function. Using Boolean functions
also makes the same deﬁnitions of semantics applicable to
similar language extensions, such as external or HEX atoms
(Eiter et al. 2014).
Another advantage of this generality is the identiﬁcation of semantic classes of programs with benign computational properties. For example, programs with monotone
and convex (Liu and Truszczynski 2006) Boolean functions
are associated with lower complexity classes in many cases
(Faber, Pfeifer, and Leone 2011). Many other tractability results were proven for programs with non-convex aggregates
of speciﬁc forms (Pelov 2004; Son and Pontelli 2007), providing ad-hoc proofs for each considered case. These results
hold for stable models as deﬁned by Pelov, Denecker, and
Bruynooghe (2007) and Son and Pontelli (2007), for which
tractability of the three-valued evaluation of aggregates implies tractability of the stability check.
Boolean functions were also considered in a related
knowledge representation formalism called abstract dialectical frameworks (ADFs, Brewka and Woltran; Brewka et
al., 2010; 2013). There, argumentation scenarios are modelled in terms of arguments and possible relationships between arguments. In the class of bipolar ADFs, relationships between arguments are restricted to supports and attacks, which decreases the computational complexity by one
level in the polynomial hierarchy (Strass and Wallner 2015).
It is interesting to observe that, under some syntactic restric-

Abstract
Boolean functions in Answer Set Programming have proven
a useful modelling tool. They are usually speciﬁed by means
of aggregates or external atoms. A crucial step in computing
answer sets for logic programs containing Boolean functions
is verifying whether partial interpretations satisfy a Boolean
function for all possible values of its undeﬁned atoms. In this
paper, we develop a new methodology for showing when such
checks can be done in deterministic polynomial time. This
provides a unifying view on all currently known polynomialtime decidability results, and furthermore identiﬁes promising new classes that go well beyond the state of the art. Our
main technique consists of using an ordering on the atoms to
signiﬁcantly reduce the necessary number of model checks.
For many standard aggregates, we show how this ordering
can be automatically obtained.

Introduction
Answer set programming (ASP) is a declarative language
for knowledge representation and reasoning (Brewka, Eiter,
and Truszczynski 2011). ASP programs are interpreted according to the stable model semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988; 1991), and several deﬁnitions were proposed for
extensions of the basic language. A particularly useful construct of ASP are aggregate functions (Simons, Niemelä,
and Soininen 2002; Liu et al. 2010; Bartholomew, Lee,
and Meng 2011; Pelov, Denecker, and Bruynooghe 2007;
Son and Pontelli 2007; Shen et al. 2014; Faber, Pfeifer,
and Leone 2011; Ferraris 2011; Alviano et al. 2011;
Gelfond and Zhang 2014), which allow for expressing properties on sets of atoms declaratively and in a space-efﬁcient
way. For example, aggregates are widely used to enforce
functional dependencies, where a rule of the form
⊥ ← node(X), COUNT({ C | hasColour(X, C)}) = 1
in a graph-colouring problem asserts that the colour of a
node is a functional property. On the other hand, aggregates
often make the evaluation of programs harder. In fact, the
three-valued evaluation of an aggregate, that is, its evaluation with respect to a partial interpretation I, depends in
general on the evaluation of the aggregate with respect to
exponentially many totalisations of I.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

879

