Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

High-Order Stochastic Gradient Thermostats for
Bayesian Learning of Deep Models∗
Chunyuan Li1 , Changyou Chen1† , Kai Fan2 and Lawrence Carin1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Duke University
chunyuan.li@duke.edu, cchangyou@gmail.com, kai.fan@stat.duke.edu, lcarin@duke.edu

Deep models come in two broad categories. The ﬁrst
uses stochastic hidden layers, typically deep latent variable models. This includes the deep sigmoid belief network (Mnih and Gregor 2014; Gan et al. 2015b), the variational auto-encoder (Kingma and Welling 2014), and many
others (Ranganath et al. 2015; Gan et al. 2015a; 2015c;
Pu, Yuan, and Carin 2015). The second category of deep
models uses deterministic hidden layers. While the stochastic hidden units of the ﬁrst category make this class of
models naturally amenable to Bayesian learning (see the
above references), for the second category appropriate priors on the weights of networks may be employed to consider
weight uncertainty. Previous work has applied Bayesian
methods to neural networks (MacKay 1992; Neal 1995), including feedforward neural networks (Blundell et al. 2015;
Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015; Korattikara et al. 2015)
and convolutional neural networks (Gal and Ghahramani
2015). Deep learning may often be interpreted as a stacking
of such neural networks.
Bayesian learning and inference methods have generated signiﬁcant recent research activity. Stochastic gradient
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) methods (Welling
and Teh 2011; Chen, Fox, and Guestrin 2014; Ding et al.
2014; Li et al. 2016) are a family of Itô diffusion based
algorithms that can efﬁciently sample target distributions,
and can be applied to large datasets. In these algorithms,
two approximations are made (Chen, Ding, and Carin 2015).
(i) For practical scalability, stochastic gradients from minibatches of data are used to estimate the true gradient; (ii)
For numerical feasibility, a numerical integration with small
step is used to solve the corresponding Itô diffusion (a
continuous-time Markovian process).
The ﬁrst attempt at SG-MCMC was the Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) (Welling and Teh 2011) .
It is based on 1st-order Langevin dynamics. The Stochastic
Gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) (Chen, Fox,
and Guestrin 2014) extends SGLD with 2nd-order Langevin
dynamics, where momentum variables are introduced into
the system. In an attempt to address the problem of estimating stochastic gradient noise, the Stochastic Gradient NośeHoover Thermostat (SGNHT) (Ding et al. 2014) was proposed, with one additional global thermostat variable. To
further improve the efﬁciency of the SGNHT, a multivariate version of SGNHT (mSGNHT) was proposed by in-

Abstract
Learning in deep models using Bayesian methods has
generated signiﬁcant attention recently. This is largely
because of the feasibility of modern Bayesian methods
to yield scalable learning and inference, while maintaining a measure of uncertainty in the model parameters.
Stochastic gradient MCMC algorithms (SG-MCMC)
are a family of diffusion-based sampling methods for
large-scale Bayesian learning. In SG-MCMC, multivariate stochastic gradient thermostats (mSGNHT) augment each parameter of interest, with a momentum and
a thermostat variable to maintain stationary distributions as target posterior distributions. As the number
of variables in a continuous-time diffusion increases,
its numerical approximation error becomes a practical
bottleneck, so better use of a numerical integrator is
desirable. To this end, we propose use of an efﬁcient
symmetric splitting integrator in mSGNHT, instead of
the traditional Euler integrator. We demonstrate that the
proposed scheme is more accurate, robust, and converges faster. These properties are demonstrated to be
desirable in Bayesian deep learning. Extensive experiments on two canonical models and their deep extensions demonstrate that the proposed scheme improves
general Bayesian posterior sampling, particularly for
deep models.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn abstract representations that support
generalization to novel instances lies at the core of many
problems in machine learning and computer vision. Human
learners often can grasp concepts at multiple levels of abstraction from training examples, and make meaningful generalizations (Xu and Tenenbaum 2007; Kemp, Perfors, and
Tenenbaum 2007). Intuitively, appropriately employed prior
knowledge and hierarchical reasoning are necessary in this
task. Bayesian learning and inference applied to deep models may naturally possess such characterization, and potentially could take a step towards this ability (Salakhutdinov,
Tenenbaum, and Torralba 2013).
∗

Appendix is at https://sites.google.com/site/chunyuan24
Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1795

