Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Evaluation of Semantic Dependency Labeling Across Domains
Svetlana Stoyanchev

Amanda Stent

Srinivas Bangalore

Interactions Labs
25 Broadway,
New York, NY
sstoyanchev@interactions.com

Yahoo Labs
229 W. 43rd St.
New York, NY
stent@yahoo-inc.com

Interactions Labs
41 Spring Street,
Murray Hill, NJ 07974
sbangalore@interactions.com

to also achieve generality and rapid adaptability to new domains.
One way to achieve generality and rapid domain adaptation is to use a generic semantic representation for SLU
with a mapping from generic to application-speciﬁc representations in a later control component (Dzikovska, Allen,
and Swift 2008; Bastianelli et al. 2014). FrameNet (Fillmore
1982; Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998) is one such representation. FrameNet deﬁnes a set of domain-independent
and language-independent semantic frames. Each FrameNet
frame is associated with a (non-exhaustive) list of target
words and typed arguments. For example, a frame representing the notion of Departing is associated with the words
leave, decamp, exit, go, etc. with the core arguments source
(location) and theme (physical object). FrameNet is not only
a lexicon, but also a growing dataset with 170K manually annotated English sentences, providing a unique resource for
training SLUs.
There are existing general purpose statistical semantic
parsers based on FrameNet annotations (Das et al. 2010;
Johansson and Nugues 2007; Croce and Basili 2011). While
generic semantic resources have been successfully used for
domain-speciﬁc SLUs by researchers (Bastianelli et al.
2014; Tur, Hakkani-Tür, and Chotimongkol 2005), they are
not widely used in commercial spoken dialog systems due
to accuracy issues, some related to the handling of speech
disﬂuencies in spoken language input, and some related to
domain-speciﬁc coverage gaps.
In this paper, we present a systematic evaluation of approaches to domain adaptation of generic semantic resources
for SLU. We deﬁne a semantic dependency labeling (SDL)
task, which is similar to the semantic parsing task (Das et al.
2010) except that frame targets and arguments are labeled
on single nodes (phrase heads) in a dependency tree rather
than on text spans. Because it uses features associated with a
head word of the argument instead of the full argument span,
an SDL system should be more robust to speech recognition
errors and disﬂuencies than existing semantic parsers. In addition, a semantically annotated dependency tree provides a
rich joint representation of semantic and syntactic information that may be useful for downstream processing.
We present a statistical SDL system, OnePar. OnePar
achieves similar accuracy to the reported results of the
widely used state-of-the-art semantic parser SEMAFOR on

Abstract
One of the key concerns in computational semantics is to construct a domain independent semantic representation which
captures the richness of natural language, yet can be quickly
customized to a speciﬁc domain for practical applications. We
propose to use generic semantic frames deﬁned in FrameNet,
a domain-independent semantic resource, as an intermediate
semantic representation for language understanding in dialog systems. In this paper we: (a) outline a novel method
for FrameNet-style semantic dependency labeling that builds
on a syntactic dependency parse; and (b) compare the accuracy of domain-adapted and generic approaches to semantic
parsing for dialog tasks, using a frame-annotated corpus of
human-computer dialogs in an airline reservation domain.

Introduction
With advancements in artiﬁcial intelligence new types of
systems are emerging, for which speech is a natural input
modality. Speech is increasingly used with autonomous cars
and robots. Speech also eliminates the need for graphical
user interfaces in “smart home” systems; users may turn the
lights on, change the temperature of a thermostat, choose
music to listen to, or control robotic vacuum cleaners using spoken commands. On mobile devices, apps can be controlled through speech; for example, a user can ﬁnd a restaurant in a search application or retrieve schedule information
from a calendar application.
A Spoken Language Understanding (SLU) component for
a speech interface identiﬁes intents and related entities in
spoken natural language utterances. For example, the utterance “Leaving from New York on Friday” has a Departing
intent with the arguments location (New York) and time (Friday). A SLU must be quick to support high interactivity, accurate for retaining user engagement, and precise for mapping into domain-speciﬁc functions or database queries. For
these reasons SLUs are often domain speciﬁc. To create a
domain-speciﬁc SLU, a system developer annotates domainspeciﬁc data or creates rules that convert a user’s spoken
input into a domain-speciﬁc representation (Williams et al.
2015; Wit.AI 2015). Designing a domain-speciﬁc SLU is a
laborious and time-consuming process. As speech interfaces
evolve into general purpose personal assistants, SLUs need
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2814

