Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Multi-View Subspace Learning
through Dual Low-Rank Decompositions
†

Zhengming Ding† and Yun Fu†‡
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
‡
College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
allanding@ece.neu.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

Class structure ܼ௖

Multi-view data is highly common nowadays, since various view-points and different sensors tend to facilitate better data representation. However, data from different views
show a large divergence. Speciﬁcally, one sample lies in
two kinds of structures, one is class structure and the other
is view structure, which are intertwined with one another
in the original feature space. To address this, we develop
a Robust Multi-view Subspace Learning algorithm (RMSL)
through dual low-rank decompositions, which desires to seek
a low-dimensional view-invariant subspace for multi-view
data. Through dual low-rank decompositions, RMSL aims
to disassemble two intertwined structures from each other in
the low-dimensional subspace. Furthermore, we develop two
novel graph regularizers to guide dual low-rank decompositions in a supervised fashion. In this way, the semantic gap
across different views would be mitigated so that RMSL can
preserve more within-class information and reduce the inﬂuence of view variance to seek a more robust low-dimensional
subspace. Extensive experiments on two multi-view benchmarks, e.g., face and object images, have witnessed the superiority of our proposed algorithm, by comparing it with the
state-of-the-art algorithms.

(a)

(b)

ܺ ൌ ܼܺ௖ ൅ ܼܺ௩ ൅ ‫ܧ‬
Dual Low-rank Decompositions View structure ܼ

௩

(c)

Figure 1: Framework Illustration. Note that the same color
denotes same class, while same shape means same view. (a)
represents the two intertwined structures of multi-view data
X at one data point (blue ◦). (b) Dual low-rank decompositions tend to separate view structure Zv and class structure
Zc from each other through X = X(Zc + Zv ) + E. (c) denotes the desired results with the guidance of two supervised
graph regularizers, and therefore, the same class data points
are pulled close, while different class data points lying in the
same view are pushed far away.

ture adaptation (Kan et al. 2012; Zheng and Jiang 2013;
Zhang et al. 2013), classiﬁers adaptation (Hestenes 1969;
Wu and Jia 2012) and deep learning (Zhu et al. 2014).
Speciﬁcally, feature adaptation algorithms aim to seek a
common space where features across different views could
be aligned well. Classiﬁer adaptation algorithms are designed to adapt classiﬁer trained on one view to another
view. Whilst deep learning algorithms focus on building a
hierarchical structure to capture more discriminative features to mitigate the view divergence.
Recently, low-rank constraint is widely adopted in data
representation, which originally helps uncover the multiple
structures of the data by ﬁnding the lowest rank representation and detecting noise or outliers. Along this line, recent works (Bao et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2015) adopt dual
low-rank decompositions to handle largely corrupted data
situations. However, they usually apply low-rank decomposition in the original high-dimensional space and none of
these works consider two intertwined structures for multiview data. Most recently, robust subspace learning smoothly
integrates subspace learning and low-rank decomposition in
a uniﬁed framework to deal with high-dimensional data (Li
and Fu 2014; Ding et al. 2015; Ding, Shao, and Fu 2014).
In this paper, we develop a novel multi-view learning al-

Introduction
Multi-view data analysis has caught an increasing attention in the recent years (Kan et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2012;
Wu and Jia 2012; Cai et al. 2013; Shekhar et al. 2014;
Zhao and Fu 2015), since multi-view data (e.g., multi-pose
images and multi-modal data) is frequently seen in reality
(Ding and Tao 2015) when data is taken from various viewpoints (Cai et al. 2013) or captured with different types of
sensors (Liu et al. 2012; Shekhar et al. 2014). Multi-view
data brings in the challenge that the data with the same label
tend to be multiple different samples, even heterogeneous.
This results in a difﬁcult learning problem, where withinclass data across multiple views show a lower similarity than
that within the same view but from different classes. In other
words, one sample lies in two kinds of structures, one is class
structure and the other is view structure, which are intertwined in the original high-dimensional space.
Generally, there are three categories of techniques to
handle multi-view data analysis problems, including feac 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1181

