Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

SPAN: Understanding a Question with Its Support Answers
Liang Pang∗ , Yanyan Lan† , Jiafeng Guo† , Jun Xu† , and Xueqi Cheng†
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
∗
pangliang@software.ict.ac.cn, † {lanyanyan,guojiafeng,junxu,cxq}@ict.ac.cn

In this paper, we propose a novel deep architecture,
namely SPAN, to tackle the above challenges. The main idea
comes from the assumption that similar questions usually
have similar answers. Based on that, we can better understand a question with its similar questions’ best answers, deﬁned as support answers. We can see that support answers
can be viewed as a way to provide additional content for a
question. Speciﬁcally, a deep model is ﬁrstly used to generate the sentence embeddings of the question, candidate
answer, and the support answers. Then two similarities are
computed, one is between question and the candidate answer, and the other one is between support answers and the
candidate answer. Finally, the matching score is produced
by combing the two similarities. Please note that SPAN is
a general architecture where any kind of deep model, such
as RNN and LSTM, can be used as the basic component
to generate the sentence embedding. In this paper, we use
CSM (Kalchbrenner, Grefenstette, and Blunsom 2014) as an
example to facilitate the study, mainly because CSM is a
common deep model to represent a sentence, and has been
widely used in many related works.
Experiments conducted on 100,000 real-world questions
from Yahoo! show that SPAN1 performs better than baseline
methods. Besides, we observe that SPAN can also beat baseline methods if we only use support answers themselves in
representing a question, indicating that support answers are
good representations for a question in the task of CQA.

Abstract
Matching a question to its best answer is a common task
in community question answering. In this paper, we focus on the non-factoid questions and aim to pick out
the best answer from its candidate answers. Most of the
existing deep models directly measure the similarity between question and answer by their individual sentence
embeddings. In order to tackle the problem of the information lack in question’s descriptions and the lexical
gap between questions and answers, we propose a novel
deep architecture namely SPAN in this paper. Speciﬁcally we introduce support answers to help understand
the question, which are deﬁned as the best answers of
those similar questions to the original one. Then we can
obtain two kinds of similarities, one is between question
and the candidate answer, and the other one is between
support answers and the candidate answer. The matching score is ﬁnally generated by combining them. Experiments on Yahoo! Answers demonstrate that SPAN
can outperform the baseline models.

Introduction
Community question answering (CQA) sites have become
very popular in recent years (Surdeanu, Ciaramita, and
Zaragoza 2008). Information seekers post their questions on
the CQA website and other users can give some replies to
the question. Therefore, it is valuable if we can automatically select the best answer from the candidate answers.
Recently, deep learning methods have been applied to this
task and gain state-of-the-art performances. Most existing
deep models (Yu et al. 2014; Qiu and Huang 2015) are directly using similarities between question and answer by
their individual sentence embeddings, obtained by convolutional sentence model (CSM). Such deep models are effective in solving the mismatching problem, therefore they
usually work well in distinguishing the best answers of one
question with those of other questions. However, the information is usually limited in the descriptions of question, and
there is always some lexical gap between question and answer in the application of CQA. These issues make the above
deep learning approach far from solving the problem of selecting the best answer from the candidates with respect to
one question.

SPAN: A New Deep Architecture for CQA
In this section, we introduce our new deep architecture
SPAN. The basic component of SPAN is convolutional sentence model (CSM), as illustrated in Fig 1A. The input of
CSM is a sentence T , where each word wi in T is represented as its word embedding initialed by Word2Vec2 . Then
one dimensional convolution and pooling are applied layer
by layer, and a sentence embedding will be generated.
The architecture of SPAN is illustrated in Fig 1B. Suppose
there is a question Q and a candidate answer A, they are both
feeded into a CSM to obtain their sentence embeddings, denoted as vQ and vA , respectively. Simultaneously, we also
1
More complementary materials of this research are available
in http://pl8787.github.io/qa.html.
2
https://code.google.com/p/word2vec/

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4250

