Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Dynamic Concept Composition for Zero-Example Event Detection
Xiaojun Chang1 , Yi Yang1 , Guodong Long1 , Chengqi Zhang1 and Alexander G. Hauptmann2
1

Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney.
2
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.
{cxj273, yee.i.yang}@gmail.com, {guodong.long,chengqi.zhang}@uts.edu.au, alex@cs.cmu.edu

more and more research attention in the computer vision
and multimedia communities (Chen et al. 2014; Chang et al.
2015b; Cheng et al. 2014; Lai et al. 2014; Li et al. 2013;
Chang et al. 2015c; Ma et al. 2012; Yan et al. 2015a;
2015b).
Current state-of-the-art systems for event detection ﬁrst
seek a compact representation of the video using feature extraction and encoding with a pre-trained codebook (Lowe
2004; Bay, Tuytelaars, and Gool 2006; Wang and Schmid
2013). With labeled training data, sophisticated statistical
classiﬁers, such as support vector machines (SVM), are then
applied on top to yield predictions. With sufﬁcient labeled
training examples, these systems have achieved remarkable
performance in the past (Lai et al. 2014; Sun and Nevatia
2014; Li et al. 2013; Cheng et al. 2014). However, MED
faces the severe data-scarcity challenge: only very few, perhaps even none, positive training samples are available for
some events, and the performance degrades dramatically
once the number of training samples falls short. Reﬂecting this challenge, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) hosts an annual competition on a variety of retrieval tasks, of which the Zero-Exemplar Multimedia Event Detection (0Ex MED in short) in TRECVID
2013 (TRECVID 2013) and 2014 (TRECVID 2014) has
received considerable attention. Promising progress (Dalton, Allan, and Mirajkar 2013; Habibian, van de Sande,
and Snoek 2013; Habibian, Mensink, and Snoek 2014;
Chang et al. 2015a) has been made in this direction, but further improvement is still anticipated.
In this paper, we aim to detect complex event without any
labeled training data for the event of interest. Following previous work on zero-shot learning (Lampert, Nickisch, and
Harmeling 2009; Palatucci et al. 2009), we regard an event
as compositions of multiple mid-level semantic concepts.
These semantic concept classiﬁers are shared among events
and can be trained using other resources. We then learn a
skip-gram model (Mikolov et al. 2013) to assess the semantic correlation of the event description and the pre-trained
vocabulary of concepts, based on which we automatically
select the most relevant concepts to each event of interest. This step is carried out without any visual training data
at all. Such concept bundle view of event also aligns with
the cognitive science literature, where humans are found to
conceive objects as bundles of attributes (Roach and Lloyd

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on automatically detecting
events in unconstrained videos without the use of any
visual training exemplars. In principle, zero-shot learning makes it possible to train an event detection model
based on the assumption that events (e.g. birthday
party) can be described by multiple mid-level semantic concepts (e.g. “blowing candle”, “birthday cake”).
Towards this goal, we ﬁrst pre-train a bundle of concept classiﬁers using data from other sources. Then we
evaluate the semantic correlation of each concept w.r.t.
the event of interest and pick up the relevant concept
classiﬁers, which are applied on all test videos to get
multiple prediction score vectors. While most existing
systems combine the predictions of the concept classiﬁers with ﬁxed weights, we propose to learn the optimal
weights of the concept classiﬁers for each testing video
by exploring a set of online available videos with freeform text descriptions of their content. To validate the
effectiveness of the proposed approach, we have conducted extensive experiments on the latest TRECVID
MEDTest 2014, MEDTest 2013 and CCV dataset. The
experimental results conﬁrm the superiority of the proposed approach.

Introduction
In multimedia event detection (MED), a large number of
unseen videos is presented and the the learning algorithm
must rank them according to their likelihood of containing an event of interest, such as rock climbing or attempting a bike trick. Compared to traditional recognition of
visual concepts (e.g. actions, scenes, objects, etc.), event
detection is more challenging for the following reasons.
First, an event is a higher level abstraction of video sequences than a concept and consists of multiple concepts.
For example, an event, say birthday part, can be described
by multiple concepts (e.g. “birthday cake”, “blowing candle”, etc.) Second, an event spreads over the entire duration of long videos while a concept can be detected in a
shorter video sequence or even in a single frame. As the
ﬁrst important step towards automatic categorization, recognition, search, indexing and retrieval, MED has attracted
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3464

