Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Argument Mining from Speech: Detecting Claims in Political Debates
Marco Lippi

Paolo Torroni

DISI, University of Bologna, Italy
marco.lippi3@unibo.it

DISI, University of Bologna, Italy
paolo.torroni@unibo.it

promising results (Levy et al. 2014; Lippi and Torroni
2015b). All the focus so far has been on written text: to the
best of our knowledge, no attempt has ever been made at detecting arguments from spoken language. However, thanks
also to breakthrough advancements in deep learning, speech
recognition technology has reached commercial-level maturity and has become truly pervasive, due also to services
such as Siri, Google Now and Cortana. It seems sensible
then to consider speech as a natural—albeit noisy1 —input
for argument detection systems, on par with text.

Abstract
The automatic extraction of arguments from text, also
known as argument mining, has recently become a hot
topic in artiﬁcial intelligence. Current research has only
focused on linguistic analysis. However, in many domains where communication may be also vocal or visual, paralinguistic features too may contribute to the
transmission of the message that arguments intend to
convey. For example, in political debates a crucial role
is played by speech. The research question we address
in this work is whether in such domains one can improve claim detection for argument mining, by employing features from text and speech in combination. To
explore this hypothesis, we develop a machine learning
classiﬁer and train it on an original dataset based on the
2015 UK political elections debate.

Motivation
The hypothesis that motivates our study is that vocal features
of speech can improve argument mining. This hypothesis is
inspired by results in nonverbal communication but also by
recent studies on the connections between the argumentation process and the emotions felt by the people involved
in such process. Benlamine et al. (2015) show, through an
experiment with human participants, that there is indeed a
correlation between number and strength of arguments exchanged between debaters, and emotions such as anger. At
the same time, we know that emotional states can be recognized from speech with reasonable accuracy (El Ayadi,
Kamel, and Karray 2011). All this leads us to believe that a
correlation between vocal features of speech and arguments
should be investigated.
We elected political debate as a domain of choice. We
based our study on an original corpus constructed from material available online from the 7-party leader’s debate of
April 2, 2015 which preceded the last UK general elections.2
Our choice of that particular event was not only motivated
by the availability of input data, but also by the good quality of the speech audio signal (the debate was moderated
and subject to strict rules) and the potential outreach to areas such as political communication and media studies. Indeed, televised debates are becoming increasingly popular
also thanks to the impact they have upon ﬁrst-time voters
(Coleman 2011). Political discourse on the other hand has
been a long standing domain of interest for argumentation

Introduction
Context
The studies conducted in the late Sixties under Merhabian’s
lead, summarized in (Mehrabian 1981), became extremely
popular because they were the ﬁrst attempt to quantify the
impact of nonverbal communication. In particular, his team
run a number of experiments designed to measure the relative importance of verbal and nonverbal messages when a
communicator is talking about their feelings and attitudes.
While his famous equation Total Liking = 7% Verbal Liking
+ 38% Vocal Liking + 55% Facial Liking has often been and
still is subject to misquotes and unwarranted generalizations,
the fact remains that non-verbal elements are particularly
important for communicating feelings and attitude. In particular, voice quality is an essential part of prosody, it serves
as a strong indicator of the affective states of the speaker,
and is perhaps the most strongly recognised feature of paralinguistic speech, albeit subconsciously (Campbell 2007).
The context of the present work is not psychology but argumentation, and in particular argument mining. This is a
booming area in artiﬁcial intelligence, where the combined
efforts of experts in machine learning, computational linguistics and argumentation are producing innovative methods for detecting and processing argumentative elements—
such as claims and premises—in natural language, with

1

According to Apple, currently Siri has a 5% word error rate.
Source: VentureBeat’s coverage of WDC 2015, San Francisco,
June 2015. http://venturebeat.com
2
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Sv2AOQBd s

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2979

