Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

New 1 -Norm Relaxations and Optimizations for Graph Clustering
Feiping Nie1 , Hua Wang2 , Cheng Deng3 , Xinbo Gao3 , Xuelong Li4 , Heng Huang1∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, USA
3
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
4
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
feipingnie@gmail.com, huawang@mines.edu, {chdeng,xbgao}@mail.xidian.edu.cn, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn, heng@uta.edu
2

Shenton 2004). In the past decades, many clustering algorithms have been proposed. Among these approaches, the
use of manifold information in graph clustering has shown
the state-of-the-art clustering performance. The graph based
clustering methods model the data as a weighted undirected
graph based on the pair-wise similarities. Clustering is then
accomplished by ﬁnding the best cuts of the graph that optimize the predeﬁned cost functions. Two types of graph clustering methods, normalized cut (Shi and Malik 2000) and
ratio cut (Cheng and Wei 1991; Hagen and Kahng 1992),
are popularly used to solve the clustering problems due to
their good clustering performance.
Solving the graph clustering problem is a difﬁcult task
(NP-hard problems). The main difﬁculty of the graph clustering problem comes from the constrains on the solution. It
is hard to solve the graph clustering problems exactly. However, the approximation solutions are possible with spectral
relaxations. The optimization usually leads to the computation of the top eigenvectors of certain graph afﬁnity matrices, and the clustering result can be derived from the obtained eigen-space. However, the traditional spectral relaxations lead the non-optimal clustering results. The spectral
solutions don’t directly provide the clustering results and the
thresholding post-processing has to be applied, such that the
results often severely deviate from the true solution. More
recently, tight relaxations of balanced graph clustering methods were proposed (Bühler and Hein 2009; Luo et al. 2010;
Hein and Setzer 2011), and gradient based method was used
to solve the problem, which is time consuming and slow to
converge in practice.
In order to solve the above challenging issues, in this paper, we revisit the normalized cut and ratio cut methods, and
propose new relaxations for these methods to achieve the
discrete and sparse clustering results which are close to the
ideal solutions. Instead of minimizing the projected squared
clustering indictors distance, we minimize the 1 distance.
Meanwhile, our new relaxations also use the 1 -norm for the
normalization terms. Due to the 1 -norm minimization, most
elements of each clustering indictor are enforced to be zero
and hence the clustering results are close the ideal solutions.
However, our new relations introduce a difﬁcult optimization problem which optimizes the ratio of two nonsmooth terms. The standard optimization methods for sparse
learning, such as Proximal Gradient, Iterative Shrinkage-

Abstract
In recent data mining research, the graph clustering
methods, such as normalized cut and ratio cut, have
been well studied and applied to solve many unsupervised learning applications. The original graph clustering methods are NP-hard problems. Traditional approaches used spectral relaxation to solve the graph
clustering problems. The main disadvantage of these
approaches is that the obtained spectral solutions could
severely deviate from the true solution. To solve this
problem, in this paper, we propose a new relaxation
mechanism for graph clustering methods. Instead of
minimizing the squared distances of clustering results,
we use the 1 -norm distance. More important, considering the normalized consistency, we also use the 1 norm for the normalized terms in the new graph clustering relaxations. Due to the sparse result from the
1 -norm minimization, the solutions of our new relaxed graph clustering methods get discrete values with
many zeros, which are close to the ideal solutions. Our
new objectives are difﬁcult to be optimized, because
the minimization problem involves the ratio of nonsmooth terms. The existing sparse learning optimization
algorithms cannot be applied to solve this problem. In
this paper, we propose a new optimization algorithm to
solve this difﬁcult non-smooth ratio minimization problem. The extensive experiments have been performed
on three two-way clustering and eight multi-way clustering benchmark data sets. All empirical results show
that our new relaxation methods consistently enhance
the normalized cut and ratio cut clustering results.

Introduction
Clustering is an important task in computer vision and machine learning research with many applications, such as
image segmentation (Shi and Malik 2000), image categorization (Grauman and Darrell 2006), scene analysis (Koppal and Narasimhan 2006), motion modeling (P.Ochs and
T.Brox 2012), and medical image analysis (Brun, Park, and
∗
To whom all correspondence should be addressed. This work
was partially supported by the following grants: NSF-IIS 1117965,
NSF-IIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NSF-IIS
1423591, NIH R01 AG049371.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1962

