Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Zero-Shot Event Detection by Multimodal
Distributional Semantic Embedding of Videos
Mohamed Elhoseiny§‡ , Jingen Liu‡ , Hui Cheng‡ , Harpreet Sawhney‡ , Ahmed Elgammal§
m.elhoseiny@cs.rutgers.edu,{jingen.liu,hui.cheng,harpreet.sawhney}@sri.com, elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu
§
‡
Rutgers University, Computer Science Department
SRI International, Vision and Learning Group

Abstract
We propose a new zero-shot Event Detection method by
Multi-modal Distributional Semantic embedding of videos.
Our model embeds object and action concepts as well as other
available modalities from videos into a distributional semantic space. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst Zero-Shot event
detection model that is built on top of distributional semantics and extends it in the following directions: (a) semantic
embedding of multimodal information in videos (with focus
on the visual modalities), (b) automatically determining relevance of concepts/attributes to a free text query, which could
be useful for other applications, and (c) retrieving videos by
free text event query (e.g., ”changing a vehicle tire”) based on
their content. We embed videos into a distributional semantic space and then measure the similarity between videos and
the event query in a free text form. We validated our method
on the large TRECVID MED (Multimedia Event Detection)
challenge. Using only the event title as a query, our method
outperformed the state-of-the-art that uses big descriptions
from 12.6% to 13.5% with MAP metric and 0.73 to 0.83 with
ROC-AUC metric. It is also an order of magnitude faster.

(a) Grooming an Animal

(b) Birthday Party

(1) “brushing dog”, weight = 0.67

(1) “cutting cake”, weight = 0.72

(2) “combing dog”, weight = 0.66

(2) “blowing candles”, weight = 0.65

(3) “clipping nails”, weight = 0.52

(3) “opening presents”, weight = 0.59

Figure 1: Top relevant Concepts from a pre-deﬁned multimedia concept repository and their automatically-assigned
weights as a part of our Event Detection method

videos (e.g., YouTube), zero-shot search and retrieval of
videos has become an increasingly important problem.
Several research works have been proposed to facilitate
performing the zero-shot learning task by establishing an intermediate semantic layer between events or generally categories (i.e., concepts or attributes) and the low-level representation of a multimedia content from the visual perspective. (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009) and (Farhadi
et al. 2009) were the two ﬁrst to use attribute learning representation for the zero-shot setting for object recognition
in still images. Attributes were similarly adopted for recognizing human actions (Liu, Kuipers, and Savarese 2011); attributes are generalized and denoted by concepts in this context. Later, (Liu et al. 2013) proposed Concept Based Event
Retrieval (CBER) for videos InTheWild. Even though these
methods facilitate zero-shot event detection, they only capture the visual modality and more importantly they assume
that the relevant concepts for a query event are manually deﬁned. This manual deﬁnition of concepts, also known as
semantic query editing, is a tedious task and may be biased
due to the limitation of human knowledge. Instead, we aim
at automatically generating relevant concepts by leveraging
information from distributional semantics.
Recently, several systems were proposed for zero-shot
event detection methods (Wu et al. 2014; Jiang et al. 2014b;
2014a; Chen et al. 2014; Habibian, Mensink, and Snoek

Introduction
Every minute, hundreds of hours of video are uploaded to
video archival site such as YouTube (Google2014 ). Developing methods to automatically understand the events captured in this large volume of videos is necessary and meanwhile challenging. One of the important tasks in this direction is event detection in videos. The main objective of
this task is to determine the relevance of a video to an event
based on the video content (e.g., feeding an animal, birthday
party; see Fig. 1). The cues of an event in a video could include visual objects, scene, actions, detected speech (by Automated Speech Recognition(ASR)), detected text (by Optical Character Recognition (OCR)), and audio concepts (e.g.
music and water concepts).
Search and retrieval of videos for arbitrary events using
only free-style text and unseen text in particular has been a
dream in computational video and multi-media understanding. This is referred as “zero-shot event detection”, because
there is no positive exemplar videos to train a detector. Due
to the proliferation of videos, especially consumer-generated
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3478

