Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Using Domain Knowledge to Improve
Monte-Carlo Tree Search Performance
in Parameterized Poker Squares
Robert Arrington, Clay Langley, and Steven Bogaerts
Department of Computer Science
DePauw University
Greencastle, IN, USA
{robertarrington 2015, claylangley 2017, stevenbogaerts}@depauw.edu
Abstract

Table 1: Example scoring systems
Hand Type Am. Brit. F.H. Random
royal ﬂush
100
30
-1
-23
straight ﬂush
75
30
-1
-55
4 of a kind
50
16
-1
32
straight
25
10
-1
-64
full house
20
5
1
-102
3 of a kind
15
12
-1
16
ﬂush
10
6
-1
118
2 pair
5
3
-1
-126
1 pair
2
1
-1
11
high card
0
0
-1
-128

Poker Squares is a single-player card game played on a 5 x
5 grid, in which a player attempts to create as many highscoring Poker hands as possible. As a stochastic single-player
game with an extremely large state space, this game oﬀers an
interesting area of application for Monte-Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS). This paper describes enhancements made to the
MCTS algorithm to improve computer play, including pruning in the selection stage and a greedy simulation algorithm.
These enhancements make extensive use of domain knowledge in the form of a state evaluation heuristic. Experimental results demonstrate both the general eﬃcacy of these enhancements and their ideal parameter settings.

Introduction

play this game, experiments showing the eﬀectiveness and
ideal use of these enhancements, and future work.

Poker Squares is a single-player card game played on a 5 x 5
grid, on which the player places one drawn card at a time.
Once placed, a card may not be moved. The goal is to create as many high-scoring Poker hands as possible in each of
the ﬁve rows and ﬁve columns. Due to the overlapping of
rows and columns and the uncertainty of what cards will
be drawn in what order, players must balance the risk of
pursuing high-scoring hand types with the safer but lessrewarding pursuit of more easily-attained hand types.
In human play, two of the most common scoring systems
are American and British (Table 1). Parameterized Poker
Squares (PPS) includes the added challenge that the player
is not told the scoring system until the moment the game
begins, so the player must be highly adaptive. For example,
the scoring system may be standard American or British, or
perhaps a system in which positive points are given for a full
house and negative points for all other hand types, or even a
random scoring system (Table 1).
This paper considers the application of Monte-Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) to PPS. Like other game-playing algorithms, at its core MCTS involves the creation of a game tree
to decide on a move. MCTS is typically applied to games
with extremely large trees, because the algorithm is designed
to build the tree selectively rather than exhaustively. This paper begins with a brief introduction to MCTS, followed by
a discussion of related work, key enhancements to MCTS to

Monte-Carlo Tree Search
The four-state process of MCTS consists of selection, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation. The selection
step typically balances goals of exploration and exploitation
to select a node for further consideration. Brieﬂy, a measure of the most “interesting” child of a given node is applied recursively from the root down the tree to some notfully-expanded descendant node. One common measure of
the most “interesting” child is the upper-conﬁdence bound
applied to trees (UCT) (Kocsis, Szepesvári, and Willemson
2006), in which a child j is chosen to maximize:

2 ln n
(1)
UCT = X j + 2C p
nj
where X j is the mean score obtained in games passing
through child j, n is the number of visits to the parent node
during tree construction, n j the number of visits to child j,
and C p > 0 is a constant. Thus the X j term is the exploitation
term, through which children with higher average scores will
receive higher UCT scores, and therefore be more likely selected for further consideration. Similarly, the second term
is the exploration term, in which a child that has been visited signiﬁcantly less frequently than the parent will receive
a higher UCT score. Therefore, C p balances the goals of
exploitation and exploration in selecting a child of a given

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4065

