Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Two-Stream Contextualized CNN for
Fine-Grained Image Classiﬁcation
Jiang Liu,1 Chenqiang Gao,1,∗ Deyu Meng,2 Wangmeng Zuo3
1

Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
liujiang4work@outlook.com, gaocq@cqupt.edu.cn, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Methodology

Abstract

Overview

Human’s cognition system prompts that context information
provides potentially powerful clue while recognizing objects.
However, for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation, the contribution of context may vary over different images, and sometimes the context even confuses the classiﬁcation result. To
alleviate this problem, in our work, we develop a novel
approach, two-stream contextualized Convolutional Neural
Network, which provides a simple but efﬁcient contextcontent joint classiﬁcation model under deep learning framework. The network merely requires the raw image and a
coarse segmentation as input to extract both content and context features without need of human interaction. Moreover,
our network adopts a weighted fusion scheme to combine
the content and the context classiﬁers, while a subnetwork
is introduced to adaptively determine the weight for each image. According to our experiments on public datasets, our approach achieves considerable high recognition accuracy without any tedious human’s involvements, as compared with the
state-of-the-art approaches.

Our two-stream contextualized CNN network utilizes two
parallel nets: content net and context net, which are modiﬁed and ﬁne-tuned from the convolutional layers of vgg-16
net(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014b), to capture both object and background features. The input of our two-stream
network requires an image coupling with its coarse image
segmentation to separate content and context regions. We
name them as the content image and context image in our
work, respectively. We get the content image from the raw
image by calculating the bounding box of the content part
given the segmentation result. The context counterpart is
obtained by ﬁlling the content region with the pixels from
equivalent position of the mean image calculated across the
training set. Two parallel nets, the content net and the context net are employed to handle the corresponding images
and extract feature maps. We also conduct a Spatial Pyramid Pooling(SPP)(He et al. 2014) operation after the last
convolutional layer in order to obtain ﬁxed length features
without distorting and cropping the input image. Finally, we
design a optimal fusion model to automatically learn the fusion weight from content and context features and output the
ﬁnal recognition result.

Introduction
We notice that when people discriminate different images, they will have different attentions between content and context information. Inspired from this cognition
mechanism and combining it with the recent deep learning method(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014a), we propose
a novel two-stream contextualized Convolutional Neural
Network(CNN), to address ﬁne-grained level classiﬁcation
problem. Our contribution mainly has the following three
aspects:

Classiﬁer and optimal fusion model
Our optimal fusion model is illustrated in Figure 1. Given
the i-th input image xi , off-the-shelf segmentation result
M (xi ), we can obtain corresponding context feature f c (xi )
and content feature f o (xi ). We then formalize three independent networks: Wo -Net as the content classiﬁer, Wc -Net
as the context classiﬁer and Wq -Net as the fusion weight
regression model to construct the optimal fusion framework. Both the Wo -Net and Wc -Net are fully connected to
f o (xi ) and f c (xi ) to output probabilistic classiﬁcation results ϕoij and ϕcij , respectively. The Wq -Net is constructed
with a fully-connected layer followed by a logistic regression model to output the fusion weight qi ranging from 0
to 1. Finally, we deﬁne the probabilistic classiﬁcation result
using a fusion function π(xi , j) as following:

• The content and context information are ﬁnely compensated with each other. Thus, for a given image, we employ
a two-stream CNN architecture to simultaneously utilize
both of them.
• The fusion weight for compensating the content and context classiﬁers can be optimally adapted in an uniﬁed optimization framework, which ﬁnely accords with the cognition process of humans.
• Our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
public datasets so far without any human interactions.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

π(xi , j) =

4232

1
,
1 + exp(−(qi ϕcij + (1 − qi )ϕoij ))

(1)

