Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Articulated Pose Estimation Using Hierarchical Exemplar-Based Models
Jiongxin Liu, Yinxiao Li, Peter Allen, Peter Belhumeur
Columbia University in the City of New York
{liujx09, yli, allen, belhumeur}@cs.columbia.edu

shape. In this model, parts are connected with tree edges
modeled as elastic springs. On top of such model, various
formulations have been proposed. (Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher 2005) designed pictorial structure to combine appearance and spatial terms in a generative way. Discriminatively trained method is more powerful, and easily adapts to
extended deformable part models (DPMs) with mixture of
parts (Yang and Ramanan 2011) and hierarchical representations (Sun and Savarese 2011; Branson, Perona, and Belongie 2011; Sapp and Taskar 2013; Wang and Li 2013).
There are efforts to go beyond the tree structure: (Wang,
Tran, and Liao 2011) proposes a loopy model that contains
composite parts implemented by Poselets (Bourdev and Malik 2009; Bourdev et al. 2010); (Ramakrishna et al. 2014;
Tompson et al. 2014) treat all the other parts as the neighbors
of a target part; Grammar model has also been proposed to
generalize the tree structure (Rothrock, Park, and Zhu 2013).
As nonparametric spatial models, exemplars are also effective in part localization problems (Sapp, Jordan, and
Taskar 2010; Belhumeur et al. 2011; Liu and Belhumeur
2013), as an ensemble of labeled samples (i.e., exemplars) literally capture plausible part conﬁgurations without assuming the distribution of part relations. However, the
exemplar-based models have not shown much efﬁcacy in human pose estimation due to degraded expressiveness of limited training samples (Liu, Li, and Belhumeur 2014).
In our work, we improve the expressiveness of exemplarbased models by leveraging hierarchy and composite parts:
each composite part is treated as an object, with exemplars
dictating the conﬁguration of its child parts. By doing so,
we obtain exemplar-based models covering a spectrum of
granularity. In addition, we propose a novel formulation that
captures the interactions between object parts in two aspects: spatial relations between parts at the same granularity level are inferred by DCNNs (inspired by (Chen and
Yuille 2014)), and constrained by exemplar-based models
at that level; spatial relations between parts at different levels follow the parent-child relations in the hierarchy, which
are well maintained in the bottom-up inference through exemplars. These efforts together allow us to only model the
part relations in each layer via DCNNs without impairing
the strength of the method. In some sense, our formulation
is tailored for exemplar-based inference, which differs from
other hierarchical models such as multi-layer DPMs.

Abstract
Exemplar-based models have achieved great success on localizing the parts of semi-rigid objects. However, their efﬁcacy on highly articulated objects such as humans is yet to be
explored. Inspired by hierarchical object representation and
recent application of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNNs) on human pose estimation, we propose a novel formulation that incorporates both hierarchical exemplar-based
models and DCNNs in the spatial terms. Speciﬁcally, we obtain more expressive spatial models by assuming independence between exemplars at different levels in the hierarchy; we also obtain stronger spatial constraints by inferring
the spatial relations between parts at the same level. As our
method strikes a good balance between expressiveness and
strength of spatial models, it is both effective and generalizable, achieving state-of-the-art results on different benchmarks: Leeds Sports Dataset and CUB-200-2011.

Introduction
Articulated pose estimation from a static image remains a
challenge in computer vision. The difﬁculty lies in the wide
variations in the appearance of object due to articulated deformations. Therefore, an effective method generally relies
on strong appearance models and expressive spatial models to capture the variations. More importantly, these models should be incorporated into a sensible framework where
correct poses do enjoy relatively high likelihood.
There has been great progress in developing appearance
and spatial models. Histogram of Gradient (HOG) (Dalal
and Triggs 2005) was widely used as the part descriptor. However, HOG is rather weak and introduces visual
ambiguities (Vondrick et al. 2013). Recently, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) have demonstrated
excellent performance in building appearance models for
object detection (Szegedy, Toshev, and Erhan 2013; Sermanet et al. 2014; Girshick et al. 2014) and human pose
estimation (Toshev and Szegedy 2014; Jain et al. 2014;
Chen and Yuille 2014; Tompson et al. 2014). Compared with
a shallow classiﬁer with hand-crafted features, DCNNs have
the capacity of learning more discriminative features.
As for the spatial models, tree-structured model wins popularity by enjoying a simpliﬁed representation of object
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3546

