Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Modeling Evolving Relationships Between Characters in Literary Novels
Snigdha Chaturvedi1 , Shashank Srivastava2 , Hal Daumé III1 , Chris Dyer2
1

University of Maryland, College Park 2 Carnegie Mellon University
snigdhac@cs.umd.edu, ssrivastava@cmu.edu, hal@cs.umd.edu, cdyer@cs.cmu.edu

and the more recent bags of related events (Orr et al. 2014;
Chambers 2013; Cheung, Poon, and Vanderwende 2013).
The alternate perspective attempts to understand stories
from the viewpoint of characters and relationships between
them. This perspective explains the set of observed actions using characters’ personas or roles and the expected
behavior of the character in that role (Valls-Vargas, Zhu,
and Ontañón 2014; Bamman, O’Connor, and Smith 2013;
Bamman, Underwood, and Smith 2014; Elson 2012). Recent work has also focused on constructing social networks,
sometimes signed networks, to model the relationships between characters (Agarwal et al. 2013; 2014; Elson, Dames,
and McKeown 2010; Krishnan and Eisenstein 2015).
The work presented in this paper aligns with the second
perspective. We address the problem of modeling relationships between characters in literary ﬁction, speciﬁcally novels. Existing work mentioned above, models each character
as assuming a single narrative role, and these roles deﬁne the
relationships between characters and also govern their actions. While such a simpliﬁed assumption provides a good
general overview of the narrative, it is not sufﬁcient to explain all events in the narrative. We believe that in most narratives, relationships between characters are not static but
evolve as the novel progresses. For example, consider the relationship between Tom and Becky depicted in Fig. 1 which
shows an excerpt from the summary 1 of The Adventures of
Tom Sawyer. For most of the narrative (and its summary), the
characters are participants in a romantic relationship, which
explains most, but not all, of their mutual behavior. However, we can observe that their relationship was not static
but evolving, driving nature of the characters’ actions. In
this particular case, the characters presumably start as lovers
(sentence S1 in the ﬁgure), which is hinted at by (and explains) becoming engaged. The relationship sours when Tom
reveals his previous love interest (S2 and S3). However, later
in the narrative they reconcile (S4 and S5). A model that
assumes a ﬁxed romantic relationship between characters
would fail to explain their behaviors during the phase when
their relationship was under stress.
Therefore, we assume that the relationship between characters evolves with the progress of the novel and model it
as a sequence of latent variables denoting relation state. In
this work, we take a coarse-grained view, and model rela-

Figure 1: Sample sentences from a narrative depicting evolving relationship between characters: Tom and Becky. The relationship changes from cooperative (+) to non-cooperative
(-) and then back to cooperative (+). ‘. . . ’ represent text
omitted due to space constraints.
Abstract
Studying characters plays a vital role in computationally representing and interpreting narratives. Unlike previous work,
which has focused on inferring character roles, we focus on
the problem of modeling their relationships. Rather than assuming a ﬁxed relationship for a character pair, we hypothesize that relationships temporally evolve with the progress of
the narrative, and formulate the problem of relationship modeling as a structured prediction problem. We propose a semisupervised framework to learn relationship sequences from
fully as well as partially labeled data. We present a Markovian model capable of accumulating historical beliefs about
the relationship and status changes. We use a set of rich linguistic and semantically motivated features that incorporate
world knowledge to investigate the textual content of narrative. We empirically demonstrate that such a framework outperforms competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of computational narrative studies focuses on algorithmically understanding, representing and generating stories. Most research in this ﬁeld focuses on modeling the narrative from the perspective of (1) events or (2) characters.
Popular events-based approaches include scripts (Schank
and Abelson 1977; Regneri, Koller, and Pinkal 2010), plot
units (Goyal, Riloff, and Daumé III 2010; McIntyre and Lapata 2010; Finlayson 2012; Elsner 2012), temporal event
chains or schemas (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008; 2009),

1

SparkNotes Editors. SparkNote on The Adventures of Tom
Sawyer. SparkNotes LLC. 2003. http://www.sparknotes.com/lit/
tomsawyer/

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2704

