Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reading Scene Text in Deep Convolutional Sequences
Pan He,∗1, 2 Weilin Huang,∗1, 2 Yu Qiao,1 Chen Change Loy,2, 1 and Xiaoou Tang2, 1
1

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis and Pat. Rec.,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{pan.he,wl.huang,yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn, {ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We develop a Deep-Text Recurrent Network (DTRN)
that regards scene text reading as a sequence labelling
problem. We leverage recent advances of deep convolutional neural networks to generate an ordered highlevel sequence from a whole word image, avoiding the
difﬁcult character segmentation problem. Then a deep
recurrent model, building on long short-term memory
(LSTM), is developed to robustly recognize the generated CNN sequences, departing from most existing approaches recognising each character independently. Our
model has a number of appealing properties in comparison to existing scene text recognition methods: (i)
It can recognise highly ambiguous words by leveraging meaningful context information, allowing it to work
reliably without either pre- or post-processing; (ii) the
deep CNN feature is robust to various image distortions;
(iii) it retains the explicit order information in word image, which is essential to discriminate word strings; (iv)
the model does not depend on pre-deﬁned dictionary,
and it can process unknown words and arbitrary strings.
It achieves impressive results on several benchmarks,
advancing the-state-of-the-art substantially.

Figure 1: The word image recognition pipeline of the proposed Deep-Text Recurrent Networks (DTRN) model.

Text recognition in natural image has received increasing attention in computer vision and machine intelligence,
due to its numerous practical applications. This problem includes two sub tasks, namely text detection (Huang, Qiao,
and Tang 2014; Yin et al. 2014; He et al. 2015; Zhang et
al. 2015; Huang et al. 2013; Neumann and Matas 2013)
and text-line/word recognition (Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Almazán et al. 2014; Jaderberg et al. 2014;
Bissacco et al. 2013; Yao et al. 2014). This work focuses on
the latter that aims to retrieve a text string from a cropped
word image. Though huge efforts have been devoted to
this task, reading text in unconstrained environment is still
extremely challenging, and remains an open problem, as
substantiated in recent literature (Jaderberg et al. 2015b;
Almazán et al. 2014). The main difﬁculty arises from the
large diversity of text patterns (e.g. low resolution, low
contrast, and blurring), and highly complicated background
clutters. Consequently, individual character segmentation or
separation is extremely challenging.

Most previous studies focus on developing powerful character classiﬁers, some of which are incorporated with a language model, leading to the state-of-the-art performance
(Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Bissacco et al.
2013; Yao et al. 2014; Lee et al. 2014). These approaches
mainly follow the pipeline of conventional OCR techniques
by ﬁrst involving a character-level segmentation, then followed by an isolated character classiﬁer and post-processing
for recognition. They also adopt deep neural networks for
representation learning, but the recognition is still conﬁned
to character-level classiﬁcation. Thus their performance are
severely harmed by the difﬁculty of character segmentation
or separation. Importantly, recognizing each character independently discards meaningful context information of the
words, signiﬁcantly reducing its reliability and robustness.
First, we wish to address the issue of context information
learning. The main inspiration for approaching this issue
comes from the recent success of recurrent neural networks
(RNN) for handwriting recognition (Graves, Liwicki, and
Fernandez 2009; Graves and Schmidhuber 2008), speech

∗

Authors contributed equally
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3501

