Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Verifying ConGolog Programs on Bounded Situation Calculus Theories∗
Giuseppe De Giacomo

Yves Lespérance

Sapienza Univ. Roma
Rome, Italy
degiacomo@dis.uniroma1.it

York University
Toronto, ON, Canada
lesperan@cse.yorku.ca

Fabio Patrizi

Sebastian Sardina

Free Univ. Bozen/Bolzano
Bolzano, Italy
patrizi@inf.unibz.it

RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia
sebastian.sardina@rmit.edu.au
guages, but their atomic actions are speciﬁed in terms of
preconditions and effects deﬁned in a situation calculus action theory and their tests involve ﬂuents whose changing
value is speciﬁed by the theory. Notably, such programs may
be highly nondeterministic and allow many possible executions. In particular, a program may nondeterministically pick
an object from the inﬁnite domain and execute some actions
on it. The decidability results for veriﬁcation of bounded action theories do not apply to ConGolog programs, since unlike domain objects, which are inﬁnitely many but unstructured, programs are unbounded terms deﬁned inductively.
So a natural question is whether such results can be extended
to deal with ConGolog programs as well, to check properties
like termination, safety, total correctness, etc. In this paper,
we show that this is indeed the case: veriﬁcation of ﬁrstorder μ-calculus temporal properties against ConGolog programs over bounded action theories is decidable.
To obtain this result we develop a new transition semantics for ConGolog programs, which is shown equivalent to
the original one, that keeps bindings of nondeterministically
picked object variables in a separate “program environment”
whose size in terms of number of pick variables is naturally
bounded. Differently from the original semantics, the set of
remaining programs (without assignment to the pick variables, now separated) that can be produced in any execution of a given initial program is in fact ﬁnite, and can be
viewed as program counter values. Thus there is no need to
deﬁne a complex encoding of programs as terms in the situation calculus as in the original ConGolog semantics (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and Levesque 2000). Leveraging on this
new semantics, we can adapt the approach of (De Giacomo,
Lespérance, and Patrizi 2012; 2016) to show decidability of
veriﬁcation of temporal properties. With the new semantics
it becomes clear that if the action theory is bounded, then
every reachable program conﬁguration (formed by the remaining program, the variable environment state, and the
situation) is also bounded.
This main result is complemented by a second one:
for programs that are “situation-determined” (De Giacomo,
Lespérance, and Muise 2012), we can compile the program
into the action theory itself without loss of generality, so
that the executable situations become those that can be gen-

Abstract
We address veriﬁcation of high-level programs over situation
calculus action theories that have an inﬁnite object domain,
but bounded ﬂuent extensions in each situation. We show
that veriﬁcation of μ-calculus temporal properties against
ConGolog programs over such bounded theories is decidable
in general. To do this, we reformulate the transition semantics of ConGolog to keep the bindings of “pick variables”
into a separate variable environment whose size is naturally
bounded by the number of variables. We also show that for
situation-determined ConGolog programs, we can compile
away the program into the action theory itself without loss of
generality. This can also be done for arbitrary programs, but
only to check certain properties, such as if a situation is the
result of a program execution, not for μ-calculus veriﬁcation.

Introduction
Most work on veriﬁcation of agent systems/programs is
restricted to ﬁnite state systems (Baier and Katoen 2008;
Lomuscio, Qu, and Raimondi 2009). In AI, starting from
the seminal work in (De Giacomo, Ternovskaia, and Reiter
1997) and (Claßen and Lakemeyer 2008), there has been
growing interest in verifying agent programs with a ﬁrstorder state representation as in the situation calculus. Recently, (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and Patrizi 2012) have
shown that veriﬁcation of μ-calculus temporal properties
over bounded action theories in the situation calculus is decidable. Such theories have an inﬁnite object domain, but the
number of object tuples that belong to ﬂuents in each situation remains bounded. Nonetheless, they deal with inﬁnitely
many objects over the course of an inﬁnite execution.
On top of action theories, high level programming languages, such as ConGolog (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and
Levesque 2000), have been introduced to express semantically rich agent behaviors. ConGolog programs include conditionals, loops, and concurrency as usual programming lan∗
We acknowledge the support of Sapienza 2015 project “Immersive Cognitive Environments,” the NSERC of Canada, Provincia Autonoma di Bolzano (under project VeriSynCoPateD), and a
Sapienza 2014 Visiting Grant (for the last author).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

950

