Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Abductive Reasoning Using Random Examples
Brendan Juba∗
Washington University in St. Louis
bjuba@wustl.edu

standing (Cox and Pietrzykowski 1986; Poole 1990), natural
language understanding (Hobbs et al. 1990), planning (Eshghi 1988; Missiaen, Bruynooghe, and Denecker 1995), and
plan recognition (Charniak and McDermott 1985) all involve abduction. We will discuss applications slightly further in Section 5.
As we will review, the task of abduction itself has already
been formalized in (at least) three distinct ways, and we propose a new formalization of abduction using examples; the
examples here consist of settings of the various attributes,
e.g., encoding a concrete “scene” or “episode” in the image units of Valiant’s neuroidal model (2000a), or more abstractly, as in the entries in a database. We assume these
examples to have been drawn independently from a common unknown distribution D, modeling the frequency with
which such scenes occur in a domain. We formulate the task
as searching for a conditional distribution: in addition to this
data, we are given a Boolean query that we wish to “explain”
in a sense we will elaborate on below, and a class of Boolean
formulas H over a distinguished set of attributes of the data
A. A indicates the attributes that we wish to allow in our
explanations, for example, attributes that took values prior
to the condition to be explained, and might therefore be predictive. We then seek to ﬁnd a (hypothesis) formula h in the
class H using only the attributes in A such that
(i) Approximate validity: the query is (almost) always true
on examples drawn from the conditional distribution D|h,
i.e., the distribution over assignments induced by D given
that h is satisﬁed, and
(ii) Plausibility: the probability of h being true under D is
at least some minimum value μ∗ . We will often seek to
ﬁnd a h attaining as large a plausibility μ as possible.
So, h is an “explanation” in the sense that the query empirically follows from h, and h holds sufﬁciently often. For
example, in our model, the query might indicate whether or
not the key facts of the story – the gun in the bank – are
present in the examples, and the property h to be found represents the desired “explanation.” A slightly more precise
example that we will return to later involves formulating
a diagnosis. For example, we may have various attributes
about the state of a car, and the query may be something
like key turned ∧ ¬engine running, for which we may seek
an explanation such as h = key turned ∧ ¬gas in tank: although Pr[key turned ∧ ¬gas in tank] may be low, it occa-

Abstract
We consider a new formulation of abduction in which degrees
of “plausibility” of explanations, along with the rules of the
domain, are learned from concrete examples (settings of attributes). Our version of abduction thus falls in the “learning to reason” framework of Khardon and Roth. Such approaches enable us to capture a natural notion of “plausibility” in a domain while avoiding the extremely difﬁcult problem of specifying an explicit representation of what is “plausible.”
We speciﬁcally consider the question of which syntactic
classes of formulas have efﬁcient algorithms for abduction.
We ﬁnd that the class of k-DNF explanations can be found in
polynomial time for any ﬁxed k; but, we also ﬁnd evidence
that even weak versions of our abduction task are intractable
for the usual class of conjunctions. This evidence is provided by a connection to the usual, inductive PAC-learning
model proposed by Valiant. We also consider an exceptiontolerant variant of abduction. We observe that it is possible
for polynomial-time algorithms to tolerate a few adversarially
chosen exceptions, again for the class of k-DNF explanations.
All of the algorithms we study are particularly simple, and indeed are variants of a rule proposed by Mill.

1

Introduction

Abduction is the process of passing from an observation to
a plausible explanation or diagnosis. For example, to understand a story in which a man is holding a gun in a bank,
one must “abduce” that (perhaps) the man wishes to rob
the bank. This is not a sound inference, of course – the
man could be a guard, the man could be seeking to place
the ﬁrearm in a safe deposit box, etc. – but it represents
at least a highly plausible explanation for the given facts.
Unlike the usual forms of inference of deduction and induction, abduction as a form of inference was only brought
to prominence relatively recently, by Pierce (1931). It was
then promoted as a core task in AI by Charniak and McDermott (1985). It has since been observed that problems as diverse as diagnosis (Reggia 1983; Reiter 1987), image under∗
Work partially performed while the author was afﬁliated
with Harvard University and supported by ONR grant number
N000141210358. Currently supported by an AFOSR Young Investgator award.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

999

