Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Asynchronous Distributed
Semi-Stochastic Gradient Optimization
Ruiliang Zhang, Shuai Zheng, James T. Kwok
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
{rzhangaf, szhengac, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk
with the server but not among them. Such a distributed computing model has been commonly used in many recent largescale machine learning implementations (Dean et al. 2012;
Gimpel, Das, and Smith 2010; Shamir, Srebro, and Zhang
2014; Zhang and Kwok 2014).
Often, machines in these systems have to run synchronously (Boyd et al. 2011; Shamir, Srebro, and Zhang
2014). In each iteration, information from all workers need
to be ready before the server can aggregate the updates. This
can be expensive due to communication overhead and random network delay. It also suffers from the straggler problem (Albrecht et al. 2006), in which the system can move
forward only at the pace of the slowest worker.
To alleviate these problems, asynchronicity is introduced
(Agarwal and Duchi 2011; Dean et al. 2012; Ho et al. 2013;
Li et al. 2014; Zhang and Kwok 2014). The server is allowed
to use only staled (delayed) information from the workers,
and thus only needs to wait for a much smaller number of
workers in each iteration. Promising theoretical/empirical
results have been reported. One prominent example of asynchronous SGD is the downpour SGD (Dean et al. 2012).
Each worker independently reads the parameter from the
server, computes the local gradient, and sends it back to the
server. The server then immediately updates the parameter
using the worker’s gradient information. Using an adaptive
learning rate (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011), downpour
SGD achieves state-of-the-art performance.
However, in order for these algorithms to converge, the
learning rate has to decrease not only with the number of
iterations (as in standard single-machine SGD algorithms
(Bottou 2010)), but also with the maximum delay τ (i.e.,
the duration between the time the gradient is computed by
the worker and it is used by the server) (Ho et al. 2013). On
the other hand, note that downpour SGD does not constrain
τ , but no convergence guarantee is provided.
In practice, a decreasing learning rate leads to slower convergence (Bottou 2010; Johnson and Zhang 2013). Recently,
Feyzmahdavian, Aytekin, and Johansson (2014) proposed
the delayed proximal gradient method in which the delayed
gradient is used to update an analogously delayed model parameter (but not its current one). It is shown that even with
a constant learning rate, the algorithm converges linearly to
within  of the optimal solution. However, to achieve a small
, the learning rate needs to be small, which again means

Abstract
With the recent proliferation of large-scale learning problems,
there have been a lot of interest on distributed machine learning algorithms, particularly those that are based on stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) and its variants. However, existing
algorithms either suffer from slow convergence due to the inherent variance of stochastic gradients, or have a fast linear
convergence rate but at the expense of poorer solution quality. In this paper, we combine their merits by proposing a fast
distributed asynchronous SGD-based algorithm with variance
reduction. A constant learning rate can be used, and it is also
guaranteed to converge linearly to the optimal solution. Experiments on the Google Cloud Computing Platform demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms state-of-theart distributed asynchronous algorithms in terms of both wall
clock time and solution quality.

Introduction
With the recent proliferation of big data, learning the parameters in a large machine learning model is a challenging problem. A popular approach is to use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants (Bottou 2010;
Dean et al. 2012; Gimpel, Das, and Smith 2010). However,
it can still be difﬁcult to store and process a big data set on
one single machine. Thus, there is now growing interest in
distributed machine learning algorithms. (Dean et al. 2012;
Gimpel, Das, and Smith 2010; Niu et al. 2011; Shamir, Srebro, and Zhang 2014; Zhang and Kwok 2014). The data set
is partitioned into subsets, assigned to multiple machines,
and the optimization problem is solved in a distributed manner.
In general, distributed architectures can be categorized
as shared-memory (Niu et al. 2011) or distributed-memory
(Dean et al. 2012; Gimpel, Das, and Smith 2010; Shamir,
Srebro, and Zhang 2014; Zhang and Kwok 2014). In this
paper, we will focus on the latter, which is more scalable.
Usually, one of the machines is the server, while the rest
are workers. The workers store the data subsets, perform local computations and send their updates to the server. The
server then aggregates the local information, performs the
actual update on the model parameter, and sends it back to
the workers. Note that workers only need to communicate
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2323

