Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Morphology-Aware Network for Morphological Disambiguation
Eray Yildiz, Caglar Tirkaz, H. Bahadir Sahin, Mustafa Tolga Eren, Ozan Sonmez
Huawei Turkey Research and Development Center, Umraniye, Istanbul, Turkey
{eray.yildiz, mustafa.tolga.eren}@huawei.com
{caglartirkaz, hbahadirsahin, osonmez}@gmail.com

While morphological disambiguation is important for
natural language processing in any language, it is vital
in morphologically rich languages. We speciﬁcally focus
on Turkish which is an important language spoken by
over 70 million people and has a complex morphology
that allows construction of thousands of word forms from
each root through inﬂectional and derivational sufﬁxation
(Hakkani-Tür, Oﬂazer, and Tür 2000). For instance, yürü
(walk), yürüdüm (I walked), yürüyeceksiniz (you will walk),
yürüttüler (they made somebody walk), yürüyünce (When
(he/she/it) walks) and yürüyecektiler (They were going to
walk) are some of the possible word formations of a Turkish
verb root yürü. In all the examples “yürü” is the root of the
words whereas the sufﬁxes are used to change meaning.
Morphological analysis of a word might produce more
than one analysis since there might be multiple interpretations of a single word. Consider the example given in Table 1 where the Turkish word “dolar” is analyzed. The output of the morphological analyzer for this word contains four
possible analyses. The reason for that is each of the words
“dolar”, “dola”, “dol” and “do” can be used as roots and at
the same time “r”, “ar” and “lar” are all valid sufﬁxes in
Turkish. Thus, all four of the analyses are valid that lead to
quite different meanings.

Abstract
Agglutinative languages such as Turkish, Finnish and Hungarian require morphological disambiguation before further
processing due to the complex morphology of words. A morphological disambiguator is used to select the correct morphological analysis of a word. Morphological disambiguation is important because it generally is one of the ﬁrst steps
of natural language processing and its performance affects
subsequent analyses. In this paper, we propose a system
that uses deep learning techniques for morphological disambiguation. Many of the state-of-the-art results in computer
vision, speech recognition and natural language processing
have been obtained through deep learning models. However,
applying deep learning techniques to morphologically rich
languages is not well studied. In this work, while we focus
on Turkish morphological disambiguation we also present results for French and German in order to show that the proposed architecture achieves high accuracy with no languagespeciﬁc feature engineering or additional resource. In the experiments, we achieve 84.12 , 88.35 and 93.78 morphological disambiguation accuracy among the ambiguous words for
Turkish, German and French respectively.

Introduction
Morphological analysis is generally achieved through the
use of ﬁnite state transducers (FST) (Kaplan and Kay 1981;
Koskenniemi 1984; Beesley and Karttunen 2003; Oﬂazer
1993). During morphological analysis, the surface form of
the word is given as input and an FST is used to output possible morphological analyses of the input word. A morphological analysis contains a root and a set of tags so called morphemes, minimal units of meaning in a language (Oﬂazer
1993).
A morphological disambiguator is used to select the correct analysis among the possible analyses of a word using
the context that the word appears in. The output of morphological disambiguation contains syntactic and semantic information about a word such as its POS tag, tense, polarity
and it being accusative, possessive or genitive. This information is vital for some NLP tasks such as dependency parsing
and semantic role labeling whereas it can be utilized in other
NLP tasks such as topic modeling, named entity recognition
and machine translation.

Table 1: Morphological analyses of the Turkish word “dolar”
Morphological
English
Analysis
Translation
dolar +Noun +3sg +Pnon +Nominative
dola +Verb +Positive +Aorist +3sg
dol +Verb +Positive +Aorist +3sg
do +Noun +3pl +Pnon +Nominative

dollar
he/she wraps
it ﬁlls
Multiple C
(musical note)

Another reason for multiple morphological analyses is
due to the fact that a morpheme might change meanining
depending on the context of the word. Consider the example
given in Table 2. In the ﬁrst row “evi” is used in the accusative case whereas in the second row it is used as a possessive noun. The word “evi” has two morphological analyses sharing the same root. Thus, the only difference in the

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2863

