Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

BeeMo, a Monte Carlo Simulation Agent
for Playing Parameterized Poker Squares
Karo Castro-Wunsch, William Maga, Calin Anton
MacEwan University, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
karoantonio@gmail.com, magaw@mymacewan.ca, antonc@macewan.ca

given scoring policy, usually the American or the British
system. Poker Squares is a stochastic single player game,
with a very large search tree size.
Parameterized Poker Squares is a variation of the game
in which the scoring system is non standard and revealed
right at the beginning of the game. The lack of initial
knowledge about the scoring system and the wide range
of possible scoring systems have important consequences
for the agent design. For example, the American scoring
system, which values royal flushes highly and single pairs
minimally, necessitates the placement of flushes in either
columns or rows exclusively. However, a scoring system
that rewards only high cards and penalizes all hands
requires the avoidance of any hand. This forces agents to
use more generalized algorithms and approaches and
prevents the implementation of simple heuristic based
agents.
The guidelines of the competition specify a limited
training time for the agent to learn the scoring system and
a limited play time per game.

Abstract
We investigated Parameterized Poker Squares to
approximate an optimal game playing agent. We organized
our inquiry along three dimensions: partial hand
representation, search algorithms, and partial hand utility
learning. For each dimension we implemented and
evaluated several designs, among which we selected the
best strategies to use for BeeMo, our final product. BeeMo
uses a parallel flat Monte-Carlo search. The search is
guided by a heuristic based on hand patterns utilities,
which are learned through an iterative improvement
method involving Monte-Carlo simulations and optimized
greedy search.

Introduction
This paper describes the design of BeeMo, a
Parameterized Poker Squares agent we developed to
participate in the EAAI-2016 student-faculty research
challenge. We present an overview of our inquiry as well
as the most important aspects of algorithm and agent
design: implementation of flat Monte Carlo search, state
space representation, and use of Monte Carlo simulations
for feedback learning. To facilitate the reproducibility of
our results and to encourage further work on
Parameterized Poker Squares, we made the Java source
code of the agent available at:
https://github.com/MrMagaw/Beemo.

Agent design
We identified three axes along which to design our
Parameterized Poker Square agent: hand representations,
search algorithms, and partial hand utility learning
algorithms. Initially we investigated the choices for each
axis independently, without considering possible inter
axes interactions. After selecting the best approaches
along each axis we investigated the performance of
complete agents by combining the selected approaches
and comparing their overall score.

Parameterized Poker Squares
The 2016 EAAI NSG Challenge asks participants to
submit agents to play Parameterized Poker Squares
(Neller 2014). Poker Squares, a variation of Solitaire, is
played by placing cards in a 5×5 grid, where each row and
column is a poker hand. The aim of the game is to
maximize the total points of the ten hands, according to a

Hand Pattern and Board Context Encoding
We used a straightforward representation of the board,
enhanced with a bit packed representation of the

 
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4071

