Toward Interactive Relational Learning
Ryan Rossi and Rong Zhou
Palo Alto Research Center

prior knowledge, understand the model, and analyze errors
and uncertainty.
Existing RML methods use exhaustive grid-based search,
which is computationally expensive, suffers from local optimum problems, and is impractical in many situations (Rossi
and Neville 2010). However, since i RML leverages human
capabilities (Figure 1), the space of relational models can be
searched more effectively and seamlessly, while also being
guided by prior/domain knowledge and experience (which
may be difﬁcult to encode into the model directly).
Visual analytic techniques for rich multivariate networks
are introduced that combine state-of-the-art visualization and
interaction techniques (Ahmed and Rossi 2015) to understand, explore, and interactively analyze RML methods. These
techniques facilitate the design and selection of a relational
model (from the space of potential models), their evaluation,
error and uncertainty analysis, as well as give users the ability to interactively reﬁne them in a closed-loop. In addition,
users can quickly understand the interplay between properties of the network and its associated node and edge data,
e.g., understanding the relationship between the formation of
large stars (or cliques) and how these correlate with attributes
of nodes.
Desiderata for the i RML paradigm are as follows:

Abstract
This paper introduces the Interactive Relational Machine
Learning (i RML) paradigm in which users interactively design relational models by specifying the various components,
constraints, and relational data representation, as well as perform evaluation, analyze errors, and make adjustments and
reﬁnements in a closed-loop. i RML requires fast real-time
learning and inference methods capable of interactive rates.
Methods are investigated that enable direct manipulation of the
various components of the RML method. Visual representation
and interaction techniques are also developed for exploring
the space of relational models and the trade-offs of the various
components and design choices.

Discussion
Relational Machine Learning (RML) (Getoor and Taskar
2007) methods exploit the relational dependencies between
nodes to improve predictive performance (Macskassy and
Provost 2003). However, these approaches often fail in practice due to low relational autocorrelation, noisy links, sparsely
labeled graphs, and data representation (Rossi et al. 2012).
To overcome these problems, we envision an Interactive
Relational Machine Learning (i RML) paradigm in which
users interactively specify relational models and data representation (via transformation techniques for the graph structure and features), as well as perform evaluation, analyze errors, and make adjustments and reﬁnements in a closed-loop.
In this work, humans interact with relational learning algorithms by providing input (in the form of labels, similarity/kernel function, hyper-parameters, priors, conﬁdence/uncertainty about particular instances, learning rate, corrections,
rankings, probabilities, evaluation) while observing the output (in the form of predictions, uncertainty, feedback, and
any useful visual representation of the data).
i RML combines fast, ﬂexible, and powerful relational
learning techniques with interactive visualization to aid in
evaluation, tuning, analysis of errors, model selection, regularization, semi-supervised information, etc. It is designed for
rapid interactive visual exploration and learning through visual representations and interaction techniques at each stage.
i RML enables users to trade off competing goals, encode

• Immediate visual feedback. i RML methods should be optimized for the way humans learn (Ahlberg, Williamson, and
Shneiderman 1992; Thomas and Cook 2005; Ahmed and Rossi
2015). Thus, they should provide immediate and continuous visual feedback upon every interaction (e.g., change of a slider for
ﬁltering uncertain or misclassiﬁed nodes, selection of a subgraph
for modeling, or correcting the class label of a node). Further,
interactive queries need to be rapid, incremental and reversible
with immediate visual feedback.
• Flexibility and generality. Methods should be useful for a wide
variety of data, constraints, and learning scenarios. They need to
also be robust for learning sparsely labeled graphs, noisy relational data, low and varying levels of relational autocorrelation,
and other problems that frequently arise in practice.
• Effectiveness. Models must have good predictive quality with
low error, variance, and bias.
• Scalable methods. Fast time- and space-efﬁcient learning methods capable of interactive rates is an important and key requirement. The requirement of rapid and interactive model updates
often dictates trading off accuracy with speed. Thus, network
sampling methods may be used to balance speed and accuracy.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4383

