Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Estimating Text Intelligibility
via Information Packaging Analysis
Junyi Jessy Li
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Computer and Information Science
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ljunyi@seas.upenn.edu

Introduction

Discourse Structure Variance

Effective communication through language involves organizing the content a person or system wishes to convey into
text that ﬂows naturally. There are many ways to render the
same information, but those appropriate for one group of audience may not be intelligible to another. For example, an
English speaker may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to process a sentence
in subject-object-verb order. A child may not understand a
complex sentence with multiple clauses. In these situations,
it is important for both human and text generation systems
to properly reorganize text segments to be well understood.
While sentence-level elements such as syntax are important
to ensure grammaticality, text comprehension is much determined by how information is arranged into discourse. Consider the following snippets:

Discourse structure represents the organization of text in ﬁne
grained units such as sentences or sub-sentential units (e.g.
clauses), and relationships between them (e.g. causal or contrast). Well-packaged discourse ensures a natural ﬂow of the
text; unusual or bad structure, on the other hand, renders the
text incoherent and unintelligible. In this thesis, I would like
to identify factors in discourse structure that are most important when text is reorganized. In doing so, systems can adopt
necessary processing to ensure text intelligibility. Writers
can also be informed of potential discourse structuring problems in their text.
Cross-lingual analysis. Differences in languages involve
aspects at various granularity. At the word level, vocabularies, including morphology, are different; at the sentence
level, phrases are ordered differently. Discourse structure is
no exception (Marcu, Carlson, and Watanabe 2000). Each
of these aspects impact machine translation (MT) systems.
However, although much prior work focused on the word or
sentence level, discourse structure variances were rarely analyzed. This is mainly due to the fact that MT systems standardly translate one input sentence into a single sentence in
the target language, forgoing the multi-sentence nature of
discourse structure. In this thesis I would like to show that
discourse phenomena are highly inﬂuential for system translations to be well comprehended.
Across languages, the amount of content that can be reasonably packaged into a single sentence varies. The result
is that information originally packaged in a single sentence
in one language sometimes must be expressed as a multisentence discourse in another. Failure in doing so may result
in a translated sentence being hard to process for speakers in
the target language. To understand whether this phenomenon
is important enough for human and system translators to
consider, I showed that sentences need to be translated into
multiple English sentences cause signiﬁcant quality drop for
MT, while the number of words in them has little correlation with MT quality (Li, Carpuat, and Nenkova 2014;
Li and Nenkova 2015a). From a translator’s point of view,
more than 15% of the sentences were translated into multiple sentences in English by at least three out of four human translators. From a reader’s point of view, for more than
27% of the sentences, at least three out of ﬁve readers prefer a multi-sentence translation. Therefore discourse struc-

The Dutch, under the leadership of Jan Pieterszoon Coen,
captured and razed the city in 1619, after which the capital
of the Dutch East Indies – a walled township named Batavia
– was established on the site. (Encyclopedia Britannica)
The Dutch captured and destroyed the city in 1619. They then
constructed a new town and named it Batavia. (Britannica
Elementary)

To make the text accessible to kids while keeping it informative, the authors of Britannica Elementary selectively removed some information and repacked the rest into two different sentences. The resulting text is thus different in both
its discourse structure (two sentences vs. one) and its speciﬁcity (general vs. detailed).
The goal of this thesis to analyze and address factors that
inﬂuence the intelligibility of text from two aspects of information packaging: discourse structure and text speciﬁcity.
In particular, I aim to identify discourse phenomena that
are highly signiﬁcant for the quality of text generation system outputs in both cross-lingual and monolingual context.
I will also introduce new dataset and methods for analyzing
text speciﬁcity in its discourse. Using this corpus, I seek to
propose techniques that improve the organization of system
outputs at multi-sentence level. In addition to automatic text
generation systems, my research can also be applied to providing feedback to authors on the naturalness and ﬂow of
their text, which currently is difﬁcult to obtain without an
editor.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4305

