Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting Prices in the Power TAC
Wholesale Energy Market
Moinul Morshed Porag Chowdhury
The University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, TX, USA
mchowdhury4@miners.utep.edu
Phone : 9034140259

Power TAC Wholesale Market Prediction

Abstract

In the Power TAC simulation, a timeslot refers to a simulated
hour and a typical simulation has 1440 timeslots. The wholesale market is modeled by a periodic double auction market
that allows brokers to trade energy between 1 and 24 timeslots into the future. Our baseline agent SPOT (which had no
machine learning technique to predict prices) uses a moving average price prediction based on the price history of the
agent. I have been experimenting with three machine learning algorithms to predict prices: 1) REPTree (Decision tree)
2) Linear Regression and 3) Multilayer Perceptron (Neural
network). I chose some potential features that are available
in the simulation at runtime to train a price predictor. I included 8 price features into my feature set because recent
trading histories reﬂect the present wholesale market economy. These include the clearing prices for the previous hour,
as well as the same time slot in the previous day and week. I
also included the weather forecast data and time related data
because the energy production of the producers (e.g. renewable energy sources as energy producers in the system) are
related with this. I selected the number of participants in the
game as a feature because the amount of competition affects
the market clearing price. I also included the moving average prices predicted by the baseline SPOT agent as a feature
so that I could get a better predictor model than the baseline.

The Power TAC simulation emphasizes the strategic
problems that broker agents face in managing the economics of a smart grid. The brokers must make trades
in multiple markets and to be successful, brokers must
make many good predictions about future supply, demand, and prices. Clearing price prediction is an important part of the broker’s wholesale market strategy because it helps the broker to make intelligent decisions
when purchasing energy at low cost in a day-ahead
market. I describe my work on using machine learning
methods to predict prices in the Power TAC wholesale
market, which will be used in future bidding strategies.

Introduction
The traditional energy grid lacks several important features
such as effective use of pricing and demand response of energy, customer participation, and proper distribution management for variable-output renewable energy sources etc
(Ketter, Peters, and Collins 2013). The smart grid has the potential to address many of these issues by providing a more
intelligent energy infrastructure (Ketter, Collins, and Reddy
2013). Researchers rely on rich simulations such as Power
TAC to explore the characteristics of future smart grids. In
the Power TAC smart grid simulation, brokers participate in
several markets including the wholesale market, the tariff
market, and the load balancing market to purchase energy
and sell it to customers. This game was designed as a scenario for the annual Trading Agent Competition, a research
competition with over a decade of history. The wholesale
market attempts to simulate existing energy markets such as
the European or North American wholesale energy markets.
The wholesale market is a “day ahead market” where the
energy is a perishable good and it allows brokers to buy and
sell quantities of energy for future delivery. Market structures like this exist across many different types of perishable
goods, so ﬁnding effective, robust, automated bidding strategies for these markets is an important research challenge. I
present my initial work on the price prediction part of this
problem.

Methodology
In the Power TAC competition automated broker agents play
many games against different numbers of opponents. In this
work, I experiment with games with three brokers, ﬁxing
two of them to be SPOT (baseline) and SPOTV2 (which is
used to introduce several learned predictors and gather training data). The remaining variable broker is selected from
a pool of ﬁve agents : TacTex14, CwiBroker15, Maxon15,
Maxon14 and AgentUDE14. I use the available agent binaries from the previous Power TAC tournaments. I ran one
simulation for each of the ﬁve variable agent from the agent
pool using four different initializations of the simulation.
As a result, each initialization has ﬁve training datasets and
in total I generated twenty training datasets. I used Weka
(Hall et al. 2009 2015) and 5, 10, 15 and 20 games training datasets to generate the predictor models. Each of the
Linear regression, 3 layer Multilayer Perceptron (25,40,35
nodes respectively on each layer) and REPTree (Decision

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4204

