Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Personalized Microblog Sentiment
Classiﬁcation via Multi-Task Learning
Fangzhao Wu and Yongfeng Huang
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology,
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
wufangzhao@gmail.com, yfhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

siﬁed using a single sentiment classiﬁer. When posting microblog messages, users frequently embed their individual
character, opinion bias and language habits into their messages. Thus, the same word or sentence may convey different
sentiments in messages posted by different users. For example, a tweet may be “The price comes down! #apple.” If the
author is a student and wants to buy some Apple products,
then it may show a positive sentiment. However, if the author is an investor and holds a large number of Apple stocks,
then this tweet probably conveys a negative sentiment. A single sentiment classiﬁer fails to capture the individuality and
opinion bias of different users, and the classiﬁcation performance is usually unsatisfactory.
A simple solution to this problem is to train an individual sentiment classiﬁer for each user using their personal data. However, the number of messages posted by
one user is usually limited. Thus it is very difﬁcult to train
an accurate sentiment classiﬁer for each single user independently. Although users tend to use some personalized sentiment expressions, they also share a lot of common sentiment knowledge. For example, many global sentiment words such as “love” and “hate” are used in the
same way by different users. Thus, it is beneﬁcial to train
the personalized sentiment classiﬁers for massive users simultaneously and exploit the common sentiment knowledge
shared by them, which can help alleviate the data sparseness
problem. In addition, friends usually hold similar opinion
bias towards the same targets, which is formulated as “homophyly” in social science (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and
Cook 2001) and also holds in social media (Hu et al. 2013;
Kramer, Guillory, and Hancock 2014). Therefore incorporating the social relations of microblogging users may help
strengthen the learning of personalized sentiment classiﬁers.
Motivated by the above observations, in this paper we propose a personalized sentiment classiﬁcation approach. In our
approach, each user has a personalized sentiment classiﬁer,
which is decomposed into two components, a global one and
a user-speciﬁc one. The global classiﬁer is trained using the
messages from all the users in a collaborative way, and the
user-speciﬁc classiﬁer is trained using the data of an individual user. Thus, our approach can capture the individuality of each user and at the same time leverage the global
sentiment knowledge shared by all the users to tackle the
data sparseness problem. In addition, we regard the social

Abstract
Microblog sentiment classiﬁcation is an interesting and important research topic with wide applications. Traditional microblog sentiment classiﬁcation methods usually use a single
model to classify the messages from different users and omit
individuality. However, microblogging users frequently embed their personal character, opinion bias and language habits
into their messages, and the same word may convey different
sentiments in messages posted by different users. In this paper, we propose a personalized approach for microblog sentiment classiﬁcation. In our approach, each user has a personalized sentiment classiﬁer, which is decomposed into two
components, a global one and a user-speciﬁc one. Our approach can capture the individual personality and at the same
time leverage the common sentiment knowledge shared by all
users. The personalized sentiment classiﬁers of massive users
are trained in a collaborative way based on multi-task learning
to handle the data sparseness problem. In addition, we incorporate users’ social relations into our model to strengthen the
learning of the personalized models. Moreover, we propose
a distributed optimization algorithm to solve our model in
parallel. Experiments on two real-world microblog sentiment
datasets validate that our approach can improve microblog
sentiment classiﬁcation accuracy effectively and efﬁciently.

Introduction
Microblogging services such as Twitter provide ideal places
for the public to share their opinions on various topics, such
as companies, products, political events, celebrities, daily
life and so on. Analyzing the sentiments in massive microblog messages has wide applications, such as user modeling, personalized recommendation, crisis management, political campaign improvement, stock market price prediction, and so on (Tumasjan et al. 2010; Bollen, Mao, and Zeng
2011; Ren and Wu 2013; Wu et al. 2014), Thus, microblog
sentiment analysis has become a hot research topic in both
industrial and academic ﬁelds.
Many approaches have been proposed for microblog sentiment analysis (Liu, Li, and Guo 2012; Liu et al. 2013;
Wu, Song, and Huang 2015). However, in all these methods
the personality of microblogging users is not taken into consideration, and the messages from different users are clasc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3059

