Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Improving Opinion Aspect Extraction Using
Semantic Similarity and Aspect Associations
1

Qian Liu1,2 , Bing Liu3 , Yuanlin Zhang4 , Doo Soon Kim5 and Zhiqiang Gao1,2
Key Lab of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
4
Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University, USA
5
Bosch research lab, USA
1,2
3
{qianliu, zqgao}@seu.edu.cn, liub@cs.uic.edu, 4 y.zhang@ttu.edu, 5 DooSoon.Kim@us.bosch.com
Abstract

Aspect extraction is a key task of ﬁne-grained opinion mining. Although it has been studied by many researchers, it remains to be highly challenging. This paper proposes a novel
unsupervised approach to make a major improvement. The
approach is based on the framework of lifelong learning and
is implemented with two forms of recommendations that are
based on semantic similarity and aspect associations respectively. Experimental results using eight review datasets show
the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Figure 1: Dependency relations in the sentence “The phone
has a good screen.”
a word A, whose part-of-speech (POS) is a singular noun
(nn), has the dependency relation amod with (i.e., modiﬁed
by) an opinion word O, then A is an aspect.” Similarly, one
can use such rules to extract new aspects from the extracted
aspects, and new opinion words from the extracted aspects.
Although effective, syntactic rule-based methods such as
DP still have room for major improvements. This is not surprising as it is very hard to design a set of rules to perform
extraction with high precision and high recall due to the ﬂexibility of natural languages. One way to improve is to use
the prior knowledge in the framework of lifelong machine
learning. That is, the system retains its past experiences and
learned results as knowledge and uses it to help the new
learning or extraction. In other words, if the system already
knows a lot before extraction, it clearly can do much better. The prior knowledge is mined automatically by exploiting the abundance of reviews for all kinds of products on
the Web. This idea is workable because many products actually share aspects, e.g., many electronic products have aspects screen and battery. To exploit such knowledge for new
extraction, we use the idea of recommendation, in particular collaborative ﬁltering (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin 2005).
This type of recommendation uses the behavioral information of other users to recommend products/services to the
current user. This is exactly the idea that we want to employ,
using the information in reviews of a large number of other
products to help extract aspects from reviews of the current
product. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time
that recommendation is used for aspect extraction.
In this work, we propose to use DP as the base and improve its results dramatically through aspect recommendation. Two forms of recommendations are proposed, (1) semantic similarity-based, and (2) aspect associations-based.
Semantic similarity-based recommendation aims to solve

Introduction
Aspect extraction is a fundamental task of opinion mining
or sentiment analysis (Liu 2012). It aims to extract opinion
targets from opinion text. For example, from “This phone
has a good screen,” it aims to extract “screen.” In product
reviews, aspects are product attributes or features. They are
needed in many sentiment analysis applications.
Aspect extraction has been studied by many researchers.
There are two main approaches: supervised and unsupervised. Some existing work has shown that unsupervised syntactic dependency-based methods such as double propagation (DP) (Qiu et al. 2011) can perform better than supervised Conditional Random Fields (CRF) (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001) based methods. The unsupervised
dependency-based methods also have the key advantage of
not requiring any human labeled data. They are based on the
fact that opinions have targets and there are often explicit
syntactic relations between opinion words (e.g., “good”) and
target aspects (e.g., “screen”). By exploiting such relations,
DP and other related methods can use a set of seed opinion
words to extract aspects and new opinion words, and then
use them to extract more aspects and opinion words through
bootstrapping propagation.
Figure 1 shows the dependency relations between words
in “The phone has a good screen.” If “good” is a known
opinion word (given or extracted), “screen,” a noun modiﬁed
by “good,” is clearly an aspect as they have a dependency
relation amod. From a given set of opinion words, we can
extract a set of aspects if we have a syntactic rule like “if
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2986

