Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Numerical Relation Extraction with Minimal Supervision
Aman Madaan∗

Ashish Mittal∗

Mausam

Visa Inc.
amadaan@visa.com

IBM Research
ashishmittal@in.ibm.com

IIT Delhi
mausam@cse.iitd.ac.in

Ganesh Ramakrishnan

Sunita Sarawagi

IIT Bombay
ganesh@cse.iitb.ac.in

IIT Bombay
sunita@cse.iitb.ac.in

a sentence is indicative of the presence of that relation in that
sentence. The signal from distant supervision becomes much
weaker for numerical relations since there can be a much
larger number of reasons why a certain number is present
in the sentence. This renders distant supervision based nonnumerical extractors less effective for numerical relations.
In our early experiments, MultiR (Hoffmann et al. 2011),
a state-of-the-art IE system, obtained an F-score of under
20, hardly acceptable for real tasks. Secondly, numbers have
units and their semantics is important. Thirdly, numbers may
be written at different rounding levels necessitating partial
matching techniques. Lastly, numerical relations allow for
sentences which describe the change in the argument value
from the last measurement, instead of the argument value
itself.
In response, we develop two numerical relation extractors
that incorporate these observations . Both extractors expect
minimal human supervision in the form of the unit of the
relation and up to four keywords indicative of that relation.
Our ﬁrst system, NumberRule, is a rule-based extractor that
looks for occurrences of speciﬁc numerical relation based
patterns that explicitly mention the given keywords. Our second system, NumberTron, goes beyond the given keywords
to learn new keywords and patterns and can also leverage
any existing background Knowledge base (KB).
We evaluate our extractors on the task of extracting numerical indicators (e.g., inﬂation rate) for countries. We
compile a knowledge-base using geopolitical data from
World Bank and learn extractors for ten numerical relations.
We ﬁnd that NumberTron obtains a much higher recall at a
slightly higher precision as compared to NumberRule. Both
systems massively outperform MultiR model (and its simple
extensions) obtaining 17–25 point F-score improvements.
We release our code1 and other resources for further research. Overall, we make the following contributions in this
paper:

Abstract
We study a novel task of numerical relation extraction with
the goal of extracting relations where one of the arguments
is a number or a quantity (e.g., atomic number(Aluminium,
13), inﬂation rate(India, 10.9%)). This task presents peculiar
challenges not found in standard Information Extraction (IE),
such as the difﬁculty of matching numbers in distant supervision and the importance of units. We design two extraction systems that require minimal human supervision per relation: (1) NumberRule, a rule based extractor, and (2) NumberTron, a probabilistic graphical model. We ﬁnd that both
systems dramatically outperform MultiR, a state-of-the-art
non-numerical IE model, obtaining up to 25 points F-score
improvement.

Introduction
While there is a long history of relation extraction systems
in the NLP literature (e.g., (ARPA 1991; Soderland 1999;
Hoffmann et al. 2011; Riedel et al. 2013)), almost all information extractors have concentrated on relations in which
the arguments are non-numerical. These include real world
entities or objects, or other attributes that are usually expressed in words, such as color and job title. Several extractors do deal with speciﬁc numerical regular expression
types such as dates, while some extract the age of individuals, but almost none have focused on numerical relations,
i.e., relations involving general numeric arguments such as
population, area, atomic number, inﬂation rate, or boiling
point. Numerical relations form a signiﬁcant subset of relations in many ﬁelds, including science, current affairs, geography, and healthcare; extraction of numerical information
from text is an important Information Extraction (IE) problem requiring research attention.
This is especially true since numerical relations present
several peculiarities and challenges not found or less prevelant in standard IE. Firstly, and probably most importantly, modern IE systems are based on distant supervision,
in which the presence of entities from a database relation in

• We deﬁne and analyze the task of numerical relation extraction. Our analysis highlights stark differences in this
task compared to standard IE.
• We design NumberRule, a rule-based system that looks

∗
Most work was done when the authors were graduate students
at IIT Bombay.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2764

Available at http://www.github.com/NEO-IE

