Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

STELLAR: Spatial-Temporal Latent Ranking for
Successive Point-of-Interest Recommendation
Shenglin Zhao1,2 , Tong Zhao1,2 , Haiqin Yang1,2 , Michael R. Lyu1,2 , Irwin King1,2
1

Shenzhen Research Institute
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
{slzhao, tzhao, hqyang, lyu, king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
has attracted great research interest. Different from general
POI recommendation that focuses only on estimating users’
preferences on POIs, successive POI recommendation provides satisﬁed recommendations promptly based on users’
most recent checked-in location, which requires not only
the preference modeling from users but also the accurate
correlation analysis between POIs. (Cheng et al. 2013) utilizes a personalized Markov chain and region localization
to solve the problem. (Feng et al. 2015) proposes a personalized metric embedding method to model the check-in sequences. However, all previous methods ignore to investigate the impact of time on successive POI recommendation.
Successive POI recommendation is a time-subtle recommendation task since at different time, users would prefer
different successive POIs. It is easy to imagine that a user
may go to a restaurant after leaving from ofﬁce at noon,
while he/she may be more likely to go to a gym when he/she
leaves ofﬁce at night. However, previous successive POI recommendation methods only highlight the modeling of correlations between POIs within users’ check-in sequences, but
neglect to model such a time-sensitive property.
In this paper, we try to understand the underlying mechanism of how time inﬂuences successive POI recommendation performance. To motivate this work, we ﬁrst conduct an
empirical analysis on two real world LBSN datasets to verify that time is an important factor to affect users’ successive POI check-in behaviors. Based on the analysis, we propose a spatial-temporal latent ranking (STELLAR) model
to recommend users most possible successive POIs based on
their most recent check-in and the querying time stamp. The
proposed STELLAR model is built upon a ranking-based
pairwise tensor factorization framework with a ﬁne-grained
modeling of user-POI, POI-time, and POI-POI interactions
for successive POI recommendation. To overcome the weaknesses of prior latent ranking models(e.g., Tucker Decomposition, Canonical Decomposition, and Pairwise Interaction
Tensor Factorization) that suffer from coupled interaction
on POI feature, we represent each POI by three different
latent feature vectors and model the three kinds of interactions separately. Moreover, the proposed STELLAR method
contains two speciﬁc characteristics making it more suitable
for successive POI recommendation: 1) we design a threeslice time indexing scheme to capture the temporal features
of check-in behavior–periodicity and preference variance;

Abstract
Successive point-of-interest (POI) recommendation in
location-based social networks (LBSNs) becomes a signiﬁcant task since it helps users to navigate a number of
candidate POIs and provides the best POI recommendations
based on users’ most recent check-in knowledge. However,
all existing methods for successive POI recommendation
only focus on modeling the correlation between POIs based
on users’ check-in sequences, but ignore an important
fact that successive POI recommendation is a time-subtle
recommendation task. In fact, even with the same previous
check-in information, users would prefer different successive
POIs at different time. To capture the impact of time on
successive POI recommendation, in this paper, we propose
a spatial-temporal latent ranking (STELLAR) method to
explicitly model the interactions among user, POI, and time.
In particular, the proposed STELLAR model is built upon a
ranking-based pairwise tensor factorization framework with
a ﬁne-grained modeling of user-POI, POI-time, and POI-POI
interactions for successive POI recommendation. Moreover,
we propose a new interval-aware weight utility function to
differentiate successive check-ins’ correlations, which breaks
the time interval constraint in prior work. Evaluations on two
real-world datasets demonstrate that the STELLAR model
outperforms state-of-the-art successive POI recommendation
model about 20% in Precision@5 and Recall@5.

Introduction
Location-based social networks (LBSNs) become increasingly popular and provide users a new way to share their
location and experience about point-of-interests (POIs) via
check-in behaviors. To navigate users the most suitable
POIs, POI recommendation methods are developed and play
an important role in LBSN services. POI recommendation
aims to learn users’ preferences based on their check-in
records and then recommend users preferred POIs. Several methods are proposed for POI recommendation. Ye
et al. use memory-based methods to recommend POIs (Ye
et al. 2011). Some other researchers (Cheng et al. 2012;
Gao et al. 2013; Lian et al. 2014) turn to model-based methods to improve the scalability.
Successive POI recommendation, as a natural extension
of general POI recommendation, is recently proposed and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

315

