Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Convolutional Neural Networks over Tree Structures
for Programming Language Processing
Lili Mou,1 Ge Li,1∗ Lu Zhang,1 Tao Wang,2 Zhi Jin1∗
1

Software Institute, Peking University ∗ Corresponding authors
doublepower.mou@gmail.com, {lige,zhanglu,zhijin}@sei.pku.edu.cn
2
Stanford University, twangcat@stanford.edu

statistical properties, which are important for program analysis. These properties are difﬁcult to capture by humans,
but justify learning-based approaches for programming language processing. However, existing machine learning program analysis depends largely on feature engineering, which
is labor-intensive and ad hoc to a speciﬁc task, e.g., code
clone detection (Chilowicz, Duris, and Roussel 2009), and
bug detection (Steidl and Gode 2013). Further, evidence
in the machine learning literature suggests that humanengineered features may fail to capture the nature of data,
so they may be even worse than automatically learned ones.
The deep neural network, also known as deep learning, is
a highly automated learning machine. By exploring multiple layers of non-linear transformation, the deep architecture can automatically learn complicated underlying features, which are crucial to the task of interest. Over the
past few years, deep learning has made signiﬁcant breakthroughs in various ﬁelds, such as speech recognition (Dahl,
Mohamed, and Hinton 2010), computer vision (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), and natural language processing (Collobert and Weston 2008).
Despite some similarities between natural languages and
programming languages, there are also obvious differences
(Pane, Ratanamahatana, and Myers 2001). Based on a formal language, programs contain rich and explicit structural
information. Even though structures also exist in natural
languages, they are not as stringent as in programs. Pinker
(1994) illustrates an interesting example, “The dog the stick
the ﬁre burned beat bit the cat.” This sentence complies
with all grammar rules, but too many attributive clauses
are nested. Hence, it can hardly be understood by people
due to the limitation of human intuition capacity. On the
contrary, three nested loops are common in programs. The
parse tree of a program, in fact, is typically much larger
than that of a natural language sentence—there are approximately 190 nodes on average in our experiment, whereas
a sentence comprises only 20 words in a sentiment analysis dataset (Socher et al. 2013). Further, the grammar rules
“alias” neighboring relationships among program components. The statements inside and outside a loop, for example, do not form one semantic group, and thus are not semantically neighboring. On the above basis, we think more
effective neural models are in need to capture structural information in programs.

Abstract
Programming language processing (similar to natural language processing) is a hot research topic in the ﬁeld of software engineering; it has also aroused growing interest in the
artiﬁcial intelligence community. However, different from a
natural language sentence, a program contains rich, explicit,
and complicated structural information. Hence, traditional
NLP models may be inappropriate for programs. In this paper, we propose a novel tree-based convolutional neural network (TBCNN) for programming language processing, in
which a convolution kernel is designed over programs’ abstract syntax trees to capture structural information. TBCNN
is a generic architecture for programming language processing; our experiments show its effectiveness in two different program analysis tasks: classifying programs according
to functionality, and detecting code snippets of certain patterns. TBCNN outperforms baseline methods, including several neural models for NLP.

Introduction
Researchers from various communities are showing growing
interest in applying artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques to
solve software engineering (SE) problems (Dietz et al. 2009;
Bettenburg and Begel 2013; Hao et al. 2013). In the area of
SE, analyzing program source code—called programming
language processing in this paper—is of particular importance.
Even though computers can run programs, they do not
truly “understand” programs. Analyzing source code provides a way of estimating programs’ behavior, functionality,
complexity, etc. For instance, automatically detecting source
code snippets of certain patterns help programmers to discover buggy or inefﬁcient algorithms so as to improve code
quality. Another example is managing large software repositories, where automatic source code classiﬁcation and tagging are crucial to software reuse. Programming language
processing, in fact, serves as a foundation for many SE tasks,
e.g., requirement analysis (Ghabi and Egyed 2012), software
development and maintenance (Bettenburg and Begel 2013).
Hindle et al. (2012) demonstrate that programming languages, similar to natural languages, also contain abundant
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1287

