Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

News Veriﬁcation by Exploiting Conﬂicting
Social Viewpoints in Microblogs
Zhiwei Jin1,2 , Juan Cao1 , Yongdong Zhang1 , and Jiebo Luo3
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA
{jinzhiwei, caojuan, zhyd }@ict.ac.cn; jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Fake news spreading in social media severely jeopardizes
the veracity of online content. Fortunately, with the interactive and open features of microblogs, skeptical and opposing voices against fake news always arise along with it. The
conﬂicting information, ignored by existing studies, is crucial
for news veriﬁcation. In this paper, we take advantage of this
“wisdom of crowds” information to improve news veriﬁcation by mining conﬂicting viewpoints in microblogs. First, we
discover conﬂicting viewpoints in news tweets with a topic
model method. Based on identiﬁed tweets’ viewpoints, we
then build a credibility propagation network of tweets linked
with supporting or opposing relations. Finally, with iterative
deduction, the credibility propagation on the network generates the ﬁnal evaluation result for news. Experiments conducted on a real-world data set show that the news veriﬁcation
performance of our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms those
of the baseline approaches.

Figure 1: The framework of our proposed approach for news
veriﬁcation.

Introduction

supportive voices in the case of fake news. These conﬂicting voices are very crucial for verifying the truthfulness of
news.
Based on above observations, we propose to exploit the
conﬂicting viewpoints in microblogs to detect relations
among news tweets and construct a credibility network
of tweets with these relations (Figure 1). First, conﬂicting
viewpoints are mined through a topic model method. Based
on this result, relations among tweets are revealed: tweets
with the same viewpoint form supporting relations, while
tweets with conﬂicting viewpoints form opposing relations.
Rather than examining each tweet individually (Kwon et
al. 2013; Gupta et al. 2013; Sun et al. 2013), we then
construct a credibility network by linking tweets with detected relations to evaluate them as a whole. Credibility
values of tweets would inﬂuence each other differently as
indicated by these relations. Finally, credibility values of
tweets propagate following these links on the network to
produce a ﬁnal decision. In the conﬂicting viewpoints mining process (Figure 2), news tweets are modeled as various topics. These topics are then clustered into conﬂicting viewpoints. Compared with traditional opinion mining
methods(Kim and Hovy 2007; Park, Lee, and Song 2011;
Thomas, Pang, and Lee 2006), our topic model is more focused on ﬁnding conﬂicting relations among tweets rather

With everyone serving as an information source, news in
microblogs is substantial and valuable. Meanwhile, various
fake news spreading on microblogs becomes a serious concern recently. For example, it was reported that 92 different
rumors were widely spreading in Sina Weibo (a popular microblog service in China) during the ﬁrst two days of the
accident “Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 Lost Contact”
(Jin et al. 2014). It is a very challenging task to verify news
automatically with the ever-increasing amounts of news in
microblogs.
In this paper, we try to address this news veriﬁcation issue upon deeper inspections, speciﬁcally for the conﬂicting
viewpoints expressed by microblog users spontaneously regarding news. Generally, two kinds of relations exist among
news tweets. One is supporting relation: tweets expressing
the same viewpoint mutually support each other’s credibility. The other is opposing relation, which is more subtle
and exists among tweets expressing conﬂicting viewpoints.
As microblogs are open media platforms, people can post
their observations, opinions and feelings immediately when
they read a piece of news. Thus, skeptical and even opposing voices would arise against the news along with original
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2972

