Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Defender Strategic Filtering Against Spear-Phishing Attacks
Jian Lou and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik

Aron Laszka

Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Dept.
Institute for Software Integrated Systems
University of California, Berkeley
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Berkeley, CA
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN

White House internal networks (McCullagh 2012), computers at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Rogers 2014),
and Oak Ridge National Laboratory (Zetter 2011).
To mitigate spear-phishing attacks, an organization may
set up an e-mail ﬁlter, which assigns a maliciousness score to
each incoming e-mail and delivers only those that are below
a given threshold (Hong 2012). Unfortunately, scoring is
inevitably imperfect, and threshold choice must necessarily
balance security (risk of delivering malicious e-mails) and
usability (blocking of benign trafﬁc).
Unlike non-targeted malicious e-mails, such as spam,
spear-phishing e-mails must be customized to their targets, which means that an attacker must spend a substantial
amount of effort on each target (Herley and Florêncio 2008).
Consequently, attackers can only target a limited number of
users in any spear-phishing campaign. This limitation implies that an attacker must select a subset of targets to maximize expected yield from an attack. Moreover, resource
limitation on the attacker links the decisions of otherwise
independent defenders: ﬁltering decisions by some may result in others being targeted. If a single organization were responsible for setting ﬁltering thresholds for all users, it could
optimally account for such interdependencies, as shown in
prior work (Laszka, Vorobeychik, and Koutsoukos 2015;
Zhao, An, and Kiekintveld 2015). Realistically, however,
numerous organizations are typically targeted, and their
goals are generally distinct. The externalities that users impose upon one another therefore become strategically signiﬁcant, and no work to date analyzes the resulting strategic
dynamics in the spear-phishing context, even though prior
work has considered other, quite different, interdependent
security problems (Laszka, Felegyhazi, and Buttyan 2014;
Kunreuther and Heal 2003; Chan, Ceyko, and Ortiz 2012;
Lou and Vorobeychik 2015).
We address the problem of strategic e-mail threshold selection by a collection of independent users, faced with a
threat of both spear-phishing and non-targeted (e.g., spam)
malicious e-mail campaigns. We consider short-term strategic dynamics by appealing to a Stackelberg multi-defender
equilibrium concept, as well as long-term dynamics using
the Nash equilibrium concept. We offer a characterization of
both kinds of equilibria, and present a polynomial-time algorithm for computing the Stackelberg multi-defender equilibrium. Remarkably, we demonstrate that while Stackelberg

Abstract
Spear-phishing attacks pose a serious threat to sensitive
computer systems, since they sidestep technical security mechanisms by exploiting the carelessness of authorized users. A common way to mitigate such attacks is to use e-mail ﬁlters which block e-mails with
a maliciousness score above a chosen threshold. Optimal choice of such a threshold involves a tradeoff between the risk from delivered malicious emails and the
cost of blocking benign trafﬁc. A further complicating factor is the strategic nature of an attacker, who
may selectively target users offering the best value in
terms of likelihood of success and resulting access privileges. Previous work on strategic threshold-selection
considered a single organization choosing thresholds
for all users. In reality, many organizations are potential targets of such attacks, and their incentives need
not be well aligned. We therefore consider the problem of strategic threshold-selection by a collection of
independent self-interested users. We characterize both
Stackelberg multi-defender equilibria, corresponding to
short-term strategic dynamics, as well as Nash equilibria of the simultaneous game between all users and
the attacker, modeling long-term dynamics, and exhibit
a polynomial-time algorithm for computing short-term
(Stackelberg) equilibria. We ﬁnd that while Stackelberg
multi-defender equilibrium need not exist, Nash equilibrium always exists, and remarkably, both equilibria
are unique and socially optimal.

1

Introduction

A number of high-proﬁle targets have fallen victim to spearphishing attacks. In 2013, Target, the second largest general merchandise retailer in the US, suffered a massive data
breach due to a spear-phishing attack (Smith 2014). As a
consequence, Target had to pay Visa issuers $67 million as
a reimbursement, and it is reportedly working on a similar deal with MasterCard (Sidel 2015). In 2014, the corporate network of a German steel mill was inﬁltrated by
a spear-phishing attack (Zetter 2015). The attackers manipulated and disrupted control systems, resulting in massive physical damage. Further examples include one of the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

537

