Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Improving Recommendation of Tail Tags
for Questions in Community Question Answering
†

Yu Wu,†∗ Wei Wu,‡ Xiang Zhang,† Zhoujun Li,† Ming Zhou‡
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{wuyu,lizj,zhangxiang}@buaa.edu.cn {wuwei,mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study tag recommendation for questions in community
question answering (CQA). Tags represent the semantic summarization of questions are useful for navigation and expert
ﬁnding in CQA and can facilitate content consumption such
as searching and mining in these web sites. The task is challenging, as both questions and tags are short and a large fraction of tags are tail tags which occur very infrequently. To
solve these problems, we propose matching questions and
tags not only by themselves, but also by similar questions and
similar tags. The idea is then formalized as a model in which
we calculate question-tag similarity using a linear combination of similarity with similar questions and tags weighted by
tag importance. Question similarity, tag similarity, and tag
importance are learned in a supervised random walk framework by fusing multiple features. Our model thus can not
only accurately identify question-tag similarity for head tags,
but also improve the accuracy of recommendation of tail tags.
Experimental results show that the proposed method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on tag recommendation for questions. Particularly, it improves tail tag recommendation accuracy by a large margin.

Figure 1: An example of descriptive tags in Quora
annotated for the question “Why do people say that we can
never tell when MCMC for LDA has converged?”. The tags
have greatly improved user experience in the CQA ecosystem. Tags make questions easier to understand and thus can
accelerate the process of the questions being solved. Under
the guidance of tags, answerers can quickly locate questions
within their expertise and provide answers with higher quality. This high quality content raises the overall quality of
the CQA portals and can attract more users. Through tags,
browsers can quickly ﬁnd content they are interested in, easily keep track of the update of their favorite content, and
get more engaged. Besides these advantages, an accurate
and complete tag schema is also beneﬁcial to consumption
of the content in CQA. For example, tags can facilitate indexing, searching, and knowledge mining of the content in
CQA.
Despite the importance of tags, existing CQA portals
suffer from an incomplete tagging problem. According
to (Nie et al. 2014), more than 50% questions in a subset of Zhihu questions have less than 3 tags. The problem is caused by the complexity of the tagging mechanism
and incomprehensive question understanding, and severely
hurts the performance of the tagging system in CQA. To
solve this problem, we consider automatically recommending tags for questions. The recommendation provides tag
candidates for users and can simplify the tagging procedure. Although tag recommendation has been studied for
a long time (Herlocker et al. 2004; Rendle et al. 2009;

Introduction
Community question answering (CQA) has become a popular platform for people sharing their knowledge and learning from each other. Large CQA portals like Yahoo! Answers have accumulated a large amount of user generated
content which has played an important role in knowledge
dissemination and information seeking. Recently, new types
of CQA service such as Quora, Stack Overﬂow, and Zhihu
have emerged. These web sites bring new features to conventional CQA portals such as Yahoo! Answers, and these
features can guide the healthy growth of communities.
One creative feature in the new CQA service is the tagging system in which users can manually annotate multiple tags to their questions without any constraints. The tags
represent semantic summarization of questions and reveal
users’ interests. Figure 1 gives an example from Quora in
which Markov Chain Monte Carlo, Topic Models, LDA, Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning are tags
∗
The work was done when the ﬁrst author was an intern in Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3066

