Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Implementing Troubleshooting with Batch Repair
Roni Stern, Meir Kalech, Hilla Shinitzky
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
Be’er Sheva, Israel

Warnquist 2012; Torta, Anselma, and Dupré 2014). This approach can be wasteful for BRP. For example, if a diagnosis engine infers that multiple faulty components need to be
repaired to ﬁx the system, then it would be wasteful to repair these components one at a time since each repair action
incurring its repair overhead. Instead, an efﬁcient BRP algorithm would repair all the faulty components in a single
repair action. More generally, we expect an intelligent BRP
algorithm to consider to repair overheads and the component
repair costs when deciding which components to repair.
Due to the repair overhead, repairing a single component,
even if it is the component most likely to be faulty, can be
wasteful. This is especially wasteful in cases where all the
found diagnoses consist of multiple faulty components, thus
suggesting that repairing a single component would not ﬁx
the problem. Alternatively, one may choose to repair the
components in the single most likely diagnosis. This may
also be wasteful, especially if there are several diagnoses
which have similar likelihood. It might be worthwhile to repair, in a single repair action, a set of components that “covers” more than a single diagnosis. This may reduce the number of repair actions until the system is ﬁxed, thus saving
repair overhead costs. The downside in this approach is that
healthy components may be repaired, increasing the overall
repair costs.
For example, consider the boiler tank system scheme
made by Warren Controls, Inc. described in Figure 1. When
demand for water reduces the liquid level in the tank, the
ﬂoat cage (A) opens the lever valves (B) to supply intake
water to the tank and closes it when the water reaches the desired level. Component C is an overﬂow trap which collects
and relieves condensate overﬂow. Component D includes
two vacuum breakers which are opened to relieve the tank
with outside air to prevent vacuum pressures in the tank.
Assume additional water is required but the level of the
water does not increase. There are two possible diagnoses:
either the ﬂoat cage A is faulty or the lever valve B is faulty.
Assume that the probabilities of A and B to be faulty are
given by the manufacturer and are 0.06 and 0.04, respectively. Since only these diagnoses can explain the problem,
the normalized probability of A to cause the problem is 0.6
and that of B is 0.4. There are three possible repair actions:
to repair A, to repair B, and to repair A and B. Assume
the repair cost of each component is 5$ but the repair over-

Abstract
Recent work has raised the challenge of efﬁcient automated
troubleshooting in domains where repairing a set of components in a single repair action is cheaper than repairing each
of them separately. This corresponds to cases where there is
a non-negligible overhead to initiating a repair action and to
testing the system after a repair action. In this work we propose several algorithms for choosing which batch of components to repair, so as to minimize the overall repair costs.
Experimentally, we show the beneﬁt of these algorithms over
repairing components one at a time.

Introduction
Troubleshooting algorithms, in general, plan a sequence of
actions that are intended to ﬁx an abnormally behaving system. Fixing a system includes repairing faulty components.
Such repair actions incur a cost. These costs can be partitioned into two types of repair cost. The ﬁrst, referred to as
the component repair cost, is the cost of repairing a component. The second, referred to as the repair overhead, is the
cost of preparing the system to perform repair actions (e.g.,
halting the system) and the cost of testing the system after
performing a repair action.
This paper considers the case where the repair overhead is
not negligible and is potentially more expensive than a component repair cost (of a single component). Therefore, it may
be more efﬁcient to repair a batch of components in a single
repair action. We call the problem of choosing which batch
of components to repair the Batch Repair Problem (BRP).
BRP is an optimization problem, where the task is to minimize the total repair costs, which is the sum of component
repair costs and costs due to repair overheads incurred by
repair actions performed until the system is ﬁxed.
Note that in this paper we use the term “ﬁx” when referring to the entire system and term “repair” for a single or a
set of components. Thus, to ﬁx the system one needs to repair components, and a system is only ﬁxed if it returned to
its nominal behavior.
Most previous work assumed that components are repaired one at a time (Heckerman, Breese, and Rommelse
1995; Friedrich and Nejdl 1992; Pernestål, Nyberg, and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

769

