Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Common and Discriminative Subspace Kernel-Based
Multiblock Tensor Partial Least Squares Regression
Ming Hou1 , Qibin Zhao2,3 , Brahim Chaib-draa1 and Andrzej Cichocki2,4
1 Laval University, Quebec, Canada
2 RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Japan
3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia

ming.hou.1@ulaval.ca, qbzhao@brain.riken.jp, brahim.chaib-draa@ift.ulaval.ca, cia@brain.riken.jp
Y , ensuring that the latent components from X and Y have
the maximum pairwise covariance. However, due to the fact
that the NPLS is established based on the CP model, it exhibits several drawbacks such as inferior ﬁtness ability and
slow convergence rate when dealing with higher order tensorial data.
The higher-order partial least squares (HOPLS) (Zhao et
al. 2013a), on the other hand, attempts to conduct a multilinear projection of both tensors onto a new latent space using
the orthogonal block Tucker decomposition (De Lathauwer,
De Moor, and Vandewalle 2000; Tucker 1963), with constraint that the extracted latent variables explain as much as
possible the covariance between X and Y . Beneﬁting from
the advantages of Tucker over CP model, HOPLS promises
to provide a better predictive ability as well as a highly ﬂexible model that optimally balances between ﬁtness and complexity. To further enhance the predictability, an extension
of HOPLS, named kernel-based tensor partial least square
(KTPLS), was introduced in (Zhao et al. 2013b) based on
the combination of kernel machines with tensor decomposition, providing an attractive solution to the nonlinear tensor
regression problem.
Recently, advancing technologies have been producing
massive tensorial data streams from multiple sources or
modalities that couple in a common domain, and thus can be
analyzed jointly, e.g., the linked EEG and fMRI from neuroimaging data analysis. Most of studies have focused on
the single-block situation and the predictability is always restricted due to the limited amount of information contained
in the single data source. If we simply apply the above methods and average the predictions among the blocks, then the
obtained result will not outperform the best singleton case,
since the common features of all data blocks are neglected.
Such progress highlights a growing need for the development and application of tensor regression techniques by considering multiple predictor and response tensor blocks. For
this purpose, Smilde et al. proposed the multiway multiblock
covariates regression model (Smilde, Westerhuis, and Boque
2000), also termed as MMCR, to quantitatively analyze a
collection of predictor and response tensor blocks. Generally, MMCR handles all the predictor blocks in a hierarchical way that a super latent factor matrix is deﬁned based on
all the individual latent factor matrices to make the ﬁnal prediction. Nevertheless, MMCR may suffer from low predic-

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a new generalized nonlinear tensor
regression framework called kernel-based multiblock tensor
partial least squares (KMTPLS) for predicting a set of dependent tensor blocks from a set of independent tensor blocks
through the extraction of a small number of common and discriminative latent components. By considering both common
and discriminative features, KMTPLS effectively fuses the
information from multiple tensorial data sources and uniﬁes
the single and multiblock tensor regression scenarios into one
general model. Moreover, in contrast to multilinear model,
KMTPLS successfully addresses the nonlinear dependencies
between multiple response and predictor tensor blocks by
combining kernel machines with joint Tucker decomposition, resulting in a signiﬁcant performance gain in terms of
predictability. An efﬁcient learning algorithm for KMTPLS
based on sequentially extracting common and discriminative
latent vectors is also presented. Finally, to show the effectiveness and advantages of our approach, we test it on the real-life
regression task in computer vision, i.e., reconstruction of human pose from multiview video sequences.

Introduction
Over the past few years, tensor-variate regression approaches have attracted a great amount of attention and
have been successfully applied in a variety of ﬁelds such
as chemometrics (Smilde, Westerhuis, and Boque 2000),
computer vision (Zhao et al. 2014; Guo, Kotsia, and Patras
2012), signal processing (Cichocki et al. 2015; Hou, Wang,
and Chaib-draa 2015; Zhao et al. 2013a; Eliseyev and Aksenova 2013), industrial batch process (Luo, Bao, and Gao
2015) and medical imaging data analysis (Zhou, Li, and Zhu
2013; Li, Zhou, and Li 2013; Hou and Chaib-draa 2015).
Among these approaches, the N-way partial least squares
(NPLS) regression approach, proposed by (Bro 1996), is a
natural multi-way extension of standard partial least squares
(PLS) (Abdi 2010; Zhao, Zhang, and Cichocki 2014) for
modeling a linear relationship between a response tensor and
a predictor tensor. The key idea of NPLS is to search for a
set of latent variables by performing a simultaneous canonical/parallel (CP) factor analysis decomposition (Harshman
1970) of both independent tensor X and dependent tensor
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1673

