Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Wishart Mechanism for Differentially
Private Principal Components Analysis
Wuxuan Jiang, Cong Xie and Zhihua Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
jiangwuxuan@gmail.com, {xcgoner, zhihua}@sjtu.edu.cn

A simple idea to achieve this purpose is to add some special noise to the original model. After that, the attacker, who
has two outputs generated by slightly different inputs, cannot distinguish whether the output change comes from the
artiﬁcial noise or input difference. However, the noise might
inﬂuence the quality of regular performance of the model.
Thus, we should carefully trade off between privacy and utility.
No matter what the procedure is, a query, a learning algorithm, a game strategy or something else, we are able to
deﬁne differential privacy if this procedure takes a dataset as
input and returns the corresponding output. In this paper, we
study the problem of designing differential private principal
component analysis (PCA). PCA reduces the data dimension while keeping the optimal variance. More speciﬁcally,
it ﬁnds a projection matrix by computing a low rank approximation to the sample covariance matrix of the given data
points.
Privacy-preserving PCA is a well-studied problem in the
literature (Dwork et al. 2014; Hardt and Roth 2012; 2013;
Hardt and Price 2014; Blum et al. 2005; Chaudhuri, Sarwate, and Sinha 2012; Kapralov and Talwar 2013). It outputs a noisy projection matrix for dimension reduction while
preserving the privacy of any single data point. The extant
privacy-preserving PCA algorithms have been devised based
on two major features: the notion of differential privacy
and the stage of randomization. Accordingly, the privacypreserving PCA algorithms can be divided into distinct categories.
The notion of differential privacy has two types: (, 0)-DP
(also called pure DP) and (, δ)-DP (also called approximate
DP). (, δ)-DP is a weaker version of (, 0)-DP as the former
allows the privacy guarantee to be broken with tiny probability (more precisely, δ). In the seminal work on privacypreserving PCA (Dwork et al. 2014; Hardt and Roth 2012;
2013; Hardt and Price 2014; Blum et al. 2005), the authors used the notion of (, δ)-DP. In contrast, there is
only a few work (Chaudhuri, Sarwate, and Sinha 2012;
Kapralov and Talwar 2013), which is based on (, 0)-DP.
In terms of the stage of randomization, there are two
mainstream classes of approaches. The ﬁrst is randomly
computing the eigenspace (Hardt and Roth 2013; Hardt and
Price 2014; Chaudhuri, Sarwate, and Sinha 2012; Kapralov
and Talwar 2013). The noise is added in the computing pro-

Abstract
We propose a new input perturbation mechanism
for publishing a covariance matrix to achieve (, 0)differential privacy. Our mechanism uses a Wishart distribution to generate matrix noise. In particular, we
apply this mechanism to principal component analysis (PCA). Our mechanism is able to keep the positive semi-deﬁniteness of the published covariance matrix. Thus, our approach gives rise to a general publishing framework for input perturbation of a symmetric positive semideﬁnite matrix. Moreover, compared
with the classic Laplace mechanism, our method has
better utility guarantee. To the best of our knowledge,
the Wishart mechanism is the best input perturbation
approach for (, 0)-differentially private PCA. We also
compare our work with previous exponential mechanism algorithms in the literature and provide near optimal bound while having more ﬂexibility and less computational intractability.

1

Introduction

Plenty of machine learning tasks deal with sensitive information such as ﬁnancial and medical data. A common
concern regarding data security arises on account of the
rapid development of data mining techniques. Several data
privacy deﬁnitions are proposed in the literature. Among
them differential privacy (DP) has been widely used (Dwork
et al. 2006). Differential privacy controls the fundamental
quantity of information that can be revealed with changing one individual. Beyond a concept in database security,
differential privacy has been used by many researchers to
develop privacy-preserving learning algorithms (Chaudhuri
and Monteleoni 2009; Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and Sarwate
2011; Bojarski et al. 2014). Indeed, this class of algorithms
is applied to a large number of machine learning models including logistic regression (Chaudhuri and Monteleoni
2009), support vector machine (Chaudhuri, Monteleoni, and
Sarwate 2011), random decision tree (Bojarski et al. 2014),
etc. Accordingly, these methods can protect the raw data
even though the output and algorithm itself are published.
Differential privacy (DP) aims to hide the individual information while keeping basic statistics of the whole dataset.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1730

