Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Weighted A∗ Algorithms for Unsupervised Feature Selection
with Provable Bounds on Suboptimality
Hiromasa Arai, Ke Xu, Crystal Maung, Haim Schweitzer

{Hiromasa.Arai, ke.xu}@utdallas.edu Crystal.Maung@gmail.com, hschweitzer@utdallas.edu
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas (Dallas)
800 W Campbell Road, Richardson, TX 75080

Abstract
Identifying a small number of features that can represent the
data is believed to be NP-hard. Previous approaches exploit
algebraic structure and use randomization. We propose an algorithm based on ideas similar to the Weighted A* algorithm
in heuristic search. Our experiments show this new algorithm
to be more accurate than the current state of the art.

1

0. Put the root node into the fringe F .
1. While F is nonempty and no solution found:
1.1 Pick ni with the smallest fi from F .
1.2 If ni has k columns return it as the solution.
1.3 Otherwise:
1.3.1 Add ni to the closed list C.
1.3.2 Examine all children nj of ni .
1.3.2.1 If nj is in C or F do nothing.
1.3.2.2 Otherwise put nj in F .

The problem

Feature selection is a standard dimensionality reduction
technique. Given data items described in terms of n features, the goal is to select k<n features such that the reduced k dimensional vectors are useful for the task at hand.
A standard criterion is to select k features that can be
used to approximate all n features by a linear combination
of the selected features (e.g., (Golub and Van-Loan 1996;
Dasgupta et al. 2007)).
Let X be an m×n data matrix of m items (rows), each deﬁned in terms of n features (columns). We wish to estimate
X by a linear combination of k of its columns: X ≈ Sk A.
The matrix Sk = (xs1 , . . . , xsk ) is formed by the selected
columns of X, and A is the coefﬁcients matrix. In Frobenius
norm the approximation error is:
E = min X − Sk A2F
A,Sk

Figure 1: Example of the subsets graph and the details of the
generic heuristic search algorithm.
Calculating Ek∗ is easy, since the columns of the best rank-k
matrix are the k dominant eigenvectors of XX T
, scaled by
m
the eigenvalues. From this it follows that: Ek∗ = t=k+1 λt ,
where λt is the t-largest eigenvalue.
A recent study (Arai et al. 2015) has shown how to model
the CSSP as a graph search, and then apply the classic A∗ .
Their algorithm, that we call CSSP-A∗ , uses (2) to compute
heuristic estimates. It is guaranteed to ﬁnd the optimal solution, runs much faster than exhaustive search, but much
slower than other algorithms. It operates on a graph, where
nodes correspond to column subsets. There is an edge from
subset s1 to subset s2 if adding one column to s1 creates s2 .
An example is shown in Figure 1.

(1)

Finding Sk that minimizes (1) is also known as the “Column Subset Selection Problem” (CSSP) in numerical linear
algebra (e.g., (Golub and Van-Loan 1996; Boutsidis, et. al.
2009)). It is believed to be NP-hard (Çivril 2014).

2

Heuristic search for the optimal solution

3

Let Sk∗ denote a (best) selection of k columns that minimizes the error in (1), and let E(Sk∗ ) be the corresponding
T

Let ni be a node in the graph with the corresponding subset
Si . Set j = |Si | and deﬁne:
gi  Error of estimating X using the j columns in Si .
fi  Error of estimating X using the j columns in Si and
additional “best possible” k − j vectors.
hi  g i − fi .
Let g∗ be the smallest possible error in Equation (1). It was
shown by (Arai et al. 2015) that running the algorithm in
Fig.1 with fi = gi −hi is guaranteed to ﬁnd an optimal solution with error g∗ . Since this is similar to the classic A∗ , one

(minimal) error. The eigenvalues of the matrix XX can be
used to obtain bounds on E(Sk∗ ). Let Ek∗ denote the error
of the best approximation of X in terms of a rank-k matrix.
Then the following inequalities (Golub and Van-Loan 1996;
Deshpande and Rademacher 2010) hold:
Ek∗ ≤ E(Sk∗ ) ≤ (k + 1)Ek∗

Weighted A∗ algorithms for the CSSP

(2)

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4194

