Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Discriminative Analysis Dictionary Learning
1

Jun Guo1∗ , Yanqing Guo1 , Xiangwei Kong1 , Man Zhang2 , and Ran He2,3
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China
The Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
guojun@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {guoyq,kongxw}@dlut.edu.cn, {zhangman,rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

2

Elad (Rubinstein and Elad 2014) imposed a hard thresholding operator on the analysis codes leading to sparse representations for synthesis reconstruction. Gu et al. (Gu et al.
2014) combined analysis class-speciﬁc dictionary and synthesis class-speciﬁc dictionary for classiﬁcation.
These aforementioned methods beneﬁt from the simpler
optimization for training and the higher speed for testing in
ADL. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are few
works to address the discriminability of ADL. This may be
because of its poor discriminability for pattern classiﬁcation
tasks. Inspired by the signiﬁcant attempts of synthesis dictionary learning, we further integrate structure preserving and
discriminative characters into the basic analysis model. We
simply utilize the classical k Nearest Neighbor (kNN) classiﬁer that performs exceptionally well without training effort. Nevertheless, it critically relies on the local topological
structures (known as topology property in (Luo et al. 2011))
as well as the discriminability of data. Hence, it is extremely
important to simultaneously exploit the underlying geometrical structures and discriminability of data when applying
kNN classiﬁer to DL-based classiﬁcation tasks.
Main contributions of this paper are as follows:

Abstract
Dictionary learning (DL) has been successfully applied to
various pattern classiﬁcation tasks in recent years. However,
analysis dictionary learning (ADL), as a major branch of
DL, has not yet been fully exploited in classiﬁcation due
to its poor discriminability. This paper presents a novel DL
method, namely Discriminative Analysis Dictionary Learning (DADL), to improve the classiﬁcation performance of
ADL. First, a code consistent term is integrated into the basic
analysis model to improve discriminability. Second, a tripletconstraint-based local topology preserving loss function is introduced to capture the discriminative geometrical structures
embedded in data. Third, correntropy induced metric is employed as a robust measure to better control outliers for classiﬁcation. Then, half-quadratic minimization and alternate
search strategy are used to speed up the optimization process
so that there exist closed-form solutions in each alternating
minimization stage. Experiments on several commonly used
databases show that our proposed method not only signiﬁcantly improves the discriminative ability of ADL, but also
outperforms state-of-the-art synthesis DL methods.

1

Introduction

• We explicitly introduce the discriminative information
into the analysis dictionary learning framework via a code
consistent term. Then, the learned analysis dictionary can
exploit the discriminability of data instead of merely well
representing data.

The success of sparse representation (SR) pushes forward
the research of dictionary learning (DL). In SR, a desired
dictionary learned from data often outperforms a set of predeﬁned bases in pattern classiﬁcation tasks. One popular
line of research in DL aims to learn a synthesis dictionary with speciﬁc promotion functions. Synthesis dictionary
learning is widely used but time-consuming. Hence, as its
dual model, analysis model has drawn much attention recently (Rubinstein, Bruckstein, and Elad 2010).
Analysis dictionary learning (ADL) aims to learn a transformation instead of utilizing off-the-shelf transformations
like FFT, DCT, etc, in such a way that the resulting presentation of signal is sparse (Shekhar, Patel, and Chellappa
2014). In recent years, some ADL methods have been developed. Ravishankar and Bresler (Ravishankar and Bresler
2013) proposed well-conditioned square transformations for
image denoising, while Shekhar et al. (Shekhar, Patel, and
Chellappa 2014) enhanced this method by imposing a fullrank constraint on the analysis dictionary. Rubinstein and

• We employ triplet constraints to capture the underlying
discriminative local structures of data, resulting in a novel
local topology preserving loss function. This loss function
can preserve the relative neighborhood proximities in a
supervised manner.
• We utilize correntropy induced metric (CIM) as a robust
measure to handle outliers and noise. Consequently, we
develop an alternating optimization algorithm based on
the alternate search strategy and half-quadratic (HQ) minimization.
• Extensive comparison experiments well validate the encouraging gain in pattern classiﬁcation from our method,
and demonstrate that analysis models can outperform synthesis models in pattern classiﬁcation tasks if discriminative information is well treated.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1617

