Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Model for Learning Description Logic
Ontologies Based on Exact Learning
Boris Konev

Ana Ozaki

Frank Wolter

University of Liverpool
United Kingdom

University of Liverpool
United Kingdom

University of Liverpool
United Kingdom

• the domain expert knows the domain ontology and its vocabulary without being able to formalize or communicate
this ontology;

Abstract
We investigate the problem of learning description logic (DL)
ontologies in Angluin et al.’s framework of exact learning via
queries posed to an oracle. We consider membership queries
of the form “is a tuple a of individuals a certain answer to
a data retrieval query q in a given ABox and the unknown
target ontology?” and completeness queries of the form “does
a hypothesis ontology entail the unknown target ontology?”.
Given a DL L and a data retrieval query language Q, we study
polynomial learnability of ontologies in L using data retrieval
queries in Q and provide an almost complete classiﬁcation
for DLs that are fragments of EL with role inclusions and of
DL-Lite and for data retrieval queries that range from atomic
queries and EL/ELI-instance queries to conjunctive queries.
Some results are proved by non-trivial reductions to learning
from subsumption examples.

• the domain expert is able to communicate the vocabulary
of the ontology and shares it with the ontology engineer.
Thus, the domain expert and ontology engineer have a common understanding of the vocabulary of the ontology. The
ontology engineer knows nothing else about the domain.
• the ontology engineer can pose queries to the domain expert which the domain expert answers truthfully. Assuming
that the domain expert can interpret data in her area of expertise, the main queries posed by the ontology engineer
are based on data retrieval examples:
– assume a data instance A and a data retrieval query q(x)
are given. Is the tuple a of individuals a certain answer
to query q(x) in A and the ontology O?

Introduction

In addition, we require a way for the ontology engineer to
ﬁnd out whether she has reconstructed the target ontology
already and, if this is not the case, to request an example
illustrating the incompleteness of the reconstruction. We
abstract from deﬁning a communication protocol for this,
but assume for simplicity that the following query can be
posed by the ontology engineer:

Building an ontology is prone to errors, time consuming, and
costly. The research community has addressed this problem in
many different ways, for example, by supplying tool support
for editing ontologies (Musen 2013; Bechhofer et al. 2001;
Day-Richter et al. 2007), developing reasoning support for
debugging ontologies (Wang et al. 2005; Schlobach et al.
2007), supporting modular ontology design (Stuckenschmidt,
Parent, and Spaccapietra 2009), and by investigating automated ontology generation from data or text (Cimiano, Hotho,
and Staab 2005; Buitelaar, Cimiano, and Magnini 2005;
Lehmann and Völker 2014; Borchmann and Distel 2011;
Ma and Distel 2013). One major problem when building an
ontology is the fact that domain experts are rarely ontology
engineering experts and that, conversely, ontology engineers
are typically not familiar with the domain of the ontology.
An ontology building project therefore often relies on the
successful communication between an ontology engineer
(familiar with the semantics of ontology languages) and a
domain expert (familiar with the domain of interest). In this
paper, we consider a simple model of this communication
process and analyse, within this model, the computational
complexity of reaching a correct and complete domain ontology. We assume that

– Is this ontology H complete? If not, return a data instance A, a query q(x), and a tuple a such that a is a
certain answer to q(x) in A and the ontology O and is
not a certain answer to q(x) in A and the ontology H.
Given this model, our question is whether the ontology engineer can learn the target ontology O and which computational
resources are required for this depending on the ontology language in which the ontology O and the hypothesis ontology
H are formulated. Our model obviously abstracts from a
number of fundamental problems in building ontologies and
communicating about them. In particular, it makes the assumption that the domain expert knows the domain ontology
and its vocabulary (without being able to formalize it) despite the fact that ﬁnding an appropriate vocabulary for a
domain of interest is a major problem in ontology design
(Lehmann and Völker 2014). We make this assumption here
in order to isolate the problem of communication about the
logical relationships between known vocabulary items and
its dependence on the ontology language within which the

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1008

