Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Inferring Interpersonal Relations in Narrative Summaries
Shashank Srivastava1 , Snigdha Chaturvedi2 , Tom Mitchell1
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Maryland, College Park
ssrivastava@cmu.edu, snigdhac@cs.umd.edu, tom.mitchell@cmu.edu

Abstract

Young drifter Axel Nordmann goes to work in a gang of
stevedores headed by Charlie Malik, a vicious bully, and
is befriended by Tommy Tyler, who also supervises a stevedore gang. Malik resents blacks in positions of authority,
and is antagonized when Axel goes to work for Tommy. Axel
moves into Tommy’s neighborhood and becomes friends with
Tommy’s wife Lucy. Axel is hiding something, and it emerges
that he is a deserter from the United States Army. Malik is
aware of that, and is extorting money from him. Malik frequently tries to provoke Tommy and Axel into ﬁghts, with
Tommy coming to Axel’s aid ...

Characterizing relationships between people is fundamental
for the understanding of narratives. In this work, we address
the problem of inferring the polarity of relationships between
people in narrative summaries. We formulate the problem as
a joint structured prediction for each narrative, and present
a general model that combines evidence from linguistic and
semantic features, as well as features based on the structure
of the social community in the text. We additionally provide a clustering-based approach that can exploit regularities in narrative types. e.g., learn an afﬁnity for love-triangles
in romantic stories. On a dataset of movie summaries from
Wikipedia, our structured models provide more than a 30%
error-reduction over a competitive baseline that considers
pairs of characters in isolation.

1

(a)

Introduction

Understanding narratives requires the ability to interpret
character intentions, desires and relationships. The importance of characters and characterization in narratives has
been explored in recent works that focus on their roles
and representations (Bamman, Underwood, and Smith 2014;
Valls-Vargas, Zhu, and Ontañón 2014; Chambers 2013), as
against a plot-centric perspective of a narrative as primarily
a sequence of events (Finlayson 2012; Schank and Abelson
1977; Chambers and Jurafsky 2008). However, while such
approaches can identify characters types, they do not model
relationships between characters in a narrative.
In this work, we address the problem of inferring cooperative and adversarial relationships between people in narrative summaries. Identifying character cooperation and conﬂict is essential for narrative comprehension. It can guide interpretation of narrative events, explain character actions and
behavior and steer the reader’s expectation about the plot.
As such, it can have value for applications such as machine
reading, QA and document summarization.
As a motivating example, let us consider the plot summary in Figure 1a (condensed here for brevity). In this passage, the relations between the principal characters are explicated through a combination of cues, as seen in Figure
1b. For instance, one can infer that Alex (A) and Tommy
(T) have a cooperative relationship through a combination

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Sample summary extract for the 1957 movie
‘Edge of the City’; and (b) inferred relationship polarities
with supporting evidence

of the following observations (among others): (1) T initially
‘befriends’ A, (2) A works for T, and its connotation that A
is likely to cooperate with T , (3) T aids A in ﬁghts, (4) A
is a friend of T’s wife , (5) A and T have a common adversary. In particular, we note that cues (4) and (5) cannot be
extracted from looking at the relation between A and T in
isolation, but depend on their relations with others. In this
work, we show that such indirect structural cues can be very
signiﬁcant for inference of character relationships.
Our problem formulation assumes a ﬁxed relation between a pair of characters within a narrative. While this can
be problematic since relationships can transform over time;
in a wide range of examples, the assumption is reasonable.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2807

