Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Proactive Sampling Approach to Project Scheduling under Uncertainty
Pradeep Varakantham, Na Fu and Hoong Chuin Lau
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
80 Stamford Road, Singapore 178902
{pradeepv, nafu, hclau}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

on reactive approaches for scheduling problems. We employ
RCPSP/max with durational uncertainty model provided by
(Fu et al. 2012). Jobshop Scheduling Problems (JSP) with
uncertainty (Beck and Wilson 2007) and RCPSP with uncertainty (Lamas and Demeulemeester 2015) are subsumed
by RCPSP/max with durational uncertainty. The presence of
maximum time lags in RCPSP/max makes the problem significantly challenging, as demonstrated in our experimental
results. Our approaches are similar to scenario-based optimization (Kouvelis, Daniels, and Vairaktarakis 2000; Mulvey, Vanderbei, and Zenios 1995) that have previously been
applied to sub-problems of the RCPSP/max with uncertainty
model. The current best approach for solving RCPSP/max
is by (Fu et al. 2012), where local search methods are employed. We provide principled stochastic approximation approaches based on Sample Average Approximation (SAA).
Similar to a few existing proactive approaches for considering uncertainty in scheduling (Fu et al. 2012; Beck and
Wilson 2007), we consider a risk aware objective in solving RCPSP/max with durational uncertainty. Specifically,
given a risk parameter α, we minimize the α-quantile1 on
the makespan distributions2 . We refer to this α-quantile also
as the α-robust makespan.
Concretely, we make the following key contributions in
this paper. First, we provide an exact MIP formulation for
solving deterministic RCPSP/max. A key advantage of this
deterministic formulation is that it helps provide a principled approximation approach for solving RCPSP/max with
durational uncertainty. Second, we extend the MIP formulation with Sample Average Approximation to represent uncertainty in activity durations. Third, we provide a scalable
extension to SAA in order to significantly improve the scalability of the MIP formulation with SAA. Because of this
extension, existing algorithms (Schutt et al. 2013) for solving deterministic RCPSP/max become relevant and complementary. Finally, we provide an extensive experimental evaluation on benchmark problems from literature and compare
against the best known approach to solve RCPSP/max with
uncertainty.

Uncertainty in activity durations is a key characteristic of
many real world scheduling problems in manufacturing, logistics and project management. RCPSP/max with durational uncertainty is a general model that can be used to represent durational uncertainty in a wide variety of scheduling
problems where there exist resource constraints. However,
computing schedules or execution strategies for RCPSP/max
with durational uncertainty is NP-hard and hence we focus
on providing approximation methods in this paper. We provide a principled approximation approach based on Sample
Average Approximation (SAA) to compute proactive schedules for RCPSP/max with durational uncertainty. We further contribute an extension to SAA for improving scalability significantly without sacrificing on solution quality.
Not only is our approach able to compute schedules at comparable runtimes as existing approaches, it also provides
lower α-quantile makespan (also referred to as α-robust
makespan) values than the best known approach on benchmark problems from the literature.

Introduction
In most manufacturing, logistics and project management
problems, activity durations are uncertain because of commonly occurring events such as human error, manpower unavailability and weather changes. Hence, accounting for uncertainty in scheduling problems is practically important.
There have been proactive (compute offline schedules or
strategies), reactive (provide online decisions on next activity to be scheduled) and proactive-reactive combination
approaches developed in the literature to solve scheduling
problems with durational uncertainty. We refer the readers to
(Beck and Wilson 2007; Fu et al. 2012; Davenport, Gefflot,
and Beck 2001; Herroelen and Leus 2005; Bidot et al. 2009;
Lombardi and Milano 2009; Cimatti, Micheli, and Roveri
2015) for a survey of existing work in scheduling under uncertainty.
In this paper, we are specifically interested in developing proactive approaches for resource constrained scheduling problems where there is durational uncertainty. Our research is complementary to other works that have focussed

1
α-quantile for a probability distribution is the minimum value
(outcome) amongst all those values (outcomes) whose cumulative
probability exceeds α.
2
Since the duration is uncertain, makespan is no longer a single
value but a probability distribution.

Copyright c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3195

