Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Conceptualizing Curse of Dimensionality with Parallel Coordinates
G Devi , Charu Chauhan and Sutanu Chakraborti
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai-600036, Tamil Nadu, India
{devsjee, charu.chauhan.8888}@gmail.com, sutanuc@cse.iitm.ac.in

of our fundamental impairment in conceiving higher dimensional spaces in a way that perceptually grounds its abstractions.
Inselberg’s novel contribution of Parallel Coordinates (Inselberg 1985) makes some signiﬁcant headway in overcoming this limitation. We have created a novel use of Parallel
Coordinates as a pedagogical tool for visualizing the properties of high dimensional spaces and found it to be more convincing in conveying the non-intuitive phenomena of COD
to students.

Abstract
We report on a novel use of parallel coordinates as a pedagogical tool for illustrating the non-intuitive properties of
high dimensional spaces with special emphasis on the phenomenon of Curse of Dimensionality. Also, we have collated
what we believe to be a representative sample of diverse approaches that exist in literature to conceptualize the Curse of
Dimensionality. We envisage that the paper will have pedagogical value in structuring the way Curse of Dimensionality
is presented in classrooms and associated lab sessions.

1

2

Introduction

Perspectives on High Dimensional Spaces

In this section, we have presented the different perspectives
on COD in a sequence that will be of pedagogical value.
Firstly, there is an exponential increase in the volume of
space spanned by a hypercube as we go to higher dimensions. Secondly, the volume of hypersphere approaches zero
as the number of dimensions increase. Another apparently
non-intuitive observation is that as we go to higher dimensions, the hypercubes become spiky in shape. These observations have been elaborated upon in the following discussion.

Humans ﬁnd it hard to imagine high dimensional spaces
since they are exclusively adapted to a world in three dimensions (3D). In practice, though immersed in a 3D world,
humans are more often experienced to living in two dimensional (2D) world, and this can be appreciated from the way
we rely on 2D maps to localize ourselves. This is unlike
ﬁshes which experience the 3D space of ocean completely.
Techniques like Flatland trick (Abbott 2006), require us to
construct a four dimensional (4D) picture from many 3D
projections by imagining how we are able to construct a
3D image in brain from multiple 2D projections. In spite
of this being a great introduction to imagining hyperspace,
it is quite challenging for anyone to extrapolate the ideas to
realistic high dimensional spaces. Students in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) frequently encounter high dimensional design spaces in the form of multivariate data and complex models with large number of parameters. The phenomenon called Curse of Dimensionality
(COD)(Bellman 1961) which is unique to high dimensional
spaces could have profound effect on the design of search
algorithms in AI. It is also one of the major challenges for
parameter estimation of learning algorithms in ML.
In this paper, we have attempted to collate what we believe to be a representative sample of diverse perspectives
that exist in literature for illustrating COD. These perspectives are founded on either mathematical conclusions or
statistical comparisons. We will see in the following section that while these approaches provide analytically useful
tools, they still leave a lot to imagination. This is because

Observation 1 Richard Hamming gives a beautiful introduction to n dimensional spaces in his book (Hamming
2003).

Figure 1: Ants moving in a line could meet each other more
frequently than two men walking on the ground. Two ﬁshes
swimming in an ocean or ﬁsh tank have even fewer chances
of meeting each other due to more number of degrees of
freedom available to them than men or ants.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4075

