Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Scaling-Up MAP and Marginal MAP Inference in Markov Logic
Somdeb Sarkhel
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
somdeb.sarkhel@utdallas.edu

Introduction

network. We observe that for non-shared MLN s(i.e., MLNs
where ﬁrst-order formulas have no shared terms), one of the
MAP state can be found using ‘uniform assignment’, i.e.,
all ground atoms of a predicate are either true or f alse. We
proposed to solve the MAP problem on these MLNs by ﬁrst,
creating a Markov network deﬁned over only the predicates
of the MLN and then using existing solvers to solve them.
Our experiments on both synthetic and real-world MLNs
demonstrated the scalability of our approach.
Unfortunately, this approach does not use existing research on lifted inference to the fullest extent and is efﬁcient only for non-shared MLNs. Hence, in our next paper
(Sarkhel et al. 2014a), we propose a novel lifted MAP inference approach which is also based on the “lifting as preprocessing” paradigm and is at least as powerful as probabilistic theorem proving (Gogate and Domingos 2011), an
advanced lifted inference algorithm. The key idea in our approach is to reduce the lifted MAP inference problem to an
equivalent Integer Polynomial Program (IPP). Each variable
in the IPP potentially refers to an assignment to a large number of ground atoms in the original MLN. Hence, the size of
the search space of the generated IPP can be signiﬁcantly
smaller than the ground Markov network. To solve the IPP
generated from the MLN we convert it to an equivalent Integer Linear Program (ILP) using a classic conversion method
outlined in (Watters 1967). A desirable characteristic of our
reduction is that we can use any off-the-shelf ILP solver to
get exact or approximate solution to the original problem.
Experimental results show that our approach is superior to
existing approaches in terms of scalability and accuracy.
Although the aforementioned two approaches are sound,
in a vast majority of cases, they, like many other lifted
inference algorithms, are unable to identify several useful
symmetries (lifting rules are sound but not complete), either because the symmetries are approximate or because
the symmetries are domain-speciﬁc and do not belong to a
known type. In such cases, lifted inference algorithms partially ground the MLN (namely ground only a few ﬁrst-order
atoms) and search for a solution in this much larger partially propositionalized space. In our recent paper (Sarkhel,
Singla, and Gogate 2015), we propose a principled, approximate approach for solving this partial grounding problem.
Our approach is straight-forward: partition the ground atoms
into groups and force the inference algorithm to treat all

Markov Logic Networks (Domingos and Lowd 2009)
(MLNs) use a few weighted ﬁrst-order logic formulas to
represent large probabilistic graphical models and are ideally suited for representing both relational and probabilistic
knowledge in a wide variety of application domains such as,
NLP, computer vision, and robotics. However, inference in
them is hard because the graphical models can be extremely
large, having millions of variables and features (potentials).
Therefore, several lifted inference algorithms that exploit relational structure and operate at the compact ﬁrst-order level,
have been developed in recent years. However, the focus of
much of existing research on lifted inference is on marginal
inference while algorithms for MAP and marginal MAP inference are far less advanced. The aim of the proposed thesis
is to ﬁll this void, by developing next generation inference
algorithms for MAP and marginal MAP inference.

Progress to Date
Fast Scalable MAP Inference
A key inference task in MLNs used in computer vision and
NLP is maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) inference which is deﬁned as the task of ﬁnding the maximum probability assignment. One can solve this task by grounding the MLN, yielding a Markov network and then using propositional inference algorithms, such as those developed in the graphical
models literature, over the Markov network. To scale these
algorithms further and to take advantage of relational structure, one can lift them by looking into each of their various
steps and checking whether symmetries can be exploited in
order to improve its computational efﬁciency. However, this
requires signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to be made to the propositional algorithm. This is time consuming, as one has to lift
decades of advances in propositional inference.
To circumvent this problem, we (Sarkhel et al. 2014b) advocate using the “lifting as pre-processing” paradigm. The
key idea is to apply lifted inference as pre-processing step
and construct a Markov network that is lifted in the sense
that its size can be much smaller than the ground Markov
network and a complete assignment to its variables may represent several complete assignments in the ground Markov
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4313

