Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Large-Scale Graph-Based Semi-Supervised
Learning via Tree Laplacian Solver
Yan-Ming Zhang and Xu-Yao Zhang

Xiao-Tong Yuan

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory of Big Data
Analysis Technology, Nanjing University of
Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China

Cheng-Lin Liu
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Center of Excellence for Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
scale well with respect to the sample size n. Indeed, Graphbased SSL method has to minimize a quadratic-form objective function induced by the graph Laplacian matrix, which
suffers from a time complexity O(n3 ) for dense graphs. Although this complexity can be signiﬁcantly reduced when
the graph is sparse, it is still polynomial in the number of
nodes, which is intractable for large-scale problems.
To address this scalability issue, various methods have
been proposed. In particular, based on the idea of graph
sparsiﬁcation, (Herbster, Pontil, and Galeano 2008; CesaBianchi, Gentile, and Vitale 2009) propose to approximate
the graph by a spanning tree and then design fast labeling
methods under the online learning setting. Despite the speed,
(Zhang, Huang, and Liu 2015) has shown that these methods enjoy the advantage over graph-based SSL of being very
robust to the graph construction.
Inspired by these methods, our method also begins with
the tree approximation of graph. With a given tree, our
method infers labels of unlabeled data by minimizing the
same objective function as in traditional graph-based SSL
method. The main contribution is that we propose a novel
tree Laplacian solver that solves the optimization problem
in O(n) time. Although the tree approximation idea has
been explored before, both our learning model and the optimization method are totally different. We will review related
works in Section 2, and show advantages of our method by
extensive comparison experiments in Section 5: for given
graphs, our method is at least 10 times faster than state-ofthe-art scalable methods.

Abstract
Graph-based Semi-Supervised learning is one of the most
popular and successful semi-supervised learning methods.
Typically, it predicts the labels of unlabeled data by minimizing a quadratic objective induced by the graph, which is
unfortunately a procedure of polynomial complexity in the
sample size n. In this paper, we address this scalability issue by proposing a method that approximately solves the
quadratic objective in nearly linear time. The method consists of two steps: it ﬁrst approximates a graph by a minimum
spanning tree, and then solves the tree-induced quadratic objective function in O(n) time which is the main contribution
of this work. Extensive experiments show the signiﬁcant scalability improvement over existing scalable semi-supervised
learning methods.

Introduction
Over the past decades, big data phenomenon becomes
more and more common as collecting unlabeled data is
very easy. On the other hand, labeled data are still precious as labeling data needs expensive human labor. This
motivates researchers to develop a new machine learning
paradigm, called semi-supervised learning (SSL), that can
learn from mixed data sets consist of a limited number of
labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data. Actually, many SSL methods have been proposed over the past
decades, such as generative approach (Nigam et al. 2000),
co-training (Blum and Mitchell 1998), transductive support
vector machines (Joachims 1999), graph-based SSL (Blum
and Chawla 2001; Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003;
Zhou et al. 2004; Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006).
Among these methods, graph-based SSL is perhaps the
most popular one. It is appealing because: (1) graph-based
SSL provides a general and effective way for combining
labeled and unlabeled data, (2) the resulting optimization
problem is convex and admits a closed-form solution. Although having these advantages, graph-based SSL does not

Related Works
Based on how to approximate the Laplacian matrix, scalable graph-based SSL methods can be divided into two categories: low-rank approximation and sparse approximation.
Low-rank approximation methods can be further divided
into two sub-categories. The methods of the ﬁrst subcategory (Delalleau, Bengio, and Le Roux 2005; Zhang,
Kwok, and Parvin 2009; Liu, He, and Chang 2010; Lever,
Diethe, and Shawe-Taylor 2012) are based on sampling a

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2344

