Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Bayesian Networks with
Bounded Tree-Width via Guided Search
Siqi Nie

Cassio P. de Campos

Qiang Ji

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy NY, USA

Queen’s University Belfast
Belfast, UK

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy NY, USA

Even though research on BN structure learning has been
very active (Barlett and Cussens 2013; Cussens et al. 2013;
de Campos and Ji 2011; Hemmecke, Lindner, and Studený
2012; Jaakkola et al. 2010; Yuan and Malone 2013), few
algorithms have been designed for learning with bounded
tree-width. Elidan and Gould (2008) designed an approximate algorithm by combining several heuristics to compute
the tree-width and to learn the structure of BNs. Very recently, this topic has attracted great attention. Korhonen and
Parviainen (2013) proposed a dynamic programming algorithm for learning n-node BNs of tree-width at most k with
time complexity O(3n nk+O(1) ). In practice, such approach
is quite slow for networks with more than 15 nodes or for
tree-width bound greater than 3. Parviainen, Farahani, and
Lagergren (2014) employed an integer programming approach to solve the problem. To avoid exponentially many
constraints in the number of variables, it iteratively creates
a cutting plane on the current incumbent solution. Berg,
Järvisalo, and Malone (2014) translated the problem into a
weighted maximum satisﬁability problem and solved it by
weighted MAX-SAT solvers. These algorithms work only
with networks of at most 30 variables. Nie et al. (2014) proposed two algorithms, one based on integer programming
that focuses on ﬁnding the exact solution for small domains
and one based on sampling k-trees with the goal of addressing large domains. One shortcoming of the latter approach is
that the sampling space for k-trees is huge and can be barely
explored by the sampling technique in a reasonable amount
of time.
We develop an approximate algorithm that is able to deal
with domains with more than 100 variables (well beyond
current methods) and still produce reasonably accurate results. We achieve signiﬁcant improvements on large domains while maintaining close to optimal performance on
small ones. The strategy we employ is to search for promising k-trees, which are the maximal undirected graphs of
tree-width k, and then discover the optimal BN whose moral
graph is a subgraph of it. By taking advantage of some underlying ideas behind the procedure to construct a k-tree, a
search algorithm with pruning is introduced to ﬁnd the ktree from a root clique with maximum Informative Score
(Nie, de Campos, and Ji 2015), which is a heuristic measure for a k-tree about the quality of the BNs that are “contained” in it. Therefore, we avoid the high complexity of an

Abstract
Bounding the tree-width of a Bayesian network can reduce
the chance of overﬁtting, and allows exact inference to be
performed efﬁciently. Several existing algorithms tackle the
problem of learning bounded tree-width Bayesian networks
by learning from k-trees as super-structures, but they do not
scale to large domains and/or large tree-width. We propose
a guided search algorithm to ﬁnd k-trees with maximum Informative scores, which is a measure of quality for the k-tree
in yielding good Bayesian networks. The algorithm achieves
close to optimal performance compared to exact solutions in
small domains, and can discover better networks than existing approximate methods can in large domains. It also provides an optimal elimination order of variables that guarantees small complexity for later runs of exact inference. Comparisons with well-known approaches in terms of learning
and inference accuracy illustrate its capabilities.

Introduction
Bayesian networks (BNs) compactly represent the joint
probability distribution for a multivariate domain by using
a directed acyclic graph (DAG) to encode conditional independences. Learning the graph (a.k.a. structure) of a BN is
a very challenging task. With the goal of decision making
or probabilistic explanation, it is desirable to learn models
that generalize well and at the same time have low inferential complexity. One attempt that has received growing attention recently is to learn a BN with bounded tree-width.
By imposing a hard constraint on the tree-width of a BN,
selecting overly complicated structures of dependences is
avoided, thereby the chance of overﬁtting is reduced. This
has been supported by empirical results (Elidan and Gould
2008). Moreover, a BN with small tree-width allows exact
inferences to be performed efﬁciently (Kwisthout, Bodlaender, and van der Gaag 2010). This paper presents a new approach for score-based Bayesian network structure learning
with a hard constraint on the tree-width of the yielded network. We show that such approach outperforms the state of
the art, and can be applied to numerous problems. We employ it on the UAI’2014 Inference Competition and achieve
promising results.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3294

