Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Unifying Variational Inference Framework for Hierarchical
Graph-Coupled HMM with an Application to Inﬂuenza Infection
Kai Fan

Chunyuan Li

Katherine Heller

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
kai.fan@stat.duke.edu

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
chunyuan.li@duke.edu

Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
kheller@stat.duke.edu

Abstract

Gt−1

The Hierarchical Graph-Coupled Hidden Markov Model
(hGCHMM) is a useful tool for tracking and predicting the
spread of contagious diseases, such as inﬂuenza, by leveraging social contact data collected from individual wearable
devices. However, the existing inference algorithms depend
on the assumption that the infection rates are small in probability, typically close to 0. The purpose of this paper is to
build a uniﬁed learning framework for latent infection state
estimation for the hGCHMM, regardless of the infection rate
and transition function. We derive our algorithm based on
a dynamic auto-encoding variational inference scheme, thus
potentially generalizing the hGCHMM to models other than
those that work on highly contagious diseases. We experimentally compare our approach with previous Gibbs EM algorithms and standard variational method mean-ﬁeld inference, on both semi-synthetic data and app collected epidemiological and social records.

h
θX

Gt
γn αn βn

zn

xt−1
n

xtn

xt+1
n

ynt−1

ynt

N

μ, Σ
η

ynt+1

Figure 1: A template graphical representation of hGCHMM.
See an unrolled but equivalent version in supplementary.
a unifying inference method for a non-conjugate disease diffusion model.
Along the lines of (Fan, Aiello, and Heller 2015), we
adopt the hGCHMM model (Fig. 1) where the binary latent variables indicate whether the person is infected, and
the observed variables are a binary vector which indicate
multiple symptoms. The colored nodes are observables and
the nodes Gt representing the dynamic social network, implicitly drawn (see explicit graph in(Fan et al. 2015) or
supplementary1 ). The reason we emphasize this model is
that the hGCHMM is a general and ﬂexible framework
to heterogeneously simulate the disease spread in a dynamic social network. It simulates a discretized SuspiciousInfections-Suspicious (SIS) model (Cooper and Lipsitch
2004), evolved from standard hidden Markov process, and is
able to reduce to a homogeneous version, the Graph-coupled
HMM or even latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Gruber,
Weiss, and Rosen-Zvi 2007). The generative process of Fig.
1 follows
 


αn , βn , γn ∼ Beta ezn η·,1 , ezn η·,1

Introduction
The mainstay of computational epidemiology research for
predicting patterns or discovering the risks of infectious disease has been at the population level. A prominent example
is the Google ﬂu trend website, which, leveraging the temporal searching key words associating with ﬂu, forecasted
the ﬂu outbreak two weeks ahead of Center of Disease Control (CDC). However, the advent of personal health apps in
mobile or wearable devices allows disease diffusion to be
modeled in an individual level, e.g. data from cell phones
is harnessed to identify the probability of contracting ﬂu for
every single person in a relatively close community (Dong,
Pentland, and Heller 2012; Fan et al. 2015). They both incorporate the face-to-face contact information within a local
area to adjust the transmission function and construct their
models, thus constructing a hierarchical model with extra
features with an enriched epidemiology dataset for more accurate prediction. The main idea in these works is to build
a model in a fully Bayesian setting taking the advantage of
efﬁcient Gibbs sampling. However, the nice conjugacy property of such complicated models, to a great extent, relies on
a small infection rate since a Taylor expansion trick is applied. This paper aims to break this assumption and develop

xtn ∼ Bernoulli(φ(αn , βn , γn ; xt−1 , Gt−1 )) (1)
t
yn,s
∼ Bernoulli(θxtn ,s )

where the subscript · means either α, β or γ, and transition
function φ takes the arguments αn , βn , γn and depends on

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3828

http://people.duke.edu/∼kf96/docs/aaai2016supp.zip

