Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-View 3D Human Tracking in Crowded Scenes
Xiaobai Liu
Department of Computer Science, San Diego State University
GMCS Building, Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182

bottom-central point as footprints and apply the view-tomap or cross-view ground homograph. This is however infeasible for crowded scenes, e.g. ofﬁce, because persons are
usually occluded by furniture or other persons. Fortunately,
human detection boxes, although being incomplete, usually
reﬂect pair-wise 3D spatial relationship between subjects.
Taking two boxes A and B detected in the same frame for
instance, if A is larger than B, the person A is likely to stand
closer to the camera than B; if the central point of box A locates on the left to box B, so do their footprints.
On the other hand, binary spatial relationships can be used
to help track moving persons that have frequent intersections. The basic idea follows the Ising/Potts prior, that two
moving people are likely to preserve their spatial relations,
e.g. being left, over a certain time period. If person A locates
on the left of person B at time t, the two people should have
the same pair-wise spatial relationship at time t + 1. In addition, these consistency constraints can be used to suppress
noise detections while associating boxes to subjects .
We develop an uniﬁed probabilistic method to automatically mine binary constraints for various objectives, including localizing truncated human boxes in 3D scene, identifying detected boxes across views, recovering missing detections and tracking subjects over time. These objectives are
mutually beneﬁcial and should be solved jointly. In particular, we describe each trajectory as a continuous function of
3D locations w.r.t time and enforce high-order smoothness
over time to facilitate trajectory estimation from incomplete
observations.
For inference, we introduce an iterative cluster Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method Tu and Zhu (2002)
to search the optimal solution. Once initialized, we use a
set of dynamics to drive the current solution to a new one
to simulate a Markov Chain in the solution space. At each
step, our method changes the status of a cluster of nodes, instead of a single node Khan, Balch, and Dellaert (2005), to
speed up the sampling process Barbu and Zhu (2007). The
new solution is accepted with a probability and the dynamics are paired with each other to make the search reversible
that shall guarantee convergence to global optimal. We evaluate the proposed method on both public benchmarks and a
newly built video dataset. Results with comparisons to other
popular trackers show that our method could achieve stateof-the-art tracking results and localize moving subjects in

Abstract
This paper presents a robust multi-view method for tracking
people in crowded 3D scene. Our method distinguishes itself from previous works in two aspects. Firstly, we deﬁne
a set of binary spatial relationships for individual subjects
or pairs of subjects that appear at the same time, e.g. being
left or right, being closer or further to the camera, etc. These
binary relationships directly reﬂect relative positions of subjects in 3D scene and thus should be persisted during inference. Secondly, we introduce an uniﬁed probabilistic framework to exploit binary spatial constraints for simultaneous 3D
localization and cross-view human tracking. We develop a
cluster Markov Chain Monte Carlo method to search the optimal solution. We evaluate our method on both public video
benchmarks and newly built multi-view video dataset. Results with comparisons showed that our method could achieve
state-of-the-art tracking results and meter-level 3D localization on challenging videos.

Introduction
Tracking multiple people in 3D scene is crucial for highlevel video understanding tasks, e.g. recognizing human activities, behaviours or social activities. Despite impressive
results achieved Hofmann, Wolf, and Rigoll (2013) Fan,
X.Shen, and Wu (2013), existing methods still suffer from
occlusions, frequent intersections, missing detections of humans and other challenges, in particular for crowded scenes,
e.g. parking-lot, ofﬁce etc. In this work, we study a multiview method for simultaneous tracking and localizing moving subjects in 3D scene map with sub-meter accuracy.
The major contribution of this work is to explore a set of
binary spatial relationships between subjects in images, i.e.
being left or right, being closer to the camera central, which
are all expressed in binary forms and can be directly mined
from 2D image observations, e.g. detection results. These relationships, once mined, are potentially helpful for two purposes: i) registering the detected boxes in other views or the
3D scene map; ii) tracking human over frames in different
views.
On the one hand, in order to localize a detected human
box in 3D or other views, existing multi-view 3D trackers Fleuret et al. Khan and Shah (2006) usually select the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3553

