Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Computing Optimal Monitoring Strategy for Detecting Terrorist Plots
Zhen Wang

Yue Yin

Bo An

School of Computer Engineering
The Key Lab of Intelligent Information
School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
Processing, ICT, CAS
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore 639798
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Singapore 639798
wangzhen@ntu.edu.sg
Beijing 100190, China
boan@ntu.edu.sg
melody1235813@gmail.com

It is challenging to develop efﬁcient monitoring strategies
since the terrorist planner can arouse any connected subgroup of a terrorist network, and different subgroups of terrorists can cause different levels of damage. A subgroup of
terrorists who can cooperate well is more dangerous than
a subgroup of terrorists who cannot (Enders and Jindapon
2010). Therefore, to decide whether to monitor a potential
terrorist, the defender should consider the terrorist’s capability as well as all subgroups he may be involved in. In
addition, a strategic terrorist planner may take advantage of
patterns in the security agency’s monitoring strategies (Enders and Su 2007). Thus randomized monitoring strategies
are needed. In this paper, we aim at designing the optimal
allocation of security resources to monitor terrorists.
There has been lots of research on game-theoretic security
resource allocation (Tambe 2011; Yin, An, and Jain 2014)
and many systems based on attacker-defender security game
models have been successfully deployed (Shieh et al. 2012).
However, an attacker chooses a target to attack in standard security games (Blum, Haghtalab, and Procaccia 2014;
Gan, An, and Vorobeychik 2015; Yin et al. 2015) or a path to
execute an attack in graph based security games (Vorobeychik et al. 2014). While, in our domain, considering potential terrorists as targets, an attacker can choose a connected
subgroup of targets and the strategy space is signiﬁcantly
larger than the set of targets or paths. Thus, existing approaches cannot be directly applied to our domain. Law enforcement and intelligence agencies often use network centrality measures (e.g., degree, closeness and betweenness)
to priorities the potential terrorists (I2 2010). Recently, Lindelauf et al. (2013) introduced a Shapley value-based centrality metric. However, all these existing centrality metrics did not consider defender’s combinatorial pure strategy
space and failed to generate optimal monitoring strategy as
we will show later.
To ﬁll the research gap, we build a novel Stackelberg
game model (TPD), where the leader (defender) chooses
vertices of a terrorist network to monitor while the follower
(terrorist planner) arouses a connected subgraph of the network to launch a coordinated attack. The major challenge
brought by this model is the exponential growth (in terms of
the network size) of both players’ strategy spaces.The double oracle framework is a standard approach for handling
problems with such large strategy spaces. Unfortunately,

Abstract
In recent years, terrorist organizations (e.g., ISIS or al-Qaeda)
are increasingly directing terrorists to launch coordinated attacks in their home countries. One example is the Paris shootings on January 7, 2015. By monitoring potential terrorists,
security agencies are able to detect and stop terrorist plots at
their planning stage. Although security agencies may have
knowledge about potential terrorists (e.g., who they are, how
they interact), they usually have limited resources and cannot monitor all terrorists. Moreover, a terrorist planner may
strategically choose to arouse terrorists considering the security agency’s monitoring strategy. This paper makes ﬁve
key contributions toward the challenging problem of computing optimal monitoring strategies: 1) A new Stackelberg
game model for terrorist plot detection; 2) A modiﬁed double
oracle framework for computing the optimal strategy effectively; 3) Complexity results for both defender and attacker
oracle problems; 4) Novel mixed-integer linear programming
(MILP) formulations for best response problems of both players; and 5) Effective approximation algorithms for generating
suboptimal responses for both players. Experimental evaluation shows that our approach can obtain a robust enough solution outperforming widely-used centrality based heuristics
signiﬁcantly and scale up to realistic-sized problems.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the rise of terrorist organizations (e.g., ISIS,
al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)) leads new challenges to the world’s security. Such organizations are increasingly directing and encouraging their supporters in the
West to carry out coordinated attacks in their home countries. To thwart such attacks, it is extremely important for
domestic security agencies to detect the terrorist plot in the
planning stage by monitoring potential terrorists1 . Unfortunately, though security agencies may have knowledge about
the suspects (e.g., who they are, whom they interact with),
they do not have enough resources to monitor them all (Woo
2009). For example, the recent Paris shootings on January
7, 2015 is a successful plot directed by AQAP owing to the
limited resources of France’s domestic intelligence agency
and most probably its poor monitoring strategy.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use ‘terrorist’ and ‘potential terrorist’ interchangeably.

637

