Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Competition of Distributed and
Multiagent Planners (CoDMAP)∗
Michal Štolba and Antonı́n Komenda

{stolba,komenda}@agents.fel.cvut.cz
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic

Daniel L. Kovacs
daniel.laszlo.kovacs@gmail.com
Department of Measurement and Information Systems,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary

Abstract

Formalism and Input Language

As a part of the workshop on Distributed and Multiagent
Planning (DMAP) at the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) 2015, we have organized a competition in distributed and multiagent planning.
The main aims of the competition were to consolidate the
planners in terms of input format; to promote development
of multiagent planners both inside and outside of the multiagent research community; and to provide a proof-of-concept
of a potential future multiagent planning track of the International Planning Competition (IPC). In this paper we summarize course and highlights of the competition.

A crucial point of the competition was to determine a formalism and an input language. For the formalism, we have
chosen MA-STRIPS (Brafman and Domshlak 2008) for its
simplicity and wide acceptance among existing planners.
MA-STRIPS extends the STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson 1971)
formalism with two concepts: (i) factorization and (ii) privacy. Factorization is deﬁned in the planning problem and
prescribes what STRIPS actions can be executed by which
agents. A STRIPS fact is private if it is not affected and cannot affect more than one agent.
Following the minimalistic extension of STRIPS to MASTRIPS, we wanted a simple extension of the common planning language PDDL (McDermott et al. 1998) towards multiagent planning, also compatible with MA-STRIPS. After
analysis of candidate languages, we have decided to extend
MA-PDDL (Kovacs 2012). The extension1 came in two ﬂavors, a factored description, which allowed the deﬁnition of
separate domain and problem description for each agent, and
an unfactored description, which allowed the deﬁnition of
factorized privacy in a single domain and problem description. Additionally, our generalized deﬁnition of privacy was
enough to comprise MA-STRIPS privacy, but allowed for
more general deﬁnitions, possibly usable in future multiagent planning competitions.

Introduction and Aims of CoDMAP
Various forms of multiagent planning have recently found
their way to the automated planning research community,
nevertheless, there was no competition of multiagent planners in the tradition of IPC yet. As the organizers of
DMAP’15, we have decided to run a co-located competition
of multiagent planners.
We chose an approach similar to that of classical planning competitions, to start with the smallest possible subset of features and possibly extend them in the future. One
of the main focuses of the competition design was to allow as many existing planners as possible to enter without
large-scale modiﬁcations. In order to foster our awareness
of the existing planners and their possible extensions, we
have conducted a public poll. Out of the poll and other considerations arose three main restrictions of the multiagent
planning model: deterministic, non-durative actions, full observability (with respect to privacy), cooperative agents and
ofﬂine planning.

Competition Tracks
A success of a planning competition is determined to large
extent by the number of contestants and as there was no historical experience from previous multiagent planning competitions, we wanted to open the competition to the widest
possible audience. A survey of literature on multiagent planners together with the competition poll2 provided enough
information to set the rules for the competition so that an
ample amount of already existing multiagent planners could

∗

This research was supported by the Czech Science Foundation (grant no. 15-20433Y), by the Air Force Ofﬁce of
Scientiﬁc Research, USAF (grant no. FA8655-12-1-2096) and
by the Grant Agency of the CTU in Prague (grant no.
SGS14/202/OHK3/3T/13).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The extended BNF can be found at http://agents.fel.cvut.cz/
codmap/MA-PDDL-BNF.pdf
2
The poll form can be found at: http://bit.ly/1IsNoqY

4343

