Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Framework for Outlier Description Using Constraint Programming
Chia-Tung Kuo

Ian Davidson

Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis
tomkuo@ucdavis.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis
davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu

The recall can then be limited to those automobiles which
match the description instead of all automobiles.
We call such setting the outlier description problem and
address it with the deﬁnition below.

Abstract
Outlier detection has been studied extensively and employed
in diverse applications in the past decades. In this paper
we formulate a related yet understudied problem which we
call outlier description. This problem often arises in practice
when we have a small number of data instances that had been
identiﬁed to be outliers and we wish to explain why they are
outliers. We propose a framework based on constraint programming to ﬁnd an optimal subset of features that most
differentiates the outliers and normal instances. We further
demonstrate the framework offers great ﬂexibility in incorporating diverse scenarios arising in practice such as multiple
explanations and human in the loop extensions. We empirically evaluate our proposed framework on real datasets, including medical imaging and text corpus, and demonstrate
how the results are useful and interpretable in these domains.

Problem 1 The General Outlier Description Problem.
Given a collection of instances that are deemed
normal, N , and another separate collection
deemed outliers, O, where instances in both N
and O are in feature space S, ﬁnd a feature mapping t : S → F that maximizes the difference
between O and N according to some outlier property measure m : F → R and an aggregate
objective obj : (R|N | , R|O| ) → R. That is,
max obj(m(t(N )), m(t(O))).
t,m

The functions t and m can be naturally viewed as the description/explanation of the outlying behavior where t describes the space where the behavior is exhibited and m deﬁnes what we deem to be an outlier in this space. In this paper we focus on a particular form of t which projects the data
to a subspace and use an m that measures the local neighborhood density around each point. The objective obj here
is the difference between the densities surrounding the outliers and normal instances. Notice that this problem is distinguished from metric learning in that t takes single instances
as inputs, instead of pairs, and we do not enforce all normal
instances to be close together.
A key requirement of outlier description is ﬂexibility
since each domain may have its domain knowledge with
which the description should be consistent. To address this
we propose using constraint programming (CP) which is
a declarative paradigm of solving optimization problems,
not unlike mathematical programming, but offers a more
expressive language. A strength of the CP framework is
that it allows the functions t, m and obj to take a wide
variety of forms unincumbered by the limitations associated with mathematical programming. CP has only recently
been used in data mining, in particular association rule mining (De Raedt, Guns, and Nijssen 2008; 2010) but has
not yet been fully exploited in the community. Our current work is another example of using this powerful mature
paradigm which interfaces with highly parallelized state-ofthe-art solvers.
Our contributions are as follows:

Introduction
Outlier detection is a core technique used extensively in
AI along with clustering and classiﬁcation. The core outlier detection problem aims to identify which subset of data
instances are most dissimilar to the vast majority. For example, in a dataset of individuals containing their physical
measurements an outlier may be an extremely tall or short
person. The recent survey on the topic of anomaly detection (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009) outlines variations of the core problem such as contextual outlier detection which identiﬁes a context where the point is an outlier.
In our earlier example, a 6-foot tall person is not an outlier
in general but a 6-foot tall eight-year-old certainly is. Outlier
detection has numerous practical applications, such as fraud
detection, network intrusion detection and climate anomaly
detection (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009).
However, in many real world problems a more typical
setting is that the outliers are already known and discovering what makes them outliers will have an immense impact.
Consider the example of automobile recalls. An automobile
recall occurs when a small, yet sufﬁcient, number of cars
are found to have defective steering. Here we are given examples of the outliers (recalled cars) and many examples of
the non-outliers (non-recalled cars), with the aim to ﬁnd a
description of what makes the identiﬁed outliers anomalous.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1237

