Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

DARI: Distance Metric and Representation
Integration for Person Veriﬁcation
Guangrun Wang, Liang Lin∗ , Shengyong Ding, Ya Li and Qing Wang
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
wanggrun@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org, marcding@163.com,
liya@gzhu.edu.cn, ericwangqing@gmail.com



Abstract
The past decade has witnessed the rapid development of
feature representation learning and distance metric learning,
whereas the two steps are often discussed separately. To
explore their interaction, this work proposes an end-to-end
learning framework called DARI, i.e. Distance metric And
Representation Integration, and validates the effectiveness of
DARI in the challenging task of person veriﬁcation. Given
the training images annotated with the labels, we ﬁrst produce a large number of triplet units, and each one contains
three images, i.e. one person and the matched/mismatch references. For each triplet unit, the distance disparity between
the matched pair and the mismatched pair tends to be maximized. We solve this objective by building a deep architecture of convolutional neural networks. In particular, the Mahalanobis distance matrix is naturally factorized as one top
fully-connected layer that is seamlessly integrated with other
bottom layers representing the image feature. The image feature and the distance metric can be thus simultaneously optimized via the one-shot backward propagation. On several
public datasets, DARI shows very promising performance on
re-identifying individuals cross cameras against various challenges, and outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches.





Figure 1: Typical examples of person veriﬁcation across
cameras. Each column corresponds to one individual, and
the large variations exist between the two examples due to
the light, pose and view point changes.

capturing variety of image appearance and handling complicated nonlinear manifold.
In this paper, we investigate the possible interaction between feature learning and distance metric learning, and address the very challenging task of person veriﬁcation (i.e.
matching individuals across cameras). Figure 1 shows some
examples of this task, where the pedestrians across cameras
distinctly vary in appearance and structure caused by pose,
lighting and view angle changes. The proposed framework is
built based on the convolutional neural network (CNN) (LeCun et al. 1989), which jointly optimizes the human representation as well as the proper distance metric to robustly
match individuals against various real challenges. We call
this framework DARI (i.e. Distance metric And Representation Integration).
We aim at preserving similarity of the same person
while discriminating the different individuals, and thus deﬁne DARI in the form of maximizing relative distance.
Speciﬁcally, we organize the training images into triplet
units, and each unit contains one person image and the
matched/mismatch references. For all triplet units, the objective of DARI is to maximize the distance disparity between the matched pairs and the mismatched pairs. In particular, DARI seeks optimal solutions for both feature representation and distance metric, while the existing approaches
of person veriﬁcation (Xu et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2012) focuses on only either of the two components. We adopt the
deep CNN architecture to extract the discriminative features
from the input images, where the convolutional layers, maxpooling operators, and one full connection layer are stacked

Introduction
Distance/similarity measure between images plays a fundamental role in many computer vision applications, e.g., person veriﬁcation (Hirzer et al. 2012), matching heterogeneous
data (Zhai et al. 2012), and multimedia retrieval (Chechik et
al. 2012). Conventional Mahalanobis distance metric learning models, which aim to seek a linear transformation by
pulling the distances between similar pairs while pushing
the distances between dissimilar pairs, are theoretically appealing in producing discriminative similarity or distance
measure from the given training data (Weinberger, Blitzer,
and Saul 2005a). However, these approaches usually are performed in the original data space or the hand-engineered
feature space (i.e. representation), and thus are limited in
∗

Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work is in part
supported by China 863 Program (Grant no. 2013AA013801),
in part by Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (Grant no.
2014A030313201), in part by Guangdong Science and Technology
Program (Grant no. 2013B010406005 and 2015B010128009).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3611

