Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Privacy Management in
Agent-Based Social Networks
Nadin Kökciyan
Department of Computer Engineering
Bogazici University, 34342 Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey
nadin.kokciyan@boun.edu.tr

(i.e., through inferences). According to these two axis, we
identiﬁed four types of privacy violations. In type (i), a user
shares some content with some privacy settings, the system
acts against these settings and shares the content with people
that it was not supposed to. In type (ii), an information about
a user is shared by another person. In online social networks,
information about a user can easily propagate in the system,
without a user’s consent. In type (iii), a user puts up a content
on the social network without realizing that more information can be inferred from her post; e.g., giving away location
information through a landmark. In type (iv), a friend’s action leads to a privacy leakage but the leakage can only be
understood with some inferences in place; e.g., a friend’s tag
revealing friendship status. Moreover, a content may lead to
privacy violations because of its semantics. A post may annoy or insult the user, or it may include private information;
e.g., sharing a post that reveals the user’s politic afﬁliation.
This thesis develops an approach for managing users’ privacy constraints in online social networks for detecting privacy violations and guide the user to protect her privacy.

Abstract
In online social networks (OSNs), users are allowed to create
and share content about themselves and others. When multiple entities start distributing content, information can reach
unintended individuals and inference can reveal more information about the user. Existing applications do not focus on
detecting privacy violations before they occur in the system.
This thesis proposes an agent-based representation of a social network, where the agents manage users’ privacy requirements and create privacy agreements with agents. The privacy
context, such as the relations among users, various content
types in the system, and so on are represented with a formal
language. By reasoning with this formal language, an agent
checks the current state of the system to resolve privacy violations before they occur. We argue that commonsense reasoning could be useful to solve some of privacy examples
reported in the literature. We will develop new methods to automatically identify private information using commonsense
reasoning, which has never been applied to privacy context.
Moreover, agents may have conﬂicting privacy requirements.
We will study how to use agreement technologies in privacy
settings for agents to resolve conﬂicts automatically.

Approach
Introduction

We envision an intelligent digital assistant, which would automatically interact with the user and other users to protect the user’s privacy in the social network. For this, we
focus on intelligent reasoning over the content and the privacy requirements of users. Our work proposes an agentbased representation of a social network, where each agent
(e.g., digital assistant) represents a user. The agents manage users’ privacy requirements, which are represented via
privacy agreements. A privacy agreement should be structured so that agents can process it automatically and reason
about it. A logic-based representation would be appropriate since agents can infer new information from the existing
knowledge. Hence, the privacy context, such as the relations
among users, various content types in the system, and so on
are represented with a formal language. By reasoning with
this formal language, an agent checks the current state of
the system to resolve privacy violations before they occur.
An agent notiﬁes its user to take an action accordingly.
In our recent work, there are three contributions that we
make. (i) A meta-model for agent-based online social networks is developed. Hence, agent-based social networks,
privacy requirements, and privacy violations can be formally

Typical examples of privacy violations on social networks
resemble violations of access control. In typical access control scenarios, there is a single authority (i.e., administrator)
that can grant accesses as required. However, in social networks, there are multiple sources of control. That is, each
user can contribute to the sharing of content by putting up
posts about herself as well as others. Further, audience of a
post can reshare the content, making it accessible for others.
These interactions lead to privacy violations, some of which
are difﬁcult to detect by users.
Our review of privacy violations reveal two important axis
for understanding privacy violations. The ﬁrst axis is the
main contributor to the situation. This could be the user herself putting up a content that reveals unwanted information
or it could be other people sharing content that reveals information about the user. The second axis is how the information is revealed; if the information was itself unwanted
or the information led to new information being revealed
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4299

