Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

General Error Bounds in Heuristic Search Algorithms
for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems
Eric A. Hansen and Ibrahim Abdoulahi
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, MS 39762
hansen@cse.msstate.edu, ia91@msstate.edu
Likhachev, and Gordon 2005; Smith and Simmons 2006;
Sanner et al. 2009). An alternative approach generalizes traditional AND/OR graph search techniques (Hansen and Zilberstein 2001; Bonet and Geffner 2003a; 2006; Warnquist,
Kvarnström, and Doherty 2010). Whereas RTDP samples
the reachable state space by repeated simulated trajectories from the start state, the second approach systematically
explores the reachable state space by repeated depth-ﬁrst
traversals from the start state. Some algorithms use a mix
of the two strategies (Bonet and Geffner 2003b).
The systematic approach to heuristic search shares with
traditional value iteration the important advantage that it
computes a residual each iteration, where the residual is
equal to the largest improvement in value for any (reachable) state. Computation of the residual is useful because it
can be used to test for convergence. The smaller the residual,
the higher the quality of the solution. When the residual is
equal to zero, the solution is optimal. Because the residual
only converges to zero in the limit, however, it is common
practice to test for convergence by testing for an -consistent
solution, which is a solution for which the residual is less
than some threshold  > 0. Until recently, however, this approach has lacked a principled way of selecting a threshold 
that provides a bound on the suboptimality of the solution.
Hansen and Abdoulahi (2015) recently derived the ﬁrst
easily-computed error bounds for SSP problems, where the
bounds are based only on the residual and the cost-to-go
function. The bounds perform very well in practice. But the
approach has two limitations. First, it is only applicable if
all action costs are positive. Second, the bounds are tightest if action costs are uniform, or nearly uniform. For problems with non-uniform action costs, the quality of the error
bounds decreases, roughly in proportion to the difference between the smallest action cost and the average action cost.
In this paper, we overcome both limitations by showing
how to compute error bounds that are equally good whether
action costs are uniform or not, and are available regardless of the cost structure of the problem; in particular, the
bounds do not depend on all action costs being positive.
In discussing how to incorporate these bounds in different
heuristic search algorithms, we also introduce a simple new
heuristic search algorithm that we show performs as well
or better than previous heuristic search algorithms for SSP
problems, and is easier to implement and analyze.

Abstract
We consider recently-derived error bounds that can be
used to bound the quality of solutions found by heuristic
search algorithms for stochastic shortest path problems.
In their original form, the bounds can only be used for
problems with positive action costs. We show how to
generalize the bounds so that they can be used in solving any stochastic shortest path problem, regardless of
cost structure. In addition, we introduce a simple new
heuristic search algorithm that performs as well or better than previous algorithms for this class of problems,
while being easier to implement and analyze.

Introduction
Decision-theoretic planning problems are often modeled as
stochastic shortest path (SSP) problems. For SSP problems,
actions have probabilistic outcomes, and the objective is to
ﬁnd a conditional plan, or policy, that reaches a goal state
from the start state with minimum expected cost. Classic
dynamic programming algorithms ﬁnd a solution for the entire state space, that is, for all possible start states. By contrast, heuristic search algorithms ﬁnd a conditional plan for a
given start state, and can do so by evaluating only a fraction
of the state space. The heuristic search approach to solving SSP problems generalizes the approach of A* and related heuristic search algorithms for solving deterministic
shortest-path problems, which also limit the number of states
that must be evaluated in the search for an optimal path from
a given start state to a goal state.
The heuristic search approach to solving SSP problems
is based on the insight that if the initial cost-to-go function is an admissible heuristic (that is, if it underestimates
the optimal cost-to-go function), then an algorithm that only
visits and updates states that are reachable from the start
state under the current greedy policy converges in the limit
to the optimal cost-to-go function for these states, without necessarily evaluating the full state space. Two broad
strategies for using heuristic search in solving SSP problems have been studied. Real-time dynamic programming
(RTDP) uses trial-based search methods that generalize realtime heuristic search techniques for deterministic shortestpath problems (Barto, Bradtke, and Singh 1995; McMahan,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3130

