Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Pose-Dependent Low-Rank Embedding for Head Pose Estimation
†

Handong Zhao† , Zhengming Ding† and Yun Fu†‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA, 02115
‡
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA, 02115
{hdzhao,allanding,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

Low-rank embedding
for each task/subject

Head pose estimation via embedding model has been demonstrated its effectiveness from the recent works. However, most
of the previous methods only focus on manifold relationship
among poses, while overlook the underlying global structure among subjects and poses. To build a robust and effective head pose estimator, we propose a novel Pose-dependent
Low-Rank Embedding (PLRE) method, which is designed
to exploit a discriminative subspace to keep within-pose samples close while between-pose samples far away. Speciﬁcally,
low-rank embedding is employed under the multi-task framework, where each subject can be naturally considered as one
task. Then, two novel terms are incorporated to align multiple tasks to pursue a better pose-dependent embedding. One
is the cross-task alignment term, aiming to constrain each
low-rank coefﬁcient to share the similar structure. The other
is pose-dependent graph regularizer, which is developed to
capture manifold structure of same pose cross different subjects. Experiments on databases CMU-PIE, MIT-CBCL, and
extended YaleB with different levels of random noise are conducted and six embedding model based baselines are compared. The consistent superior results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Pose-dep.
Low-Rank
Embedding

Pose-dependent
regularizer across subjects

Original Feature Space

Projective Embedding Space

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of the proposed PLRE
method. Head pose images distribute arbitrarily in the original feature space due to the noise and/or some large corruptions, e.g., illumination, etc. Here, for simplicity, we take
three subjects as an example marked by different colors.
Through the proposed PLRE method, low-rank embedding
is employed on each subject under the multi-task framework, where each subject is a task. Regions with different
background colors (gray and purple) denote pose-dependent
regularizers across subjects, which couple data with same
pose but from different subjects. PLRE is optimized jointly
to seek the discriminative embedding space, with which the
testing head pose is estimated.

Introduction
Head pose estimation is an integral component in computer
vision system, which has a wide range of applications, such
as face recognition, person/face identiﬁcation and humanmachine interaction. Although there are extensive works
studying head pose estimation from 2D images, it is still far
away from mature. The challenges are induced by changing
illuminations, various facial expressions, and subject variability. A generic algorithm for head pose estimation has to
be robust to such factors, e.g., occlusion, noise, lighting and
perspective distortion, which make it a challenging issue.
Recently, a number of algorithms have been proposed to
address head pose estimation problem, and a good survey
can be referred to (Murphy-Chutorian and Trivedi 2009). In
general, these existing methods can be categorized into the
following groups: template model (Kwong and Gong 2002),
regression model (Haj, Gonzàlez, and Davis 2012; Geng and
Xia 2014), embedding model (Wang and Song 2014), active appearance model (Edwards et al. 1998; He, Sigal, and

Sclaroff 2014) and geometric model (Wang and Sung 2007;
Fanelli, Gall, and Van Gool 2011). Among them, embedding
model attracts lots of attention recently because of the high
accuracy and good generalizability (Fu and Huang 2006;
Balasubramanian, Ye, and Panchanathan 2007; Wang et al.
2008; BenAbdelkader 2010; Wang and Song 2014). However, it is worth noticing that all the previous embedding
based methods fail to consider the underlying global structure among subjects and poses, which results in vulnerability
of noises or corruptions.
To better handle head pose estimation problem, we get inspiration from the fact that data from different poses within
the same subject should lie in separable subspaces, which
is independent of illuminations, expression, lighting condition, etc. Correspondingly, low-rank representation (Liu
et al. 2013; Wang and Fu 2015; Shao, Kit, and Fu 2014;
Li and Fu 2014) is a promising way to uncover the posespeciﬁc subspaces within each subject. Low-rank representation manages to ﬁnd the lowest rank representation

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1422

