Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Benders Decomposition for
Large-Scale Prescriptive Evacuations
Julia Romanski1 and Pascal Van Hentenryck2
1

2

Brown University, Providence, RI.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Van Hentenryck (2015) to eliminate delays associated with
forks in evacuation plans. Indeed, it was observed during
Hurricane Ivan that forks used in contraﬂow operations induce driver hesitation and may become a signiﬁcant source
of delays (Wolshon, Catarella-Michel, and Lambert 2006).
Convergent paths are easy to enforce because, once the necessary roads are blocked, minimal vehicle guidance is required. Even, Pillac, and Van Hentenryck (2015) proposed
a two-stage approach to solve the CEPP. Their ﬁrst stage is
a tree design problem which chooses a convergent plan by
aggregating the arc capacities, while the second stage is a
ﬂow scheduling problem on the time-expanded graph. They
showed that the Tree Design Problem (TDP) is a relaxation
of the CEPP. This two-stage approach produces high-quality
results very quickly whenever the disaster affects all the road
segments uniformly. However, on more complex disaster
scenarios, the quality of the two-stage approach degrades
and the duality gap is more substantial.
In this paper, we address this limitation and propose a
Benders decomposition exploiting the insights of the twostage approach. In particular, the master problem in the
Benders decomposition enhances the TDP with Benders cuts
obtained from the second stage. Since the second stage is a
ﬂow problem which typically has many optimal solution for
speciﬁc values of the ﬁrst-stage variables, the Benders decomposition may be extremely slow to converge. To remedy
this limitation, we use Pareto-optimal Benders cuts (Magnati
and Wong 1981). The Benders decomposition was evaluated on the real-case study from (Even, Pillac, and Van Hentenryck 2015). For the original case where the evacuation
must conclude by a certain deadline, the Benders decomposition closes all the instances. For the more complex case
of a 1/100 year ﬂood scenario, the Benders decomposition
is shown to produce signiﬁcant improvements over the twostage approach, with beneﬁts exceeding 25% in the best case
and 10% on average. The Benders decomposition is also
shown to ﬁnd high-quality solutions quickly. Note also that
the Benders decomposition proposed here would also apply
to zone-based evacuations plans that are not convergent.

Abstract
This paper considers prescriptive evacuation planning for a
region threatened by a natural disaster such a ﬂood, a wildﬁre,
or a hurricane. It proposes a Benders decomposition that generalizes the two-stage approach proposed in earlier work for
convergent evacuation plans. Experimental results show that
Benders decomposition provides signiﬁcant improvements in
solution quality in reasonable time: It ﬁnds provably optimal
solutions to scenarios considered in prior work, closing these
instances, and increases the number of evacuees by 10 to 15%
on average on more complex ﬂood scenarios.

Introduction
Emergency evacuation is becoming increasingly critical
with the rising number of natural disasters (e.g., ﬂoods, ﬁres,
hurricanes) and rapid urbanization across the globe. Evacuations, once rare events, are becoming increasingly common:
On average, there is an evacuation of 1,000 or more people
every two or three weeks in the United States alone (MurrayTuite and Wolshon 2013). Moreover, the global trend towards urbanization makes planning for city-level evacuations imperative. For example, in Australia and Chile, 85%
of the population lives in cities (Kates 2010).
This paper considers prescriptive evacuation planning
(e.g., (Bish and Sherali 2013; Bretschneider and Kimms
2012; Cova and Johnson 2003; Dish, Sherali, and Hobeika
2013; Miller-Hooks and Sorrel 2008; Lim et al. 2012;
Xie, Lin, and Waller 2010)) which has been gaining traction
in the last decade. In prescriptive evacuations, the goal is to
produce an operationally viable set of instructions for the authorities, who will close roads and manage trafﬁc, and clear
directions for evacuees about when to leave their homes and
where to go. This task is computationally challenging because many factors must be taken into account, including
the nature of the disaster, the layout of the road network,
the locations of evacuees, and human behavior. Prescriptive
evacuation planning contrasts with self-evacuations where
people can choose how to evacuate and when, often leading
to congestion as the demand exceeds the network capacity.
This paper reconsiders the Convergent Evacuation Planning Problem (CEPP) introduced by Even, Pillac, and

Literature Review
Hamacher and Tjandra (2002) classiﬁes approaches to evacuation planning into microscopic and macroscopic categories. Microscopic evacuation planning seeks to accurately

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3894

