Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Execution Strategies for Probabilistic Temporal Planning
Sam Dietrich∗ and Kyle Lund∗ and James C. Boerkoel Jr.
Human Experience & Agent Teamwork Laboratory (http://cs.hmc.edu/HEAT/)
Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, California 91711
{sdietrich, klund, boerkoel}@g.hmc.edu

A
activity) is represented as a timepoint variable (PST
and
A
PET , where P denotes which activity, the superscript denotes which agent, and the subscript distinguishes between
start and end time). Temporal constraints are represented as
directed edges that are labeled with the range of time that is
allowed to elapse between the source of the edge and the target (e.g., painting takes between 0 and 10 minutes). Dashed
edges highlight constraints between agents, and thick lines
convey that the duration is contingent, or controlled by an
uncertain process. Finally, self-loops are labeled with when
each event occurs relative to an overall start time.
Probabilistic STNs (PSTNs) augment STNs by using
probability density functions to characterize activities with
uncertain durations, e.g., in Figure 1 the uncertain durations
of the paint and varnish activities are represented by normal
distributions. Robustness is a measure of the likelihood that
a PSTN will be executed successfully (i.e. without violating any constraints) (Brooks et al. 2015). Previous methods
for dealing with temporal uncertainty have either accepted
a predetermined, suboptimal level of risk (Fang, Yu, and
Williams 2014) or have not fully taken advantage of knowledge about the nature of the uncertainty (Tsamardinos, Pollack, and Ramakrishnan 2003).

Introduction
Consider a scheduling scenario in a furniture factory where
two robotic agents work together to apply ﬁnish to custom
table pieces. Robot A is set up to paint, while Robot B must
apply varnish. Both actions take an uncertain amount of time
due to physical variation in the size and shape of the table
components. Painting takes around six minutes to complete,
while applying varnish take around two minutes. To maintain efﬁciency at the factory, the tasks must be completed
within two minutes of each other before the furniture components must move on. This scheduling problem is illustrated in Figure 1. Successfully executing this task requires
coordination between the robots—if both robots started at
the same time, Robot B is likely to ﬁnish varnishing its component before Robot A ﬁnishes painting. The challenge that
this abstract addresses is determining the best way to schedule events in the face of scheduling uncertainty.
[0,10]

[0,5]
A
PST

B
VST

[0,10]
A
PET
N(μ = 6, σ = 2)
[-2,2]
[0,6]
B
VET
N(μ = 2,σ = 1)

[0,5]

The Robust Execution Problem

[0,10]

Our goal is to ﬁnd a dispatch strategy for a PSTN that maximizes robustness. We deﬁne the Robust Execution Problem (REP) for a given PSTN, S, as ﬁnding the dispatch
strategy D that solves the following optimization:

Figure 1: Nodes represent events such as the start of Robot
A
) and edges describe how much time
A’s paint activity (PST
can pass between each event.

maximize
subject to

Background
The Simple Temporal Network (STN) provides a framework
for representing systems of temporal constraints and captures how they restrict the times at which activities can occur (Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991). Our furniture scheduling problem is displayed graphically as an STN in Figure
1. Each event (e.g., the start and end of Robot A’s paint

Robustness(S, D)
Constraints of S

The output of the REP is a plan for assigning times to timepoints that maximizes the likelihood of success (i.e., robustness) subject to all constraints. Solving the REP requires
approximate approaches, as exactly computing robustness
is generally intractible for instances of PSTNs (Brooks et
al. 2015). Even if we limit our dispatch strategy to assign
all timepoints before execution, previous work has shown
that an equivalent problem (temporal decoupling) is generally NP-hard for non-linear objective functions (Planken, de
Weerdt, and Witteveen 2010).

∗
Primary authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4206

