Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Analogical Generalization of Linguistic Constructions
Clifton McFate
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
c-mcfate@northwestern.edu

& Goldberg (2005) demonstrate that children readily learn
the semantics of novel argument structure constructions
given few examples, and constructions have been invoked
to explain a wide array of developmentary linguistic
phenomena (Tomasello, 2003). One proposal for how
humans learn these constructions is through analogical
generalization.

Abstract
Human language is extraordinarily creative in form and
function, and adapting to this ever-shifting linguistic
landscape is a daunting task for interactive cognitive
systems. Recently, construction grammar has emerged as a
linguistic theory for representing these complex and often
idiomatic linguistic forms. Furthermore, analogical
generalization has been proposed as a learning mechanism
for extracting linguistic constructions from input. I propose
an account that uses a computational model of analogy to
learn and generalize argument structure constructions.

Analogical Generalization
Our approach to analogical generalization is based on
Gentner’s (1983) structure mapping theory in which
human similarity judgments are viewed as a process of
alignment between hierarchical structured representations.
Falkenhainer et al’s (1989) structure mapping engine
(SME) is a computational implementation of structure
mapping. SME takes a base and target case of structured
representations and maps entities and relations. It prefers
matches with a shared higher-order structure, so cases with
high structural similarity but low feature similarity match.
Relationships that are present in the base but not in the
target can be hypothesized as candidate inferences.
SME provides the matching algorithm for the Sequential
Analogical
Generalization
Engine
(SAGE),
a
computational model of human analogical generalization
that has been used in tasks such as learning concepts from
maps (McLure et al, 2015). Given a new example and a
case-library, SAGE compares it to existing examples using
SME. If over threshold, the new example is added to an
existing case to create a generalization with a probability
distribution governing the features of mapped entities.
Over time, SAGE produces schema-like constructs that
still retains high-probability attributes and relationships.

Introduction
Humans easily interpret novel uses of known linguistic
items. Consider caused motion constructions or denominal
verbs (Goldberg, 2003; Kaschak & Glenberg, 2000).
1 a) Pat sliced the carrots into the salad.
b) Lyn crutched Tom her apple so he wouldn’t starve.
In 1a, we easily interpret the sentence such that slicing
caused the carrots to fall into the salad, though one would
hardly want to create a new sense of the word slice for this
usage. Similarly, in 1b, the usage of crutch conveys that
Lyn used a crutch to pass Tom the apple. Certainly this
isn’t a pre-defined semantics for crutch. Instead,
construction grammar views the fundamental ‘motion’ and
‘transfer’ semantics of these sentences as properties of the
grammatical forms, namely the transitive and dative
constructions. Constructions pair form and meaning.
This approach is also useful in explaining more
idiomatic constructions such as the comparativecoorelative (‘The X-er, The Y-er) as in “The bigger they
are, the harder they fall” (Cullicover & Jackendoff, 1999).
In both examples, the structure of the sentence provides
extra semantic meaning beyond that provided by the head
verb. The semantics is enriched by the verb, not derived
from it. This is one way construction grammar differs from
traditional approaches. Additionally, construction grammar
does not posit underlying grammatical transformations.
Finally, a core principle of construction grammar is that
constructions are learnable from input. Indeed, Casenhiser

Proposed Work and Progress
My thesis has two goals: (1) support the claim that
analogical generalization is a driving mechanism in
construction learning. (2) Demonstrate that analogically
learned constructions can improve language understanding.

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4309

