Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Explaining Inconsistency-Tolerant Query Answering
over Description Logic Knowledge Bases
Meghyn Bienvenu

Camille Bourgaux

François Goasdoué

CNRS, Univ. Montpellier, Inria
Montpellier, France

Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS
Orsay, France

Univ. Rennes 1, CNRS
Lannion, France

in databases (cf. (Bertossi 2011) for a survey). Query answering under AR semantics amounts to considering those
answers (w.r.t. standard semantics) that can be obtained
from every repair, the latter being deﬁned as an inclusionmaximal subset of the ABox that is consistent with the
TBox. The more cautious IAR semantics (Lembo et al. 2010)
queries the intersection of the repairs and provides a lower
bound on AR semantics. The brave semantics (Bienvenu and
Rosati 2013), which considers those answers holding in at
least one repair, provides a natural upper bound.
The complexity of inconsistency-tolerant query answering in the presence of ontologies is now well understood (see
e.g. (Rosati 2011; Bienvenu 2012; Lukasiewicz, Martinez,
and Simari 2013)), so attention has turned to the problem
of implementing these alternative semantics. There are currently two systems for querying inconsistent DL-Lite KBs:
the QuID system of (Rosati et al. 2012) implements the IAR
semantics, using either query rewriting or ABox cleaning,
and our CQAPri system (2014) implements the AR, IAR
and brave semantics, using tractable methods to obtain the
answers under IAR and brave semantics and calls to a SAT
solver to identify the answers holding under AR semantics.
The need to equip reasoning systems with explanation services is widely acknowledged by the DL community (see
Section 6 for discussion and references), and such facilities
are all the more essential when using inconsistency-tolerant
semantics, as recently argued in (Arioua et al. 2014). Indeed, the brave, AR, and IAR semantics allow one to classify
query answers into three categories of increasing reliability,
and a user may naturally wonder why a given tuple was assigned to, or excluded from, one of these categories. In this
paper, we address this issue by proposing and exploring a
framework for explaining query answers under these three
semantics. Our contributions are as follows:
• We deﬁne explanations of positive and negative query answers under brave, AR and IAR semantics. Intuitively, such
explanations pinpoint the portions of the ABox that, in combination with the TBox, sufﬁce to obtain the considered
query answer. We focus on ABox assertions since inconsistencies are assumed to stem from errors in the ABox, and
because this already yields a non-trivial framework to study.
• We investigate the main search and decision problems related to explanations: generating an (arbitrary) explanation,
generating a most preferred explanation according to some

Abstract
Several inconsistency-tolerant semantics have been introduced for querying inconsistent description logic knowledge
bases. This paper addresses the problem of explaining why a
tuple is a (non-)answer to a query under such semantics. We
deﬁne explanations for positive and negative answers under
the brave, AR and IAR semantics. We then study the computational properties of explanations in the lightweight description logic DL-LiteR . For each type of explanation, we
analyze the data complexity of recognizing (preferred) explanations and deciding if a given assertion is relevant or necessary. We establish tight connections between intractable explanation problems and variants of propositional satisﬁability (SAT), enabling us to generate explanations by exploiting
solvers for Boolean satisfaction and optimization problems.
Finally, we empirically study the efﬁciency of our explanation
framework using the well-established LUBM benchmark.

1

Introduction

Description logic (DL) knowledge bases (KBs) consist of a
TBox (ontology) that provides conceptual knowledge about
the application domain and an ABox (dataset) that contains
facts about particular entities (Baader et al. 2003). The problem of querying such KBs using database-style queries (in
particular, conjunctive queries) has been a major focus of
recent DL research. Since scalability is a key concern, much
of the work has focused on lightweight DLs for which query
answering can be performed in polynomial time w.r.t. the
size of the ABox. The DL-Lite family of lightweight DLs
(Calvanese et al. 2007) is especially popular due to the fact
that query answering can be reduced, via query rewriting, to
the problem of standard database query evaluation.
Since the TBox is usually developed by experts and subject to extensive debugging, it is often reasonable to assume
that its contents are correct. By contrast, the ABox is typically substantially larger and subject to frequent modiﬁcations, making errors almost inevitable. As such errors may
render the KB inconsistent, several inconsistency-tolerant
semantics have been introduced in order to provide meaningful answers to queries posed over inconsistent KBs. Arguably the most well-known is the AR semantics (Lembo et
al. 2010), inspired by work on consistent query answering
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

900

