Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Two Efﬁcient Local Search Algorithms
for Maximum Weight Clique Problem
1

2

Yiyuan Wang1,3 , Shaowei Cai2 , and Minghao Yin1,3∗

School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Symbol Computation and Knowledge Engineer of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun, China
yiyuanwangjlu@126.com; caisw@ios.ac.cn; ymh@nenu.edu.cn
reasonable time. Up to now, there are mainly two types of
algorithms for MCP and MWCP, i.e. exact algorithms and
heuristic algorithms.
A number of exact algorithms have been proposed to
solve MCP and MWCP. A classic branch and bound algorithm is MCQ (Tomita and Seki 2003), which uses a heuristic vertex order for independent set partition. The MCQ algorithm is further improved by computing the degree of vertices dynamically, resulting in the MaxCliqueDyn algorithm
(Konc and Janezic 2007). Recently, another paradigm encodes MCP into MaxSAT and then applies MaxSAT reasoning to improve the upper bound (Li and Quan 2010; Li, Fang,
and Xu 2013). For MWCP, an early branch and bound algorithm was proposed in (Babel 1994). An improved branch
and bound algorithm based on error-correcting codes was
offered in (Östergård 2001), and the algorithm in (Yamaguchi and Masuda 2008) computes the upper bound based
on the longest path in a directed acyclic graph constructed
from the original graph. Very recently, Fang et. al. proposes
a MaxSAT-based algorithm for MWCP, and applies Top-k
failed literal detection for improving the upper bound (Fang
et al. 2014).
Although exact algorithms can guarantee the optimality
of their solutions, they may fail to solve hard instances
of large scale. For solving large sized instances, a popular approach is local search, which can ﬁnd an approximate solution within reasonable time. There are numerous
local search algorithms for MCP (Singh and Gupta 2006;
Pullan and Hoos 2006; Pullan 2006; Guturu and Dantu 2008;
Wu and Hao 2013; Benlic and Hao 2013). Among these algorithms, DLS (Pullan and Hoos 2006) is a milestone algorithm which employs vertex penalties which are dynamically adjusted during the search. DLS is further improved
into a two phase algorithm called Phased Local Search
(PLS) (Pullan 2006). In (Wu and Hao 2013), the proposed
tabu search algorithm is presented based on k-ﬁxed penalty
strategy. (Benlic and Hao 2013) introduces a break out local search for solving MCP. Also, MCP is closely related to
minimum vertex cover (MinVC) and maximum independent
set (MaxIS) problems, and algorithms for these two problems can be directly used to solve MCP.
Compared to MCP, there are relatively fewer heuristics
on MWCP. The reason may be that MWCP is more complicated and thus difﬁcult to solve, from the viewpoint of al-

Abstract
The Maximum Weight Clique problem (MWCP) is an important generalization of the Maximum Clique problem with
wide applications. This paper introduces two heuristics and
develops two local search algorithms for MWCP. Firstly,
we propose a heuristic called strong conﬁguration checking
(SCC), which is a new variant of a recent powerful strategy
called conﬁguration checking (CC) for reducing cycling in
local search. Based on the SCC strategy, we develop a local search algorithm named LSCC. Moreover, to improve the
performance on massive graphs, we apply a low-complexity
heuristic called Best from Multiple Selection (BMS) to select the swapping vertex pair quickly and effectively. The
BMS heuristic is used to improve LSCC, resulting in the
LSCC+BMS algorithm. Experiments show that the proposed
algorithms outperform the state-of-the-art local search algorithm MN/TS and its improved version MN/TS+BMS on the
standard benchmarks namely DIMACS and BHOSLIB, as
well as a wide range of real world massive graphs.

Introduction
Given an undirected graph G=(V ,E), a clique C of G is a
subset of V such that each pair of vertices in C is mutually adjacent. The maximum clique problem (MCP) consists in ﬁnding a clique with maximum number of vertices. An important generalization of MCP is the maximum weight clique problem (MWCP), in which each vertex is associated with a non-negative integer, and the goal
is to ﬁnd a clique with the largest total weight. Obviously, MWCP reduces to MCP if each vertex has the same
weight. MWCP has been widely used in many ﬁelds, from
theoretical computer science to valuable applications (Ballard and Brown 1982; Balasundaram and Butenko 2006;
Gomez Ravetti and Moscato 2008).
As is known, the decision version of MCP is one of Karp’s
prominent 21 NP-complete combinatorial problems (Karp
1972). Both MCP and MWCP has been proved to be NPhard and state-of-the-art approximation algorithms can only
achieve an approximate ratio of O(n(log log n)2 /(log n)3 )
(Feige 2004). Thus it is common to see that a huge amount
of effort has been devoted to ﬁnding a “good” clique within
∗

Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

805

