Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Handling Class Imbalance in Link Prediction
Using Learning to Rank Techniques
Bopeng Li, Sougata Chaudhuri, and Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan
1085 South University Ave.
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1107
{bopengli, sougata, tewaria}@umich.edu
classiﬁcation function by directly optimizing a surrogate of
ranking measure AUC during training. This leads to the possibility that other, more effective ranking techniques can be
used during training to systematically handle the class imbalance problem.
Learning to rank is a well studied problem in information
retrieval (Liu 2009). In learning to rank, an instance consists
of a query and an associated list of documents. The supervision is in terms of a relevance vector, which indicates how
relevant each document is to the query. During training, a
set of queries along with their associated document lists and
relevance vectors is used to learn a ranking function. For a
test query, the learnt ranking function ranks the documents
and a ranking measure evaluates the ranked list against the
true relevance vector. There are many well established learning to rank techniques in the literature. To the best of our
knowledge, the only other work that uses a learning to rank
technique during training in LP is (Yazdani, Collobert, and
Popescu-Belis 2013). However, the paper does not explicitly
formulate LP as a learning to rank problem and uses a speciﬁc pairwise ranking surrogate that suits only their method.
Our main contribution is to give a formal procedure for recasting LP as a learning to rank problem. We deﬁne queries,
documents and relevance vectors on a network. We then develop an LP method based on the cross-entropy surrogate,
originally used in the popular ListNet ranking algorithm
(Cao et al. 2007). We conduct extensive experiments on coauthorship, citation and metabolic networks and show the
beneﬁt of our method over other baselines.

Abstract
We consider the link prediction (LP) problem in a partially observed network, where the objective is to make
predictions in the unobserved portion of the network.
Many existing methods reduce LP to binary classiﬁcation. However, the dominance of absent links in real
world networks makes misclassiﬁcation error a poor
performance metric. Instead, researchers have argued
for using ranking performance measures, like AUC, AP
and NDCG, for evaluation. We recast the LP problem
as a learning to rank problem and use effective learning
to rank techniques directly during training which allows
us to deal with the class imbalance problem systematically. As a demonstration of our general approach, we
develop an LP method by optimizing the cross-entropy
surrogate, originally used in the popular ListNet ranking algorithm. We conduct extensive experiments on
publicly available co-authorship, citation and metabolic
networks to demonstrate the merits of our method.

Introduction
Since the publication of Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg’s seminal paper (2003), the link prediction (LP) problem has received much attention. Many existing techniques treat LP
as a binary classiﬁcation problem and apply classiﬁcation
methods designed for minimizing misclassiﬁcation error
(see references within (Menon and Elkan 2011)). The number of present links is orders of magnitude smaller than the
number of absent links in most real world networks. For LP
treated as classiﬁcation problem, this creates highly imbalanced classes. General classiﬁcation techniques will learn a
poor classiﬁer because a low error rate can be achieved by
trivially predicting everything to be negative.
In order to overcome the imbalance problem, researchers
have argued for using ranking measures like AUC (Menon
and Elkan 2011), precision-recall curves (Doppa et al.
2010), and NDCG (Yang et al. 2011), during evaluation.
Still, most existing methods minimize misclassiﬁcation error during training, but coupled with certain class balancing techniques, such as undersampling (Chawla, Japkowicz,
and Kotcz 2004). However, there are problems with undersampling and (Menon and Elkan 2011) proposed to learn a

Link Prediction as Learning to Rank Problem
We ﬁrst give a formal deﬁnition of the learning to rank
problem. In learning to rank, each query-document pair is
jointly represented by a feature vector. Thus, a list of m
documents pertaining to a query q is represented as a matrix X = (x1 , . . . , xm )T ∈ Rm×d , where xi ∈ Rd represents the joint feature vector of query q and the ith document.
The relevance vector for the document list is represented as
R = (r1 , . . . , rm )T , where ri ∈ {0, 1} denotes relevance of
ith document to query q (where 1 means relevant, 0 means irrelevant). For learning, a training set consisting of n queries,
along with their list of documents and relevance vectors, is
provided, denoted as {(X 1 , R1 ), . . . , (X n , Rn )}.
A common technique used to learn a ranking function is

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4226

