Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Look-Ahead with Mini-Bucket Heuristics for MPE
Rina Dechter, Kalev Kask, William Lam

Javier Larrosa

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, California, USA

UPC Barcelona Tech
Barcelona, Spain

problems having a high induced width). A natural approach
is to improve it via dynamic look-ahead during search itself.
In the context of depth-ﬁrst BnB a better heuristic may
i) allow ﬁnding an optimal solution early with less search
(and thus the best upper bound for pruning), and ii) once the
optimal bound is reached, it will help proving optimality by
better pruning of the search space.
What we show in this paper is that in the context of graphical models and when using the mini-bucket heuristic, we
can bound the computation of d-level look-ahead sufﬁciently,
making it cost effective. This is accomplished by i) exploiting
a relationship between the residual of the heuristic and a new
concept of bucket error that can be pre-compiled, to facilitate
a selective look-ahead process combined with effective pruning of the d-level lookahead tree whenever it is applied, and
ii) using an inference-based message-passing algorithm to
compute the look-ahead, thus exploiting the graphical model
structure at each node.
In Section 2, we provide background. Section 3 introduces
the notions of residual and local bucket-error of the minibucket heuristic that captures the mini-bucket approximation
error. Section 4 presents the experiments and discussion. Section 5 concludes the paper.

Abstract
The paper investigates the potential of look-ahead in the context of AND/OR search in graphical models using the MiniBucket heuristic for combinatorial optimization tasks (e.g.,
MAP/MPE or weighted CSPs). We present and analyze the
complexity of computing the residual (a.k.a. Bellman update)
of the Mini-Bucket heuristic and show how this can be used
to identify which parts of the search space are more likely
to beneﬁt from look-ahead and how to bound its overhead.
We also rephrase the look-ahead computation as a graphical
model, to facilitate structure exploiting inference schemes. We
demonstrate empirically that augmenting Mini-Bucket heuristics by look-ahead is a cost-effective way of increasing the
power of Branch-And-Bound search.

Introduction
Look-ahead is known to be useful and even essential in
the context of online search algorithms (e.g., game playing schemes such as alpha-beta, planning under uncertainty
(Geffner and Bonet 2013; Vidal 2004) where the search space
is enormous and traversing it to completion is out of the question. Look-ahead can improve the heuristic function h of
a node by expanding the search tree below it to a certain
depth d, evaluate the static h at tip nodes and roll back this
information to n (known as a Bellman update).
Here we investigate the potential of look-ahead (Bu et al.
2014) in the different context of complete search. We consider the min-sum problem over a Graphical model (which
includes, among others, the most probable explanation task
of Markov Networks (Pearl 1988)). This problem is usually
solved by depth-ﬁrst search Branch-and-Bound (DFBnB).
The search is guided by a heuristic function that provides
an optimistic bound on the cost of the best extension of any
partial assignment. It is often observed that these types of
algorithms spend a signiﬁcant time proving the optimality of
their output (where the only use of h is pruning).
Our framework is AND/OR Branch-And-Bound (AOBB)
guided by the static Mini-Bucket Elimination heuristic
(MBE), which, assisted by variational cost-shifting methods, is one of the best current approaches for the min-sum
problem (Marinescu and Dechter 2009; L. Otten and Dechter
2012). However, this heuristic can be weak, (e.g., mainly for

Background
Graphical Models A graphical model is a tuple M =
(X, D, F), where X = {Xi : i ∈ V } is a set of variables
indexed by a set V and D = {Di : i ∈ V } is the set of
ﬁnite domains of values for each Xi , F is a set of discrete
functions. In
this paper we focus on the min-sum problem,
C ∗ = minx f ∈F f (x) wich is applicable in a wide range
of reasoning problems (e.g, MPE/MAP). The scope of f
(i.e. the subset of X relevant to f ) is noted scope(f ). We
will use lower case y to denote the assignment of a set of
variables Y ⊆ X. Thus, f (x, Y ) is a function with scope
X ∪ Y partially assigned by x. In an abuse of notation we
will sometimes write f (y) with scope(f ) ⊂ Y assuming that
the irrelevant parts of the assignment will be ignored.
Primal graph, pseudo-tree. The primal graph G of a
graphical model M has each variable Xi in a node and an
edge (Xi , Xj ) is in G iff the pair of variables appears in
the scope of any f ∈ F. A pseudo-tree T = (V, E  ) of the

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

694

