Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Recommending Groups to Users Using User-Group
Engagement and Time-Dependent Matrix Factorization
Xin Wang†‡ , Roger Donaldson , Christopher Nell§ , Peter Gorniak§ , Martin Ester‡ and Jiajun Bu†
†

Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
‡
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, B.C., Canada

Department of Mathematics, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada
§
DeviantArt, Inc. Vancouver, B.C., Canada
‡
†
{xwa49,ester}@cs.sfu.ca, {xinwang,bjj}@zju.edu.cn, rdonald@math.ubc.ca,§ {c.nell,pgorniak}@deviantart.com
To quantify user-group afﬁnity, we deﬁne a user-group
engagement matrix that is constructed from more data than
simple Boolean user-group membership information. Rather
than relying on explicit surveys of user ratings of groups
which are not always available, a user’s afﬁnity for a group
is measured implicitly through observing how often and
in what manner the user engages with that group. Following (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008), our conﬁdence in a
user’s afﬁnity for a group increases with the number of interactions between the user and the group.
Unlike many types of content where user-item engagement occurs within a relatively brief consumption period,
user-group interaction occurs over extended time scales. For
example, a user may engage with a particular group 10 times
in one month, 20 times the next, but only 2 times in the third
month, and not at all in the fourth. This kind of extended interaction offers an opportunity to explicitly model changes
in both user preferences and group dynamics when producing recommendations. Our intuition is that doing so will lead
to improved recommendations.
We capture the time-varying nature of the group recommendation problem in two ways. First, we propose a timevarying matrix factorization in order to capture preference
changes. Second, we introduce two time-varying user biases and one time-varying group bias in order to capture
changes in activity levels. We incorporate time series analysis to model the temporal evolution of these factors and
biases. Thus, our work makes three main contributions:

Abstract
Social networks often provide group features to help users
with similar interests associate and consume content together.
Recommending groups to users poses challenges due to their
complex relationship: user-group afﬁnity is typically measured implicitly and varies with time; similarly, group characteristics change as users join and leave. To tackle these
challenges, we adapt existing matrix factorization techniques
to learn user-group afﬁnity based on two different implicit
engagement metrics: (i) which group-provided content users
consume; and (ii) which content users provide to groups. To
capture the temporally extended nature of group engagement
we implement a time-varying factorization. We test the assertion that latent preferences for groups and users are sparse in
investigating elastic-net regularization. Our experiments indicate that the time-varying implicit engagement-based model
provides the best top-K group recommendations, illustrating
the beneﬁt of the added model complexity.

Introduction
Online web services recommend content items such as music, movies, or books etc. to users via algorithmic recommendations. Many of these recommenders are based on
the principle of collaborative ﬁltering, suggesting items that
similar users have consumed. On the other hand, more and
more social media and consumer websites are providing
mechanisms by which users can self-organize into groups
with other users having similar opinions or interests.
The problem of recommending groups to users has been
investigated in the literature. In particular, methods for factorizing the user-group membership matrix have been proposed, using group features, user-item ratings and user-user
networks to improve the performance. However, the existing
methods fail to capture the dynamics of user group relationships: while the properties of content items typically do not
change in the course of time, groups tend to evolve as users
join or leave. Moreover, the preferences of users themselves
tend to change over time. Thus, the existing methods are not
completely adequate for recommending groups to users.
In this paper we focus on the problem of recommending
groups to users using implicit measures of user-group afﬁnity, and model the time-varying nature of such measures.

• When recommending groups to users, we consider not
only group membership, but also different kinds of engagement between users and groups.
• We model evolution of the preferences and activity levels
of both users and groups in order to better predict future
preferences.
• We evaluate our methods using three real-world datasets
from DeviantArt (DeviantArt ), a large social network
for artists and art enthusiasts. Our experiments show
that using implicit engagement measures instead of
Boolean membership improves recommendation performance. Taking the temporal nature of the engagement into
account produces further improvements, and we also see a
moderate improvement from the use of non-negative factorization with elastic-net regularization.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1331

