Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Distant IE by Bootstrapping Using Lists and Document Structure
Lidong Bing§ Mingyang Ling§ Richard C. Wang William W. Cohen§
§



Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
US Development Center, Baidu USA, Sunnyvale, CA 94089
§
{lbing@cs, mingyanl@andrew, wcohen@cs}.cmu.edu

richardwang@baidu.com

1. “Avoid drinking alcohol. It may increase your risk of
stomach bleeding.”

Abstract
Distant labeling for information extraction (IE) suffers from
noisy training data. We describe a way of reducing the noise
associated with distant IE by identifying coupling constraints
between potential instance labels. As one example of coupling, items in a list are likely to have the same label. A
second example of coupling comes from analysis of document structure: in some corpora, sections can be identiﬁed
such that items in the same section are likely to have the
same label. Such sections do not exist in all corpora, but
we show that augmenting a large corpus with coupling constraints from even a small, well-structured corpus can improve performance substantially, doubling F1 on one task.

2. “Get emergency medical help if you have chest pain,
weakness, shortness of breath, slurred speech, or problems with vision or balance.”
3. “Check the label to see if a medicine contains an NSAID
(non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug) such as aspirin,
ibuprofen, ketoprofen, or naproxen.”
Table 1: Passages from a page describing the drug meloxicam.

Introduction
In distantly-supervised information extraction (IE), a knowledge base (KB) of relation or concept instances is used
to train an IE system. For instance, a set of facts like
adverseEffectOf(meloxicam, stomachBleeding), interactsWith(meloxicam, ibuprofen), might be matched against a
corpus, and the matching sentences then used to generate
training data consisting of labeled entity mentions. For instance, matching the KB above might lead to labeling passage 1 from Table 1 as support for the fact adverseEffectOf(meloxicam, stomachBleeding).
A weakness of distant supervision is that it produces
noisy training data, when matching errors occur. E.g., consider using distant learning to classify noun phrases (NPs)
into types, like drug or symptom; matching a polysemous
term like weakness could lead to incorrectly-labeled mention examples. Hence distant supervision is often coupled
with learning methods that allow for this sort of noise by
introducing latent variables for each entity mention (e.g.,
(Hoffmann et al. 2011; Riedel, Yao, and McCallum 2010;
Surdeanu et al. 2012)); by carefully selecting the entity mentions from contexts likely to include speciﬁc KB facts (Wu
and Weld 2010); or by careful ﬁltering of the KB strings
used as seeds (Movshovitz-Attias and Cohen 2012).
We describe a way of reducing the noise associated with
distant IE by identifying coupling constraints between potential instance labels. As one example of coupling, NPs
in a conjunctive list are likely to have the same category,

Figure 1: A structured document in WebMD describing the
drug meloxicam. All documents in this corpora have the
same 7 sections.
a fact used in prior work (Bing et al. 2015) to propagate NP categories from unambiguous NPs (such as chest
pain in passage 2) to ambiguous ones (e.g., the mention
weakness in the same passage). Bing et al. used propagation methods (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003;
Lin and Cohen 2010) to exploit this intuition, by propagating
the low-conﬁdence labels associated with distance supervision matches through an appropriate graph.
In this paper we adapt this coupling to extracting relations, rather than NP categories. We also explore additional types of coupling, derived from analysis of document
structure. In particular, in some corpora, sections can be
identiﬁed that correspond fairly accurately to relation arguments. For example, Figure 1 shows part of a small but wellstructured corpus (discussed below) which contains sections
labeled “Side Effects”. This document structure cannot be
used to directly derive training data (there are many NPs

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2899

