Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Complementing Semantic Roles with Temporally-Anchored
Spatial Knowledge: Crowdsourced Annotations and Experiments
Alakananda Vempala and Eduardo Blanco
Human Intelligence and Language Technologies Lab
University of North Texas
Denton, TX 76203
AlakanandaVempala@my.unt.edu, eduardo.blanco@unt.edu
S

Abstract
This paper presents a framework to infer spatial knowledge from semantic role representations. We infer
whether entities are or are not located somewhere, and
temporally anchor this spatial information. A large
crowdsourcing effort on top of OntoNotes shows that
these temporally-anchored spatial inferences are ubiquitous and intuitive to humans. Experimental results
show that inferences can be performed automatically
and semantic features yield performance improvements.

1

NP

VP
PURPOSE

AGENT

NNP

VBD

PP

PP

to
San Francisco

for a doctor’s
appointment

LOCATION

John

drove

Introduction

Extracting meaning from text has received considerable attention in the last decade. In particular, semantic role labeling has become popular, including both corpora development and automatic role labelers. Semantic roles capture
semantic links between predicates and their arguments; they
capture who did what to whom, how, when and where.
There are several corpora with semantic role annotations. FrameNet (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998) annotates frame elements (semantic roles) deﬁned in semantic frames, which are triggered by lexical units. PropBank (Palmer, Gildea, and Kingsbury 2005) and NomBank
(Meyers et al. 2004) annotate semantic roles for verbal and
nominal predicates respectively. More recently, OntoNotes
(Hovy et al. 2006) includes PropBank-style semantic roles.
Semantic role labelers trained with PropBank have matured
in the last decade (Carreras and Màrquez 2005; Zhou and
Xu 2015), with state-of-the-art F-measures around 0.81.
While semantic roles encode useful information, there is
much more meaning in all but the simplest statements. Consider the sentence John drove to San Francisco for a doctor’s
appointment and the semantic roles annotated in OntoNotes
(Figure 1, solid arrows). On top of these valuable roles, one
can infer that John had LOCATION San Francisco for a relatively short period of time after drove (more precisely, during the doctor’s appointment), but probably not long after,
long before or during drove. This additional knowledge is
intuitive to humans, even though it is disregarded by existing tools and highly ambiguous: if John drove home to San
Francisco after a vacation in Colorado, it is reasonable to believe that he had LOCATION San Francisco well after drove,

Figure 1: Semantic roles in OntoNotes (solid arrows) and
additional spatial knowledge (dashed arrow).
i.e., he did not leave San Francisco shortly after drove took
place because he lives in San Francisco.
This paper presents a framework to infer temporallyanchored spatial knowledge from semantic roles. The main
contributions are: (1) analysis of missing spatial knowledge in OntoNotes; (2) crowdsourced annotations on top of
OntoNotes;1 (3) experimental results detailing results with
gold-standard and predicted linguistic annotations, and using lexical, syntactic and semantic features.

2

Semantic Roles and Additional Spatial
Knowledge

We represent a semantic relation R between x and y as R(x,
y). R(x, y) can be read “x has R y”, e.g., AGENT(bought,
Bill ) can be read “bought has AGENT Bill.” Semantic roles
are relations R(x, y) such that (1) x is a predicate and
(2) y is an argument of x. In this paper, we work on top
of OntoNotes semantic roles, which only account for verbal
predicates, i.e., for all semantic roles R(x, y), x is a verb.
We use the term additional spatial knowledge to refer to
relations LOCATION(x, y) such that (1) x is not a predicate
or (2) x is a predicate and y is not an argument of x. In other
words, additional spatial knowledge is spatial meaning not
captured with semantic roles. As we shall see, the framework presented here not only infers plain LOCATION(x, y),
but also temporally anchors this additional knowledge.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2652

Available at http://hilt.cse.unt.edu/

