Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Classiﬁcation under Covariate Shift
with Application to Active Learning
Anqi Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60607
aliu33@uic.edu

Introduction

covariate shift and generate predictions that are robust and
reliable? We propose to develop a general framework for
classiﬁcation under covariate shift that is robust, ﬂexible and
accurate. By “robust,” we mean the classiﬁer should provide
reasonable performance even when confronted with large
distribution discrepancy. By “ﬂexible,” we mean the classiﬁer should handle different requirements of loss minimization. And by “accurate,” it is essential that the prediction
performance satisﬁes application demands as much as possible. The problems we are faced with include, but are not
limited to:
• On the methodology: how to robustly minimize different
loss functions subject to covariate shift, the ways to improve the performance or efﬁciency;
• On the application: how to use the framework for applications in different ﬁelds in AI, like active learning;
• On the analysis: how to prove the performance guarantees of the framework, like the ability to generalize under
covariate shift.

In supervised machine learning, we usually assume the training data is independently and identically distributed (I.I.D.)
with the testing data. We then use the trained model to generate predictions when receiving new data with the implicit
assumption that they are I.I.D. with the training set, even
though it could be untrue in many applications. Unfortunately, model performance can decrease signiﬁcantly when
the distribution generating the new data varies from the distribution that generated the training data. This situation can
arise when labeled training data is missing, hard to get access to or just very expensive to uniformly collect. For instance, in a medical study it may be impossible to collect
certain disease data in a certain area when the task is predicting that disease across many areas. Similarly, in pool-based
active learning, the labeled data is naturally distributed differently from the pool since they are selectively sampled in
each iteration from the pool. Therefore, methods that can
deal with the discrepancy in training and testing distributions are highly desired.
Covariate shift (Shimodaira 2000) is a setting that assumes the source data distribution for training Psrc (x, y)
is different with the target data distribution for testing
Ptrg (x, y), but the difference only comes from Psrc (x) =
Ptrg (x), which means P (y|x) is the same between training and testing. The assumption of an equal “labeling function” between source and target comes from a very natural
idea that we are given a biased set of data to learn from but
when given all the possible data, the “global” function that
labels the data remains the same. This is a looser assumption than I.I.D. and there are a lot of situations like that. In
medical study, whether a patient will suffer from certain disease given features, like a brain image, is independent with
whether the training data is sampled from certain distribution. In pool-based active learning, labeled data is originally
selected from the pool, where all the data share the same
P (y|x), which is also the true labeling function we are actively learning.
All (probabilistic) classiﬁers will suffer from covariate
shift (Fan et al. 2005). This motivates our research. Generally, we try to answer this question: how can we deal with

Related Work
A previously preferred approach to correct covariate shift
is to use importance weighting to estimate the prediction loss under the target distribution by reweighting the
source samples according to the target-source density ratio, Ptrg (x)/Psrc (x) (Shimodaira 2000; Zadrozny 2004).
Machine learning research has primarily investigated covariate shift from this perspective, with various techniques
for estimating the density ratio (Sugiyama et al. 2008;
Huang et al. 2006). Despite asymptotic guarantees of minimizing target distribution loss, importance weighting is often extremely inaccurate for ﬁnite sample datasets, when
distributions are very different. The reweighted loss will often be dominated by a small number of data points with large
importance weights. Additionally, the speciﬁc data points
with large importance weights vary greatly between random
source samples, often leading to high variance model estimates. Theoretically, generalization bounds using importance weighting under covariate shift have only been established when the second moment of sampled importance
weights is bounded (Cortes, Mansour, and Mohri 2010).
Existing approaches to active learning generally assumes
the unknown datapoint labels follow the inductive biases of

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4307

