Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

BBookX: Building Online Open Books for Personalized Learning

†

Chen Liang† , Shuting Wang‡ , Zhaohui Wu‡ , Kyle Williams† , Bart Pursel∗ ,
Benjamin Brautigam∗ , Sherwyn Saul∗ , Hannah Williams∗ , Kyle Bowen∗ , C. Lee Giles†‡

Information Sciences and Technology, ‡ Computer Science and Engineering, ∗ Teaching and Learning with Technology
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802
{cul226,sxw327,zzw109,kwilliams,bkp10,bjb40,sps20,hrw115,kbowen}@psu.edu, giles@ist.psu.edu

Abstract

  
 
 

We demonstrate BBookX1 , a novel system that automatically builds in collaboration with a user online open books
by searching open educational resources (OER). This system
explores the use of retrieval technologies to dynamically generate zero-cost materials such as textbooks for personalized
learning.

! 


  




 





Figure 1: System overview.

Introduction
Textbooks play a crucial role in both the teaching and learning process. However, in practice, textbooks have several
issues. Authoring a new textbook usually requires a great
amount of time and effort, even for experts. A tool that facilitates the book creation process could be very helpful. It is
not easy to keep an existing textbook up-to-date, especially
for fast changing domains such as computer science. For example, most existing machine learning books as of this date
lack recent developments in deep learning. However, most
of such information can be found in OER, such as publicly
available scientiﬁc papers, lecture notes, Wikipedia, etc. For
certain classes, teachers may want to modify the book content, change the order of sections, or combine content from
different books. This can give ﬂexibility for designing personalized textbooks.
To deal with these issues we propose BBookX, a novel
collaborative computer facilitated textbook creation system.
Designed to utilize information retrieval techniques to intelligently harvest existing OER, BBookX is currently built
on top of Wikipedia. However, it can also incorporate other
available OER.
BBookX has an interactive Web interface that supports
real-time book creation. Given a set of user-generated criteria, it returns a list of relevant material that can be put into
the book. Users can accept, reject, or reorder the returned
results. Such feedback allows the system to reformulate the
query in order to return better results. In addition, BBookX
can create an open version of existing textbooks by automatically linking their existing book chapters to Wiki articles.

BBookX System Overview
Currently, BBookX is a Web-based application, as shown in
Figure 1, and interacts with users through a Web interface.
BBookX includes the following components:

OER Retrieval
Since BBookX is designed to make use of existing OER, it
is important to collect high-quality and up-to-date open resources. The application of Wikipedia, the largest open encyclopedia, in education has long been studied (Seely Brown
2008). It also has wide coverage and high editing frequency.
BBookX is currently using a Wiki dump of Aug 5, 2015
which consists of more than 4.9 million English Wiki articles. Besides Wikipedia, we are also collecting through web
crawling existing online open access textbooks. Available
data sources include Wikibooks2 , Saylor Academy3 , OpenStax College4 , etc. However, since the number of free online textbooks collected is very small compared to the size
of Wikipedia, we have not yet included these resources.
We have also explored BBookX’s ability to generate with
Wikipedia open textbooks that are based on high quality existing textbooks (Wang et al. 2015). We see this as a way to
repurpose existing high-quality and well-structured knowledge to make it more readily accessible.

Indexing
In order to provide efﬁcient retrieval of collected OER,
we create a local searchable version. OER are ﬁrst prepro2

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://book.tlt.psu.edu/

https://en.wikibooks.org
http://www.saylor.org/books/
4
https://openstaxcollege.org/
3

4369

