Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fusing Social Networks with Deep Learning for Volunteerism Tendency Prediction
Yongpo Jia1,2 , Xuemeng Song2 , Jingbo Zhou3 , Li Liu2 , Liqiang Nie2 , David S. Rosenblum2
1

NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Big Data Lab, Baidu Research, China
{jiayongpo, dcsliuli}@nus.edu.sg, {sxmustc, nieliqiang}@gmail.com, jzhou@baidu.com, david@comp.nus.edu.sg

interests. In other words, information from each source will
not contribute equally to one given proﬁling task. Moreover,
since such multiple sources are naturally presumed to characterize the same given user, the consistency of data from
difference sources must be taken into consideration during
information fusion. Therefore, it is desirable to devise an
effective approach for multiple social network learning that
not only can better capture this complexity, but also can measure the level of conﬁdence in each source as well as the
consistency among different sources.
Great effort has been spent on this challenging multisource learning task. Concatenating all sources into a uniﬁed representation is a widely-used method. However, this
treats all sources equally without measuring the level of conﬁdence in each source and the consistency among different sources. State-of-the-art approaches (Song et al. 2015;
Xiang et al. 2013; Zhang and Huan 2012) employ source
conﬁdence or consistency regularization to address this
problem. However, such approaches adopt linear models to
fuse information from multiple sources for learning, which
cannot properly capture the complex nature of social networks. Another method is to use deep learning models to
learn a joint representation (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov
2012). These deep learning models may better capture the
complexity, but fail to explicitly model the source conﬁdence and consistency to better resolve the problem.
Based on above insights, we present a framework for
multiple social network learning, whose core is a novel
model that Fuses sociAl netwoRks uSing dEep lEarnING
(FARSEEING) with source conﬁdence and consistency regularization. Figure 1 presents the framework, which consists
of three parts. First, given a set of users, the same users
are aligned by linking their multiple social accounts and
then their publicly available historical data are crawled from
all sources. Second, multi-faceted features, such as demographic, linguistic and behavioral features, are extracted to
characterize the given users. Before feeding the extracted
features into FARSEEING, missing data, which is caused
by users’ unbalanced activities in different social networks,
are inferred from the learned shared feature spaces by nonnegative matrix factorization.
Finally, we use FARSEEING for multiple social network
learning. The model consists of two main stages. First, in the
feature transformation stage, low-level features are mapped

Abstract
Social networks contain a wealth of useful information. In
this paper, we study a challenging task for integrating users’
information from multiple heterogeneous social networks to
gain a comprehensive understanding of users’ interests and
behaviors. Although much effort has been dedicated to study
this problem, most existing approaches adopt linear or shallow models to fuse information from multiple sources. Such
approaches cannot properly capture the complex nature of
and relationships among different social networks. Adopting
deep learning approaches to learning a joint representation
can better capture the complexity, but this neglects measuring the level of conﬁdence in each source and the consistency among different sources. In this paper, we present a
framework for multiple social network learning, whose core
is a novel model that fuses social networks using deep learning with source conﬁdence and consistency regularization. To
evaluate the model, we apply it to predict individuals’ tendency to volunteerism. With extensive experimental evaluations, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our model, which
outperforms several state-of-the-art approaches in terms of
precision, recall and F1 -score.

1

Introduction

Social networks have revolutionized the way we network,
and they provide a wealth of useful information to gain a
comprehensive understanding of users’ interests and behaviors. Constrained by different designs of social networks,
each single source only provides partial information of a
user from a certain perspective. Therefore, linking and aggregating information from multiple social networks can enrich a given user’s proﬁle and enable us to comprehensively
understand the given users (Abel et al. 2013; Zhu et al. 2013;
Liu et al. 2014).
However, it is non-trivial to fuse multiple heterogeneous
social networks for learning. First of all, it is challenging to
deal with the complex nature of heterogeneous social networks (Mislove et al. 2007). Models with non-linear properties and rich modeling capabilities should be considered
for tackling this problem. Meanwhile, users use different
social networks differently, for example, using Facebook to
keep connected with friends, LinkedIn for professional networking, and Twitter to follow information about speciﬁc
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

165

