Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Collective Supervision of Topic Models for Predicting Surveys with Social Media
Adrian Benton

Michael J. Paul

Center for Language and Speech Processing
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218
adrian@cs.jhu.edu

College of Media, Communication, and Information
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
tmpaul@colorado.edu

Braden Hancock

Mark Dredze

Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
braden.hancock@stanford.edu

Human Language Technology Center of Excellence
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21211
mdredze@cs.jhu.edu

(Culotta 2014). Myslı́n et al. (2013) have also shown that
Twitter can be used to monitor opinions on tobacco use.
Paul and Dredze (2011) showed initial work on correlating several BRFSS questions with social media topics
learned by a topic model. However, since topic models are
an unsupervised method for learning text representations,
they may not identify topics that naturally correspond to
those useful in a survey. One solution is to provide supervision to the models based on previously conducted, or topically related, surveys. This can include using surveys of existing US states to train topic models for predicting missing
US states, or using previous surveys on similar issues when
conducting a new survey.
Numerous topic models incorporate supervision, such as
predicting labels for each document, e.g., supervised LDA
(Mcauliffe and Blei 2008); modeling tags associated with
each document, e.g., labeled LDA (Ramage et al. 2009) or
tagLDA (Zhu, Blei, and Lafferty 2006); placing priors over
topic-word distributions (Jagarlamudi, III, and Udupa 2012;
Paul and Dredze 2013); or interactive feedback from the user
(Hu et al. 2014). However, none of these models support the
aggregate-level labels provided by surveys.
We present a collective method of supervision for topic
models, where aggregate-level labels are provided for
groups of messages instead of individual messages. We experiment with a variety of modiﬁcations to topic models to
support this task. We evaluate our methods on using Twitter to predict three survey questions taken from the annual
BRFSS survey. We show that incorporating aggregate data
leads to more predictive topics.

Abstract
This paper considers survey prediction from social media. We use topic models to correlate social media messages with survey outcomes and to provide an interpretable representation of the data. Rather than rely on
fully unsupervised topic models, we use existing aggregated survey data to inform the inferred topics, a class
of topic model supervision referred to as collective supervision. We introduce and explore a variety of topic
model variants and provide an empirical analysis, with
conclusions of the most effective models for this task.

Introduction
Social media has proved invaluable for research in social
and health sciences, including sociolinguistics (Eisenstein,
Smith, and Xing 2011), political science (O’Connor et al.
2010), and public health (Paul and Dredze 2011). A common theme is the use of topic models (Blei, Ng, and Jordan
2003), which, by identifying major themes in a corpus, summarize the content of large text collections. Topic models
have been applied to characterize tweets (Ramage, Dumais,
and Liebling 2010), blog posts and comments (Yano, Cohen,
and Smith 2009; Paul and Girju 2009), and other short texts
(Phan, Nguyen, and Horiguchi 2008).
One goal of social media analytics is to complement or
replace traditional survey mechanisms (Thacker and Berkelman 1988; Krosnick, Judd, and Wittenbrink 2005). Traditional phone surveys are both slow and expensive to run. For
example, the CDC’s annual Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) is a health-related telephone survey
that collects health data by calling more than 400,000 Americans. The survey costs millions of dollars to run each year,
so adding new questions or obtaining ﬁner-grained temporal information can be prohibitive. Expanding this survey
through social media monitoring promises methods that are
both fast and cheap. For example, research has shown that
social media features can complement existing models in
predicting health statistics at the collective, county level

Collective Supervision
We deﬁne collective supervision1 as supervision in which
labels are provided for groups or collections of documents,
rather than supervision at the level of individual documents. Example collections include particular geographic
areas (e.g., U.S. states) or time periods (e.g., weeks). Examples of collective supervision include the proportion of

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We borrow the name for this type of supervision from collective graphical models (Sheldon and Dietterich 2011).

2892

