Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Group and Graph Joint Sparsity for
Linked Data Classiﬁcation
Longwen Gao and Shuigeng Zhou∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
{lwgao, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn

absolute penalties (CAPs) (Zhao, Rocha, and Yu, 2006) put a
hierarchical group structure among the samples. When samples are not grouped but linked with each other, graph structure sparsity (Huang, Zhang, and Metaxas, 2009) tends to
select a subset of connected training samples. Recently, Gao
and Zhou (2015) proposed uncertain group sparse representation to handle data with uncertain group membership.
Nowadays, linked data exist ubiquitously and are amassed
rapidly. A common feature of linked data is that a group
structure exists over the whole dataset and links exist between speciﬁc samples. For instance, Web pages are not only
naturally grouped via their semantic topics but also interconnected by their hyperlinks; Tweets have topics and are also
connected in terms of the relationships between their authors
(or followers and readers). The links between samples provide complementary clues to the class labels of those samples. Exploiting the link information (i.e., the graph structure of samples) and the label information (i.e., the group
structure of samples) simultaneously can deﬁnitely facilitate
the classiﬁcation tasks on linked data. As both label information and link information may contain noise, exploring them
together can also enhance learning robustness.
Recently, Dai et al. (2015) proposed the so-called groupgraph (g 2 in short) sparsity to exploit the advantages of both
group and graph structures simultaneously. g 2 sparsity is actually to impose graph sparsity on groups, in stead of on
samples. They assumed that a graph structure among the
groups is given explicitly, and samples in one group are
linked with all samples in another group if these two corresponding groups are connected in the graph of groups. That
is, they assumed dense connections between samples from
different groups connected in the graph. However, such assumption is not always applicable. And with the given graph
of groups, detailed links between samples are not considered
any more. For linked data, explicit graph structure exists
among samples, instead of among groups, and there may not
be dense connections between samples of different groups
even though the involved groups are related. These will unavoidably cause performance degradation of g 2 sparsity in
classifying linked data.
In this paper, motivated by the signiﬁcance of classifying the increasing linked data and the limitations of existing structured sparsity models in linked data classiﬁcation,
we propose a new joint regularizer to nontrivially combine

Abstract
Various sparse regularizers have been applied to machine
learning problems, among which structured sparsity has been
proposed for a better adaption to structured data. In this paper, motivated by effectively classifying linked data (e.g. Web
pages, tweets, articles with references, and biological network data) where a group structure exists over the whole
dataset and links exist between speciﬁc samples, we propose
a joint sparse representation model that combines group sparsity and graph sparsity, to select a small number of connected
components from the graph of linked samples, meanwhile
promoting the sparsity of edges that link samples from different groups in each connected component. Consequently,
linked samples are selected from a few sparsely-connected
groups. Both theoretical analysis and experimental results on
four benchmark datasets show that the joint sparsity model
outperforms traditional group sparsity model and graph sparsity model, as well as the latest group-graph sparsity model.

Introduction
Sparse representation (SR) has been proposed to do classiﬁcation due to its simple formulation and natural relationship
with the parsimony principle (Wright et al., 2009). It represents each test sample as a sparse linear combination of
the training samples and then classiﬁes the sample according to its coefﬁcient vector. The 1 -norm is used to promote
the sparsity of the coefﬁcient vector. SR has been applied to
classiﬁcation tasks in various domains, such as images (Majumdar and Ward, 2009; Wright et al., 2009; Gao and Zhou,
2014), texts (Sainath et al., 2010) and biological data (Li and
Ngom, 2012; Yuan et al., 2012).
For a better adaption to various classiﬁcation tasks, regularizers of structured sparsity were introduced. These regularizers use the structure of the training data as prior knowledge. For example, group sparse representation (GSR) (Jenatton, Audibert, and Bach, 2011) imposes the sparsity
among groups of samples. It works better than SR when the
underlying samples are strongly group-sparse (Huang and
Zhang, 2009). For data with overlapping/hierarchical class
structure, overlapping group sparsity (Jacob, Obozinski, and
Vert, 2009) allows groups to be overlapped, and composite
∗

Correspondence author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1568

