Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Hospital Stockpiling Problems
with Inventory Sharing
†

Eric Lofgren† and Anil Vullikanti∗,†
Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech, Virginia Tech
∗
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
Email: {lofgrene, akumar}@vbi.vt.edu

agreements (e.g., (Stier and Goodman 2007)). This allows
them to buy or sell supplies, based on mutual agreements. A
fundamental problem is how should hospitals decide on their
initial stockpile levels, and how should they trade supplies
based on an outbreak? How should the government design
incentives (or penalties), so that the health infrastructure is
best prepared for pandemic outbreaks?
These are natural game-theoretical problems and DeLaurentis et al. (DeLaurentis, Adida, and Lawley 2011) develop
the ﬁrst non-cooperative game formulation for the hospital
stockpiling problem. In their formulation, each hospital i
needs to decide on its stockpile level si . The epidemic outbreak is assumed to be a distribution over a small number of
scenarios, with D(i, ) denoting the patient demand at hospital i in scenario . A hospital i has surplus of D(i, ) − si if
si > D(i, ) and a deﬁcit of si − D(i, ) if si < D(i, ). It
is assumed that surplus at any hospital i can be sent to any
other hospital j, at some cost. Further, a hospital i has to
pay a penalty p for each unit of patient demand that is not
satisﬁed. (DeLaurentis, Adida, and Lawley 2011) study the
structure of Nash equilibria in such a game, and ﬁnd that they
can be fairly inefﬁcient.
While the work of (DeLaurentis, Adida, and Lawley 2011)
provides the ﬁrst formal approach to study the issues of stockpiling, they abstract out many realistic aspects—one of these
is the network structure among the hospitals, so that their
might be a limit cap(i, j) on how much supplies can be traded
between hospitals i and j. This might also affect the cost
Cij of trading supplies between the hospitals. As studied in
(Lee et al. 2011; Donker, Wallinga, and Grundmann 2010;
Simmering et al. 2015), there is a clear network structure
among hospitals, which plays a role in the patient referrals
across hospitals. The role of this network structure has been
studied extensively in studying and controlling the spread of
hospital acquired infections. Such interactions require prior
agreements, which will play a role in sharing stockpiles, in
the event of pandemic outbreaks.
In this paper, we extend the work of (DeLaurentis, Adida,
and Lawley 2011) to incorporate a much more realistic stockpiling problem with network based sharing constraints. This
takes the ﬁrst step towards addressing one of the extensions
suggested by them on considering “. . . implementable contracts among hospitals and possibly involving government in
a transfer payment scheme . . .”. Our contributions are:

Abstract
Hospitals are typically optimized to operate near capacity, and
there are serious concerns that our healthcare system is not prepared for the next pandemic. Stockpiles of different supplies,
e.g., personal protective equipments (PPE) and medical equipment, need to be maintained in order to be able to respond to
any future pandemics. Large outbreaks occur with a low probability, and such stockpiles require big investments. Further,
hospitals often have mutual sharing agreements, which makes
the problem of stockpiling decisions a natural game-theoretical
problem. In this paper, we formalize hospital stockpiling as
a game-theoretical problem, HS TOCKPILE. We use the notion of pairwise Nash stability as a solution concept for this
problem, and characterize its structure. We show that stable
strategies can lead to high unsatisﬁed demands in some scenarios, and stockpiles might not be maintained at all nodes.
We show that stable strategies and the social optimum can be
computed efﬁciently.

1

Introduction

Large disease outbreaks can place a very signiﬁcant burden
on the healthcare infrastructure, as recent Ebola and 2009
H1N1 inﬂuenza epidemics have shown. Hospitals and other
healthcare facilities are optimized for a baseline level of patient demand. Even a slight increase in the infection rate
can lead to a signiﬁcant surge in patient visits, e.g., as in the
case of the ﬁrst 40 weeks of the 2009 Flu outbreak, when
the number of patient visits increased by 4% over the baseline (DeLaurentis, Adida, and Lawley 2011). Handling such
a surge would require signiﬁcant level of planning for disaster events and investments to handle the surge in patient
demand— this includes medical equipment (e.g., personal
protective equipments (PPE), patient care supplies), medications such as anti-virals, hospital facilities and healthcare
personnel (ton ). The CDC and other regional and national
public health agencies have developed guidelines for investments in stockpile levels. However, it is challenging for
healthcare companies to make huge investments for handling
such a surge, especially because of its variable and stochastic
nature. In order to amortize the cost of such investments,
and since the patient demand at an individual hospital might
vary widely, it is common for hospitals to engage in sharing
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

35

