Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Co-Occurrence Feature Learning for Skeleton Based
Action Recognition Using Regularized Deep LSTM Networks
Wentao Zhu,1∗ Cuiling Lan,2 Junliang Xing,3 Wenjun Zeng,2 Yanghao Li,4 Li Shen,5 Xiaohui Xie1
1

University of California, Irvine, USA 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Peking University, Beijing, China 5 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
wentaoz1@uci.edu, {culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com, jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
lyttonhao@pku.edu.cn, li.shen@vipl.ict.ac.cn, xhx@ics.uci.edu

popularity thanks to its excellent accuracy in human body
modeling and affordable price. The bundled SDK for Kinect
v2 can directly generate accurate skeletons in real-time. Due
to the prevalence of these devices, skeleton based representations of the human body and its temporal evolution has
become an attractive option for action recognition.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of skeleton based
action recognition. The key to this problem lies mainly in
two aspects. One is to design robust and discriminative features from the skeleton (and the corresponding RGBD images) for intra-frame content representation (Müller, Röder,
and Clausen 2005; Wang, Liu, and Junsong 2012; Sung et
al. 2012; Yang and Tian 2014; Ji, Ye, and Cheng 2014).
The other is to explore temporal dependencies of the interframe content for action dynamics modeling, using hierarchical maximum entropy Markov model (Sung et al. 2011),
hidden Markov model (Xia, Chen, and Aggarwal 2012) or
Conditional Random Fields (Sminchisescu et al. 2005). Inspired by the success of deep recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) using the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture for speech feature learning and time series modeling
(Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013; Graves and Schmidhuber 2005), we intend to build an effective action recognition model based on deep LSTM network.
To this end, we propose an end-to-end fully connected
deep LSTM network to perform automatic feature learning
and motion modeling (Fig. 1). The proposed network is constructed by inheriting many insights from recent successful
networks (Graves 2012; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; Szegedy et al. 2015; Du, Wang, and Wang 2015) and
is designed to robustly model complex relationships among
different joints. The LSTM layers and feedforward layers
are alternately deployed to construct a deep network to capture the motion information. To ensure the model learns effective features and motion dynamics, we enforce different
types of strong regularization in different parts of the model,
which effectively mitigates over-ﬁtting.
Speciﬁcally, two types of regularizations are proposed. (i)
For the fully connected layers, we introduce regularization
to drive the model to learn co-occurrence features of the
joints at different layers. (ii) For the LSTM neurons, we derive a new dropout and apply it to the LSTM neurons in the
last LSTM layer, which helps the network to learn complex
motion dynamics. With these forms of regularization, we

Abstract
Skeleton based action recognition distinguishes human actions using the trajectories of skeleton joints,
which provide a very good representation for describing actions. Considering that recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) can
learn feature representations and model long-term temporal dependencies automatically, we propose an endto-end fully connected deep LSTM network for skeleton
based action recognition. Inspired by the observation
that the co-occurrences of the joints intrinsically characterize human actions, we take the skeleton as the input
at each time slot and introduce a novel regularization
scheme to learn the co-occurrence features of skeleton
joints. To train the deep LSTM network effectively, we
propose a new dropout algorithm which simultaneously
operates on the gates, cells, and output responses of the
LSTM neurons. Experimental results on three human
action recognition datasets consistently demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed model.

1 Introduction
Recognizing human actions has remained one of the most
important and challenging tasks in computer vision. It facilitates a wide range of applications such as intelligent
video surveillance, human-computer interaction, and video
understanding (Poppe 2010; Weinland, Ronfard, and Boyerc
2011).
Traditional studies on action recognition mainly focus on
recognizing actions from RGB videos recorded by 2D cameras (Weinland, Ronfard, and Boyerc 2011). However, capturing human actions in the full 3D space in which they actually occur can provide more comprehensive information.
Biological observations suggest that humans can recognize
actions from just the motion of a few light displays attached
to the human body (Johansson 1973). Motion capture systems (CMU 2003) extract 3D joint positions using markers
and high precision camera arrays. Although slightly higher
in price, such systems provide highly accurate joint positions
for skeletons. Recently, the Kinect device has gained much
∗
This work was done when W. Zhu was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3697

