Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Iterative Project Quasi-Newton Algorithm for Training RBM
Shuai Mi

Xiaozhao Zhao

Yuexian Hou

Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
watermelon0519@163.com

Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
0.25eye@gmail.com

Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
yxhou@tju.edu.cn

Peng Zhang

Wenjie Li

Dawei Song

Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
pzhang@tju.edu.cn

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong
cswjli@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
dwsong@tju.edu.cn

many obstructions, including the infeasibility of applying 2nd order optimization methods.
We are committed to deal with this obstruction. We introduce a novel iterative project quasi-Newton (IPQN) method
for training restricted Boltzmann machine. With the iterative project method (Zhao et al. 2013), our algorithm transforms the overall training procedure into an iterative procedure, i.e., iteratively perform the sampling procedure where
it is not necessary to update parameters, and the sub-training
procedure that is convex. We apply the curvature information based second order quasi-Newton methods to the subtraining procedures to deal with the pathological problem.
In addition, our algorithm can deal with another training obstruction caused by the non-convexity, i.e., the saddle points
whose neighborhood is similar to optima.
Furthermore, we investigate the nature of the Hessian in
the RBM training, and based on this nature, two main advantages of our algorithm can be realized. Firstly, in IPQN,
the Hessian of the objective function is relatively well conditioned. Secondly, Newtons method turns out to be a good
approximation of the natural gradient method (Amari 1998)
in our algorithm. Besides, there are still more advantages
of IPQN, i.e., Newtons method can achieve multi-times
quadratically convergent stage by applying IP method, and
Newtons method is independent of afﬁne changes. We show
some experiment results in this paper.

Abstract
The restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) has been used as
building blocks for many successful deep learning models,
e.g., deep belief networks (DBN) and deep Boltzmann machine (DBM) etc. The training of RBM can be extremely
slow in pathological regions. The second order optimization
methods, such as quasi-Newton methods, were proposed to
deal with this problem. However, the non-convexity results in
many obstructions for training RBM, including the infeasibility of applying second order optimization methods. In order
to overcome this obstruction, we introduce an em-like iterative project quasi-Newton (IPQN) algorithm. Speciﬁcally,
we iteratively perform the sampling procedure where it is
not necessary to update parameters, and the sub-training procedure that is convex. In sub-training procedures, we apply
quasi-Newton methods to deal with the pathological problem.
We further show that Newton’s method turns out to be a good
approximation of the natural gradient (NG) method in RBM
training. We evaluate IPQN in a series of density estimation experiments on the artiﬁcial dataset and the MNIST digit
dataset. Experimental results indicate that IPQN achieves an
improved convergent performance over the traditional CD
method.

Introduction
A RBM is a non-convex graphical model which contains a
layer of visible units and a layer of hidden units. The hidden
units give rise to the unidentiﬁability which in turn directly
results in the non-convexity of RBM.
Typically, RBM is trained using Contrastive Divergence
(CD) learning, which can be considered as a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method. This optimization method is
concise. However, it is a well known fact in the optimization
community that gradient descent is unsuitable for optimizing objectives that exhibit pathological curvature (Martens
2010).
Martens (2010) proposed a second order Hessian-Free optimization method, which can effectively deal with pathological curvature, to train deep auto-encoders and neural networks. However, the non-convexity of RBM could result in

Experimental Study
We experimentally investigate the IPQN algorithm in density estimation tasks for restricted Boltzmann machines.
In our experiments, we used the artiﬁcial data and the
MNIST digit data. We compare iterative project quasiNewton method (IPQN) with Contrastive Divergence (CD1), iterative project (IP) and Hessian-Free (HF), and show
that IPQN achieves better convergence in our experiments.

Experiments on the Artiﬁcial Data
The artiﬁcial binary dataset: we ﬁrst randomly select the target distribution q(x), which is randomly chosen from the
open probability simplex over the n random variables using
the Dirichlet prior (with parameters alpha = 0.5). Then, the
dataset with N samples are generated from q(x). In order

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4236

