Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for
X-Ray Protein Crystallization Image Analysis
Margot Lisa-Jing Yann and Yichuan Tang
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{lyan, tang}@cs.toronto.edu

them is ﬁlled with the target protein solution and a unique
cocktail of crystallizing reagents. An image is captured periodically over each well, to record an individual protein’s
different stages, changing from clear solution to crystal or
precipitate. This process produces a large number of images
which require image processing and stage classiﬁcation.
An automatic image scoring system is needed to substantially replace/assist human experts to identify successful
crystallized images during HTP screening process. Machine
learning and computer vision techniques have been widely
applied to solve the crystal detection problem including image analysis, feature extraction and classiﬁcation. However,
automatic crystal detection in practice is a very challenging
problem. The challenges are the large amounts of images,
low resolution of images, variations of lighting and other
conditions, and the diversity of protein crystal morphology.
In this paper, we use an image dataset (Snell et al. 2008b;
2008a) from the Hauptman-Woodward Institute, whose Hydra robots set up microbatch-under-oil crystallization experiments in 1536-well microassay plates (Luft, Snell, and
DeTitta 2011). Thousands of proteins screened each year
with this 1536-well system, and it produces millions of images recorded which require humans to manually examine
the crystallization stages. Thus, one critical step for scaling up the HTP pipeline is the automatic labeling of protein
crystallization-trial images, for example, into classes such as
crystal, clear or precipitate. This paper focuses on learning
a convolutional deep neural network to efﬁciently and accurately analyze protein crystallization images automatically
in HTP pipelines.

Abstract
Obtaining a protein’s 3D structure is crucial to the understanding of its functions and interactions with other proteins.
It is critical to accelerate the protein crystallization process
with improved accuracy for understanding cancer and designing drugs. Systematic high-throughput approaches in protein crystallization have been widely applied, generating a
large number of protein crystallization-trial images. Therefore, an efﬁcient and effective automatic analysis for these
images is a top priority. In this paper, we present a novel
system, CrystalNet, for automatically labeling outcomes of
protein crystallization-trial images. CrystalNet is a deep convolutional neural network that automatically extracts features
from X-ray protein crystallization images for classiﬁcation.
We show that (1) CrystalNet can provide real-time labels for
crystallization images effectively, requiring approximately 2
seconds to provide labels for all 1536 images of crystallization microassay on each plate; (2) compared with the stateof-the-art classiﬁcation systems in crystallization image analysis, our technique demonstrates an improvement of 8% in
accuracy, and achieve 90.8% accuracy in classiﬁcation. As a
part of the high-throughput pipeline which generates millions
of images a year, CrystalNet can lead to a substantial reduction of labor-intensive screening.

Introduction
Crystallization is a bottleneck problem in structural biology. A protein’s structure determines its function, and similarly structured proteins have similar functions. Obtaining
a protein’s structure is crucial to the understanding of its
functions and interactions with other proteins. Protein Xray crystallography is a methodology used to discover protein structure. However, structural genomics is a complex,
expensive and failure-prone process, where chemical conditions for each protein’s successful crystallization are difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Typically, crystallization proceeds as a trialand-error approach. Systematic high-throughput (HTP) approaches lead to rapid collection of trial information regarding the crystallization problem. X-ray diffraction can only
take place after proteins have crystallized. During HTP protein crystallization trials, each well of an assay plate constitutes a unique crystallization experiment, where each of

Related Background and Seminal Works
Many research groups have utilized various machine learning techniques to tackle this needle-in-a-haystack problem,
as only a few crystals appear among thousands of trials. An
automatic system is required to correctly reject clear or precipitate images, yet accurately identify the crystal image for
X-ray diffraction. Two aspects need to be considered which
relate to the factors determining the image classiﬁcation performance: (1) each group analyzes different types of images,
pixel quality, color versus gray scale; (2) the different number of class categories. The better the image quality, the relatively easier it is for classiﬁcation; the more detailed the
class categories, the more difﬁcult it is to achieve accurate

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1373

