Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

QART : A System for Real-Time Holistic Quality
Assurance for Contact Center Dialogues
Shourya Roy, Ragunathan Mariappan, Sandipan Dandapat,
Saurabh Srivastava, Sainyam Galhotra and Balaji Peddamuthu
Xerox Research Centre India
Bangalore, India
{ﬁrstname.lastname@xerox.com}
Providing highest quality of service leading to satisﬁed
customers is the other key objective of contact centers. Two
of the most commonly employed practices towards that are
Quality Assurance (QA) and Customer Satisfaction analysis
(C-Sat). QA process, primarily involving dialogue scrutiny
(ofﬂine) and to some extent dialogue monitoring (live), is
about measuring quality against a set of targets deﬁned
by the organization.1 Supervisors of contact center agents
are expected to rate agents’ performances on a variety of
metrics to measure how compliant and effective they have
been (intrigued readers may make a forward reference to
Table 5 to see some examples). C-Sat, on the other hand,
is about analyzing customers’ post interaction feedback to
identify drivers for (dis)satisfaction. Manual customer satisfaction surveys are conducted via telephonic interviews,
mail-in or electronic forms, where customers are asked to
evaluate various aspects of their interaction on a 5-point
Likert scale (Likert 1932) and subsequently responses are
analyzed. While a number of research articles have been
written about correlation between these two practices and
their comparative usefulness (Kantsperger and Kunz 2005;
Rafaeli, Ziklik, and Doucet 2008), both remain widely popular in the industry. Contact centers employ specialized people to conduct these processes periodically and typically independently to identify actionable areas of improvement in
service delivery (e.g. leading to customized agent training).
Both manual QA and C-Sat as practiced today have several shortcomings. Firstly, they reveal outcomes of dialogues
and associated reasons always in hindsight. While live dialogue monitoring is encouraged but owing to their human
time and effort intensive nature, it is less common than their
ofﬂine counterpart. Secondly, owing to their different focus
of analysis - customers’ post-interaction feedback in C-Sat
versus best practices mandated by the organization in QA,
it is not uncommon to have conﬂicting outcome from these
two processes. An agent and her supervisor may feel that
in a dialogue everything was done perfectly but still customer’s feedback could be negative. Thirdly, only a small
fraction of contact center workforce are responsible for QA
and C-Sat (Godbole and Roy 2008c) processes, hence they
can analyze only a small sample of total interactions thereby

Abstract
Quality assurance (QA) and customer satisfaction (C-Sat)
analysis are two commonly used practices to measure goodness of dialogues between agents and customers in contact
centers. The practices however have a few shortcomings. QA
puts sole emphasis on agents’ organizational compliance aspect whereas C-Sat attempts to measure customers’ satisfaction only based on post-dialogue surveys. As a result, outcome of independent QA and C-Sat analysis may not always
be in correspondence. Secondly, both processes are retrospective in nature and hence, evidences of bad past dialogues (and
consequently bad customer experiences) can only be found
after hours or days or weeks depending on their periodicity.
Finally, human intensive nature of these practices lead to time
and cost overhead while being able to analyze only a small
fraction of dialogues. In this paper, we introduce an automatic real-time quality assurance system for contact centers
- QART (pronounced cart). QART performs multi-faceted
analysis on dialogue utterances, as they happen, using sophisticated statistical and rule-based natural language processing
(NLP) techniques. It covers various aspects inspired by today’s QA and C-Sat practices as well as introduces novel incremental dialogue summarization capability. QART frontend is an interactive dashboard providing views of ongoing
dialogues at different granularity enabling agents’ supervisors to monitor and take corrective actions as needed. We
demonstrate effectiveness of different back-end modules as
well as the overall system by experimental results on a reallife contact center chat dataset.

Introduction
Contact center is a general term for help desks, information lines and customer service centers. They provide dialogue (both voice and online chat) and email-based support
to solve product and services-related issues, queries, and requests. Two key drivers of contact center industry are cost
reduction and service quality improvement. Exploiting cost
arbitrage through outsourcing and bringing in automation
for (parts of) service delivery processes such as agent assistance tools (Padmanabhan and Kummamuru 2007; Byrd
et al. 2008; Marom and Zukerman 2009) have been companies’ strategy towards the ﬁrst.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We use the term dialogue to refer to two-party contact center
conversations between customers and agents.

3768

