Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

What’s Hot in Heuristic Search?∗
1

Roni Stern1 and Levi H. S. Lelis2
Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
e-mail: roni.stern@gmail.com
2
Universidade Federal de Vicosa, Brazil
e-mail: levi.lelis@ufv.br

been acknowledged that in many cases suboptimal solutions are also acceptable, especially since search problems
can be too hard to solve optimally even with “almost perfect heuristic estimators, whose heuristic error is bounded
by a small additive constant” (Helmert, Röger, and others 2008). Consequently, there are numerous suboptimal
search algorithms, including beam search variants (Furcy
and Koenig 2005; Lelis, Zilles, and Holte ), and search algorithms that include random elements (Nakhost and Müller ;
Xie, Valenzano, and Müller 2013; Valenzano et al. 2014).
Unlike the theory of optimal search (Dechter and Pearl 1985;
Goldenberg et al. 2014), the theory of suboptimal search algorithms is relatively under-developed, and hence developing deeper understanding of their behavior is an important
current line of research.
Recent papers studied the behavior of Greedy Best First
Search (GBFS), a popular suboptimal heuristic search algorithm that systematically expands states in an order dictated
by a heuristic function that assigns merit to states. While
simple to implement and often quite successful, GBFS is
also known to fail on some domains. GBFS is especially ineffective in state spaces that have large regions in which the
heuristic is uninformative: either giving equal value to all
states in the region (known as a plateau) or misleading the
search away from a goal (known as a local minimum).
Xie et al. explain theoretically this weakness of GBFS,
showing that multiple small uninformative heuristic regions
(UHR) – i.e., plateaus or local minima – can cause GBFS
to “become stuck in the union of many distinct UHRs from
different parts of the search space”, resulting in a large virtual UHR over the open list (Xie, Müller, and Holte 2015).
To partially resolve this, they proposed to perform periodic
local searches. We expect that future work will study ways
to detect such UHRs early in the search and more effective
methods to escape these UHRs.
Another key factor that affects GBFS’s performance is the
heuristic being used. In optimal search, the use of a more accurate heuristic usually results in better search performance.
Wilt and Ruml (2015) showed that this is not the case for
GBFS, where using the more accurate heuristics may result
in substantially poorer performance in terms of search running time. This highlights the challenge faced when developing an effective heuristic for suboptimal search: what function to optimize when developing a heuristic for suboptimal

Abstract
Search in general, and heuristic search in particular, is at the
heart of many Artiﬁcial Intelligence algorithms and applications. There is now a growing and active community devoted
to the empirical and theoretical study of heuristic search algorithms, thanks to the successful application of search-based
algorithms to areas such as robotics, domain-independent
planning, optimization, and computer games. In this extended
abstract we highlight recent efforts in understanding suboptimal search algorithms, as well as ensembles of heuristics
and algorithms. The result of these efforts are meta-reasoning
methods which are applied to orchestrate the different components of modern search algorithms. Finally, we mention recent innovative applications of search that demonstrate the
relevance of the ﬁeld to general AI.

Introduction
Most approaches to Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applications
involve searching in large state spaces. Therefore, most AI
algorithms and applications include heuristic search algorithms. We observed in the past years an inﬂux in interest
in the ﬁeld of heuristic search, mostly due to the success
of search-based planning algorithms in robotics (Likhachev
and Ferguson 2009; Butzke et al. 2014), domain independent planning (Bonet and Geffner 2001; Helmert 2006), optimization (Marinescu and Dechter 2009), and commercial
computer games (Churchill and Buro 2015).
In this extended abstract we highlight recent progress in:
1) the development and understanding of suboptimal search
algorithms, 2) the design of ensembles of search algorithms
and heuristics, and 3) the use of meta-reasoning to orchestrate autonomously different search algorithms components.
Also, we point to several recent and innovative applications
of heuristic search. This extended abstract is by no means an
exhaustive review of heuristic search research, but a highlight of recent research in the ﬁeld.

Understanding Suboptimal Heuristic Search
Much work has been done by the heuristic search community on studying algorithms and heuristics designed to
ﬁnd optimal solutions to search problems. However, it has
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4340

