Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Deep 0 Encoders
Zhangyang Wang †, Qing Ling ‡, Thomas S. Huang †

†Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
‡Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230027, China

More recently, deep learning has attracted great attentions
in many feature learning problems (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012). The advantages of deep learning lie in its
composition of multiple non-linear transformations to yield
more abstract and descriptive embedding representations.
With the aid of gradient descent, it also scales linearly in
time and space with the number of train samples.
It has been noticed that sparse approximation and deep
learning bear certain connections (Gregor and LeCun 2010).
Their similar methodology has been lately exploited in
(Hershey, Roux, and Weninger 2014), (Sprechmann et al.
2013), (Sprechmann, Bronstein, and Sapiro 2015). By turning sparse coding models into deep networks, one may expect faster inference, larger learning capacity, and better
scalability. The network formulation also facilitates the integration of task-driven optimization.
In this paper, we investigate two typical forms of 0 -based
sparse approximation problems: the 0 regularized problem,
and the M -sparse problem. Based on solid iterative algorithms (Blumensath and Davies 2008), we formulate them
as feed-forward neural networks (Gregor and LeCun 2010),
called Deep 0 Encoders, through introducing novel neurons and pooling functions. We study their applications in
image classiﬁcation and clustering; in both cases the models
are optimized in a task-driven, end-to-end manner. Impressive performances are observed in numerical experiments.

Abstract
Despite its nonconvex nature, 0 sparse approximation is desirable in many theoretical and application cases. We study
the 0 sparse approximation problem with the tool of deep
learning, by proposing Deep 0 Encoders. Two typical forms,
the 0 regularized problem and the M -sparse problem, are
investigated. Based on solid iterative algorithms, we model
them as feed-forward neural networks, through introducing
novel neurons and pooling functions. Enforcing such structural priors acts as an effective network regularization. The
deep encoders also enjoy faster inference, larger learning capacity, and better scalability compared to conventional sparse
coding solutions. Furthermore, under task-driven losses, the
models can be conveniently optimized from end to end. Numerical results demonstrate the impressive performances of
the proposed encoders.

Dedication
Zhangyang and Qing would like to dedicate the paper to
their friend, Mr. Yuan Song (10/09/1984 - 07/13/2015).

Introduction
Sparse signal approximation has gained popularity over the
last decade. The sparse approximation model suggests that
a natural signal could be compactly approximated, by only
a few atoms out of a properly given dictionary, where the
weights associated with the dictionary atoms are called the
sparse codes. Proven to be both robust to noise and scalable to high dimensional data, sparse codes are known as
powerful features, and beneﬁt a wide range of signal processing applications, such as source coding (Donoho et al.
1998), denoising (Donoho 1995), source separation (Davies
and Mitianoudis 2004), pattern classiﬁcation (Wright et al.
2009), and clustering (Cheng et al. 2010).
We are particularly interested in the 0 -based sparse approximation problem, which is the fundamental formulation
of sparse coding (Donoho and Elad 2003). The nonconvex
0 problem is intractable and often instead attacked by minimizing surrogate measures, such as the 1 -norm, which leads
to more tractable computational methods. However, it has
been both theoretically and practically discovered that solving 0 sparse approximation is still preferable in many cases.

Related Work
0 and 1 -based Sparse Approximations

Finding the sparsest, or minimum 0 -norm, representation
of a signal given a dictionary of basis atoms is an important problem in many application domains. Consider a data
sample x ∈ Rm×1 , that is encoded into its sparse code
a ∈ Rp×1 using a learned dictionary D = [d1 , d2 , · · · , dp ],
where di ∈ Rm×1 , i = 1, 2, · · · , p are the learned atoms.
The sparse codes are obtained by solving the 0 regularized
problem (λ is a constant):
a = arg mina 12 ||x − Da||2F + λ||a||0 .

(1)

Alternatively, one could explicitly impose constraints on the
number of non-zero coefﬁcients of the solution, by solving
the M -sparse problem:

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

a = arg mina ||x − Da||2F

2194

s.t.

||a||0 ≤ M

(2)

