Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Approximation Algorithms for Route
Planning with Nonlinear Objectives
Ger Yang

Evdokia Nikolova

Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
geryang@utexas.edu

Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
nikolova@austin.utexas.edu

Gaussian travel times, the latter paper only considered the
case where at least one path has mean travel time less than
the deadline, and consequently the objective function can be
modeled as a monotonic function.
The problem of ﬁnding a path that minimizes a monotonic
increasing objective has been studied in the literature (Goyal
and Ravi 2013; Nikolova 2010; Tsaggouris and Zaroliagis
2009). What if there is no monotonicity guarantee? For example, consider the deadline problem when we know that all
paths have mean travel time longer than the deadline, or consider the well-known cost-to-time ratio objective (Megiddo
1979; Guérin and Orda 1999) in various combinatorial optimization problems. Without the monotonicity assumption,
the problem usually becomes very hard. It has been shown
(Nikolova, Brand, and Karger 2006) that for a general objective function, ﬁnding the optimal simple path is NP-hard.
This is because such a problem often involves ﬁnding the
longest path for general graphs, which is known to be a
strongly NP-hard problem (Karger, Motwani, and Ramkumar 1997), namely ﬁnding a constant-factor approximation
is also NP-hard. This suggests that for a very general class of
functions, including the cost-to-time ratio objective (Ahuja,
Batra, and Gupta 1983), not only is the problem itself NPhard but so is also its approximation counterpart.
Therefore, in this paper, we focus on the problem that accepts non-simple paths, in which it is allowed to visit nodes
more than once. To make this problem well-deﬁned, we consider the problem under either a hop constraint or an additional linear constraint, where we say a path is of γ hops if it
contains γ edges. We design a fully polynomial approximation scheme under hop constraints, and show that the algorithm can extend to run in pseudo-polynomial time under an
additional linear constraint. Further, we show how our algorithm can be applied to the cost-to-time ratio objective and
the deadline problem.

Abstract
We consider optimal route planning when the objective function is a general nonlinear and non-monotonic function. Such
an objective models user behavior more accurately, for example, when a user is risk-averse, or the utility function needs
to capture a penalty for early arrival. It is known that as
nonlinearity arises, the problem becomes NP-hard and little
is known about computing optimal solutions when in addition there is no monotonicity guarantee. We show that an approximately optimal non-simple path can be efﬁciently computed under some natural constraints. In particular, we provide a fully polynomial approximation scheme under hop
constraints. Our approximation algorithm can extend to run
in pseudo-polynomial time under a more general linear constraint that sometimes is useful. As a by-product, we show
that our algorithm can be applied to the problem of ﬁnding a
path that is most likely to be on time for a given deadline.

Introduction
In this paper, we present approximation algorithms for route
planning with a nonlinear objective function. Traditionally, route planning problems are modeled as linear shortest
path problems and there are numerous algorithms, such as
Bellman-Ford or Dijkstra’s algorithm, that are able to ﬁnd
the optimal paths efﬁciently. However, nonlinearity arises
when we would like to make more complicated decisionmaking rules. For example, in road networks, the objective
might be a nonlinear function that represents the trade-off
between traveling time and cost. Unfortunately, dynamic
programming techniques used in linear shortest path algorithms no longer apply as when nonlinearity appears, subpaths of optimal paths may no longer be optimal.
Applications include risk-averse routing or routing with a
nonlinear objective when we are uncertain about the trafﬁc
conditions (Nikolova, Brand, and Karger 2006; Nikolova et
al. 2006). A risk-averse user tends to choose a route based on
both the speediness and reliability. Such risk-averse attitude
can often be captured by a nonlinear objective, e.g. a meanrisk objective (Nikolova 2010). On the other hand, the user
might seek a path that maximizes the probability for him to
be on time given a deadline. This objective was considered
by Nikolova (2010) to capture the risk-averse behavior. For

Related Work
The route planning problem with nonlinear objective we
consider here is related to multi-criteria optimization (e.g.,
Papadimitriou and Yannakakis 2000). The solutions to these
problems typically look for approximate Pareto sets, namely
a short list of feasible solutions that provide a good approximation to any non-dominated or optimal solution. A fully
polynomial approximation scheme (FPTAS) for route plan-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3209

