Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

What’s Hot in Human Language Technology:
Highlights from NAACL HLT 2015
Joyce Y. Chai

Anoop Sarkar

Rada Mihalcea

Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
jchai@cse.msu.edu

Computer Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada
anoop@sfu.ca

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
mihalcea@umich.edu

Introduction

2015). Several discriminative models with latent variables
were also explored to learn better alignment models in a wetlab experiment domain (Naim et al. 2015). As alignment is
often the ﬁrst step in many problems involving language and
vision, these approaches and empirical results provide important baselines for future work on this topic.

The Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technology (NAACL HLT) is a premier conference reporting outstanding research on human language technology.
NAACL HLT 2015 set a new record with over seven hundred submissions and close to one thousand participants.
The program covered a broad range of topic areas organized into eighteen tracks (Mihalcea, Chai, and Sarkar 2015)
that included different levels of language processing (e.g.,
phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, discourse and
pragmatics) and their applications in information extraction
and question answering, information retrieval, generation
and summarization, machine translation, sentiment analysis, text categorization and topic modeling, and dialog and
interactive systems. It also had special tracks devoted to language resources and evaluations, spoken language processing, linguistic and psycholinguistic aspects of Natural Language Processing (NLP), and machine learning for NLP.

Video/Image to Text Generation. Watching a video and describing what happens in the video may be an easy task
for humans, but it is extremely challenging for computer
systems. To help focus on language grounding without being distracted by the noise from object recognition in real
images, Ortiz and co-authors applied abstract scenes for
text generation (Gilberto Mateos Ortiz, Wolff, and Lapata
2015). The results provide better understanding of the challenges and requirements for text generation from real images. Venugopalan and colleagues presented an approach
based on deep recurrent neural networks to generate language descriptions from open-domain videos with large vocabularies (Venugopalan et al. 2015). They have incorporated models learned from a large scale image data to the
video domain and resulted in state-of-the-art performance
on a benchmark dataset for video to text generation.

Emerging Research Areas
In this section we give a brief overview on two emerging
research areas at NAACL HLT 2015.

NLP for Web, Social Media and Social Sciences

Language and Vision

NLP has had an increasingly relevant role in the humanities
and social sciences. On the one hand, models of language
processing can be used to uncover social dynamics; and on
the other hand, large amounts of data available on the web
and social media can be used to discover characteristics of
language use. The keynote talk by Prof. Lillian Lee from
Cornell University highlighted the effect of language use
and showed NLP can lead to interesting insights into topics in sociolinguistics and the social sciences such as what
makes a memorable phrase, or how different sides of a debate frame the issue through language use. Framing was also
explored in several papers in the main program (Baumer et
al. 2015; Guerini, Özbal, and Strapparava 2015).
Krishnan and Eisenstein (Krishnan and Eisenstein 2015)
presented an unsupervised approach to learn signed social
networks, in which edges between individuals are annotated
with information about the nature of the relationship by exploiting language, in particular by looking at address terms
such as dude or Mr. This work provided a uniﬁcation of un-

A new track on language and vision was introduced for the
ﬁrst time at NAACL HLT 2015 with an intent to broaden
NLP research that is situated in a rich visual and perceptual
context. This topic area has received signiﬁcant attention in
our community in the past few years. The keynote talk by
Prof. Fei-Fei Li from Stanford University highlighted the
importance of language in the quest for visual intelligence
and motivated interdisciplinary research in this area. Most
contributions in this track centered around the following two
research problems:
Alignment between Language Instructions and Video Segments. This task involves aligning natural language descriptions to the corresponding video segments. An approach
based on HMM, together with a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) classiﬁer for food detection, was developed and evaluated in a cooking domain (Malmaud et al.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4324

