Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Transfer Learning for Cross-Language Text Categorization
through Active Correspondences Construction∗
Joey Tianyi Zhou† , Sinno Jialin Pan‡ , Ivor W. Tsang§ , and Shen-Shyang Ho‡
†

Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore
‡
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
§
QCIS, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
tzhou1@e.ntu.edu.sg, sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au, ssho@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

True texts

Most existing heterogeneous transfer learning (HTL) methods for cross-language text classiﬁcation rely on sufﬁcient
cross-domain instance correspondences to learn a mapping
across heterogeneous feature spaces, and assume that such
correspondences are given in advance. However, in practice,
correspondences between domains are usually unknown. In
this case, extensively manual efforts are required to establish accurate correspondences across multilingual documents
based on their content and meta-information. In this paper,
we present a general framework to integrate active learning to
construct correspondences between heterogeneous domains
for HTL, namely HTL through active correspondences construction (HTLA). Based on this framework, we develop a
new HTL method. On top of the new HTL method, we further propose a strategy to actively construct correspondences
between domains. Extensive experiments are conducted on
various multilingual text classiﬁcation tasks to verify the effectiveness of HTLA.

Künstliche Intelligenz

Scanned type









OCR reads as

K¨unstiiche mtelligonz



(a) OCR Error
Target Domain
(German)

Source Domain
(English)

?

Artificial Intelligence

?

Artistic Director

K¨unstiiche mtelligonz

(b) Uncertainty on Finding Correspondences

Figure 1: Illustration of Motivation

manually constructing a precise hierarchy of categories is
expensive, especially for a minor language. In contrast, there
are plenty of annotated books in a major language, such as
English. Intuitively, one can apply HTL techniques to transfer annotation information from a major language to a minor language for book categorization. This usually requires
a sufﬁcient set of correspondences between languages as
inputs. However, due to the optical character recognition
(OCR) error caused by converting the scanned books into
editable data, simply machine/human translation on book titles fails to construct precise book correspondences between
languages. For example, as shown in Figure 1(a), the book
in German entitled “Künstliche Intelligenz” turns into unrecognized text “K¨unstiiche mtelligonz” by an OCR reader.
Such error may induce ambiguity when constructing crosslanguage correspondences shown in Figure 1(b). The German book named “Künstliche Intelligenz” after OCR scanning and conversing can correspond to either the book “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” (“Künstliche Intelligenz” in German) or
the book “Artistic Director” (“Künstlerisch Intelligenzia” in
German) in English. In this case, extensive human efforts are
required to construct the precise correspondences based on
the content and meta information of the books.
Inspired by the idea of active learning (Settles 2010), to
reduce the cost of constructing correspondences between

Introduction
In natural language processing, how to exploit knowledge
in a source-language domain with sufﬁcient labeled documents to assist text mining in a target-language domain with
limited annotated documents is crucial. Recently, heterogeneous transfer learning (HTL) has been proposed to solve
this problem (Duan, Xu, and Tsang 2012; Xiao and Guo
2013; Zhou et al. 2014a). One of the critical issues in HTL
is how to learn a mapping between heterogeneous feature
spaces of the source and target domains. Most existing HTL
approaches assume that sufﬁcient instance-correspondences
are given in advance to learn such a feature mapping (Xiao
and Guo 2013; Zhou et al. 2014a). However, in practice,
instance-correspondences between domains are usually unknown. Therefore, extensively manual efforts are required to
establish accurate correspondences across multilingual documents based on their content and meta-information.
For instance, given a task on topic categorization for
scanned books in a minor language such as German or Vietnamese, there may be few annotated books available because
∗
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was with Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2400

