Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Maximum Margin Dirichlet Process Mixtures for Clustering
1

2

Gang Chen1 , Haiying Zhang2 ∗ and Caiming Xiong3

Computer Science and Engineering, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, gangchen@buffalo.edu
State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, RADI, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101
3
MetaMind Inc., 172 University Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94301, cmxiong@metamind.io

normalizing constants in the likelihood. One possible trend
is to either assume conjugate priors or employ approximate
methods (Blei and Jordan 2005) to accelerate the inference.
Another trend that catches great attention recently is to learn
the parameters with the discriminative models (Vapnik 1995).
An important question is whether it is possible to learn a discriminative model for nonparametric clustering; and whether
the modeling performance is weakened without conjugate
prior assumption.
In this work, we learn component parameters in a discriminative manner, instead of the generative method used
in the DPM model. We prefer discriminative models because: (1) we can circumvent the intractable inference effectively, that is usually a challenge in DPM; (2) discriminative models can greatly reduce the parameter space. For
example, the DPM with Gaussian mixtures need to store
and update covariance matrix, which is very expensive in
high dimension space; (3) it has been demonstrated that discriminative models generally yield higher accuracy than generative approaches (Nigam, Lafferty, and McCallum 1999;
Jebara and Pentland 1998; Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira
2001). Furthermore, maximum margin learning demonstrates promising results on both classiﬁcation (Vapnik 1995;
Tsochantaridis et al. 2005) and clustering problems (Xu et
al. 2005; Chen, Zhu, and Zhang 2014). Recent advances
in online maximum margin learning (Crammer et al. 2006)
make it possible to embed Gibbs sampling inference into the
discriminative model.
Hence, we propose a maximum margin Dirichlet process
mixture model (MMDPM), which inherits the advantages of
online maximum margin learning and nonparametric clustering. As a discriminative model, we directly optimize the conditional model to learn component parameters. More speciﬁcally, we use Gibbs sampling to infer each instance’s label,
and in turn we use it to learn model parameters and do the
model selection in an online fashion. Our contributions can
be summed up as follows:
• optimize a conditional model, instead of the joint likelihood as in DPM model;
• learn model parameters online, via Gibbs sampling and
maximum margin learning in an uniﬁed framework;
• yield higher clustering accuracy with fast speed.
We test our model on both synthetic and real datasets, and

Abstract
The Dirichlet process mixtures (DPM) can automatically infer the model complexity from data. Hence it has attracted
signiﬁcant attention recently, and is widely used for model
selection and clustering. As a generative model, it generally
requires prior base distribution to learn component parameters
by maximizing posterior probability. In contrast, discriminative classiﬁers model the conditional probability directly, and
have yielded better results than generative classiﬁers. In this
paper, we propose a maximum margin Dirichlet process mixture for clustering, which is different from the traditional DPM
for parameter modeling. Our model takes a discriminative clustering approach, by maximizing a conditional likelihood to
estimate parameters. In particular, we take a EM-like algorithm by leveraging Gibbs sampling algorithm for inference,
which in turn can be perfectly embedded in the online maximum margin learning procedure to update model parameters.
We test our model and show comparative results over the traditional DPM and other nonparametric clustering approaches.

Introduction
Bayesian nonparametric models (Antoniak 1974; Sethuraman and Tiwari 1981; Rasmussen 2000; Nguyen et al.
2014) have received a lot of attention in the machine learning community. The attractive property of these models is
that the number of components can be learned automatically from data, without being speciﬁed in advance. One
of the most popular nonparametric models for clustering
is Dirichlet process mixture model (DPM) (Neal 2000;
Teh 2010), which has been widely used on character recognition and document categorization (Blei and Jordan 2005;
Kurihara, Welling, and Teh 2007). For DPM, the prior imposed by Dirichlet process (DP) is deﬁned by two parameters:
the concentration parameter α and the base measure G0 respectively. In a DP mixture model, both two parameters heavily inﬂuence the model selection and clustering performance.
In general, the concentration parameter can be learned from
the data adaptively (Gilks and Wild 1992) and the component
parameters can be estimated by maximizing posterior probability (Rasmussen 2000). However, it remains challenging to
estimate these parameters due to the appearance of intractable
∗

Corresponding author: zhanghy@radi.ac.cn
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1491

