Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deep Hashing Network for Efﬁcient Similarity Retrieval∗
Han Zhu, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang and Yue Cao
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
{zhuhan10,caoyue10}@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

and Darrell 2009; Gong and Lazebnik 2011; Norouzi and
Blei 2011; Fleet, Punjani, and Norouzi 2012; Liu et al. 2012;
Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012; Liu et al. 2013; Gong et al.
2013; Yu et al. 2014; Xia et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2014;
Shen et al. 2015; Lai et al. 2015; Erin Liong et al. 2015).
Hash learning can be divided into unsupervised methods and
supervised methods. While unsupervised methods are more
general and can be trained without semantic labels or relevances, they are restricted by the semantic gap dilemma
(Smeulders et al. 2000) that high-level semantic description
of an object often differs from low-level feature descriptors.
Supervised methods can incorporate semantic labels or relevances to mitigate the semantic gap and improve the hashing
quality, i.e. achieve accurate search with fewer bits of codes.
Recently, deep learning to hash methods (Xia et al. 2014;
Lai et al. 2015) have shown that both feature representation
and hash coding can be learned more effectively using deep
neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Lin, Chen, and Yan 2014), which can naturally encode any
nonlinear hashing functions. These deep hashing methods
have created state-of-the-art results on many benchmarks.
However, a crucial disadvantage of these deep learning to
hash methods is that the quantization error is not statistically
minimized hence the feature representation is not optimally
compatible with binary hash coding. The continuous relaxation (Wang et al. 2014), i.e. solving the discrete optimization of hash codes by more viable continuous optimization,
may give rise to two important issues widely ignored by previous learning to hash work: (1) uncontrollable quantization
error by binarizing continuous embeddings to binary codes,
and (2) large approximation error by adopting ordinary distance between continuous embeddings as the surrogate of
Hamming distance between binary codes. Another potential
limitation is that they do not adopt principled pairwise loss
function to link the pairwise Hamming distances with the
pairwise similarity labels, i.e. to classify whether a data pair
is similar or dissimilar (pairwise classiﬁcation) based on the
pairwise Hamming distances. Therefore, suboptimal hash
coding may be produced by existing deep hashing methods.
In this paper, we simultaneously control the quantization
error and close the gap between Hamming distance and its
approximate distance for learning high-quality hash codes.
To approach this goal, we propose a novel Deep Hashing
Network (DHN) architecture for supervised hashing using a

Abstract
Due to the storage and retrieval efﬁciency, hashing has been
widely deployed to approximate nearest neighbor search for
large-scale multimedia retrieval. Supervised hashing, which
improves the quality of hash coding by exploiting the semantic similarity on data pairs, has received increasing attention
recently. For most existing supervised hashing methods for
image retrieval, an image is ﬁrst represented as a vector of
hand-crafted or machine-learned features, followed by another separate quantization step that generates binary codes.
However, suboptimal hash coding may be produced, because
the quantization error is not statistically minimized and the
feature representation is not optimally compatible with the
binary coding. In this paper, we propose a novel Deep Hashing Network (DHN) architecture for supervised hashing, in
which we jointly learn good image representation tailored
to hash coding and formally control the quantization error.
The DHN model constitutes four key components: (1) a subnetwork with multiple convolution-pooling layers to capture
image representations; (2) a fully-connected hashing layer to
generate compact binary hash codes; (3) a pairwise crossentropy loss layer for similarity-preserving learning; and (4)
a pairwise quantization loss for controlling hashing quality.
Extensive experiments on standard image retrieval datasets
show the proposed DHN model yields substantial boosts over
latest state-of-the-art hashing methods.

Introduction
While image big data with large volume and high dimension
are pervasive in search engines and social networks, it has
attracted increasing attention to enable approximate nearest
neighbors (ANN) retrieval of images with both computation
efﬁciency and search quality. An advantageous solution is
hashing methods (Wang et al. 2014), which transform highdimensional data into compact binary codes and generate
similar binary codes for similar data items. In this paper, we
focus on learning to hash methods that build data-dependent
hash coding for efﬁcient image retrieval, which have shown
better performance than data-independent hashing methods,
e.g. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Gionis et al. 1999).
Many learning to hash methods have been proposed to enable efﬁcient ANN search using Hamming distance (Kulis
∗

Corresponding authors: Mingsheng Long and Jianmin Wang.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2415

