Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fine-Grained Semantic Conceptualization of FrameNet
Jin-woo Park

Seung-won Hwang

Haixun Wang

POSTECH, Korea, Republic of
jwpark85@postech.edu

Yonsei University, Korea, Republic of
seungwonh@yonsei.ac.kr

Facebook Inc., USA
haixun@gamil.com

for training applications such as semantic parser (Das, Martins, and Smith 2012) or question answering systems (Pizzato
and Mollá 2008). Yet, as shown in Table 1, the instances in
FrameNet, being just small samples for the FEs, are often
insufﬁcient for supporting machine understanding.

Abstract
Understanding verbs is essential for many natural language
tasks. To this end, large-scale lexical resources such as
FrameNet have been manually constructed to annotate the
semantics of verbs (frames) and their arguments (frame elements or FEs) in example sentences. Our goal is to “semantically conceptualize” example sentences by connecting FEs
to knowledge base (KB) concepts. For example, connecting
Employer FE to company concept in the KB enables the
understanding that any (unseen) company can also be FE
examples. However, a naive adoption of existing KB conceptualization technique, focusing on scenarios of conceptualizing a few terms, cannot 1) scale to many FE instances
(average of 29.7 instances for all FEs) and 2) leverage interdependence between instances and concepts. We thus propose
a scalable k-truss clustering and a Markov Random Field
(MRF) model leveraging interdependence between conceptinstance, concept-concept, and instance-instance pairs. Our
extensive analysis with real-life data validates that our approach improves not only the quality of the identiﬁed concepts
for FrameNet, but also that of applications such as selectional
preference.

1

We thus focus on “semantically conceptualizing” FE instances. Take the E MPLOYER FE for example. Our goal is to
infer that any instance of company concept is equally plausible as sample companies mentioned in FrameNet. A closely
related well-known task is “selectional preference” of computing “plausibility” scores for arbitrary instances (Resnik
1996). That is, our task is to ﬁnd selectional preferences based
on concepts of a knowledge base (KB). With such conceptualization, we can infer that “Shell hires 100 workers” is
plausible as Shell is an instance of company concept in the
KB.
Related work To enable this inference on unobserved sentences, existing work uses WordNet concept (Tonelli et al.
2012) or topic modeling (Ritter, Mausam, and Etzioni 2010)
to relate the unobserved instances to the observed instances.
For example, WordNet concepts identiﬁed for FEs (Tonelli et
al. 2012) can infer plausibility of the unobserved instances if
they belong to the same concept from the observed instances.
However, WordNet concepts, being restricted to about 2,000
concepts linked with Wikipedia pages (Bryl et al. 2012), are
often too coarse for our purpose. For example, the WordNet
concept container, enumerating generic containers including envelope or wastebasket, is too general for Container
FE, as it inaccurately predicts wastebasket as a plausibility
score of a cooking utensil. More desirably, we may consider
using a knowledge base that materializes concepts of ﬁner
granularity, e.g., cooking container for C OOKING CREATION
frame. In addition, a desirable KB should cover sufﬁcient
instances for each concept. To argue that WordNet is limited
in terms of coverage, we analyzed English Gigaword Fifth
Edition (LDC2011T07) consisting of 180 million sentences
from English news. In this corpus, WordNet covers only 33%
of instances as shown in Table 2. In contrast, automatically
harvested KBs such as Probase covers many instances including named entities (e.g., Microsoft and British Airways),
which are not covered by WordNet.

Introduction

Overview Understanding verbs is critical to understanding
text. For example, the verb “employ” is associated with two
different semantic classes described as the U SING and the
E MPLOYING frames:
• U SING: [The few states]Agent [employed]LU [chemical
weapons]Instrument .
• E MPLOYING: [Hong Kong manufacturers]Employer [employ]LU
[2m workers]Employee [in China]Place .

FrameNet (Fillmore, Johnson, and Petruck 2003) is a lexical resource that describes semantic frames, by annotating
verbs1 (i.e., lexical units or LUs) and their arguments (i.e.,
frame elements or FEs) that evoke frames. Table 1 shows all
of the FE instances for the E MPLOYING frame in FrameNet.
This resource is critical for human understanding of verbs and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Although FrameNet annotated verbs, nouns, adjectives, and
adverbs as lexical units, this paper focuses on verbs.

Proposed method To overcome concept and instance sparsity of manually-built KB, we utilize on Probase (Wu et al.

2638

