Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deep Neural Networks for Learning Graph Representations
Shaosheng Cao

Wei Lu

Qiongkai Xu

Xidian University
shelsoncao@gmail.com

Singapore University of
Technology and Design
luwei@sutd.edu.sg

Australian National University
National ICT Australia - CRL
Qiongkai.Xu@nicta.com.au

Mikolov et al. 2013). Their goal is to learn for each natural language word a low-dimensional vector representation based on their contexts, from a large amount of natural language texts. Such works can be regarded as learning representations for linear sequences, since the corpora
consist of linear structures which are natural language word
sequences. The resulting compact, low-dimensional vector
representations are believed to be able to capture rich semantic information and are proven to be useful for various
natural language processing tasks. While efﬁcient and effective methods for learning good representations for linear structures have been identiﬁed (Mikolov et al. 2013;
Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), dealing with general graph structures with rich topologies is more complicated. To this end, one natural approach is to identify effective means to cast the task of learning vertex representations for general graph structures into the task of learning
representations from linear structures. DeepWalk proposed
by Perozzi et al. (2014) presented an idea to transform unweighted graphs into collections of linear sequences by a
uniform sampling method known as truncated random walk.
In their approach, sampled vertex sequences characterize the
connections between vertices in a graph. This step can be understood as a process for converting a general graph structure into a large collection of linear structures. Next, they
utilized the skip-gram model proposed by Mikolov et al.
(2013) to learn low-dimensional representations for vertices
from such linear structures. The learned vertex representations were shown to be effective across a few tasks, outperforming several previous approaches such as spectral clustering and modularity method (Tang and Liu 2009a; 2009b;
2011; Macskassy and Provost 2003).

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel model for learning graph
representations, which generates a low-dimensional vector
representation for each vertex by capturing the graph structural information. Different from other previous research efforts, we adopt a random surﬁng model to capture graph
structural information directly, instead of using the samplingbased method for generating linear sequences proposed by
Perozzi et al. (2014). The advantages of our approach will
be illustrated from both theorical and empirical perspectives.
We also give a new perspective for the matrix factorization
method proposed by Levy and Goldberg (2014), in which the
pointwise mutual information (PMI) matrix is considered as
an analytical solution to the objective function of the skipgram model with negative sampling proposed by Mikolov et
al. (2013). Unlike their approach which involves the use of
the SVD for ﬁnding the low-dimensitonal projections from
the PMI matrix, however, the stacked denoising autoencoder
is introduced in our model to extract complex features and
model non-linearities. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model, we conduct experiments on clustering and visualization tasks, employing the learned vertex representations as
features. Empirical results on datasets of varying sizes show
that our model outperforms other stat-of-the-art models in
such tasks.

1 Introduction
Graphs are common representations used for information
management in many real-world problems. For example, in
protein network research, mining protein complexes from
protein-protein interaction networks plays an important role
in the description of functional diversity of homologous proteins and serves valuable evolutionary insights, which is essentially a clustering problem. It is therefore crucial to develop automated algorithms to extract useful, deep information from graphs. One of effective means towards organizing such information associated with the potentially large
and complex graph is to learn the graph representations,
which assign to each vertex of the graph a low-dimensional
dense vector representation, encoding meaningful information conveyed by the graph.
Recently, there has been signiﬁcant interest in the work
of learning word embeddings (Bullinaria and Levy 2007;

While such an approach for learning vertex representations of a unweighted graph is effective, two important issues remain to be answered. First, how to accurately and
more directly capture the graph structural information for
weighted graphs? Second, is there a better method of representing vertices of linear structures? To answer the ﬁrst
question, we design a random surﬁng model suitable for
weighted graphs, which can directly yield a probabilistic
co-occurrence matrix. Such a matrix is similar to the cooccurrence matrix obtained by sampling linear sequences
from graphs (Bullinaria and Levy 2007), but no sampling
process is required in our approach. To answer the sec-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1145

