Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Gated Neural Networks for Targeted Sentiment Analysis
Meishan Zhang1,2∗ and Yue Zhang2∗ and Duy-Tin Vo2
1. School of Computer Science and Technology, Heilongjiang University, Harbin, China
2. Singapore University of Technology and Design
{meishan zhang, yue zhang}@sutd.edu.sg,
duytin vo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

She began to love [miley ray cyrus]+ since 2013 :)
Some chocolate a tup of ice cream and [taylor swift]+
songs. Best remedy to help cure the pain.
Does Vmware fusion support [Windows 7]0 yet?
[nick cannon]− face is annoying!!!!!!
I have no interest in seeing [britney spears]− do anything.

Abstract
Targeted sentiment analysis classiﬁes the sentiment polarity
towards each target entity mention in given text documents.
Seminal methods extract manual discrete features from automatic syntactic parse trees in order to capture semantic information of the enclosing sentence with respect to a target
entity mention. Recently, it has been shown that competitive
accuracies can be achieved without using syntactic parsers,
which can be highly inaccurate on noisy text such as tweets.
This is achieved by applying distributed word representations
and rich neural pooling functions over a simple and intuitive
segmentation of tweets according to target entity mentions.
In this paper, we extend this idea by proposing a sentencelevel neural model to address the limitation of pooling functions, which do not explicitly model tweet-level semantics.
First, a bi-directional gated neural network is used to connect
the words in a tweet so that pooling functions can be applied
over the hidden layer instead of words for better representing
the target and its contexts. Second, a three-way gated neural
network structure is used to model the interaction between
the target mention and its surrounding contexts. Experiments
show that our proposed model gives signiﬁcantly higher accuracies compared to the current best method for targeted sentiment analysis.

Figure 1: Targeted sentiment analysis.

tweet as well as its context tweets, in order to capture target
sentiment polarities. Dong et al. (2014) use word embeddings and neural networks instead of manual features, but
also rely on syntactic dependencies, which are produced by
automatic POS-tagging and parsing.
Compared with discrete manual features, embedding features are less sparse, and can be learned from large raw texts,
capturing distributional syntactic and semantic information
automatically. As a result, they offer a potentially more elegant and effective solution to complex semantic problems
such as negation and sarcasm. Vo and Zhang (2015) exploit
this advantage by deﬁning rich automatic features via neural
pooling over multifarious word embeddings. Shown in Figure 2(a), given a target, they divide the enclosing sentence
into three segments, using pooling functions on each segment to obtain features for the left context, the target and the
right context, respectively. The automatic features are then
fed into a linear classiﬁer for sentiment classiﬁcation.
The method of Vo and Zhang (2015) avoids the reliance
on automatic syntactic parsers, which can be highly inaccurate on tweets, thereby leading to improved sentiment classiﬁcation results compared with Dong et al. (2014). On the
other hand, it does not fully capture semantic information
of the tweet and the given target entity. First, pooling functions can select the most useful features from a sequence of
words, but do not capture underlying tweet-level syntactic
and semantic information. Second, the interaction between
the target and its contexts is modeled only implicitly over the
pooling functions and the linear classiﬁer, but not explicitly.
We address the above two limitations by using gated
neural network structures to model the syntax and semantics of the enclosing tweet, and the interaction between
the surrounding contexts and the target, respectively. Re-

Introduction
Targeted sentiment analysis investigates the classiﬁcation
of opinion polarities towards certain target entity mentions
in given sentences (Jiang et al. 2011; Dong et al. 2014;
Vo and Zhang 2015). An example is shown in Figure 1,
where the inputs are a set of tweets, with the entities “miley ray cyrus”, “taylor swift”, “Windows 7”, “nick cannon”
and “britney spears” being marked as the opinion targets,
respectively. The outputs consist of three way (+, -, 0) sentiment labels on each entity.
A very important issue in targeted sentiment analysis is
how to model the association between targets and their contexts, which can involve complex syntactic and semantic
structures such as predicate-argument links, negations, coreferences and even sarcasm. Jiang et al. (2011) deﬁne rich
features over POS tags and dependency links of a given
∗
Both authors contributed equally. The work is done when the
ﬁrst author is in SUTD.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3087

