Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

ExTaSem! Extending, Taxonomizing and Semantifying Domain Terminologies
Luis Espinosa-Anke*, Horacio Saggion*, Francesco Ronzano* and Roberto Navigli †

* DTIC - TALN Research Group, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Carrer Tànger 122-134, 08018 Barcelona (Spain)
† Department of Computer Science, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale Regina Elena, 295, Rome (Italy)
*{luis.espinosa, horacio.saggion, francesco.ronzano}@upf.edu, †navigli@di.uniroma1.it

providing a common evaluation benchmark for taxonomy
learning.
Previous methods for inducing taxonomic relations can
be (broadly) classiﬁed into linguistic or statistic. Linguistic
methods are those that, extending Hearst’s patterns (Hearst
1992), exploit linguistic evidence for unveiling hypernym
relations (Kozareva and Hovy 2010; Navigli, Velardi, and
Faralli 2011; Flati et al. 2014; Luu Anh, Kim, and Ng
2014). Other approaches are based purely on statistical
evidence and graph-based measures (Fountain and Lapata
2012; Alfarone and Davis 2015). However, none of these
approaches addressed explicitly the problem of ambiguity
and semantically-motivated domain pertinence, albeit a few
cases in which all this was tackled tangentially (Kozareva
and Hovy 2010; Velardi, Faralli, and Navigli 2013).
E X TA S EM ! is designed to bridge the gap between relation
extraction and graph construction, on one hand, and domain
pertinence on the other. Starting from a list of domain terms,
E X TA S EM ! induces a full-ﬂedged taxonomy by leveraging
a large semantic network, from which high quality knowledge in the form of textual deﬁnitions is retrieved for each
domain. Then, (hyponym, hypernym) pairs are extracted via
a Conditional Random Fields (CRF) based sequential classiﬁer. Finally, a state-of-the-art vector space representation
of individual word senses is exploited for constructing a
domain taxonomy only made up of semantically pertinent
edges1 . Our approach does not require a step for graph pruning or trimming, a must in some of the systems mentioned
above.
In terms of taxonomy evaluation, E X TA S EM ! is able to
reliably reconstruct gold standard taxonomies of interdisciplinary domains such as Science, Terrorism or Artiﬁcial Intelligence, as well as more speciﬁc ones like Food or Equipment. In addition, it has the capacity to extend and semantify
an input taxonomy, i.e. increase its size and link many of its
nodes to a reference sense inventory.

Abstract
We introduce E X TA S EM !, a novel approach for the automatic learning of lexical taxonomies from domain terminologies. First, we exploit a very large semantic network
to collect thousands of in-domain textual deﬁnitions. Second, we extract (hyponym, hypernym) pairs from each definition with a CRF-based algorithm trained on manuallyvalidated data. Finally, we introduce a graph induction procedure which constructs a full-ﬂedged taxonomy where each
edge is weighted according to its domain pertinence. E X TA S EM ! achieves state-of-the-art results in the following taxonomy evaluation experiments: (1) Hypernym discovery, (2)
Reconstructing gold standard taxonomies, and (3) Taxonomy
quality according to structural measures. We release weighted
taxonomies for six domains for the use and scrutiny of the
community.

Introduction
Question Answering and Reasoning, as well as other applications in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Natural Language
Processing (NLP), can beneﬁt dramatically from semantic knowledge. Many approaches for creating and formalizing this knowledge are based on domain ontologies, whose
backbone are lexical taxonomies (Navigli, Velardi, and Faralli 2011). The term taxonomy is used to refer to graph-like
hierarchical structures where concepts are nodes organized
over a predeﬁned merging or splitting criterion (Hwang,
Grauman, and Sha 2012). For example, WordNet (Miller et
al. 1990) groups words into sets of super and subordinate
(is-a) relations. Taxonomies have proven beneﬁcial for tasks
like Question Answering (Harabagiu, Maiorano, and Pasca
2003) or textual entailment (Glickman, Dagan, and Koppel
2005).
Prominent examples of projects leveraging taxonomic organization of knowledge are lexical databases like WordNet,
or knowledge-oriented endeavours aimed at taxonomizing
large information repositories, such as YAGO (Suchanek,
Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), WikiTaxonomy (Ponzetto and
Strube 2008) or the Wikipedia Bitaxonomy (W I B I) (Flati
et al. 2014). More recently, the ﬁrst Semeval Task on Taxonomy Learning Evaluation (Bordea et al. 2015) aimed at

Related Work
Building up on the pioneering work by (Hearst 1992) for
hypernym discovery, later methods have leveraged linguistic regularities as a ﬁrst step for taxonomy learning. Some
of these works include KnowItAll (Etzioni et al. 2005),

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2594

Taxonomies available at http://taln.upf.edu/extasem.

