Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Variations on the Hotelling-Downs Model
Michal Feldman and Amos Fiat

Svetlana Obraztsova

Department of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University, Israel

I-CORE
Hebrew University of Jerusalem,∗ Israel

for lack of other alternatives, but this may be a signiﬁcant
problem in voting. A voter may compromise his beliefs, but
only to a limit. If no competing candidate is close enough,
the voter may simply abstain.
Similarly, the assumption that voters always choose the
candidate closest to their political views may be questionable. Should two or more competing candidates be close
enough in their political stance, a voter may see little difference between the candidates. This is also true for the proverbial sunbather seeking ice cream. If both vendors are close
enough, the choice of vendor may be random.
In this paper we study a variant of the Hotelling-Downs
model, modifying the core assumptions:
• All competitors (called agents hereinafter) have a limited
attraction interval. Only clients that lie within this interval
may support the agent (buy the product, cast a vote, etc.);
• The support of clients that fall in the attraction interval of
several agents is randomly shared among the latter.
We consider two utility functions for the agents: “winnertakes-all” — this is reminiscent of a political voting situation (e.g. the winner forms the new government); and “support maximizers” — this is a model for commercial competition (i.e., agents seek to maximize their number of customers).
One might suspect that these new variants will also suffer
from lack of Nash equilibria. However, this is not the case.
Our existence theorem shows that a pure Nash Equilibrium
always exists.
With respect to these pure Nash Equilibria, we study
client participation. Different equilibria may have a different number of clients that take part. Surprisingly, there are
equilibria that do not cover the population completely, even
if the number of agents grows to inﬁnity.
Translated into economic terms, there are stable situations, where some niche clientele will not be serviced by any
agent. Or, in political terms, there may be a group of voters
that does not participate in the political process. Contrariwise, we also ﬁnd that in low-intensity competitions (i.e.,
where the number of agents is less than four) the level of
client participation is at least 50% of the maximum.
The structure of this paper is as follows:
• In Section 2 we introduce a general framework, based on
the Hotelling-Downs model, that captures the limited at-

Abstract
In this paper we expand the standard Hotelling-Downs
model (Hotelling 1929; Downs 1957) of spatial competition
to a setting where clients do not necessarily choose their
closest candidate (retail product or political). Speciﬁcally, we
consider a setting where clients may disavow all candidates
if there is no candidate that is sufﬁciently close to the client
preferences. Moreover, if there are multiple candidates that
are sufﬁciently close, the client may choose amongst them at
random. We show the existence of Nash Equilibria for some
such models, and study the price of anarchy and stability in
such scenarios.

1

Introduction

A toy problem illustrating the Hotelling-Downs model is the
strategic positioning of two ice cream vendors along a beach
front (Hotelling 1929). The model was later extended to
ideological positioning in a bi-partisan democracy (Downs
1957) (See also Enelow and Hinich 1984). The model has
gained a signiﬁcant following, since it agrees with a key aspect of such competitions: the median placement policy. In
the case of two vendors this explains why they’ve clumped
together on a stretch of a beach, and why opposing political
parties frequently agree on terms that ultimately express the
interests of neither.
Unfortunately, the model introduced several assumptions
that have resulted in its failure to explain the behavior of
higher numbers of competitors, and limited the model’s applicability. Osborne (1993) shows that the model does not, in
general, admit Nash Equilibria. Variants of the model, such
as allowing candidates to quit (see e.g. Sengupta and Sengupta 2008) and runoff voting protocols (see e.g. Brusco et
al 2012) do admit pure Nash equilibria for more than 2 competitors.
In the original model and in the variants above, some of
the assumptions may be problematic. Consider the ice cream
vendor problem. The Hotelling-Downs model would have
us assume that — no matter what the distance of the vendor
from a client — the latter would travel this distance given
that this is the closest vendor. This may hold in some cases,
∗
The work was done while the author was afﬁliated with TelAviv University
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

496

