Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Mobility Sequence Extraction and Labeling Using Sparse Cell Phone Data
Yingxiang Yang

Peter Widhalm

Shounak Athavale

Marta C. González

Massachusetts Inst. of
Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, USA

Austrian Institute of
Technology
Gieﬁnggasse 2,
Vienna, Austria

Ford Motor
Company
Palo Alto, CA

Massachusetts Inst. of
Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, USA

Problem Deﬁnition

Abstract

The notations and problems are deﬁned as:
Notation: Mobile phone record r. A mobile phone record
contains user id, timestamp, longitude, latitude.
Notation: Activity a. In the current study, activities are
classiﬁed as home, work, leisure, shopping, other.
Notation: Stay S. A stay means performing an activity at a
ﬁxed location. A stay has properties start time t˜arr , duration
δ̃ , and location l.
Notation: Stay Sequence. A stay sequence represents the
consecutive stays a person made in a day.
Problem 1. Stay sequence extraction. Filter out passing by
records (records made when a person is moving) and signal
hyperspacing in the records and estimate stay start time t˜arr ,
duration δ̃ and location l for each extracted stay s.
Problem 2. Activity classiﬁcation. Given the extracted
stay sequences and labeled travel survey data. Identify the
activity type a for each stay.
Problem 3. Activity clustering. When there is no labeled
training data, we want to cluster the stays into meaningful
categories based on properties such as stay start time, duration, nearby land use types, etc.

Human mobility modeling for either transportation system
development or individual location based services has a tangible impact on people’s everyday experience. In recent years
cell phone data has received a lot of attention as a promising
data source because of the wide coverage, long observation
period, and low cost. The challenge in utilizing such data is
how to robustly extract people’s trip sequences from sparse
and noisy cell phone data and endow the extracted trips with
semantic meaning, i.e., trip purposes. In this study we reconstruct trip sequences from sparse cell phone records. Next
we propose a Bayesian trip purpose classiﬁcation method and
compare it to a Markov random ﬁeld based trip purpose clustering method, representing scenarios with and without labeled training data respectively. This procedure shows how
the cell phone data, despite their coarse granularity and sparsity, can be turned into a low cost, long term, and ubiquitous
sensor network for mobility related services.

Introduction
Until the end of last century, the data source of transportation modeling had come from manual travel surveys,
which are very expensive and have limited sample size and
update frequency. But the wide spread of GPS and mobile phone usage has provided new perspectives to acquire
such information (Gonzalez, Hidalgo, and Barabasi 2008;
Wang et al. 2012). Compared with GPS and survey data, cell
phone call detailed records (CDR) can provide much larger
sample size and longer observation period. But the spatial measurement accuracy and the average temporal sampling rate for each individual are low. Another common
shortcoming of both GPS and mobile phone CDR based
trip extraction is the trip sequences are semantically poor.
Neither trip purposes, i.e. the activities performed at trip
destinations, nor the social-demographic information can
be directly observed. Moreover, most existing studies on
trip purpose labeling focus on trips extracted from GPS
traces with labeled training data (Bohte and Maat 2009;
Liao, Fox, and Kautz 2005), leaving the question what is
the limit of activity labeling accuracy for trip sequences extracted from CDR data and without labeled training data.

Methodology
Stay sequence extraction
In the ﬁrst step we extract actual stay locations from cell
phone records and ﬁlter out passing by points. We consecutively examines the cell phone records of a mobile device
in their temporal order and incrementally creates and appends clusters of phone records with small distances. The
arrival times and stay durations of the stays are estimated
based on the timestamps of the cell phone records and by
assuming constraints on the travel speed. Speciﬁcally, we
set spatial and temporal thresholds on the stay extraction to
ﬁlter out mobile signal jumps and records made when a person is moving. The outputs of the algorithm are the expected
stay start time t˜arr , expected duration δ̃ , maximum duration
δmax , minimum duration δmin , and location l.

Bayesian classiﬁcation method
The activity categories ”home”, ”work”, ”leisure”, ”shopping”, and ”other” are denoted as number i = 1, ..., 5. The
classiﬁcation problem deals with assigning the activity a

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4276

