Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Solving Goal Recognition Design Using ASP
Tran Cao Son,† Orkunt Sabuncu,‡ Christian Schulz-Hanke,‡
Torsten Schaub,‡ William Yeoh†
‡

†
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, USA

University of Potsdam, Germany
INRIA, Rennes, France

1

Abstract

2

3

Goal Recognition Design involves identifying the best ways
to modify an underlying environment that agents operate in,
typically by making a subset of feasible actions infeasible, so
that agents are forced to reveal their goals as early as possible. Thus far, existing work has focused exclusively on
imperative classical planning. In this paper, we address the
same problem with a different paradigm, namely, declarative
approaches based on Answer Set Programming (ASP). Our
experimental results show that one of our ASP encodings is
more scalable and is signiﬁcantly faster by up to three orders
of magnitude than the current state of the art.

B

4

5

1

2

3

G1

B

C

C

D

D

4

5
G2

A

A

G1
G3

E

E
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Example Problem
Karpas (2014)’s seminal paper, they introduced the notion of
worst-case distinctiveness (wcd), as a goodness measure that
assesses the ease of performing goal recognition within an
environment. The wcd of a problem is the longest sequence
of actions an agent can take without revealing its goal. The
objective in GRD is then to ﬁnd a subset of feasible actions
to make infeasible such that the resulting wcd is minimized.
Existing algorithms have been designed and developed exclusively using imperative programming techniques,
where the algorithms deﬁne a control ﬂow, that is, a sequence of commands to be executed. The focus has been
on using state-of-the-art planners and pruning techniques
in computing and reducing the wcd. In this paper, we
are interested in investigating the beneﬁts of using declarative programming techniques to solve GRD problems.
Speciﬁcally, we propose to use Answer Set Programming
(ASP) (Niemelä 1999; Marek and Truszczyński 1999) as the
general framework for solving GRD problems.
This paper contributes to both areas of GRD and ASP.
Regarding GRD, we demonstrate that using ASP as the
general framework provides a number of beneﬁts including the ability to capitalize on (i) ASP’s manifold problem
solving techniques (e.g., formulating GRD as a minimization/maximization problem that can be solved by saturation
techniques) and (ii) the highly optimized and effective ASP
solvers, which results in improved scalability. As regards
ASP, the paper shows—by solving GRD—that an appropriate use of the saturation-based encoding coupled with a
phase separation can be extremely effective in solving QBF
problems. Speciﬁcally, it demonstrates that many problem
solving techniques developed in ASP can be used directly to
outperform specialized imperative method in problems-of-

Introduction
Goal recognition, a special form of plan recognition, deals
with online problems aiming at identifying the goal of an
agent as quickly as possible given its behavior (Geffner and
Bonet 2013; Ramı́rez and Geffner 2011). Goal recognition
is relevant in many applications including security (Jarvis,
Lunt, and Myers 2005), computer games (Kabanza et al.
2010), and natural language processing (Geib and Steedman
2007). For example, Fig. 1(a) shows an example gridworld
application, where the agent starts at cell E3 and can move
in any of the four cardinal directions. Its goal is one of three
possible ones G1, G2, and G3. The traditional approach has
been to ﬁnd efﬁcient algorithms that observe the trajectory
of the agent and predict its actual goal (Geffner and Bonet
2013; Ramı́rez and Geffner 2011).
Keren, Gal, and Karpas (2014) took an orthogonal approach by proposing to modify the underlying environment
in which the agents operate, typically by making a subset of
feasible actions infeasible, so that agents are forced to reveal their goals as early as possible. For example, under the
assumption that agents follow optimal plans to reach their
goal, by making the action that moves the agent from cells
E3 to D3 infeasible, the agent is forced to either move left to
E2, which would immediately reveal that its goal is G1, or
move right to E4, revealing that it is either G2 or G3. They
call this the Goal Recognition Design (GRD) problem. It is
relevant in many of the same applications that goal recognition problems are relevant because, typically, the underlying environment can be easily modiﬁed. In Keren, Gal, and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3181

