Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Tiebreaking Strategies for A* Search:
How to Explore the Final Frontier
Masataro Asai and Alex Fukunaga
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo

f (n) ≤ f ∗ have cost f ∗ due to the large number of actions
with cost 0. In such domains, the tiebreaking policy which
decides which nodes to expand in the ﬁnal frontier can have
a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of A∗ .
In this paper, we investigate the tiebreaking strategy used
by A∗ , which is the policy for selecting which node to expand among nodes with the same f -cost. It is widely believed that among nodes with the same f -cost, ties should be
broken according to h(n), i.e., nodes with smaller h-values
should be expanded ﬁrst. While this is a useful rule of thumb
in many domains, it turns out that tiebreaking requires more
careful consideration, particularly for problems with large
plateaus – regions of the search space with the same f and
h values.
We ﬁrst empirically evaluate standard tiebreaking strategies for A∗ , and show that (1) a Last-In-First-Out (lifo) policy tends to be more efﬁcient than a First-In-First-Out (ﬁfo)
policy, and (2) tiebreaking according to the heuristic value h,
which frequently appears in the heuristic search literature,
has little impact on the performance as long as a lifo policy is used. We show that there are signiﬁcant performance
differences among tiebreaking strategies when domains include zero-cost actions. While there are relatively few domains with zero-cost actions in the IPC benchmark set, we
argue that zero-cost actions naturally occur in practical costminimization problems.
In order to solve such problems more efﬁciently, we
propose tiebreaking methods based on a notion of depth
within the plateau, corresponding to the number of steps
a node is from the “entrance” to the plateau. We empirically show that: (1) a randomized, depth-based strategy signiﬁcantly outperforms other tiebreaking strategies using the
same heuristic function; (2) although depth is a component
of a multi-level tiebreaking strategy, the depth is the principal factor in determining performance; and (3) depth-based
tiebreaking is robust, in the sense that it does not rely on
a particular action ordering in the domain deﬁnition. Note
that all tiebreaking strategies in this paper maintain the optimality of the search algorithm because they only affect node
expansion order among the nodes with the same f -cost.
We report our results using landmark-cut (LMcut)
(Helmert and Domshlak 2009) and merge-and-shrink
(Helmert et al. 2014) heuristics. Due to space, detailed results are only provided for LMcut. A more complete, de-

Abstract
Despite recent improvements in search techniques for costoptimal classical planning, the exponential growth of the size
of the search frontier in A* is unavoidable. We investigate
tiebreaking strategies for A*, experimentally analyzing the
performance of standard tiebreaking strategies that break ties
according to the heuristic value of the nodes. We ﬁnd that
tiebreaking has a signiﬁcant impact on search algorithm performance when there are zero-cost operators that induce large
plateau regions in the search space. We develop a new framework for tiebreaking based on a depth metric which measures distance from the entrance to the plateau, and propose
a new, randomized strategy which signiﬁcantly outperforms
standard strategies on domains with zero-cost actions.

1

Introduction

This paper investigates tiebreaking strategies for A∗ , the
standard search algorithm for ﬁnding an optimal-cost path
from an initial state s to some goal state g ∈ G in a search
space represented as a graph (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael
1968). In each iteration, A∗ selects and expands a node n
from the OPEN priority queue. n is the node which has the
lowest f -cost in OPEN, where for node n, f (n) is the sum
of g(n), the cost of the current path from the initial state to
n, and h(n), a heuristic estimate of the cost from n to a goal
state. A∗ returns an optimal solution when h is admissible,
i.e., when h ≤ h∗ , where h∗ is the optimal distance to the
goal.
If f ∗ is the cost of the optimal solution, the effective
search space of A∗ is the set of nodes with f (n) ≤ f ∗ , and
much of the work in the search and planning literature has
focused on reducing the size of this effective search space by
developing more accurate, admissible heuristic functions.
In many problems, the size of the last layer of search
(which explores the set of nodes with f (n) = f ∗ ) accounts
for a signiﬁcant fraction of the effective search space of
A∗ . Figure 1 plots the number of states with f (n) = f ∗
(y-axis) vs. the # of states with f (n) ≤ f ∗ for 1104 problem instances from the International Planning Competition
(IPC1998-2011). For many instances, a large fraction of the
nodes in the effective search space have f (n) = f ∗ . For
example, in the Openstacks domain, almost all states with
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

673

