Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Judgment Aggregation under Issue Dependencies
Marco Costantini

Carla Groenland

Ulle Endriss

University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
marcostantini2008@gmail.com

University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
carla.groenland@gmail.com

University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
ulle.endriss@uva.nl

Abstract

Beer

Caviar

Champagne

1
0
0

1
0
1

0
1
1

0
1
0

11 individuals
10 individuals
2 individuals

We introduce a new family of judgment aggregation rules,
called the binomial rules, designed to account for hidden dependencies between some of the issues being judged. To place
them within the landscape of judgment aggregation rules, we
analyse both their axiomatic properties and their computational complexity, and we show that they contain both the
well-known distance-based rule and the basic rule returning
the most frequent overall judgment as special cases. To evaluate the performance of our rules empirically, we apply them
to a dataset of crowdsourced judgments regarding the quality of hotels extracted from the travel website TripAdvisor. In
our experiments we distinguish between the full dataset and a
subset of highly polarised judgments, and we develop a new
notion of polarisation for proﬁles of judgments for this purpose, which may also be of independent interest.

1

Chips

How should they decide? Any feasible outcome consists
of exactly one dish and exactly one drink, i.e., whatever
rule they use to aggregate their judgments should respect
this integrity constraint. If they use the majority rule to decide, they will end up serving beer and caviar. This outcome
happens to respect the integrity constraint for this particular proﬁle, but otherwise—intuitively speaking—it does not
seem a good choice. Unfortunately, no existing approach to
judgment aggregation—including, e.g., premise-based rules
(Dietrich and Mongin 2010), quota rules (Dietrich and List
2007a), distance-based rules (Miller and Osherson 2009),
rules inspired by voting theory (Lang et al. 2011), scoring
rules (Dietrich 2014), and representative-voter rules (Endriss
and Grandi 2014)—allows us to capture this intuition.
The aggregation rules we propose, the binomial rules, assign scores to patterns of accepted/rejected issues. In our
example, one such pattern with a lot of support (and thus
a high score) is the joint acceptance of chips and beer. We
show that, by varying the range of patterns of interest, we
can capture two well-known rules and many interesting rules
in between. To better place our rules relative to known rules,
we analyse both their axiomatic properties and their computational complexity. Finally, we evaluate some of our rules
empirically, by testing them on judgments extracted from a
dataset of hotel reviews. Our rules can be expected to work
particularly well on highly polarised proﬁles of judgments.
To substantiate this point, we propose a new deﬁnition of polarisation, which we believe to be of independent interest.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Section 2 we deﬁne the binomial rules and study their theoretical properties. In Section 3 we develop our notion of
polarisation, introduce the compliant-reviewer problem as a
means for evaluating aggregation rules, and compare two of
our rules with the majority rule. Section 4 concludes.

Introduction

Judgment aggregation deals with the question of how to
best merge the judgments made by several agents regarding a number of issues into a single consensus judgment
for each of these issues (List and Puppe 2009; Grossi and
Pigozzi 2014). It generalises preference aggregation (Dietrich and List 2007b), and is closely related to a body of work
on belief merging in AI (Everaere, Konieczny, and Marquis
2015). While originating in legal theory, philosophy, and
economics (List and Pettit 2002), several recent contributions have focused on the algorithmic dimension of judgment aggregation and emphasised its relevance to a variety
of applications associated with AI, such as decision making
in multiagent systems and the aggregation of information
gathered by means of crowdsourcing (Endriss 2016).
In this paper, we introduce a new family of judgment aggregation rules aimed at capturing a phenomenon that hitherto has not received any explicit attention in the literature,
namely the fact that when many individuals agree on how
to judge certain subsets of issues, then this may suggest that
there are hidden dependencies between those issues. To illustrate the idea, consider the following example. A group
of 23 gastro-entertainment professionals need to decide on
the ideal meal to serve at a party. They propose one dish and
one drink each, leading to the following proﬁle:

2

Binomial Rules

In this section we introduce a class of aggregation rules that
try to account for observed dependencies between issues.
The formal framework we work in is binary aggregation

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

468

