Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Separators and Adjustment Sets in Markov Equivalent DAGs
Benito van der Zander∗ and Maciej Liśkiewicz
Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, University of Lübeck
Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck, Germany
{benito,liskiewi}@tcs.uni-luebeck.de

Z1

Abstract
In practice the vast majority of causal effect estimations from
observational data are computed using adjustment sets which
avoid confounding by adjusting for appropriate covariates.
Recently several graphical criteria for selecting adjustment
sets have been proposed. They handle causal directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) as well as more general types of graphs
that represent Markov equivalence classes of DAGs, including completed partially directed acyclic graphs (CPDAGs).
Though expressed in graphical language, it is not obvious
how the criteria can be used to obtain effective algorithms for
ﬁnding adjustment sets. In this paper we provide a new criterion which leads to an efﬁcient algorithmic framework to ﬁnd,
test and enumerate covariate adjustments for chain graphs –
mixed graphs representing in a compact way a broad range of
Markov equivalence classes of DAGs.

1

X

Z2
Z3

Y

D1 :

Z1

Z2

X

Z3

Y D2 :

Z1

Z2

X

Z3

Y

Figure 1: A chain graph (to the left) which represents two
Markov equivalent DAGs: D1 and D2 . Relative to exposure
X and outcome Y , Z = {Z2 } is an adjustment set both in
D1 and in D2 . Thus Z is an adjustment set in the chain graph.
rithmic framework for effective testing and ﬁnding covariate
adjustments in DAGs.
However, in practice the underlying DAG is usually unknown. Instead several causal DAGs exist which explain
given statistical data and background knowledge. For example, the structure learning algorithm proposed by Verma and
Pearl (1990; 1992) constructs, for a given list of conditional
independence statements M, a CPDAG (Andersson et al.
1997) representing all DAGs which are complete causal explanations of M. Meek (1995) extends this algorithm providing a method to compute a complete causal explanation
for M which is consistent with background knowledge represented as a set of required and forbidden directed edges. In
this case, the resulting causal explanation is given as a mixed
graph, which might not be a CPDAG anymore.
In our study we assume that the learned causal structure
is represented as a chain graph – a mixed graph containing
no semi-directed cycles (Lauritzen and Wermuth 1989). A
primary beneﬁt of chain graphs is that they provide an elegant framework for modeling and analyzing a broad range
of Markov equivalence classes of DAGs (Verma and Pearl
1990; Andersson et al. 1997).
Given a chain graph and the pre-intervention distribution
we can compute causal effects using the covariate adjustment approach. However, the challenging task now is to ﬁnd
an adjustment set which is common for every DAG represented by the chain graph. Figure 1 shows an example for
such adjustment. A naive approach consisting in searching
for adjustment sets in all DAGs leads to exponential time algorithms since the number of DAGs represented by a chain
graph can grow exponentially in the size of the graph.
Recently Perković et al. (2015) have presented a graphical criterion that is necessary and sufﬁcient for CPDAGs.

Introduction

Covariate adjustment is one of the most widely used techniques to estimate causal effects from observational data. By
a causal effect we mean a probability distribution of some
outcomes in post-treatment period resulting from the treatment (Pearl 2009). The primary difﬁculty in application of
the adjustment approach is the selection of covariates one
needs to adjust to compute the post-treatment distribution.
The concept of covariate adjustments is well-understood
in cases when the structure encoding the causal relationships
between variables of interest is fully known and represented
as a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Pearl’s back-door criterion (Pearl 1995) is probably the most well-known method
of selecting possible sets for adjustment in DAGs. It is sufﬁcient but not necessary. Due to Shpitser, VanderWeele, and
Robins (2010) we know a criterion expressed in graphical
language that is necessary and sufﬁcient in the sense that it
is satisﬁed if and only if the adjustment conditions are fulﬁlled. This reduces the properties of probability distributions
to properties of causal graphs. Based on the work by Shpitser et.al., Textor and Liśkiewicz (2011) and van der Zander, Liśkiewicz, and Textor (2014) have proposed an algo∗

This work was supported by the Graduate School for Computing in Medicine and Life Sciences funded by Germany’s Excellence Initiative [DFG GSC 235/2]
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3315

