Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Gaussian Process Planning with Lipschitz Continuous Reward Functions:
Towards Unifying Bayesian Optimization, Active Learning, and Beyond
Chun Kai Ling∗ and Kian Hsiang Low∗ and Patrick Jaillet†

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore∗
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA†
{chunkai, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg∗ , jaillet@mit.edu†

agent are deﬁned based on some formal measure of predictive uncertainty such as the entropy or mutual information criterion. To resolve the issue of sub-optimality (i.e.,
local maxima) faced by greedy algorithms (Krause, Singh,
and Guestrin 2008; Low et al. 2012; Ouyang et al. 2014;
Zhang et al. 2016), recent developments have made nonmyopic AL computationally tractable with provable performance guarantees (Cao, Low, and Dolan 2013; Hoang et al.
2014; Low, Dolan, and Khosla 2009; 2008; 2011), some of
which have further investigated the performance advantage
of adaptivity by proposing nonmyopic adaptive observation
selection policies that depend on past observations.
Bayesian optimization (BO). Its objective is to select and
gather the most informative (possibly noisy) observations
for ﬁnding the global maximum of an unknown, highly
complex (e.g., non-convex, no closed-form expression nor
derivative) objective function (i.e., task environment) modeled by a GP given a sampling budget (e.g., number of costly
function evaluations). The rewards of a BO agent are deﬁned using an improvement-based (Brochu, Cora, and de
Freitas 2010) (e.g., probability of improvement (PI) or expected improvement (EI) over currently found maximum),
entropy-based (Hernández-Lobato, Hoffman, and Ghahramani 2014), or upper conﬁdence bound (UCB) acquisition
function (Srinivas et al. 2010). A limitation of most BO algorithms is that they are myopic. To overcome this limitation, approximation algorithms for nonmyopic adaptive BO
(Marchant, Ramos, and Sanner 2014; Osborne, Garnett, and
Roberts 2009) have been proposed, but their performances
are not theoretically guaranteed.
General tasks/problems. In practice, other types of rewards
(e.g., logarithmic, unit step functions) need to be speciﬁed
for an agent to plan and operate effectively in a given realworld task environment (e.g., natural phenomenon like wind
or temperature) modeled by a GP, as detailed in Section 2.
As shall be elucidated later, similarities in the structure
of the above problems motivate us to consider whether it is
possible to tackle the overall challenge by devising a nonmyopic adaptive GP planning framework with a general class
of reward functions unifying some AL and BO criteria and
affording practitioners some ﬂexibility to specify their desired choices for deﬁning new tasks/problems. Such an integrated planning and learning framework has to address
the exploration-exploitation trade-off common to the above

Abstract
This paper presents a novel nonmyopic adaptive Gaussian
process planning (GPP) framework endowed with a general class of Lipschitz continuous reward functions that can
unify some active learning/sensing and Bayesian optimization criteria and offer practitioners some ﬂexibility to specify their desired choices for deﬁning new tasks/problems. In
particular, it utilizes a principled Bayesian sequential decision problem framework for jointly and naturally optimizing
the exploration-exploitation trade-off. In general, the resulting induced GPP policy cannot be derived exactly due to an
uncountable set of candidate observations. A key contribution
of our work here thus lies in exploiting the Lipschitz continuity of the reward functions to solve for a nonmyopic adaptive -optimal GPP (-GPP) policy. To plan in real time, we
further propose an asymptotically optimal, branch-and-bound
anytime variant of -GPP with performance guarantee. We
empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our -GPP policy and its anytime variant in Bayesian optimization and an
energy harvesting task.

1

Introduction

The fundamental challenge of integrated planning and learning is to design an autonomous agent that can plan its actions
to maximize its expected total rewards while interacting with
an unknown task environment. Recent research efforts tackling this challenge have progressed from the use of simple
Markov models assuming discrete-valued, independent observations to that of a rich class of Bayesian nonparametric
Gaussian process (GP) models characterizing continuousvalued, correlated observations in order to represent the latent structure of complex, possibly noisy task environments
with higher ﬁdelity. Such a challenge is posed by the following important problems in machine learning, among others:
Active learning/sensing (AL). In the context of environmental sensing (e.g., adaptive sampling in oceanography,
trafﬁc sensing (Chen et al. 2012; Chen, Low, and Tan 2013;
Chen et al. 2015)), its objective is to select the most informative (possibly noisy) observations for predicting a spatially varying environmental ﬁeld (i.e., task environment)
modeled by a GP subject to some sampling budget constraints (e.g., number of sensors). The rewards of an AL
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1860

