Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Counter-Transitivity in Argument Ranking Semantics∗
Fuan Pu, Jian Luo and Guiming Luo
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Pu.Fuan@gmail.com, j-luo10@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gluo@tsinghua.edu.cn

mainly concern on how to utilize this principle to compare
and rank arguments. A formal theory about the argument
ranking semantics is developed based on this principle.

Abstract
The principle of counter-transitivity plays a vital role in argumentation. It states that an argument is strong when its attackers are weak, but weak when its attackers are strong. In this
work, we develop a formal theory about the argument ranking semantics based on this principle. Three approaches, i.e.,
quantity-based, quality-based and the unity of them, are deﬁned to implement the principle. Then, we show an iterative
reﬁnement algorithm for capturing the ranking on arguments
based on the recursive nature of the principle.

The principle of counter-transitivity
Let T be some set. An ordering  on T is a binary relation
on T (i.e.,  ⊆ T × T ) such that: (1)  is reﬂective; (2)  is
transitive. Here, x  y means that x is at least as acceptable
as y. We denote x ≃ y iff x  y and y  x, which means x
and y are equally acceptable. Moreover, x y, means x is
strictly more acceptable than y, iff x  y but not y  x. x is
incomparable with y if both x  y and y  x are not in .
The ranking semantics deﬁned for an AF = X , R is a
function Γ which will transform AF into an ordering on X ,
denoted by Γ . Now, we formally deﬁne the principle of
counter-transitivity as below:

Introduction
Argumentation theory has gained signiﬁcant interest in the
ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence as it provides the basis for computational models inspired by the way humans reason. The
most widely used framework for exploring general issues
of argumentation is Dung’s abstract argumentation (Dung
1995). It is represented as a pair AF = X , R, where X is
a ﬁnite set of arguments and R ⊆ X × X is a binary attack relation on X . (a, b) ∈ R means that a attacks b, or
a is an attacker of b. We denote by R− (x) the subset of X
containing those arguments that attack the argument x ∈ X .
Dung provides a series of extension-based semantics for
solving an AF by selecting acceptable subsets. Extensions
are evaluated on the basis of the principle that an argument
is accepted if all its attackers are rejected; an argument is
rejected if at least one of its attackers is accepted. To generalize Dung’s two extreme views on reasoning, a trend has
emerged toward considering and exploring rankings on arguments induced by a larger number of categories or continuous numerical scales (e.g., (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex
2005; Grossi and Modgil 2015)). Even though numerous
works have been done, one basic principle behind them is:
the more acceptable the arguments that attacks argument
x are, the more unacceptable x is, and the more unacceptable these arguments are, the better x’s acceptability is. Of
course, if no argument attacks x, then it is indeed very acceptable. In short, an argument x is ranked higher than argument y, if the attackers of x are ranked lower than those of
y. Borrowing concepts from (Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2013),
we call this principle as counter-transitivity. In this work, we

Deﬁnition 1 (Counter-transitivity). Let AF = X , R, and
Γ a ranking semantics. Γ satisﬁes counter-transitivity iff for
every x, y ∈ X , if R− (y) Γ R− (x), then x Γ y.
Note that Deﬁnition 1 involves the concept of set comparison, i.e., the comparison between R− (x) and R− (y).
The deﬁnition of the order between two sets is similar with
that of the order between two elements in previous deﬁnitions. In this work, we mainly consider three approaches
to instantiate the concept of set comparison. The ﬁrst one
is the cardinality-based comparison: S1 precedes S2 if the
elements of S1 are more numerous than those of S2 , i.e.,
S1 C S2 iff |S1 | ≥ |S2 |. The cardinality-based comparison can be seen as a quantitative approach. The second approach, called quality-based comparison, states that S1 is
better than S2 iff there exists one element in S1 satisfying
that it is ranked higher than all elements in S2 , formally,
S1 Q S2 iff ∃x ∈ S1 such that x  y for all y ∈ S2 . To
compare arguments by considering both quantity and quality in their unity, thus we introduce unity-based comparison:
S1 U S2 iff S1 C S2 and S1 Q S2 .
The above three approaches can induce three ranking semantics, called cardinality-, quality- and unity-based ranking semantics, respectively, and denoted by C, Q and U, respectively. Let C and U be two orderings on X transformed from the semantics C and U w.r.t. AF = X , R, respectively. Obviously, U ⊆ C . We can see that the unitybased ranking semantics inherits the quantitative nature of
the cardinality-based ranking semantics. In the following

∗
The research reported here was supported by the Funds
NSFC61171121 and NSFC61572279.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4256

