Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

The Turing Test in the Classroom
Lisa Torrey, Karen Johnson,
Sid Sondergard, Pedro Ponce, Laura Desmond
St. Lawrence University

The Imitation Game, known better today as the Turing
Test, has been a matter of debate ever since. Turing’s suggestion had a bold implicit claim: that conversation is a complex enough behavior that conversational ability is sufﬁcient
evidence of intelligence. Objections (Searle 1980), as well
as defenses (Levesque 2009), are numerous.
In 1991, Hugh Loebner began sponsoring the Loebner
Prize, an annual contest modeled after the Turing Test. Computer programs entered into the contest attempt to convince
human judges that they are also human. The program that
most often succeeds is awarded the annual prize.
In the 1991 contest, 10 judges had 7-minute conversations
with each of 6 programs and 2 human “confederates” and
ranked them from least to most human. The judges and confederates were not computer scientists, and presumably they
did not know each other. To make the program developers’
task easier, conversations were restricted to speciﬁc topics.
Participants were instructed to converse naturally, without
“trickery or guile” (Shieber 1994).
Although the two humans were not ranked ﬁrst by every judge, their average rankings were higher than any program. The programs may have been even less successful
if the judges had been more knowledgeable in computer
science, or had been permitted to conduct an interrogation
rather than a polite conversation (Shieber 1994). The format of the Loebner contest has changed from year to year in
response to such observations.
By 2000, there were no longer any restrictions placed on
conversation topics or interrogation styles. After 5 minutes
of conversation, judges classiﬁed each contestant as human
or computer. Then the conversation continued for 10 more
minutes, and the judges decided again at the end. Their classiﬁcations were 91% correct after 5 minutes and 93% correct
after 15 minutes (Moor 2001).
In 2008, the judges conducted 5-minute conversations
with a human and a program simultaneously on a split
screen, and had to decide between them. The conversations
were not synchronized in a question-answer format; any participant could send a message at any time. The winning program that year convinced 3 of the 12 judges to decide the
wrong way (Shah and Warwick 2009).
In 2013, the judges again had simultaneous unsynchronized conversations. However, this time they were all experts in artiﬁcial intelligence, and they made no classiﬁcation mistakes at all.
One interesting aspect of Turing Tests in all their forms
is that humans sometimes get labeled as computers. There

Abstract
This paper discusses the Turing Test as an educational activity for undergraduate students. It describes in detail an experiment that we conducted in a ﬁrst-year non-CS course. We
also suggest other pedagogical purposes that the Turing Test
could serve.

Introduction
The Turing Test occasionally appears as a hands-on activity in K-12 classrooms (Lehman 2009) and museum exhibits (Hollister et al. 2013). However, the 2013 ACM curriculum suggests only that computer science majors should
be able to describe it (The Joint Task Force on Computing
Curricula 2013).
We propose a few more active roles the Turing Test could
play in the undergraduate classroom, both within and beyond the CS major. For example, it could serve as:
• A broad-interest introduction to computer science in a
ﬁrst-year course.
• An exercise in experimental design and analysis in a psychology or statistics course.
• A hands-on social activity in a course on philosophy or
artiﬁcial intelligence.
• A programming project for advanced CS students.
We begin by motivating each of these examples. Then we
elaborate on the ﬁrst one by presenting a Turing Test that we
conducted with a large group of ﬁrst-year undergraduates.
We describe how we organized the experiment, the software
we designed for it, and the data it generated. Finally, we
share some observations and advice that may help other instructors plan successful Turing Tests.

History of the Turing Test
In 1950, Alan Turing asked his famous question: “Can machines think?” To provide a way to answer it, he introduced
the idea of the Imitation Game (Turing 1950). In this game,
a human interrogator converses electronically with another
human and with a machine, and must decide which is which.
If the interrogator cannot reliably tell the difference, Turing suggested, then we ought to conclude that the machine
thinks.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4113

