Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unfolding Temporal Dynamics: Predicting Social Media
Popularity Using Multi-Scale Temporal Decomposition
Bo Wu1,2 , Tao Mei3 , Wen-Huang Cheng4 , Yongdong Zhang1
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Microsoft Research, China
4
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{wubo, zhyd}@ict.ac.cn tmei@microsoft.com whcheng@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Time information plays a crucial role on social media
popularity. Existing research on popularity prediction,
effective though, ignores temporal information which is
highly related to user-item associations and thus often
results in limited success. An essential way is to consider all these factors (user, item, and time), which capture the dynamic nature of photo popularity. In this paper, we present a novel approach to factorize the popularity into user-item context and time-sensitive context for exploring the mechanism of dynamic popularity.
The user-item context provides a holistic view of popularity, while the time-sensitive context captures the temporal dynamics nature of popularity. Accordingly, we
develop two kinds of time-sensitive features, including
user activeness variability and photo prevalence variability. To predict photo popularity, we propose a novel
framework named Multi-scale Temporal Decomposition (MTD), which decomposes the popularity matrix in
latent spaces based on contextual associations. Speciﬁcally, the proposed MTD models time-sensitive context
on different time scales, which is beneﬁcial to automatically learn temporal patterns. Based on the experiments
conducted on a real-world dataset with 1.29M photos
from Flickr, our proposed MTD can achieve the prediction accuracy of 79.8% and outperform the best three
state-of-the-art methods with a relative improvement of
9.6% on average.

Figure 1: Popularity is observed to exhibit varying trends of
changes at different time scales.

and Jose 2014). Existing research on popularity prediction predominantly focuses on exploring the correlation between popularity and user-item factors, such as item content (Hong, Dan, and Davison 2011; Cappallo, Mensink, and
Snoek 2015), user cues (Khosla, Sarma, and Hamid 2014),
social relation (Nwana, Avestimehr, and Chen 2013), and
user-item interaction (Niu et al. 2012). In fact, time also exerts crucial impact on the popularity but is often overlooked.
According to the 2015 survey (Patel 2015), it makes a big
difference on when content should be shared in order to receive the most social trafﬁc. For example, best times to pin
on Pinterest are Saturday, 2am-4am and 8pm-11pm; Facebook has 86% of its posts published during the workdays
with engagement peaking on Thursday and Friday. These
phenomena show the importance using such time-sensitive
context for popularity prediction. In other words, considering user-item factors only is insufﬁcient for capturing popularity dynamics over time. As a result, our problem can thus
be redeﬁned as follows: how to predict the popularity s of a
post v from a user u with sharing time t.
In this paper, we propose to investigate the popularity prediction by factoring popularity into two contextual associations, i.e., user-item context and time-sensitive context. The
user-item context is linked to popularity with user-speciﬁc

Introduction
In recent years, popularity prediction on social media has
attracted extensive attention because of its widespread applications, such as online marketing, trend detection and resource allocation (Tatar et al. 2014). Generally, given historical user-item pairs, popularity prediction is deﬁned as
the problem of estimating the rating scores, view counts
or click-through of a newly post in social media (Pinto,
Almeida, and Goncalves 2013; McParlane, Moshfeghi,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

272

