Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

IRobot: Teaching the Basics of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in High Schools
Harald Burgsteiner

Martin Kandlhofer

Gerald Steinbauer

Institute for eHealth
Graz University of Applied Sciences
Eggenberger Allee 11,
8020 Graz, Austria
harald.burgsteiner@fh-joanneum.at

Institute for Software Technology
Graz University of Technology
Inffeldgasse 16b/II,
8010 Graz, Austria
kandlhofer@ist.tugraz.at

Institute for Software Technology
Graz University of Technology
Inffeldgasse 16b/II,
8010 Graz, Austria
steinbauer@ist.tugraz.at

grates robotics in its regular curriculum (e.g. participating in
robotics competitions, offering robotics electives etc.).
Teaching the fundamental concepts and techniques of AI
at school level (independent of any platform or programming language) is quite rare. Many approaches focus on undergraduate/graduate students at university level (e.g. (Torrey 2012; McGovern, Tidwell, and Rushing 2011)) or on
teacher training courses (e.g. (Dilger 2005)). Common approaches at school level like (Heinze, Haase, and Higgins
2010; Fok and Ong 1996) only deal with some selected
aspects of AI (e.g. history, Turing Test, chat bots, neural
networks etc.) or use limited tools or platforms to illustrate AI concepts (e.g. (Featherston et al. 2014)). In the following sections we will brieﬂy describe the methodology
(structure, content, teaching methods), the evaluation and results/conclusions of this pilot project.

Abstract
Profound knowledge about Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) will
become increasingly important for careers in science and engineering. Therefore an innovative educational project teaching fundamental concepts of AI at high school level will be
presented in this paper. We developed an AI-course covering
major topics (problem solving, search, planning, graphs, data
structures, automata, agent systems, machine learning) which
comprises both theoretical and hands-on components. A pilot
project was conducted and empirically evaluated. Results of
the evaluation show that the participating pupils have become
familiar with those concepts and the various topics addressed.
Results and lessons learned from this project form the basis
for further projects in different schools which intend to integrate AI in future secondary science education.

Introduction and motivation

Methodology

Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has already become part of our
everyday life (e.g. intelligent household appliances, smartphones, Google, Siri, AI in computer games, . . . ). Many of
us know about the existence of services and devices based
on AI, but hardly anybody knows about the technology behind them. Therefore it is of great importance to already familiarize young people in school with the technical background and the underlying concepts including algorithms,
data structures and programming/coding. Like classic literacy which includes writing, reading and mathematics, literacy in AI/computer science will become a major issue in
future. Furthermore, with AI literacy pupils also receive a
solid preparation for subsequent studies at university level
and their future career. Currently, computer science education in school does not focus on teaching these fundamental topics in an adequate manner. In order to overcome this
shortcoming we developed a high school AI-course (called
’iRobot’) dealing with major topics of AI/computer science
(automatons, agent systems, data structures, search algorithms, graphs, problem solving, planning, machine learning). The course was divided into seven weekly teaching units of two hours, comprising both theoretical and
hands-on components. We conducted and evaluated a pilot
project in a representative Austrian high school which inte-

The project has been divided into seven weekly teaching
units (two hours each, held by university researchers) comprising theoretical and hands-on components based on the
principles of constructionism (Papert 1993). Nine pupils
from grades 9-11 (average age 16.5 years; 1 female, 8 male;
all with prior knowledge in robotics but none in AI) participated in these lessons as part of their robotics electives. According to the concept of constructionism (Alimisis 2009)
pupils were actively involved in the learning process. Activities included e.g. paper-and-pencil or programming exercises, robot construction, discussions, group works and
homework. Contents were adapted and set in context with
pupils’ prior knowledge in robotics (which they had acquired from participating in junior robotics competitions).
The course was structured around the following major AI
topics as dealt with in (Russell and Norvig 2009)):
Automata were addressed in the beginning of the
course since they form a neutral basis for describing systems/behaviours and illustrate the decision making process
in a basic way. One of the practical assignments dealt with
representing the pupils’ existing robots as a deterministic ﬁnite automaton.
Intelligent agents (simple reﬂex, model-based reﬂex,
goal-based, utility-based agents) were introduced subsequently, providing a good context to pupils’ prior robotics
experiences. Agent models are valuable tools to demonstrate

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4126

