Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

“8 Amazing Secrets for Getting More Clicks”: Detecting
Clickbaits in News Streams Using Article Informality
Prakhar Biyani, Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis, and John Blackmer
Yahoo Labs, Sunnyvale, California, USA
Email: {pxb5080, kostas, johnbl}@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
Clickbaits are articles with misleading titles, exaggerating the
content on the landing page. Their goal is to entice users
to click on the title in order to monetize the landing page.
The content on the landing page is usually of low quality.
Their presence in user homepage stream of news aggregator
sites (e.g., Yahoo news, Google news) may adversely impact
user experience. Hence, it is important to identify and demote or block them on homepages. In this paper, we present a
machine-learning model to detect clickbaits. We use a variety
of features and show that the degree of informality of a webpage (as measured by different metrics) is a strong indicator
of it being a clickbait. We conduct extensive experiments to
evaluate our approach and analyze properties of clickbait and
non-clickbait articles. Our model achieves high performance
(74.9% F-1 score) in predicting clickbaits.

Figure 1: Examples of clickbaits.

order to be blocked or demoted in the homepage stream. Algorithms for ranking and recommending articles rely signiﬁcantly on Click Through Rates (CTR) (Bian et al. 2013;
Agarwal et al. 2013). The higher the CTR of a page, the
higher its position in the stream. However, clickbaits, by nature, have high CTR’s and, hence, the approach cannot be
used to differentiate them from genuine high-quality pages.
A related ﬁeld of research is identifying bad content on
the web, such as spam and fake websites, where features like
link-structure (Becchetti et al. 2008) and blacklists of urls,
hosts and IPs (Abbasi et al. 2010; Graham 2003) have been
found to be useful. However, clickbaits are not spam or fake
pages. They can be hosted on reputed news sites. Therefore,
these features cannot be used for clickbait detection.
To address the problem of detecting clickbaits, we investigate designing features which are strong indicators of clickbait and combine them in a machine learned model to make
automatic inference of whether an article is clickbait or not.
We use a variety of features extracted from the body, title,
and url of a webpage such as its content, degree of informality and similarity between title and body. Experimental
results show that the classiﬁer achieves strong performance.
Contributions of our work as follows: 1. Formalize the
concept of clickbait by deﬁning eight types of clickbait. 2.
Develop the ﬁrst automatic machine learning method for
identifying clickbaits. 3. Use novel informality features for
clickbait classiﬁcation which have not been previously used
for similar problems such as identifying spam and fake webpages, and show that these features are the most important

Introduction
News headlines are often made to look more interesting/appealing than the actual article, in order to attract
clicks, and subsequently monetize the landing page. Various
strategies such as building suspense, sensation, luring and
teasing, and certain stylistic formats are used to make the
headlines look more interesting. Though this is a common
journalistic practice, it leads to a frustrating user experience
in cases where the landing page, i.e., the actual article, is
of low quality and signiﬁcantly under-delivers the content
promised in the headline. We call such pages “clickbaits”.
Figure 1 shows examples of clickbaits from the Yahoo
homepage stream. The examples link to these articles 1 2 3 .
As can be seen, the headlines highly exaggerate the content
of the landing page.
News aggregators such as Yahoo News serve articles from
different news sites on their users’ homepages. Since low
quality articles such as clickbaits decrease user satisfaction
and increase abandonment rate, they should be detected in
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://news.yahoo.com/justin-bieber-makes-huge-lifechanging-184057049.html
2
http://news.yahoo.com/earth-will-only-have-12-hours-toprepare-for-081651736.html
3
http://www.cheatsheet.com/money-career/want-to-be-abillionaire-solve-one-of-these-5-problems.html

94

