Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Character-Aware Neural Language Models
Yoon Kim

Yacine Jernite

David Sontag

Alexander M. Rush

School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
yoonkim@seas.harvard.edu

Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
jernite@cs.nyu.edu

Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
dsontag@cs.nyu.edu

School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
srush@seas.harvard.edu

While NLMs have been shown to outperform count-based
n-gram language models (Mikolov et al. 2011), they are
blind to subword information (e.g. morphemes). For example, they do not know, a priori, that eventful, eventfully, uneventful, and uneventfully should have structurally related
embeddings in the vector space. Embeddings of rare words
can thus be poorly estimated, leading to high perplexities
for rare words (and words surrounding them). This is especially problematic in morphologically rich languages with
long-tailed frequency distributions or domains with dynamic
vocabularies (e.g. social media).
In this work, we propose a language model that leverages subword information through a character-level convolutional neural network (CNN), whose output is used
as an input to a recurrent neural network language model
(RNN-LM). Unlike previous works that utilize subword information via morphemes (Botha and Blunsom 2014; Luong, Socher, and Manning 2013), our model does not require
morphological tagging as a pre-processing step. And, unlike
the recent line of work which combines input word embeddings with features from a character-level model (dos Santos
and Zadrozny 2014; dos Santos and Guimaraes 2015), our
model does not utilize word embeddings at all in the input
layer. Given that most of the parameters in NLMs are from
the word embeddings, the proposed model has signiﬁcantly
fewer parameters than previous NLMs, making it attractive
for applications where model size may be an issue (e.g. cell
phones).
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:

Abstract
We describe a simple neural language model that relies only on character-level inputs. Predictions are still
made at the word-level. Our model employs a convolutional neural network (CNN) and a highway network over characters, whose output is given to a
long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network language model (RNN-LM). On the English
Penn Treebank the model is on par with the existing
state-of-the-art despite having 60% fewer parameters.
On languages with rich morphology (Arabic, Czech,
French, German, Spanish, Russian), the model outperforms word-level/morpheme-level LSTM baselines,
again with fewer parameters. The results suggest that on
many languages, character inputs are sufﬁcient for language modeling. Analysis of word representations obtained from the character composition part of the model
reveals that the model is able to encode, from characters
only, both semantic and orthographic information.

Introduction
Language modeling is a fundamental task in artiﬁcial intelligence and natural language processing (NLP), with applications in speech recognition, text generation, and machine
translation. A language model is formalized as a probability
distribution over a sequence of strings (words), and traditional methods usually involve making an n-th order Markov
assumption and estimating n-gram probabilities via counting and subsequent smoothing (Chen and Goodman 1998).
The count-based models are simple to train, but probabilities
of rare n-grams can be poorly estimated due to data sparsity
(despite smoothing techniques).
Neural Language Models (NLM) address the n-gram data
sparsity issue through parameterization of words as vectors
(word embeddings) and using them as inputs to a neural network (Bengio, Ducharme, and Vincent 2003; Mikolov et al.
2010). The parameters are learned as part of the training
process. Word embeddings obtained through NLMs exhibit
the property whereby semantically close words are likewise
close in the induced vector space (as is the case with nonneural techniques such as Latent Semantic Analysis (Deerwester, Dumais, and Harshman 1990)).

• on English, we achieve results on par with the existing
state-of-the-art on the Penn Treebank (PTB), despite having approximately 60% fewer parameters, and
• on morphologically rich languages (Arabic, Czech,
French, German, Spanish, and Russian), our model
outperforms various baselines (Kneser-Ney, wordlevel/morpheme-level LSTM), again with fewer parameters.
We have released all the code for the models described in
this paper.1

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2741

https://github.com/yoonkim/lstm-char-cnn

