Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Target Surveillance in Adversarial Environments Using POMDPs
Maxim Egorov and Mykel J. Kochenderfer

Jaak J. Uudmae

Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305
{megorov, mykel}@stanford.edu

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305
juudmae@stanford.edu

(POMDP) to account for uncertainty in the adversary’s location. Problems that include a mixture of fully and partially
observable variables in the system state can be formulated
as mixed observability MDPs (MOMDPs) to reduce computational complexity (Ong et al. 2009). An example map of
an urban environment with a single agent, target, and ballistic threat is shown in Figure 1. The heat map represents
the belief, i.e, a probability distribution over the states of the
threat, as a representation of uncertainty. In this work, the
adversarial surveillance problem was modeled as a MOMDP.
The policy resulting from solving the MOMDP considers the
dynamics of the surveillance agent, its sensing capabilities,
and the behavior model of the threat (the adversary) and optimizes the surveillance strategy based on a predeﬁned reward
function. The reward function considers the competing objectives of surveillance persistency and risk mitigation. In
this paper, we investigate the feasibility of applying state-ofthe-art MOMDP solution methods to the problem of target
surveillance under ballistic threat.
The problem of optimally placing sensors in static networks has been extensively studied (Dhillon and Chakrabarty
2003; Akbarzadeh et al. 2013). Recent work extended the
problem to environments with static ballistic threats (Richie
et al. 2013). These works focus on stationary sensors that do
not require a control policy to operate. In the case of adversarial target surveillance, the surveillance agent is dynamic
and must move in order to be effective. Dynamic surveillance
has also been a topic of previous research. Control policies
have been developed for sensor network coverage with guaranteed collision avoidance (Hussein and Stipanovic 2007),
target tracking (Lee et al. 2003), and persistence surveillance (Nigam et al. 2012). These methods develop control
policies from ﬁrst principles and provide some optimality
guarantees on the solution. However, these approaches do not
consider the uncertainties that arise from operating in urban
environments ﬁlled with line-of-sight obstructions. POMDPs
have been applied to problems in which an agent must track
a moving target in an environment with line-of-sight obstructions (Hsu, Lee, and Rong 2008), and this paper aims to build
on that work.
There are many ways to model the behavior of an adversarial entity in a decision process. One approach is to formulate the problem as a Bayesian Stackelberg game (Paruchuri
2008), in which the agent is uncertain about the types of

Abstract
This paper introduces an extension of the target surveillance
problem in which the surveillance agent is exposed to an adversarial ballistic threat. The problem is formulated as a mixed
observability Markov decision process (MOMDP), which is a
factored variant of the partially observable Markov decision
process, to account for state and dynamic uncertainties. The
control policy resulting from solving the MOMDP aims to
optimize the frequency of target observations and minimize
exposure to the ballistic threat. The adversary’s behavior is
modeled with a level-k policy, which is used to construct the
state transition of the MOMDP. The approach is empirically
evaluated against a MOMDP adversary and against a human
opponent in a target surveillance computer game. The empirical results demonstrate that, on average, level 3 MOMDP
policies outperform lower level reasoning policies as well as
human players.

1

Introduction

Adversarial target surveillance arises in many peacekeeping
operations in which a strategic target must be monitored in
the presence of hostile forces. For example, a voting booth in
a politically unstable region may be a target of adversaries
and require persistent monitoring. Currently, planning for
such missions is done by human experts using a set of guiding principles that balance mission objectives (U.S. Army
2008). However, optimal decision making in hostile environments is difﬁcult due to the potential visual constraints
imposed by urban structure and the uncertainty associated
with the behavior of adversaries. In this work, we consider the
problem of target surveillance in the presence of adversarial
ballistic threats. There are two primary challenges associated
with this problem: how to accurately model an intelligent
adversary and how to plan optimally. An intelligent surveillance planner that solves these two challenges can be used
as a high level controller for autonomous systems or as a
decision support tool for aiding peacekeeping forces in the
ﬁeld.
One way to capture the stochastic nature of target surveillance is to formulate the problem as a Markov decision process (MDP), or more generally as a partially observable MDP
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2473

