Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Topic Concentration in Query Focused Summarization Datasets
Tal Baumel, Raphael Cohen, Michael Elhadad
Ben Gurion University, Dept. of Computer Science
{talbau, cohenrap, elhadad}@cs.bgu.ac.il

topically coherent document sets as input to the summarization task. Notably, the extent to which the document
clusters are focused on the query is not directly observable:
assessors could select between 50% to 100% of the documents as "relevant to the topic”. In this paper, we investigate the level of topic concentration (ratio of sentences
relevant to the query) in QFS datasets, and the impact of
the dataset topic concentration on QFS algorithms
As a research objective, QFS is a useful variant of generic multi-document summarization because it helps articulate the difference between content centrality within the
documents in the cluster and query relevance. This distinction is critical when dealing with complex information
needs (such as the TREC 2006 Legal Track (Baron et al.,
2006)) because we expect that the summary should cover
multiple aspects of the same general topic. However, the
difference between central and topic-relevant content will
only be significant when we can observe a clear difference
between these two components in the dataset. Interestingly,
it has been observed in (Gupta et al., 2007) that generic
summarization algorithms (which simply ignore the query)
perform as well as many proposed QFS algorithms on
standard QFS datasets, such as DUC 2005. We hypothesize
that this is due to the fact that existing QFS datasets have
very high topic concentration in the input (the document
cluster). In other words, the datasets used to evaluate QFS
are not geared towards distinguishing central and topic
content
Topic concentration is an abstract property of the dataset
and there is no explicit way to quantify it. A direct method
of quantifying this property was introduced before (Gupta
et al., 2007) and tested on DUC 2005. The method
measures similarity between sentences in the documents
cluster and an Oracle expansion of the query. As many as
86% of the sentences in the overall document set were
found similar to the query. We find however that this direct
method has problems that we will discuss later. We introduce an alternative way to assess topic concentration in a
dataset: which compares the behavior of summarization
algorithms on varying subsets of the document cluster. On

Abstract
Query-Focused Summarization (QFS) summarizes a document cluster in response to a specific input query. QFS algorithms must combine query relevance assessment, central
content identification, and redundancy avoidance. Frustratingly, state of the art algorithms designed for QFS do not
significantly improve upon generic summarization methods,
which ignore query relevance, when evaluated on traditional
QFS datasets. We hypothesize this lack of success stems
from the nature of the dataset. We define a task-based
method to quantify topic concentration in datasets, i.e., the
ratio of sentences within the dataset that are relevant to the
query, and observe that the DUC 2005, 2006 and 2007 datasets suffer from very high topic concentration. We introduce TD-QFS, a new QFS dataset with controlled levels of
topic concentration. We compare competitive baseline algorithms on TD-QFS and report strong improvement in
ROUGE performance for algorithms that properly model
query relevance as opposed to generic summarizers. We further present three new and simple QFS algorithms, RelSum,
ThresholdSum, and TFIDF-KLSum that outperform state of
the art QFS algorithms on the TD-QFS dataset by a large
margin.

Introduction
The task of Query-Focused Summarization (QFS) was
introduced as a variant of generic multi-document summarization in shared-tasks like DUC 2005 (Dang, 2005). QFS
goes beyond factoid extraction and consists of producing
“a brief, well-organized, fluent answer to a need for information” (Dang, 2005), which is directly applicable in real
world settings.
In multiple DUC datasets (2005, 2006, 2007) (Dang,
2005, 2006), the QFS task asks for an answer to a query as
a summary of at most 250 words created from a cluster of
25-50 documents (newspaper articles). As part of the dataset preparation, assessors were instructed to populate the
cluster with at least 25 documents that are relevant to the
query. The instructions thus encouraged the creation of
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2573

