Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fast and Accurate Reﬁned
Nyström Based Kernel SVM
1

2

Zhe Li,1 Tianbao Yang,1 Lijun Zhang,2 and Rong Jin3

Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
3
Alibaba Group, Seattle, WA 98101, USA
{zhe-li-1,tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com
2007) among others (Le et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2015b).
Recently, the authors in (Yang et al., 2012) studied the two
approximation schemes in a uniﬁed framework and demonstrated that the Nyström method could achieve a better performance than random Fourier features in certain scenarios (e.g., when there is a large eigen-gap in the kernel matrix (Yang et al., 2012) or the eigen-values follow a powerlaw distribution (Jin et al., 2013)). In this work, we focus
on further improving the performance of the Nyström based
kernel classiﬁer with the training time increased by a factor
of two.
The Nyström method for approximating a kernel matrix
works by constructing a set of bases referred to as landmark
points and then constructing an approximation based on the
kernel similarities between the landmark points and all data
points (including the landmark points). It has been observed
that the selection of the landmark points affects the performance of the Nyström method (Kumar et al., 2009a). Nevertheless, there still exists a gap between the performance of
the Nyström based kernel classiﬁer and that of the optimal
kernel classiﬁer. It remains an important problem to bridge
the performance gap while maintaining the efﬁciency. Recently, there emerges a reﬁned Nyström based kernel SVM
that ﬁrst learns an approximate dual solution close enough
to the optimal dual solution to the original kernel SVM and
then uses the approximate dual solution to construct a set of
landmark points to improve the performance of the Nyström
based kernel classiﬁer (Hsieh et al., 2014b).
In this paper, we propose an improved method to obtain
a good dual solution in the ﬁrst step. Our approach is motivated by the fact that the original kernel classiﬁer usually
has a small number of support vectors, indicating the optimal dual solution is a sparse vector. However, when exploring a Nyström approximation, the number of support
vectors could increase due to that some examples become
difﬁcult to be classiﬁed, leading to an increased number of
support vectors, i.e., a denser dual solution. Therefore, in
order to improve the quality of the dual solution, we introduce a sparsity-inducing regularizer into the dual formation deﬁned with the Nyström approximation. We justify
the proposed approach by a theoretical analysis of the error bound of the obtained dual solution under the incoherence and restricted eigen-value conditions. Empirically, we
observe that the proposed approach achieves better perfor-

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on improving the performance of the
Nyström based kernel SVM. Although the Nyström approximation has been studied extensively and its application to kernel classiﬁcation has been exhibited in several studies, there
still exists a potentially large gap between the performance
of classiﬁer learned with the Nyström approximation and that
learned with the original kernel. In this work, we make novel
contributions to bridge the gap without increasing the training
costs too much by proposing a reﬁned Nyström based kernel
classiﬁer. We adopt a two-step approach that in the ﬁrst step
we learn a sufﬁciently good dual solution and in the second
step we use the obtained dual solution to construct a new set
of bases for the Nyström approximation to re-train a reﬁned
classiﬁer. Our approach towards learning a good dual solution is based on a sparse-regularized dual formulation with
the Nyström approximation, which can be solved with the
same time complexity as solving the standard formulation.
We justify our approach by establishing a theoretical guarantee on the error of the learned dual solution in the ﬁrst
step with respect to the optimal dual solution under appropriate conditions. The experimental results demonstrate that
(i) the obtained dual solution by our approach in the ﬁrst step
is closer to the optimal solution and yields improved prediction performance; and (ii) the second step using the obtained
dual solution to re-train the model further improves the performance.

Kernel method (Scholkopf and Smola, 2001; Shawe-Taylor
and Cristianini, 2004) (e.g., Support Vector Machine (SVM)
) is one of the most effective learning methods widely used
in classiﬁcation and regression. Thanks to the kernel trick,
low dimension features in the original space are mapped
into high dimension features without explicitly computing
inner product between high dimensional features. However,
as the scale of data continues to grow, the kernel method
suffers from the severe problem of computing and maintaining a tremendously large kernel matrix, rendering it prohibitive even impossible to learn a kernel classiﬁer in real
applications with big data. To speed up the training of a
kernel classiﬁer for big data, several fast kernel approximation methods have been developed, including the Nyström
method (Williams and Seeger, 2001; Drineas and Mahoney,
2005) and the random Fourier features (Rahimi and Recht,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1830

