Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A POMDP Formulation of Proactive Learning
Kyle Hollins Wray and Shlomo Zilberstein
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
{wray,shlomo}@cs.umass.edu

do not capture the entire multiple, fallible, reluctant, and
cost-varying oracles found in the realistic PAL domain. As
such, the MDP-like states, actions, observations, and transition functions differ markedly from ours. The distinct, but
related, preference elicitation problem seeks to perform as
few queries as possible while maximizing the belief of a
user’s preferences. POMDPs have been successfully implemented here; however, they do not maintain a belief over a
dataset, model oracles, or manage a budget (Boutilier 2002).
Our primary contribution is an algorithm which maps a
PAL problem directly to the true underlying sequential optimization problem using a POMDP. To the best of our knowledge, no one has proposed such a POMDP solution to PAL.
We state and prove three propositions regarding the belief
points and horizon required to rapidly produce high-quality
solutions for the PAL POMDP using point-based methods.
Additionally, we provide experimental evidence that demonstrates our approach either meets or exceeds the performance of the original algorithms and a random baseline.
The next section formally deﬁnes PAL, POMDPs, and our
algorithm. Then, we provide a rigorous theoretical analysis
of the point-based algorithm used to solve our PAL POMDP.
Next, we present our experiments and discuss our ﬁndings.
Finally, we conclude with a summary of our contributions.

Abstract
We cast the Proactive Learning (PAL) problem—Active
Learning (AL) with multiple reluctant, fallible, cost-varying
oracles—as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP). The agent selects an oracle at each time step to
label a data point while it maintains a belief over the true underlying correctness of its current dataset’s labels. The goal
is to minimize labeling costs while considering the value of
obtaining correct labels, thus maximizing ﬁnal resultant classiﬁer accuracy. We prove three properties that show our particular formulation leads to a structured and bounded-size
set of belief points, enabling strong performance of pointbased methods to solve the POMDP. Our method is compared
with the original three algorithms proposed by Donmez and
Carbonell and a simple baseline. We demonstrate that our
approach matches or improves upon the original approach
within ﬁve different oracle scenarios, each on two datasets.
Finally, our algorithm provides a general, well-deﬁned mathematical foundation to build upon.

Introduction
Active Learning (AL) techniques capture the process of taking an unlabeled dataset and labeling a selected subset by
querying an omniscient oracle for labels (Cohn, Atlas, and
Ladner 1994). In practice, however, active learning makes
strong assumptions regarding the labeling process. Speciﬁcally, real world applications often involve multiple oracles,
each of which may be reluctant to answer, incorrectly answer, and have data point-sensitive costs subject to a ﬁxed
budget (Attenberg and Provost 2011). Proactive Learning
(PAL) captures all of these properties in a formal problem
domain (Donmez and Carbonell 2008a). We present a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) solution for this inherently sequential optimization problem.
Within AL, multi-oracle (Ipeirotis et al. 2014; Yan et al.
2011), imprecise oracle (Golovin and Krause 2011; Ipeirotis
et al. 2014), and cost-varying oracle (Culotta and McCallum
2005; Golovin and Krause 2011) scenarios have been explored separately in depth. Also, for single-oracle AL, both
MDP (Lizotte, Madani, and Greiner 2003), POMDP (Jaulmes, Pineau, and Precup 2005), and other related methods (Golovin and Krause 2011) have been devised. These

An Automated Planning Approach
We formalize the general proactive learning problem and
propose a general POMDP framework for solving it. To the
best of our knowledge, neither has been previously formulated in this manner.

Proactive Learning Deﬁnition
Originally proposed by Donmez and Carbonell (2008a),
proactive learning originally considered four relaxations to
active learning. Their approach handled each of them separately. We state the problem in its most general form, simultaneously describing all four within one problem domain.
The Proactive Learning (PAL) problem is a tuple
xX , Yl , O, Pr , Pc , Cy. X “ Xl Y Xu is a dataset of d data
points (zero-indexed), Xl denotes the dl labeled data points
with corresponding labels Yl , and Xu denotes the du unlabeled data points. O is a set of m oracles. Pr : X ˆ O Ñ
r0, 1s denotes the probability that an oracle will respond for a
data point. Pc : X ˆ O Ñ r0, 1s denotes the probability that

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3202

