Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Agent System Development MADE Easy
Zhiqi Shen1 , Han Yu1 , Chunyan Miao1 , Siyao Li1 , Yiqiang Chen2
1

Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zqshen, han.yu, ascymiao, lisi0010}@ntu.edu.sg, yqchen@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Agent-Oriented Software Engineering (AOSE) is an emerging software engineering paradigm that advocates the application of best practices in the development of Multi-Agent
Systems (MAS) through the use of agents and organizations
of agents. This paper outlines the MADE system, which provides an interactive platform for people who are not wellversed in AOSE to contribute to the rapid prototyping of
MASs with ease.



Figure 1: An example Goal Net.

Introduction
Agent Oriented Software Engineering (AOSE) is a software engineering paradigm that advocates the application
of best practices in the development of Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) through the use of agents and organizations of
agents. Over the years, intelligent agents have evolved from
software which responds to stimuli (i.e., reactivity) to programs which take initiative (i.e., autonomy) to fulﬁll their
goals (i.e., proactiveness) and interact with each other (i.e.,
social ability) (Wooldridge and Jennings 1995).
Currently, agent development tools are mostly based
on sophisticated agent modelling methodologies such as
the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) model (Padgham and
Winikoff 2004). Thus, agent developers often require specialized knowledge or training. However, as agents often
need to be incorporated into real-world applications, the
ability to infuse knowledge from domain experts is key to
their success (e.g., in (Shieh et al. 2012), knowledge from
security personnel is needed). How to enable domain experts
who may not be familiar with AOSE to easily contribute to
agent development is a signiﬁcant research challenge.
To address this problem, we propose the Multi-Agent
Development Environment (MADE) (Yu, Shen, and Miao
2008). It is based on Goal Net which is a goal-oriented
agent mental state modelling methodology (Shen, Miao,
and Gay 2006). Users can graphically design and manipulate the mental model of an agent using the Goal Net Designer (GND) integrated development environment (IDE)
under MADE to observe the effects of their design decisions
in real-time. The agent designs are captured by the Goal
Net model. Agent developers only need to provide program

codes governing speciﬁc functions the agent should perform
when transiting from one goal to the next goal. In this way,
MADE reduces the need for users to code agent internals
and opens up new possibilities for people with limited AOSE
knowledge to develop MASs.

The Goal Net Methodology
Goal Net can be used to support the entire AOSE lifecycle.
Its main design artifacts are simpliﬁed into three categories
based on human intuitions to facilitate easy understanding
by non-technical people. They are goals (a.k.a. states), transitions and arcs (as shown in Figure 1). A goal (i.e., circles and round rectangles in Figure 1) denotes the immediate milestone an agent needs to achieve during its reasoning process. Goals can be iteratively decomposed into subgoal-nets. A transition deﬁnes a set of actions that enables
an agent to transit from one goal to another. Depending on
the types of transitions, they are represented as rectangles,
hexagons, or inverted trapezoids (Figure 1). An arc is a design artifact that indicates the direction of logic ﬂow in an
agent’s mental state. Readers who are interested in more details regarding the semantics of Goal Net can refer to (Shen,
Miao, and Gay 2006).

Designing an Agent
Based on the Goal Net methodology, an IDE called the Goal
Net Designer has been developed to enable people with limited knowledge in AOSE to design agents easily (Figure 2).
The process of designing an agent using GND begins with
a user determining the goals an agent needs to achieve from

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4391

