Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Decision Making for Stochastic Network Design
Akshat Kumar,† Arambam James Singh,† Pradeep Varakantham,† Daniel Sheldon‡
†

School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
{akshatkumar,ajsingh,pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg
‡
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
tsheldon@cs.umass.edu

A key assumption implicit in most such previous approaches is that accurate estimates of different parameters
of the underlying network diffusion process, such as edge
activation probabilities and habitat suitability scores, are
known. However, this assumption is practically unrealistic.
Even using learning approaches to estimate parameter values from observed data (Kumar, Wu, and Zilberstein 2012)
may not lead to precise estimates due to missing, noisy data.
Therefore, in our work we develop conservation strategies
in the presence of partially speciﬁed diffusion process parameters. We assume the commonly used notion of interval
bounds (Boutilier et al. 2003), where only upper and lower
bounds on different parameter values are known. The decision problem in this case is that of computing a robust conservation strategy that minimizes the maximum regret (minimax regret) within the space of feasible parameter values.
The independent cascade (IC) model (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003) is the basic building block that describes the diffusion process in social networks as well as in
metapopuplation modeling in ecology (Hanski 1994). Recently, there is increasing interest in modeling the effects of
adding random noise to edge parameters of the network—
probabilities puv that model the strength of inﬂuence from
node u to v (Adiga et al. 2014; Goyal, Bonchi, and Lakshmanan 2011; He and Kempe 2014). However, He and
Kempe show that most independent random noise models
can be subsumed within the IC model and as such, do not
add anything new to the IC model. From a practical perspective, the noise in estimating network parameters may not
be random or independent due to systemic bias in algorithmic techniques and observed data. Therefore, it is better to
consider an adversarial setting which provides a worst case
analysis (He and Kempe 2014). This motivates our goal of
computing the minimax regret solution.
While He and Kempe [2014] also consider an adversarial
setting for the IC model, our work differs from it signiﬁcantly. The analysis of He and Kempe is mainly focused on
diagnosing instability in the presence of noise. If the network is deemed unstable, there is no algorithmic recourse
presented in (He and Kempe 2014) to compute a robust solution. Our work addresses this issue by computing the minimax regret solution for network design in the presence of
noise. Furthermore, directly computing the minimax regret
solution is not tractable as the feasible parameter space is

Abstract
We address the problem of robust decision making for
stochastic network design. Our work is motivated by spatial
conservation planning where the goal is to take management
decisions within a ﬁxed budget to maximize the expected
spread of a population of species over a network of land
parcels. Most previous work for this problem assumes that
accurate estimates of different network parameters (edge activation probabilities, habitat suitability scores) are available,
which is an unrealistic assumption. To address this shortcoming, we assume that network parameters are only partially known, speciﬁed via interval bounds. We then develop
a decision making approach that computes the solution with
minimax regret. We provide new theoretical results regarding
the structure of the minmax regret solution which help develop a computationally efﬁcient approach. Empirically, we
show that previous approaches that work on point estimates
of network parameters result in high regret on several standard benchmarks, while our approach provides signiﬁcantly
more robust solutions.

1

Introduction

Several dynamic processes over a network such as spread
of information and opinions, viral marketing (Domingos
and Richardson 2001; Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003;
Leskovec, Adamic, and Huberman 2007), and disease propagation among humans (Anderson and May 2002) can be
described as a diffusion or cascade over the network. The
spread of wildlife over a network of land patches can be
described using a similar diffusion process, also known as
metapopulation modeling in ecology (Hanski 1999). Our
work is motivated by the spatial conservation planning problem where goal is to ﬁnd strategies to conserve land parcels
to maximize the expected spread of the endangered wildlife.
Conservation strategies, which correspond to network design, include deciding which land parcels to purchase for
conservation within a ﬁxed budget. This problem has recently received much attention in the AI community (Sheldon et al. 2010; Ahmadizadeh et al. 2010; Golovin et al.
2011; Kumar, Wu, and Zilberstein 2012; Wu et al. 2013;
Wu, Sheldon, and Zilberstein 2014; Xue, Fern, and Sheldon
2014; 2015; Wu, Sheldon, and Zilberstein 2015).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3857

