Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Decision Sum-Product-Max Networks
§

Mazen Melibari,§ Pascal Poupart,§ Prashant Doshi,‡
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
‡
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA
§
{mmelibar,ppoupart}@uwaterloo.ca, ‡ pdoshi@cs.uga.edu

Abstract
Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) were recently proposed as a
new class of probabilistic graphical models that guarantee
tractable inference, even on models with high-treewidth. In
this paper, we propose a new extension to SPNs, called Decision Sum-Product-Max Networks (Decision-SPMNs), that
makes SPNs suitable for discrete multi-stage decision problems. We present an algorithm that solves Decision-SPMNs
in a time that is linear in the size of the network. We also
present algorithms to learn the parameters of the network
from data.

Figure 1: Example Decision-SPMN with one decision and
one random variable. Parameters and edge labels are omitted
for clearity.

Introduction
Inﬂuence diagrams (IDs) are well-known probabilistic
graphical models for multi-stage decision problems. IDs extend Bayesian Networks with decision and utility nodes.
As the case with most probabilistic graphical models,
solving IDs is NP-hard even in networks with bounded
treewidth (Mauá, de Campos, and Zaffalon 2012). SumProduct Networks (SPNs) (Poon and Domingos 2011) were
recently proposed as a new class of probabilistic graphical
models that guarantees tractable inference. Several variants
of SPNs have been developed in the recent years, including Relational-SPNs (Nath and Domingos 2015) for relational models, and Dynamic-SPNs (Melibari, Poupart, and
Doshi 2015) for data with varying lengths. In this paper,
we propose a new extension to SPNs, called Decision SumProduct-Max Networks (Decision-SPMNs), that makes it
suitable for discrete multi-stage decision problems. The next
section formally deﬁnes the proposed model and presents an
algorithm to learn the parameters from data.

nodes. The internal nodes of an SPMN are Sum, P roduct,
or M ax nodes. Each M ax node corresponds to one of the
decision variables d1 , ..., dm and each outgoing edge from a
M ax node is labeled with one of the possible values of the
corresponding decision variable. The value of a M ax node
is maxj∈Ch(i) vj , where i is the M ax node, Ch(i) is the set
of children of i, and vj is the value of node j. The Sum and
P roduct nodes are deﬁned as in regular SPNs.
We now turn to recall the concepts of information sets
and partial ordering. The information sets I0 , .., In are disjoint subsets of the random variables such that the random
variables in the information set Ii−1 are observed before the
decision associated with variable di is made. The partial order ≺ is the ordering of the information sets followed by the
decision variables, I0 ≺ d1 ≺ I1 ≺ d2 ≺ ... ≺ dn ≺ In .
Next, we deﬁne a set of properties to ensure that a
Decision-SPMN encodes a function that computes the maximum expected utility (MEU) for some partial order ≺ and
some utility function U .

Decision Sum-Product-Max Networks
Decision-SPMNs are built upon the framework of SPNs.
Deﬁnition 1 extends the deﬁnition of SPNs (Poon and
Domingos 2011) by introducing two new types of nodes:
decision and utility nodes.
Deﬁnition 1 (Decision-SPMN). A Decision-SPMN
over decision variables d1 , ..., dm and random variables
x1 , ..., xn is a rooted directed acyclic graph. Its leaves are
either indicators of the random variables x1 , ..., xn or utility

Deﬁnition 2 (Completeness of Sum Nodes). A DecisionSPMN is complete iff all children of the same sum node
have the same scope, where the scope is the set of variables
that are included in a child.
Deﬁnition 3 (Decomposability of Product Nodes). A
Decision-SPMN is decomposable iff no variable appears in
more than one child of a product node.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Deﬁnition 4 (Completeness of Max Nodes). A Decision-

4234

