Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Large Scale Similarity Learning
Using Similar Pairs for Person Veriﬁcation
Yang Yang, Shengcai Liao, Zhen Lei, Stan Z. Li
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yang.yang, scliao, zlei, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

In this paper, we propose a novel similarity measure
which can be further rewritten as a combination of a Mahalanobis metric and a bilinear similarity metric. With more
metrics, it is able to handle heterogeneous data well. We
also present an efﬁcient strategy to jointly learn the similarity measure by using only similar pairs. Different from
triplets (Schultz and Joachims 2003) or quadruplets (Law,
Thome, and Cord 2013), we employ pairwise constraints
because it is easier to specify labels in the form of equivalence constraints (Köstinger et al. 2012). To be speciﬁc,
given an image pair, we ﬁrst introduce the concepts of difference and commonness, which are deﬁned by the subtraction
between the pair and the summation of them, respectively.
Under a pair-constrained Gaussian assumption (detailed in
section 3), we then show how to calculate the Gaussian priors (or ’priors’ for brevity) of dissimilar pairs from those of
similar pairs. Inspired by KISS metric (KISSME) (Köstinger
et al. 2012), we employ a log likelihood ratio to directly
compute our similarity measure in terms of priors of labeled similar pairs. The time complexity of our method is
O(N d2 + d3 ), where d is the dimension of PCA-reduced
features and N is the number of similar pairs. Therefore, our
method is scalable to large-scale data as long as d is small.
Considering that large scale learning sometimes refers to
the regime where learning is limited by computational resources rather than availability of data (Gal Chechik and
Bengio 2010) and that our method has low time complexity,
we then name our approach as large scale similarity learning
(LSSL) using similar pairs. We validate the performances of
LSSL on challenging datasets of face veriﬁcation (LFW and
PubFig) and person re-identiﬁcation (VIPeR). Experimental
results show that LSSL is both fast and accurate.
In summary, the main contributions are two-fold: (1) We
propose a novel similarity measure and introduce a fast and
efﬁcient method to learn it; (2) Beneﬁting from the consideration of both difference and commonness of an image pair and from a pair-constrained Gaussian assumption,
we point out how to deduce priors of dissimilar pairs from
those of similar pairs. The latter contribution is interesting and important because it is useful for those based on
Bayesian rule (Moghaddam, Jebara, and Pentland 2000)
(e.g., KISSME) and avoids dealing with dissimilar pairs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We review
the related work on similarity learning and give a brief intro-

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel similarity measure and then
introduce an efﬁcient strategy to learn it by using only similar
pairs for person veriﬁcation. Unlike existing metric learning
methods, we consider both the difference and commonness of
an image pair to increase its discriminativeness. Under a pairconstrained Gaussian assumption, we show how to obtain the
Gaussian priors (i.e., corresponding covariance matrices) of
dissimilar pairs from those of similar pairs. The application
of a log likelihood ratio makes the learning process simple
and fast and thus scalable to large datasets. Additionally, our
method is able to handle heterogeneous data well. Results on
the challenging datasets of face veriﬁcation (LFW and PubFig) and person re-identiﬁcation (VIPeR) show that our algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Person veriﬁcation, i.e., verifying whether two unseen images contain the same person or not, has attracted increasing
attention in computer vision. There exist two main clues in
the images - face and human body, based on which, the problem of person veriﬁcation can be further classiﬁed into two
subproblems: face veriﬁcation and person re-identiﬁcation.
Both of them are challenging due to variations in illumination, viewpoint, pose and expression. A general framework
of addressing these two subproblems includes feature extraction and matching, which solves the issues of (1) how to
extract efﬁcient and robust features and (2) how to measure
the similarity between an image pair based on the extracted
features, respectively. This paper is mainly dedicated to the
latter - similarity learning.
Recently, learning a similarity measure (Köstinger et al.
2012; Gal Chechik and Bengio 2010; Nguyen and Bai 2010;
Bohne et al. 2014; Cao, Ying, and Li 2013) has been well
studied and utilized to address the task of person veriﬁcation. Among them, metric learning aims at learning a Mahalanobis metric while similarity metric learning is to learn a
bilinear similarity metric or a cosine similarity metric. However, a single metric is inappropriate to handle heterogeneous data. To overcome this limitation, many approaches
based on more metrics are put forward.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3655

