Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Discovering User Attribute Stylistic Differences via Paraphrasing
Daniel Preoţiuc-Pietro, Wei Xu and Lyle Ungar
Computer & Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
danielpr@sas.upenn.edu,{xwe,ungar}@cis.upenn.edu

personal things like beauty and leisure. They also showed that
lower skilled users use more elongations, hinting at stylistic
differences.
The style in which users write is much more subtle. In this
study, we isolate stylistic differences by using paraphrase
pairs and clusters. Paraphrases represent alternative ways
to convey the same information (Barzilay 2003), using either single words or phrases. By studying occurrences within
these paraphrase pairs and clusters, we directly present the
difference of stylistic lexical choice between different user
groups, while minimizing the conﬂation of topical differences. Example paraphrase clusters for three user traits (gender, age and occupational class) are presented in Table 1
where: lower occupational class is associated with higher
usage of more colloquial word choice (‘gramps’, ‘grandpa’);
females use longer and more nuanced words (‘wonderfully’,
‘delightfully’) instead of standard words (‘ﬁne’, ‘well’); older
users seem to use more formal and complex words to express congratulations (‘commended’). Table 2 shows an example of the same cluster of word paraphrases across all
three traits. In this example, high occupational class users use
much more formal and elaborate word choice (‘gratifying’,
‘enjoyable’). Older users prefer similar words to high occupational class users, only with a slightly different preference
order (Kendall’s τ = 0.51). Finally, for this example, the
gender paraphrase ranking is almost orthogonal to the others
(τ = 0.06 gender − age, τ = 0.2 occupation − gender),
showing that these occupy a separate stylistic spectrum.
We analyze the three user attributes – gender, age and
occupational class – each using a large Twitter corpus. We
ﬁrst assess the predictive performance of user attributes using
paraphrase pairs, differentiating between topical and stylistic inﬂuences. Results show signiﬁcant stylistic differences
between user traits and these still hold signiﬁcant predictive
power, albeit to a lesser extent than topical content. We then
measure how well our method captures meaningful stylistic
differences between all author traits by comparing it with
human judgements, showing that our scores match with human perception. Further, we explore psycholinguistic theories about stylistic differences between groups. Our methods
show that females choose words which are perceived as being
happier, but use less syllables. Higher occupational class and
more senior users prefer words which are longer, have more
syllables, and prefer more abstract words. This work is useful

Abstract
User attribute prediction from social media text has
proven successful and useful for downstream tasks. In
previous studies, differences in user trait language use
have been limited primarily to the presence or absence of
words that indicate topical preferences. In this study, we
aim to ﬁnd linguistic style distinctions across three different user attributes: gender, age and occupational class.
By combining paraphrases with a simple yet effective
method, we capture a wide set of stylistic differences
that are exempt from topic bias. We show their predictive
power in user proﬁling, conformity with human perception and psycholinguistic hypotheses, and potential use
in generating natural language tailored to speciﬁc user
traits.

Introduction
The large volume of social media data presents us with a
unique opportunity to learn about the users authoring the texts.
Many user traits are known to impact the content of a user’s
posts. Conversely, using only the posted text, we can automatically predict a number of traits using machine learning
methods. These include age (Rao et al. 2010), gender (Bamman, Eisenstein, and Schnoebelen 2014), location (Eisenstein
et al. 2010), personality (Schwartz et al. 2013), political afﬁliation (Volkova, Coppersmith, and Van Durme 2014) or impact (Lampos et al. 2014). Modelling author traits has proven
useful for tasks such as text classiﬁcation (Hovy 2015) and
sentiment analysis (Volkova, Wilson, and Yarowsky 2013).
Users choose at posting time both the topic of the post and
the style in which it is expressed. Topical choice is heavily
inﬂuenced by author attributes. In previous analyses, most
predictive and distinctive text features show primarily topical
differences (Van Durme 2012; Bergsma and Van Durme 2013;
Vogel and Jurafsky 2012). Stereotypically, males post more
about sports, while women are post more about fashion. Features like ‘wife’ and ‘beard’ are most predictive of male
users, while ‘husband’ and ‘purse’ are predictive of female
users (Sap et al. 2014). In an analysis of occupational class
(Preoţiuc-Pietro, Lampos, and Aletras 2015), the authors
show that users with higher skilled jobs post more about politics and ﬁnance, while lower skilled users post more about
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3030

