Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Modeling and Experimentation Framework for Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
Maikel Leon Espinosa
Department of Business Technology, University of Miami, USA
mleon@bus.miami.edu

Gonzalo Napoles Ruiz
Faculty of Business Economics, Hasselt University, Belgium
napoles.gonzalo@gmail.com

FCMs theory has gained a lot of attention among researchers worldwide where both practical and theoretical results
have been introduced. Some fields where the FCMs-based
modeling has been successfully applied include [2]: decision making, risk analysis, system control, engineering,
transport management, protein modeling, etc.

Abstract
Many papers describe the use of Fuzzy Cognitive Maps as a
modeling/representation technique for real-life scenarios’
simulation or prediction. However, not many real software
implementations are described neither found. In this proposal the authors describe a modeling and experimentation
framework where realistic problems can be recreated using
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps as a knowledge representation form.
Design elements, and descriptions of the algorithms that
have been incorporated into the software, and hybridized
with Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, are presented in this paper.
Case studies were conducted and are illustrated with the intention of demonstrating the success and practical value of
the general approach together with the implementation tool.

Modeling & Experimentation Framework
The proposal consist of more than 20.000 source code
lines (completely written in Java language) which are distributed in 115 Java source files. These archives are organized in 4 global packages (Map, Algorithms, Interface and
Resources) and numerous sub-packages (e.g. Causality,
Topology, Stability, Dataset, Handlers, and Graphics).
Figure 1 displays the tree of packages for the FCM TOOL
including primary packages and sub-packages.

Introduction
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCMs) were presented by B.
Kosko as a knowledge-based methodology for modeling
and simulating dynamic systems [1]. FCMs can be seen as
combination of fuzzy logic and cognitive mapping, it’s a
way to represent knowledge of systems which are characterized of uncertainty and complex processes, also causality. From a structural point of view, a FCM may be represented as a fuzzy directed graph that allow feedback, consisting on neurons and signed weighted relations. Using
this methodology, a system could be modeled in terms of
concepts (e.g. variables, objects, entities or states which are
mapped as neurons in connectionist approaches) and the
causal relations among such mentioned concepts. FCMs
provide a flexible and natural mechanism for knowledge
representation and reasoning, which are essential to intelligent systems. For example, interaction strengths are used
to denote either the experts’ opinion, semi-quantitative or
quantitative data on the relative degree to which one variable influences another concept in a map. Recently the

FCM TOOL

Map

Causality

Algorithms

Topology

Stability

Interface

Dataset

Handlers

Resources

Graphics

Fig. 1. Tree of packages for FCM TOOL architecture.

FCM TOOL (see Figure 2) provides a set of functionalities and not all of them can be detailed in this short demo
paper. As a rough picture, the proposed software involves
three groups of functionalities that are distributed in six
menus (File, Edit, Build, Run, Reset and Help). The first
group is oriented to the design of new FCM-based systems,
where an expert in a given domain could completely develop and simulate a system without having previous
strong knowledge in mathematics or computer science. The
second group involves learning algorithms for adjusting
the introduced parameters (e.g. the direction and intensity
of causal relations).

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4361

