Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Afﬁnity Preserving Quantization for Hashing:
A Vector Quantization Approach to Learning Compact Binary Codes
Zhe Wang, Ling-Yu Duan, Tiejun Huang, Wen Gao
Institute of Digital Media, Peking University
No.5 Yiheyuan Road Haidian District, Beijing, P.R.China 100871
{zhew,lingyu,tjhuang,wgao}@pku.edu.cn

projections via machine learning approaches, such as linear
learning (Andoni and Indyk 2006), spectral learning (Weiss,
Torralba, and Fergus 2008), kernal learning (Raginsky and
Lazebnik 2009), manifold learning (Irie et al. 2014), graph
learning (Liu et al. 2011) and others (He, Wen, and Sun
2013). Compared with the projection stage, how to make
high quality quantization has received less research efforts,
which, however, may signiﬁcantly impact ANN search performance (Kong and Li 2012). Most hashing works adopt a
single bit quantization (SBQ) (Kong and Li 2012) method
to quantize projection values. SBQ simply applies thresholds to quantize each projection element x(i) = fi (v) into a
single bit 0 or 1.
Recent works have reported the impact of quantization
on the hashing performance. As single bit quantization
(SBQ) may incur serious quantization distortion, the hashing
performance would degenerate much (Kong and Li 2012;
Kong, Li, and Guo 2012). To address the quantization distortion in SBQ, several promising multiple bit quantization
(MBQ) methods have been proposed such as double bit
quantization (DBQ) (Kong and Li 2012), manhattan quantization (MQ) (Kong, Li, and Guo 2012), adaptive quantization (AQ) (Xiong et al. 2014), hamming compatible quantization (HCQ) (Wang et al. 2015), etc. Different from SBQ,
MBQ methods assign multiple bits to each projection element, which helps to reduce the information loss in quantization stage. Experiment results have shown that MBQ
methods greatly improve the performance of various hashing methods (Kong and Li 2012; Kong, Li, and Guo 2012;
Wang et al. 2015). High quality quantization is crucial in
improving hashing performance.
In this work, we study how to further improve the performance of quantization stage in hashing from the vector
quantization (VQ) (Allen and Gray 2012) point of view. All
the previous SBQ and MBQ methods fall into the category
of scalar quantization (SQ) (Allen and Gray 2012), in which
each projection dimension (or element) is quantized separately. However, a projection value is actually a vector presentation, which renders SQ approaches inferior in utilizing
the inherent vector data distribution. By contrast, VQ excels
in adapting a quantizer to the true data space in terms of real
vectors. Figure 1 shows an example of different scalar and
vector quantization methods. In this example, data points
are projected into a 2D space at the projection stage. Scalar

Abstract
Hashing techniques are powerful for approximate nearest
neighbour (ANN) search. Existing quantization methods in
hashing are all focused on scalar quantization (SQ) which
is inferior in utilizing the inherent data distribution. In this
paper, we propose a novel vector quantization (VQ) method
named afﬁnity preserving quantization (APQ) to improve the
quantization quality of projection values, which has significantly boosted the performance of state-of-the-art hashing
techniques. In particular, our method incorporates the neighbourhood structure in the pre- and post-projection data space
into vector quantization. APQ minimizes the quantization errors of projection values as well as the loss of afﬁnity property of original space. An effective algorithm has been proposed to solve the joint optimization problem in APQ, and
the extension to larger binary codes has been resolved by applying product quantization to APQ. Extensive experiments
have shown that APQ consistently outperforms the state-ofthe-art quantization methods, and has signiﬁcantly improved
the performance of various hashing techniques.

Introduction
Approximate nearest neighbour (ANN) search is widely
used in machine learning, computer vision and information
retrieval. In the past years, there has been increasing interest in learning binary codes to fulﬁll efﬁcient and effective
ANN search by hashing techniques. Hashing aims to learn
compact binary representation for data which is supposed to
preserve the similarity structure in the original space (Weiss,
Torralba, and Fergus 2008). The compact representation is
efﬁcient in reducing memory usage as well as improving retrieval speed, so that hashing is becoming one of the most
powerful techniques in dealing with ANN search in massive
data (Torralba, Fergus, and Weiss 2008).
Typically, hashing methods consist of two basic stages:
projection and quantization (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus
2008). Hashing methods ﬁrstly transform data point v ∈ RD
into a low dimensional vector x = [f1 (v), ..., fd (v)] ∈ Rd
where real-valued functions {fi (.)}di=1 are usually called
projection functions, and then quantize the projection values
into binary codes. Many great research efforts have been devoted to the projection stage, with an aim to learn powerful
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1102

