Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Listen, Attend, and Walk: Neural Mapping
of Navigational Instructions to Action Sequences
Hongyuan Mei

Mohit Bansal

Matthew R. Walter

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
{hongyuan,mbansal,mwalter}@ttic.edu

Objects
B Barstool
C Chair
E Easel
H Hatrack
L Lamp
S Sofa

Abstract
We propose a neural sequence-to-sequence model for direction following, a task that is essential to realizing effective
autonomous agents. Our alignment-based encoder-decoder
model with long short-term memory recurrent neural networks (LSTM-RNN) translates natural language instructions
to action sequences based upon a representation of the observable world state. We introduce a multi-level aligner that
empowers our model to focus on sentence “regions” salient
to the current world state by using multiple abstractions of
the input sentence. In contrast to existing methods, our model
uses no specialized linguistic resources (e.g., parsers) or taskspeciﬁc annotations (e.g., seed lexicons). It is therefore generalizable, yet still achieves the best results reported to-date
on a benchmark single-sentence dataset and competitive results for the limited-training multi-sentence setting. We analyze our model through a series of ablations that elucidate the
contributions of the primary components of our model.

Wall paintings
Tower
Butterﬂy
Fish

Floor patterns
Blue
Brick
Concrete
Flower
Grass
Gravel
Wood
Yellow

E

L

C

E

S

L

H

H

B

S

C

Place your back against the wall of the “T” intersection. Go
forward one segment to the intersection with the blue-tiled
hall. This interesction [sic] contains a chair. Turn left. Go
forward to the end of the hall. Turn left. Go forward one segment to the intersection with the wooden-ﬂoored hall. This
intersection conatains [sic] an easel. Turn right. Go forward
two segments to the end of the hall. Turn left. Go forward
one segment to the intersection containing the lamp. Turn
right. Go forward one segment to the empty corner.

Introduction
Robots must be able to understand and successfully execute
natural language navigational instructions if they are to work
seamlessly alongside people. For example, someone using
a voice-commandable wheelchair might direct it to “Take
me to the room across from the kitchen,” or a soldier may
command a micro aerial vehicle to “Fly down the hallway
into the second room on the right.” However, interpreting
such free-form instructions (especially in unknown environments) is challenging due to their ambiguity and complexity,
such as uncertainty in their interpretation (e.g., which hallway does the instruction refer to), long-term dependencies
among both the instructions and the actions, differences in
the amount of detail given, and the diverse ways in which
the language can be composed. Figure 1 presents an example instruction that our method successfully follows.
Previous work in this domain (Chen and Mooney 2011;
Chen 2012; Kim and Mooney 2012; 2013; Artzi and Zettlemoyer 2013; Artzi, Das, and Petrov 2014) largely requires
specialized resources like semantic parsers, seed lexicons,
and re-rankers to interpret ambiguous, free-form natural language instructions. In contrast, the goal of our work is to

Figure 1: An example of a route instruction-path pair in
one of the virtual worlds from MacMahon, Stankiewicz, and
Kuipers (2006) with colors that indicate ﬂoor patterns and
wall paintings, and letters that indicate different objects. Our
method successfully infers the correct path for this instruction.

learn to map instructions to actions in an end-to-end fashion that assumes no prior linguistic knowledge. Instead, our
model learns the meaning of all the words, spatial relations,
syntax, and compositional semantics from just the raw training sequence pairs, and learns to to translate the free-form
instructions to an executable action sequence.
We propose a recurrent neural network with long shortterm memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
to both encode the navigational instruction sequence bidirectionally and to decode the representation to an action
sequence, based on a representation of the current world
state. LSTMs are well-suited to this task, as they have
been shown to be effective in learning the temporal de-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2772

