Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Agent Path Finding with Payload Transfers and
the Package-Exchange Robot-Routing Problem∗
Hang Ma

Craig Tovey

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
hangma@usc.edu

School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
ctovey@isye.gatech.edu

Guni Sharon

T. K. Satish Kumar and Sven Koenig

Department of Information Systems Engineering
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
gunisharon@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
tkskwork@gmail.com and skoenig@usc.edu

two robots in adjacent locations can exchange their packages, and each package needs to be delivered to a given
destination. We want to minimize the time when the last
package reaches its destination (makespan) or the sum of
the times when each package reaches its destination (ﬂowtime). PERR is motivated by the observation that the robots
are often interchangeable but the packages are not - due to
their different destinations.

Abstract
We study transportation problems where robots have to deliver packages and can transfer the packages among each
other. Speciﬁcally, we study the package-exchange robotrouting problem (PERR), where each robot carries one package, any two robots in adjacent locations can exchange their
packages, and each package needs to be delivered to a given
destination. We prove that exchange operations make all
PERR instances solvable. Yet, we also show that PERR is
NP-hard to approximate within any factor less than 4/3 for
makespan minimization and is NP-hard to solve for ﬂowtime
minimization, even when there are only two types of packages. Our proof techniques also generate new insights into
other transportation problems, for example, into the hardness
of approximating optimal solutions to the standard multiagent path-ﬁnding problem (MAPF). Finally, we present optimal and suboptimal PERR solvers that are inspired by MAPF
solvers, namely a ﬂow-based ILP formulation and an adaptation of conﬂict-based search. Our empirical results demonstrate that these solvers scale well and that PERR instances
often have smaller makespans and ﬂowtimes than the corresponding MAPF instances.

PERR is identical to the standard multi-agent path-ﬁnding
problem (MAPF), except that MAPF does not permit exchange operations: Each robot needs to move to a given
destination but two robots in adjacent locations cannot
exchange their positions. MAPF is NP-hard to solve for
both makespan and ﬂowtime minimization (Yu and LaValle
2013b). Furthermore, several optimal and suboptimal MAPF
solvers have been developed, including (Kornhauser, Miller,
and Spirakis 1984; Silver 2005; Sturtevant and Buro 2006;
Wagner and Choset 2011; Surynek 2012; Erdem et al. 2013;
de Wilde, ter Mors, and Witteveen 2013; Sharon et al. 2013;
Goldenberg et al. 2014; Cohen, Uras, and Koenig 2015).
Figures 1(a) & 1(b) illustrate that exchange operations can
improve the makespan and ﬂowtime by arbitrary factors.
We prove by construction that exchange operations make
all PERR instances solvable, and derive polynomial upper
bounds on makespan and ﬂowtime. Yet, we also show that
PERR is NP-hard to approximate within any factor less than
4/3 for makespan minimization and is NP-hard to solve
for ﬂowtime minimization, even when there are only two
types of packages (where packages of the same type are interchangeable). Our proof techniques also generate new insights into other transportation problems, for example, into
the hardness of approximating optimal MAPF solutions.

Introduction
Payloads can be transferred in real-world applications such
as ride-sharing (or taxis) with passenger transfers (Coltin
and Veloso 2014) or package delivery with robots in ofﬁces
(Veloso et al. 2015). The theoretical implications of allowing payload transfers are still poorly understood. In this paper, we therefore study the package-exchange robot-routing
problem (PERR), where each robot carries one package, any
∗
We thank Jingjin Yu for making the code of their ﬂow-based
MAPF solver and Nathan Sturtevant for making game maps available to us. The research at USC was supported by NSF under grant
numbers 1409987 and 1319966. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or
implied, of the sponsoring organizations, agencies or the U.S. government.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Finally, we present optimal and suboptimal PERR solvers
that are inspired by MAPF solvers, namely a ﬂow-based
ILP formulation (Yu and LaValle 2013a) and an adaptation
of conﬂict-based search (Sharon et al. 2015). Our empirical results demonstrate that these solvers scale well and that
PERR instances often have smaller makespans and ﬂowtimes than the corresponding MAPF instances.

3166

