Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Return of Frustratingly Easy Domain Adaptation
Baochen Sun

Jiashi Feng

Kate Saenko

Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Lowell
Lowell, MA 01854, USA
bsun@cs.uml.edu

Department of EECS, UC Berkeley,
USA & Department of ECE, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Lowell
Lowell, MA 01854, USA
saenko@cs.uml.edu

Abstract

     

Unlike human learning, machine learning often fails to handle changes between training (source) and test (target) input
distributions. Such domain shifts, common in practical scenarios, severely damage the performance of conventional machine learning methods. Supervised domain adaptation methods have been proposed for the case when the target data
have labels, including some that perform very well despite
being “frustratingly easy” to implement. However, in practice, the target domain is often unlabeled, requiring unsupervised adaptation. We propose a simple, effective, and efﬁcient
method for unsupervised domain adaptation called CORrelation ALignment (CORAL). CORAL minimizes domain shift
by aligning the second-order statistics of source and target
distributions, without requiring any target labels. Even though
it is extraordinarily simple–it can be implemented in four
lines of Matlab code–CORAL performs remarkably well in
extensive evaluations on standard benchmark datasets.

  

  

    
    
   
   

Figure 1: Two Domain Shift Scenarios: object recognition
across visual domains (left) and sentiment prediction across
text domains (right). When data distributions differ across
domains, applying classiﬁers trained on one domain directly
to another domain is likely to cause a signiﬁcant performance drop.

To compensate for the degradation in performance due to
domain shift, many domain adaptation algorithms have been
developed, most of which assume that some labeled examples in the target domain are provided to learn the proper
model adaptation. Daume III (2007) proposed a supervised
domain adaptation approach notable for its extreme simplicity: it merely changes the features by making domainspeciﬁc and common copies, then trains a supervised classiﬁer on the new features from both domains. The method
performs very well, yet is “frustratingly easy” to implement.
However, it cannot be applied in the situations where the target domain is unlabeled, which unfortunately are quite common in practice.
In this work, we present a “frustratingly easy” unsupervised domain adaptation method called CORrelation ALignment (CORAL). CORAL aligns the input feature distributions of the source and target domains by exploring their
second-order statistics. More concretely, CORAL aligns the
distributions by re-coloring whitened source features with
the covariance of the target distribution. CORAL is simple and efﬁcient, as the only computations it needs are (1)
computing covariance statistics in each domain and (2) applying the whitening and re-coloring linear transformation
to the source features. Then, supervised learning proceeds
as usual–training a classiﬁer on the transformed source features.

“Everything should be made as simple as possible, but
not simpler.”
Albert Einstein

1

    
       
     
      
   

Introduction

Machine learning is very different from human learning.
Humans are able to learn from very few labeled examples
and apply the learned knowledge to new examples in novel
conditions. In contrast, supervised machine learning methods only perform well when the given extensive labeled
data are from the same distribution as the test distribution.
Both theoretical (Ben-David et al. 2007; Blitzer, Dredze,
and Pereira 2007) and practical results (Saenko et al. 2010;
Torralba and Efros 2011) have shown that the test error of
supervised methods generally increases in proportion to the
“difference” between the distributions of training and test
examples. For example, Donahue et al. (2014) showed that
even state-of-the-art Deep Convolutional Neural Network
features learned on a dataset of 1.2M images are susceptible to domain shift. Addressing domain shift is undoubtedly
critical for successfully applying machine learning methods
in real world applications.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2058

