Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Probabilistic Soft Logic Based Approach to Exploiting
Latent and Global Information in Event Classiﬁcation
Shulin Liu, Kang Liu, Shizhu He, Jun Zhao
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
{shulin.liu, kliu, shizhu.he, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

tures such as part-of-speech tags. Most of these features reﬂect predominantly the contextual information around given
words; such features are called local features. We argue that
existing local features are insufﬁcient for disambiguation of
event trigger words. Global information such as event-event
association, and latent local information such as ﬁne-grained
entity types, are crucial to this task. We employ two sentences as follows to demonstrate the aforementioned issue.
(1) He left the company, and he planned to go home
directly.
(2) Obama beat McCain.
Global Information. In the ﬁrst sentence, it is difﬁcult to
tell whether “left” triggers a Transport event (meaning that
a person left a place) or an End-Position event (a person retired from a company) when we consider only on the ﬁrst
clause “He left the company”. If we could consider the texts
from a broader perspective and observe that there is a Transport event in the second clause (triggered by “go”), we
would have more conﬁdence in predicting the token “left”
to be a Transport event trigger because Transport events
are more likely to co-occur with Transport events than with
End-Position events. We refer to this type of global information as Event-event association.
Latent Local Information. In the second sentence, if we
know only that both Obama and McCain are persons, it is
difﬁcult to identify the word “beat” as an Elect event trigger because both of Elect and Attack events occur among
persons and Attack events occur in most cases. However, if
we know that both Obama and McCain are politicians, we
will have ample grounds on which to predict it as an Elect
event trigger. We refer to this type of latent information as
Fine-grained entity types.
Several existing methods have realized the usefulness of
such information. However, they employ them only partially
or mechanically. For example, Liao and Grishman (2010)
proposed a two-pass ad hoc method to employ event-event
association but ignored ﬁne-grained entity types, and Hong
et al. (2011) were versa; Li, Ji, and Huang (2013) proposed a
jointly sentence-level approach to employ event-event association, but failed to capture it in the document level. Thus,
the results of these methods are still only locally optimized
values and their performance is far from satisfactory.
The above observations motivate us to simultaneously
employ the aforementioned information. The key is how to

Abstract
Global information such as event-event association, and latent local information such as ﬁne-grained entity types1 , are
crucial to event classiﬁcation. However, existing methods
typically focus on sophisticated local features such as part-ofspeech tags, either fully or partially ignoring the aforementioned information. By contrast, this paper focuses on fully
employing them for event classiﬁcation. We notice that it is
difﬁcult to encode some global information such as eventevent association for previous methods. To resolve this problem, we propose a feasible approach which encodes global
information in the form of logic using Probabilistic Soft
Logic model. Experimental results show that, our proposed
approach advances state-of-the-art methods, and achieves the
best F 1 score to date on the ACE data set.

Introduction
In the ACE (Automatic Context Extraction) event extraction
task, an event is represented as a structure which is composed of a trigger, an event type, and the corresponding arguments with different roles. The objective of event extraction is to extract event instances of speciﬁc types and their
arguments in a given document.
To this end, previous methods frequently employ a
pipeline architecture including two main steps (Ji and Grishman 2008; Liao and Grishman 2010; Hong et al. 2011) as
follows: (1) event classiﬁcation, which involves identifying
event triggers and their corresponding event types; (2) argument classiﬁcation, which involves, for each detected trigger, identifying its arguments and their corresponding roles.
This paper focuses primarily on the ﬁrst subtask, event classiﬁcation, which is important to and independent of the subsequent argument classiﬁcation and strongly inﬂuences the
ﬁnal event extraction performance.
One difﬁculty in event classiﬁcation is the ambiguity of
the trigger words. For example, the trigger word “beat” in
“Obama beat McCain” reﬂects an Elect event (meaning that
Obama won the presidential election), but it can be easily misidentiﬁed as an Attack event trigger. Existing methods typically focus on exploiting sophisticated local feac 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This information can not be directly obtained using NLP tools,
thus we call it latent information.

2993

