Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Symbolic SAT-Based Algorithm for Almost-Sure
Reachability with Small Strategies in POMDPs∗
Krishnendu Chatterjee

Martin Chmelı́k

Jessica Davies

IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
kchatterjee@ist.ac.at

IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
mchmelik@ist.ac.at

IST Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
jdavies@ist.ac.at

and Kari 1997), software veriﬁcation (Cerný et al. 2011),
robot planning (Kress-Gazit, Fainekos, and Pappas 2009;
Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998), reinforcement
learning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore 1996), to name
a few.

Abstract
POMDPs are standard models for probabilistic planning problems, where an agent interacts with an uncertain environment.
We study the problem of almost-sure reachability, where given
a set of target states, the question is to decide whether there is
a policy to ensure that the target set is reached with probability
1 (almost-surely). While in general the problem is EXPTIMEcomplete, in many practical cases policies with a small amount
of memory sufﬁce. Moreover, the existing solution to the problem is explicit, which ﬁrst requires to construct explicitly an
exponential reduction to a belief-support MDP. In this work,
we ﬁrst study the existence of observation-stationary strategies,
which is NP-complete, and then small-memory strategies. We
present a symbolic algorithm by an efﬁcient encoding to SAT
and using a SAT solver for the problem. We report experimental results demonstrating the scalability of our symbolic
(SAT-based) approach.

1

Reachability objectives and their computational problems.
We consider POMDPs with one of the most basic and fundamental objectives, namely, reachability objectives. Given
a set of target states, the reachability objective requires that
some state in the target set is visited at least once. The main
computational problems for POMDPs with reachability objectives are as follows: (a) the quantitative problem asks for
the existence of a policy (that resolves the choice of control
actions) that ensures the reachability objective with probability at least 0 < λ ≤ 1; and (b) the qualitative problem is the
special case of the quantitative problem with λ = 1 (i.e., it
asks that the objective is satisﬁed almost-surely).

Introduction

Signiﬁcance of qualitative problems. The qualitative problem is of great importance as in several applications it is
required that the correct behavior happens with probability 1,
e.g., in the analysis of randomized embedded schedulers,
the important question is whether every thread progresses
with probability 1. Also in applications where it might be
sufﬁcient that the correct behavior happens with probability
at least λ < 1, the correct choice of the threshold λ can
be still challenging, due to simpliﬁcations and imprecisions
introduced during modeling. For example, in the analysis of
randomized distributed algorithms it is common to require
correctness with probability 1 (e.g., (Pogosyants, Segala, and
Lynch 2000)). Finally, it has been shown recently (Chatterjee
et al. 2015a) that for the important problem of minimizing
the total expected cost to reach the target set (Bertsekas 1995;
Bonet and Geffner 2009; Kolobov et al. 2011) (under positive
cost functions), it sufﬁces to ﬁrst compute the almost-sure
winning set, and then apply any ﬁnite-horizon algorithm for
approximation. Besides its importance in practical applications, almost-sure convergence, like convergence in expectation, is a fundamental concept in probability theory, and
provides the strongest probabilistic guarantee (Durrett 1996).

The de facto model for dynamic systems with probabilistic and nondeterministic behavior are Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Howard 1960). MDPs provide the appropriate model to solve control and probabilistic planning problems (Filar and Vrieze 1997; Puterman 1994), where the nondeterminism represents the choice of the control actions for
the controller (or planner), while the stochastic response of
the system to control actions is represented by the probabilistic behavior. In perfect-observation (or perfect-information)
MDPs, to resolve the nondeterministic choices among control
actions the controller observes the current state of the system
precisely, whereas in partially observable MDPs (POMDPs)
the state space is partitioned according to observations that
the controller can observe, i.e., the controller can only view
the observation of the current state (the partition the state
belongs to), but not the precise state (Papadimitriou and
Tsitsiklis 1987). POMDPs are widely used in several applications, such as in computational biology (Durbin et al. 1998),
speech processing (Mohri 1997), image processing (Culik
∗
The research was partly supported by Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) Grant No P23499-N23, FWF NFN Grant No S11407-N23
(RiSE), ERC Start grant (279307: Graph Games), and Microsoft
faculty fellows award.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Previous results. The quantitative analysis problem for
POMDPs with reachability objectives is undecidable (Paz
1971) (and the undecidability result even holds for any
approximation (Madani, Hanks, and Condon 2003)). In

3225

