Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Market Parameters Using Aggregate Demand Queries
Xiaohui Bei

Wei Chen

Jugal Garg

Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Microsoft Research
Beijing, China

MPI für Informatik
Saarbrücken, Germany

Martin Hoefer

Xiaoming Sun

MPI für Informatik
Saarbrücken, Germany

China Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
work below). The algorithmic issues in this domain are
starting to attract interest due to numerous applications of
problems with revealed preference in online markets. With
the advent of big data technology, retailers like Amazon or
Tesco collect a large amount of sales data and have a vital
interest in gaining insight into the underlying preferences of
customers. Such information is even more critical for specialized businesses who rely more heavily on a particular
customer base.
Similar to recent work (Balcan et al. 2014), we concentrate on query learning where a learner can repeatedly query
a market (without competing sellers) by setting prices for
all its goods. Upon a price query, the learner receives as
feedback for each good the sum of demands of all buyers.
In contrast to previous work, we advance the study of algorithms for revealed preference beyond a single buyer with a
single utility function. We assume the more realistic case of
multiple buyers and aggregate demand feedback. In fact, our
query model is exactly the same as the classic tâtonnement
model to ﬁnd a market equilibrium in economics (Walras 1874; Codenotti, Pemmaraju, and Varadarajan 2005;
Cole and Fleischer 2008; Bei, Garg, and Hoefer 2015).
However, our goal is not to ﬁnd an equilibrium but to learn
the unknown buyer utilities via revealed preference feedback.
We study query complexity in Fisher markets with divisible goods where buyers have budgets of money that they
can spend to purchase a bundle of goods to optimize their
utility function. We study linear, constant elasticity of substitution (CES), and Leontief utilities, which are the most
central utility functions in the market literature. We assume
that all parameters in these functions and the money budgets are given by L-bit integers, and the seller knows the
bound L. While the seller knows the number n of buyers, it
does not know their utility parameters or budgets. We show
how to learn the set of utility functions and the amount of
money associated with buyers that have this function. Note
that since the feedback is the sum of demands, it is impossible to distinguish buyer identities and to learn, e.g., that a
particular utility function belongs to buyer number 5.
More generally, we also extend some of our results to
Arrow-Debreu exchange markets, where agents bring endowments of goods instead of money. When the learner sets
prices, agents exchange their endowment into money and

Abstract
We study efﬁcient algorithms for a natural learning problem
in markets. There is one seller with m divisible goods and
n buyers with unknown individual utility functions and budgets of money. The seller can repeatedly announce prices and
observe aggregate demand bundles requested by the buyers.
The goal of the seller is to learn the utility functions and budgets of the buyers. Our scenario falls into the classic domain
of “revealed preference” analysis. Problems with revealed
preference have recently started to attract increased interest
in computer science due to their fundamental nature in understanding customer behavior in electronic markets. The goal
of revealed preference analysis is to observe rational agent
behavior, to explain it using a suitable model for the utility
functions, and to predict future agent behavior. Our results
are the ﬁrst polynomial-time algorithms to learn utility and
budget parameters via revealed preference queries in classic
Fisher markets with multiple buyers. Our analysis concentrates on linear, CES, and Leontief markets, which are the
most prominent classes studied in the literature. Some of our
results extend to general Arrow-Debreu exchange markets.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the following learning problem.
There is one seller with m divisible goods, and n buyers
with individual utility functions and budgets of money. The
seller can repeatedly announce prices, and the buyers request
demands – bundles of goods that they can afford and that
maximize their utility. The goal of the seller is to learn the
utility functions and budgets of the buyers.
This scenario represents a natural learning problem with
“revealed preference” in the classic Fisher market model.
Revealed preference analysis has a long history in the economics literature (Samuelson 1948; Afriat 1967; Varian
2005). Here a number of observations of agent behavior
are either generated by a stochastic process or actively obtained by a learner through queries. The goal is to explain
the observed behavior using a suitable model for their utility function and to predict future agent behavior. More recent work has also studied different goals of the learner,
such as revenue maximization (see, e.g., (Amin et al. 2015;
Roth, Ullman, and Wu 2015) and our discussion of related
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

404

