Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Scalable Framework to Choose Sellers in E-Marketplaces Using POMDPs ∗
Athirai A. Irissappane

Frans A. Oliehoek

Jie Zhang

Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
athirai001@e.ntu.edu.sg

University of Amsterdam
University of Liverpool
frans.oliehoek@liverpool.ac.uk

Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

optimally trading off information gaining (querying advisors) and exploiting (selecting a seller) actions, and experiments have shown very good results in practice. Moreover,
the approach is easily generalizable to more general problems with trust-propagation components, such as routing in
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) (Irissappane et al. 2015).
Unfortunately, the above approaches suffer from scalability issues. Finding optimal policies for POMDPs is, in general, computationally intractable (PSPACE complete) and
solvers computing exact solutions do not scale to more
than a handful of states (Cassandra, Kaelbling, and Littman
1994). While approximation algorithms have shown to supply good policies rapidly even for problems with very large
state spaces (Silver and Veness 2010), the scalability of the
SALE POMDP, which is based on one such method (Poupart
2005), is limited to about 10 agents (sellers and advisors).
For larger number of agents, solution times grow and solution quality degenerates, precluding the SALE POMDP
from exploiting the presence of more sellers and advisors.
This paper proposes a novel method, referred to as the
Mixture of POMDP Experts (MOPE) approach, for dealing
with very large trust-propagation problems such as SALE
POMDPs with many sellers and advisors. The key idea is to
divide the large seller selection POMDP problem into a multitude of computationally tractable smaller (sub)-POMDPs,
each containing a subset of sellers and advisors. The actions
of the sub-POMDPs (SPs) are then aggregated, to ﬁnd the
best action in the process of selecting a good seller.
The MOPE approach exploits the structure of the Dynamic Bayesian Network that represents the transition and
observation probabilities of the SALE POMDP: query actions do not affect the actual states but only the agent’s beliefs over the state factors, making it easier to decompose a
large seller selection problem into smaller sub-problems that
approximate the larger problem. Due to the improved scalability of MOPE, it can leverage the presence of more advisors to make more informed decisions about sellers. Extensive evaluation in a simulated e-marketplace demonstrates
that MOPE can scale up to a hundred agents (millions of
states and thousands of actions), outperforming the state-ofthe-art POMCP (Silver and Veness 2010) method, while using less computation time. We also demonstrate that MOPE
can bring scalability to other domains by showing results for
wireless sensor networks with up to 40 neighboring nodes.

Abstract
In multiagent e-marketplaces, buying agents need to select
good sellers by querying other buyers (called advisors). Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs)
have shown to be an effective framework for optimally selecting sellers by selectively querying advisors. However, current
solution methods do not scale to hundreds or even tens of
agents operating in the e-market. In this paper, we propose
the Mixture of POMDP Experts (MOPE) technique, which
exploits the inherent structure of trust-based domains, such as
the seller selection problem in e-markets, by aggregating the
solutions of smaller sub-POMDPs. We propose a number of
variants of the MOPE approach that we analyze theoretically
and empirically. Experiments show that MOPE can scale up
to a hundred agents thereby leveraging the presence of more
advisors to signiﬁcantly improve buyer satisfaction.

1

Introduction

In many domains, agents need to determine the trustworthiness (quality) of other agents before interacting with them.
Speciﬁcally, in e-marketplaces, buying agents need to reason about the quality of sellers and determine which sellers
to do business with (referred to as the seller selection problem). When buyers have no previous experience with sellers,
they can obtain advice by querying other buyers (called advisors). However, some advisors may be untrustworthy and
provide misleading opinions about sellers.
The Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) is a framework for sequential decision making
under uncertainty, suitable for e-markets, where buyers often need to make decisions with limited information about
the sellers and advisors. Regan, Cohen, and Poupart (2001)
propose the Advisor POMDP, for the seller selection problem, which, rather than trying to achieve the most accurate
estimate of sellers, tries to select good sellers optimally with
respect to its belief. Seller and Advisor Selection (SALE)
POMDP (Irissappane, Oliehoek, and Zhang 2014) extends
Advisor POMDP to additionally deal with trust propagation, by introducing queries about advisors. In principle,
SALE POMDP enables maximizing buyer satisfaction by
∗

An extended version of this paper is available on arXiv.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

158

