Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Big-Data Mechanisms and Energy-Policy Design
Ankit Pat, Kate Larson and S. Keshav
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON, Canada
{apat, klarson, keshav}@uwaterloo.ca

make this vision concrete using a speciﬁc approach and instantiating it in a speciﬁc problem domain. Our approach
is to use stakeholder surveys coupled with formalisms from
game theory and mechanism design to allow policy-makers
to gauge the beneﬁts of potential policy decisions, that, when
balanced with implementation costs, allows evidence-based
policy design.
Our problem domain is the peaksaver PLUS program in
Ontario, Canada. This program provides homeowners with a
programmable thermostat for free; in return, the homeowner
allows the electricity utility to increase the temperature setpoint in their homes. The question we ask is: What policy
can be used to increase the penetration of peaksaver PLUS
thermostats in Ontario? One obvious approach is to give
homeowners cash incentives to deploy thermostats. However, these incentives are likely to be fairly small in comparison to household incomes and research has shown that
they are not very effective (Delmas, Fischlein, and Asensio
2013). Instead, we study the use of non-cash incentives to
promote adoption of the peaksaver PLUS program. Since
these non-cash incentives also have a monetary cost, there
is a need to estimate the relative costs and beneﬁts of different types of non-cash incentives. This forms the focus of our
work.
The contributions of this paper are two-fold:

Abstract
A conﬂuence of technical, economic and political forces are
revolutionizing the energy sector. Policy-makers, who decide
on incentives and penalties for possible courses of actions,
play a critical role in determining which outcomes arise.
However, designing appropriate energy policies is a complex and challenging task. Our vision is to provide tools and
methodologies for policy makers so that they can leverage
the power of big data to make evidence-based decisions. In
this paper we present an approach we call big-data mechanism design which combines a mechanism design framework
with stakeholder surveys and data to allow policy-makers to
gauge the costs and beneﬁts of potential policy decisions. We
illustrate the effectiveness of this approach in a concrete application domain: the peaksaver PLUS program in Ontario,
Canada.

Introduction
A conﬂuence of technical, economic, and political factors
are revolutionizing the energy sector around the world. In
this transformation, policy-makers, who decide on incentives and penalties for possible courses of action, play a critical role. For example, the Energiewende in Germany was
essentially driven by a policy incentive of high feed-in tariffs for solar and wind generators. Developing appropriate
energy policies is a complex and challenging task. A policy has to ﬁnd a balance between many competing forces
and must take into account a range of potential outcomes.
As a case in point, the German feed-in tariff had to balance
the interests of decentralized generators and traditional grid
operators. Outcomes included substantial deployment of renewable technologies (40 GW in the last eight years), but
also signiﬁcant drops in revenues of traditional electricity
generators, a stressed transmission grid, increased reliance
on fast-ramp but high-carbon generators, and the transfer of
billions of Euros from consumers to solar farm owners (Energiewende 2014). These unanticipated consequences have
enormous societal and political implications. There is, therefore, an urgent need for tools that allow policy-makers to
make informed decisions.
Our vision is for policy-makers to leverage the power of
data to make evidence-based decisions. In this work, we

• We provide a methodology for policy design that couples
agent-data elicitation with formalisms from game theory
and mechanism design in order to provide support for
evidence-based policy design. We illustrate the feasibility
of our approach through an energy-policy design example.
• We illustrate that non-cash incentives can be an effective
tool for promoting user behavior, and that it is possible
to instantiate and reason about stakeholders’ preferences
and attitudes about non-cash incentives.

Motivation and Methodology
We envision an approach to energy-policy design which uses
the formalism of game-theoretic and mechanism-design
based models coupled with data collected via low-cost highvolume surveys (or other data collection methods).
Game theory provides us with a precise way of reasoning
as to how rational agents will behave in strategic settings,

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3887

