Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Collective Noise Contrastive Estimation
for Policy Transfer Learning
Weinan Zhang† , Ulrich Paquet‡ , Katja Hofmann‡
†

University College London, ‡ Microsoft Research

In this paper we formalise the task of learning a behaviour
policy from heterogeneous data sources as a policy transfer learning problem. Given a set of exploration data, and
additional heterogeneous data sources (e.g., user-provided
example policies), how can the additional data be used to
guide the policy learned from exploration data? As a running example, and for the empirical part of our work, we
focus on the particularly challenging task of policy learning
for online radio stations. An online radio station (referred
to as agent) like that of Xbox Music is driven by a policy that stochastically streams music according to a probability P (next track|context).1 Whilst listening to music, the
listener provides partial feedback by skipping songs (low reward), or fully listening to songs (high reward). More formally, consider a context space I (e.g., the currently playing
artist), actions in set J (e.g., artists to play next), and a reward signal r (user satisfaction with action j given context
i). Following standard contextual bandit formulations (Li et
al. 2010; 2015), in each round the environment selects the
→
context i and the correponding reward vector −
ri across all
actions J, and provides i to the agent. The agent selects an
action j, and sends it to the environment. The environment
→
reveals −
ri [j], the reward for action j only, in response (denoted as r for simplicity). Our goal is to learn an agent behaviour policy that has high expected reward.
We assume two types of data sources available for learning a policy with binary reward r ∈ {1, −1}: ﬁrst, positive
examples DP = {(i, j, r = 1)} – these are user-provided
positive examples of good policies, here obtained in the form
of user generated playlists; second, exploration data in the
form of (i, j, r, pD (j|i)), where pD (j|i) is the probability of
selecting the action j given context i under the data collection policy.2

Abstract
We address the problem of learning behaviour policies to optimise online metrics from heterogeneous usage data. While
online metrics, e.g., click-through rate, can be optimised effectively using exploration data, such data is costly to collect
in practice, as it temporarily degrades the user experience.
Leveraging related data sources to improve online performance would be extremely valuable, but is not possible using
current approaches. We formulate this task as a policy transfer learning problem, and propose a ﬁrst solution, called collective noise contrastive estimation (collective NCE). NCE is
an efﬁcient solution to approximating the gradient of a logsoftmax objective. Our approach jointly optimises embeddings of heterogeneous data to transfer knowledge from the
source domain to the target domain. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by learning an effective policy for
an online radio station jointly from user-generated playlists,
and usage data collected in an exploration bucket.

Introduction
Interactive systems, such as web search engines, news recommender systems, and online radio stations, face the problem of ﬁnding a behaviour policy (e.g., which search results to show, news items to recommend, or songs to
play) that optimises user satisfaction, typically measured
in terms of some online metrics (e.g., positive feedback
ratio, click-through rate) (Zhao, Zhang, and Wang 2013;
Li et al. 2010). Contextual bandit approaches allow learning
such behaviour policies directly from user interactions while
balancing exploration (of new policies) and exploitation (of
known good policies) (Li et al. 2010). However, learning a
policy from scratch, by exploring and exploiting feedback
obtained from real users, is a dangerous game: by the time
a good policy is learned, all users would have abandoned
the system. One is therefore forced to collectively leverage
other available data sources to bootstrap a good initial policy. Conversely, much work has focused on learning from
explicitly labelled data (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009;
Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2007), or user-provided example
policies (Chen et al. 2012a). However, these approaches do
not directly optimise online performance, and it is currently
not clear how to bridge the gap between these approaches.

1
For the purpose of this work we focus on individual transitions and model these as independent of longer-term history. Dependency on history could be extended by considering longer sequences as context, or through extension to the full MDP formulation. Also note that we focus on ﬁnding a good policy using existing data, corresponding to the “exploration ﬁrst” scenario that is
particularly relevant in practical applications.
2
We assume exploration data was collected before training using an arbitrary data collection policy. Solutions for estimating
pD (j|i) for unknown or non-stochastic exploration policies are
proposed in (Langford, Strehl, and Wortman 2008; Strehl et al.
2010).

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1408

