Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

All-in Text: Learning Document, Label, and Word Representations Jointly
Jinseok Nam, Eneldo Loza Mencı́a, Johannes Fürnkranz
Knowledge Discovery in Scientiﬁc Literature, TU Darmstadt
Knowledge Engineering Group, TU Darmstadt
Research Training Group AIPHES, TU Darmstadt

how we can deﬁne more meaningful labels in order to improve performance of classiﬁers even on unseen labels.
Recently, several approaches have been proposed to address ZSL problems by making use of additional information such as attributes of labels (Lampert, Nickisch, and
Harmeling 2014) and their textual information such as the
labels’ name (Frome et al. 2013; Socher et al. 2013;
Akata et al. 2015). Such information allows for classiﬁers
to make reasonable predictions on unseen instances associated with unseen labels, without losing generalization performance. As an example, assume that we are given a classiﬁer trained on a collection of documents about “dogs” and
“cats.” What if documents about “wolves” and “lions” arrive at test time? Given the ﬁxed label set, i.e., “dogs” and
“cats,” the classiﬁer may predict the label of documents
about wolves as “dogs” because it is likely that the documents about “wolves” shares more terms with ones about
dogs than cats. Similarly, the documents about lions will be
predicted as “cats.” Let us consider a slightly different scenario that “wolves” and “lions” are also used as labels to
be predicted at test time even though we did not train the
classiﬁer for such labels. Deﬁning A ≺ B which means
A comes before B in a ranked list, we want the classiﬁer
to yield the following ranked lists of labels for the documents about wolves: “dogs” ≺ “cats” ≺ “wolves” ≺ “lions,”
“dogs” ≺ “wolves” ≺ “cats” ≺ “lions,” or, ideally, “wolves”
≺ “dogs” ≺ “cats” ≺ “lions” based on the fact that “dogs”
and “wolves” belong to the same family, and under the assumption that the classiﬁer also knows such fact learned
from external resources. In other words, for the documents
about wolves it is reasonable that “wolves” always precedes
“lions” in label ranking based on the relationship between
“dogs” and “wolves.”
One way that allows classiﬁers to learn relationships between labels and to exploit the information for making predictions for unseen labels has been introduced in (Frome
et al. 2013). This approach ﬁrst represents words as ddimensional vectors. These word embeddings are learned
from large textual corpora such as Wikipedia whose vocabulary includes textual descriptions for labels such as “dogs”
and “cats”. In turn, representations of words corresponding
to label names are used instead when labels need to be considered. As the embedding space has the interesting property
that words used in similar contexts have similar representations, one is able to make reasonable predictions for unseen
labels even when no prior information on them is available.

Abstract
Conventional multi-label classiﬁcation algorithms treat
the target labels of the classiﬁcation task as mere symbols that are void of an inherent semantics. However, in
many cases textual descriptions of these labels are available or can be easily constructed from public document
sources such as Wikipedia. In this paper, we investigate
an approach for embedding documents and labels into a
joint space while sharing word representations between
documents and labels. For ﬁnding such embeddings, we
rely on the text of documents as well as descriptions for
the labels. The use of such label descriptions not only
lets us expect an increased performance on conventional
multi-label text classiﬁcation tasks, but can also be used
to make predictions for labels that have not been seen
during the training phase. The potential of our method
is demonstrated on the multi-label classiﬁcation task of
assigning keywords from the Medical Subject Headings
(MeSH) to publications in biomedical research, both in
a conventional and in a zero-shot learning setting.

1

Introduction

Classiﬁcation is a classical task in machine learning whose
goal is to assign class labels to instances based on instances’ properties. This can be seen as a learning process to identify common properties in instances and to aggregate instances, which are characterized by similar properties, in the same class. That is, classes represent commonality among instances in an abstract level. Thus, we
evaluate how well the classiﬁers generalize to unseen instances. In a similar sense, evaluation can also be extended
to the performance of the classiﬁers on unseen labels. For
the latter, however, classiﬁcation algorithms cannot work
well if they exploit association patterns only between instances and labels given in the training set. This is because,
in classiﬁcation problems, a label is often represented by
one of a ﬁxed number of discrete values. In other words,
there is no way to know how unseen labels are related to
seen labels. This sort of problem is often referred to as
“zero-shot learning” (ZSL) where a subset of labels is associated with none of training examples, but only appears
among the target labels at test time (Farhadi et al. 2009;
Palatucci et al. 2009). Hence, the main question in ZSL is
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1948

