Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Delay-Tolerant Online Convex Optimization:
Uniﬁed Analysis and Adaptive-Gradient Algorithms
1

Pooria Joulani1

András György2

Csaba Szepesvári1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
{pooria,szepesva}@ualberta.ca
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, UK
a.gyorgy@imperial.ac.uk
delay-tolerant online learning are common across different
domains and algorithms. In this paper, we take a different
approach: we propose a uniﬁed theoretical framework for
analyzing full-information online learning algorithms under
delayed feedback. This uniﬁed approach enables us to simultaneously analyze various online convex optimization
(OCO) methods (with linear losses or implicit updates) in
the delayed-feedback setting, without the need to resort to
ad-hoc analysis techniques.
The framework that we present is based on a natural reduction from the delayed-feedback online learning problem
to standard, non-delayed online learning, as well as on recent uniﬁed analyses of OCO algorithms (McMahan 2014;
Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011). In particular, our ﬁrst main
result gives an easy-to-interpret identity relating the regret
of an algorithm operated in a delayed environment to the
regret of the algorithm when operated in a non-delayed environment. All of our subsequent results are then derived
from this general identity. We demonstrate the ﬂexibility and
power of our framework by solving several open problems
from the literature. In particular, we analyze general delayadaptive A DAG RAD-style algorithms, both with and without projection, without relying on either strong convexity or
smoothness of the loss function, or data sparsity.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We start
with the formal deﬁnition of the learning setting we consider
(Section 2), followed by a summary of our results and their
connection to the previous work (Section 3). We present our
general reduction in Section 4 and the uniﬁed analysis of
OCO algorithms in Section 5. Section 6 demonstrates the
application of our framework in solving the aforementioned
open problems. We conclude the paper in Section 7 and discuss some potential future work.

Abstract
We present a uniﬁed, black-box-style method for developing
and analyzing online convex optimization (OCO) algorithms
for full-information online learning in delayed-feedback environments. Our new, simpliﬁed analysis enables us to substantially improve upon previous work and to solve a number of open problems from the literature. Speciﬁcally, we develop and analyze asynchronous AdaGrad-style algorithms
from the Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) and MirrorDescent family that, unlike previous works, can handle projections and adapt both to the gradients and the delays, without relying on either strong convexity or smoothness of the
objective function, or data sparsity. Our uniﬁed framework
builds on a natural reduction from delayed-feedback to standard (non-delayed) online learning. This reduction, together
with recent uniﬁcation results for OCO algorithms, allows us
to analyze the regret of generic FTRL and Mirror-Descent algorithms in the delayed-feedback setting in a uniﬁed manner
using standard proof techniques. In addition, the reduction is
exact and can be used to obtain both upper and lower bounds
on the regret in the delayed-feedback setting.

1

Introduction

Online learning algorithms are at the heart of modern machine learning algorithms. The sequential nature of these
algorithms makes them ideal for learning from data that is
too large to be processed in a batch mode. However, their
very sequential nature also predicts that they may be unﬁt to
be used in parallel and distributed processing environments.
To address this potential issue, several papers have studied
asynchronous and distributed versions of online learning and
stochastic optimization algorithms in recent years (see Section 3). These papers have shown that the ability to tolerate delays in receiving feedback is a key for obtaining asynchronous online learning algorithms.
Depending on the speciﬁcs of a machine learning task,
a user can choose from several online learning algorithms
(see, e.g., the book of Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006). Previous work has typically focused on extending these algorithms to various delayed-feedback scenarios on a caseby-case basis, and usually under the stochastic optimization setting. However, many ideas and core challenges of

1.1

Notation and deﬁnitions

We will work with a closed, convex, non-empty subset X
of a Hilbert space X over the reals. That is, X is a real vector space equipped with an inner product ·, · that is complete with respect to (w.r.t.) the norm induced by ·, ·. For
example, we might have X = Rd where ·, · is the dotproduct, or X = Rm×n , the set of m × n real matrices,
where A, B = tr A B . Let R : S → R be a strictly
convex, differentiable function over a convex closed domain
S ⊂ X with a non-empty interior S ◦ . Then, the R-induced

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1744

