Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

DRIMUX: Dynamic Rumor Inﬂuence Minimization
with User Experience in Social Networks
Biao Wang1 , Ge Chen1 , Luoyi Fu1 , Li Song1 , Xinbing Wang1 , Xue Liu2
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
School of Computer Science, McGill University, Canada
{sweetmvp24, chenge, yiluofu, song li, xwang8}@sjtu.edu.cn, xueliu@cs.mcgill.ca

Chen, Wang, and Wang 2010; Shirazipourazad et al. 2012).
In contrast, the negative inﬂuence minimization problem
has gained much less attention, but still there have been
consistent efforts on designing effective strategies for
blocking malicious rumors and minimizing the negative
inﬂuence. (Budak, Agrawal, and Abbadi 2011) introduced
the notion of a “good” campaign in a social network
to counteract the negative inﬂuence of a “bad” one by
convincing users to adopt the “good” one. (Kimura, Saito,
and Motoda 2009) studied the problem of minimizing the
propagation of malicious rumors by blocking a limited
number of links in a social network. They provided two
different deﬁnitions of contamination degree and proposed
corresponding optimization algorithms. (Fan et al. 2013)
investigated the least cost rumor blocking problem in social
networks. They introduced the concept of “protectors” and
try to select a minimal number of them to limit the bad inﬂuence of rumors by triggering a protection cascade against
the rumor cascade. However, there are a few limitations in
those works. First, they consider the rumor popularity as
constant during the whole propagation process, which is not
close to the realistic scenarios. Second, in the design of the
rumor blocking strategies, either blocking nodes or links,
they fail to take into account the issue of user experience
in real world social networks. We have to avoid blocking
the users’ accounts for such a long time that they may lodge
complaints or even quit the social network. Therefore, it is
necessary to consider the impact of blocking time on both
individual node and the entire network.

Abstract
Rumor blocking is a serious problem in large-scale social networks. Malicious rumors could cause chaos in society and
hence need to be blocked as soon as possible after being detected. In this paper, we propose a model of dynamic rumor
inﬂuence minimization with user experience (DRIMUX).
Our goal is to minimize the inﬂuence of the rumor (i.e., the
number of users that have accepted and sent the rumor) by
blocking a certain subset of nodes. A dynamic Ising propagation model considering both the global popularity and individual attraction of the rumor is presented based on realistic
scenario. In addition, different from existing problems of inﬂuence minimization, we take into account the constraint of
user experience utility. Speciﬁcally, each node is assigned a
tolerance time threshold. If the blocking time of each user exceeds that threshold, the utility of the network will decrease.
Under this constraint, we then formulate the problem as a network inference problem with survival theory, and propose solutions based on maximum likelihood principle. Experiments
are implemented based on large-scale real world networks
and validate the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
With the soaring development and rising popularity of largescale social networks such as Twitter, Facebook, and Chinese Weibo, etc., hundreds of millions of people are able
to share all kinds of information with each other online.
On one hand, these online social platforms provide great
convenience to the diffusion of positive information such
as new ideas, innovations, and hot topics (Montanari and
Saberi 2010). On the other hand, however, they may become
a channel for the spreading of malicious rumors or misinformation (Budak, Agrawal, and Abbadi 2011). For example, some people may post on social networks a rumor about
an upcoming earthquake, which will cause chaos among the
crowd and hence may hinder the normal public order. Undoubtedly, these malicious rumors should be stopped as soon
as possible once detected so that their negative inﬂuence can
be minimized.
Most of the previous works studied the problem
of maximizing the inﬂuence of positive information
through social networks based on the Independent Cascade (IC) model, (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003;

In this paper, we investigate the problem of dynamic
rumor inﬂuence minimization with user experience. First,
we incorporate the rumor popularity dynamics in diffusion
model. We analyze existing investigations on topic propagation dynamics (Yang and Leskovec 2011) and choose Chisquared distribution to approximate the global rumor popularity. Inspired by the novel energy model proposed by (Han
et al. 2014), we then analyze the individual tendency towards
the rumor and present the probability of successful rumor
propagation between a pair of nodes. Finally, inspired by
the concept in Ising model (Chelkak and Smirnov 2012),
we derive the cooperative succeeding probability of rumor
propagation that integrates the global rumor popularity with
individual tendency. After that, we introduce the concept of

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

791

