Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Submodular Asymmetric Feature Selection in Cascade Object Detection
†

Baosheng Yu† and Meng Fang‡ and Dacheng Tao† and Jie Yin§
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology, Sydney
‡
Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
§
CSIRO, Australia
baosheng.yu@student.uts.edu.au, meng.fang@unimelb.edu.au
dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au, jie.yin@csiro.au
2003). The cascade explicitly uses a cascade of node classiﬁers with increasing complexity. Each node classiﬁer is
used to correctly reject a portion of non-object windows
(measured by false positive rate) and retain any possible object windows for further precessing (measured by detection
rate), as shown in Figure 1. As most of the non-object windows can be quickly rejected by simple node classiﬁers at
early stages, the cascade runs fast and has high accuracy.
The state-of-art node learning framework (Wu et al. 2008)
contains two parts: feature selection and node classiﬁer design. It has been demonstrated that selecting features and
forming an ensemble classiﬁer using linear combinations of
these features is effective for building node classiﬁers.

Abstract
A cascade classiﬁer has turned out to be effective in slidingwindow based real-time object detection. In a cascade classiﬁer, node learning is the key process, which includes feature selection and classiﬁer design. Previous algorithms fail
to effectively tackle the asymmetry and intersection problems
existing in cascade classiﬁcation, thereby limiting the performance of object detection. In this paper, we improve current
feature selection algorithm by addressing both asymmetry
and intersection problems. We formulate asymmetric feature
selection as a submodular function maximization problem.
We then propose a new algorithm SAFS with formal performance guarantee to solve this problem. We use face detection
as a case study and perform experiments on two real-world
face detection datasets. The experimental results demonstrate
that our algorithm SAFS outperforms the state-of-art feature
selection algorithms in cascade object detection, such as FFS
and LACBoost.

Introduction
Object detection deals with detecting semantic objects (such
as persons, buildings, or cars) in digital images and videos. It
is a fundamental problem in computer vision, which is often
formulated as a search and classiﬁcation problem: the search
strategy generates potential image regions and the classiﬁer determines whether or not the potential image region
contains an object. Most of the state-of-art object detection
systems are based on a sliding-window strategy (Viola and
Jones 2001b; Wu et al. 2008; Benenson et al. 2014), which
involves scanning an image with a rectangular window and
determining the presence of an object through a binary classiﬁer. However, this brute-force search strategy is computationally expensive (e.g., in a 360×360 image, there are more
than 10000 rectangular windows needed to be classiﬁed). As
a result, there are two main methods to improve the object
detection process: cascade classiﬁer (Viola and Jones 2001b)
and efﬁcient window search (Lampert, Blaschko, and Hofmann 2008). These two methods can work collaboratively.
In sliding-window based object detection setting, there
are only a few windows containing objects, which is known
as the rare event detection problem (Wu, Rehg, and Mullin

Figure 1: Cascade object detection with asymmetry and intersection problems. The asymmetry problem: maintain an
extremely high detection rate and a moderate false positive
rate. The intersection problem: reduce the redundant voting.
One of main considerations in feature selection is about
asymmetry, which is illustrated in Figure 1. In order to guarantee the accuracy of the cascade (high detection rate and
low false positive rate), each node classiﬁer needs to be an
asymmetric classiﬁer, which has an extremely high detection
rate (e.g., 0.99) and a moderate false positive rate (e.g., 0.5).
Wu et al. (2008) proposed a fast feature selection algorithm,
called the Forward Feature Selection (FFS) algorithm. However, FFS algorithm uses error rate as criterion for feature

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1387

