Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Jointly Modeling Topics and Intents with Global Order Structure
Bei Chen† , Jun Zhu†∗ , Nan Yang‡ , Tian Tian† , Ming Zhou‡ , Bo Zhang†

†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research, TNList, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
‡
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, 100080, China
{chenbei12@mails., dcszj@, tiant13@mails., dcszb@}tsinghua.edu.cn; {nanya, mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Abstract

,QWHQWVWUXFWXUH

7RSLFZRUGV

,QWHQWZRUGV

%$&.*5281' 0RGHOLQJ GRFXPHQW VWUXFWXUH LV RI JUHDW
LPSRUWDQFHIRUGLVFRXUVHDQDO\VLV2%-(&7,9(7KHJRDORI
WKLV UHVHDUFK LV WR FDSWXUH WKH GRFXPHQW LQWHQW VWUXFWXUH :H
SUHVHQW *00/'$ WR MRLQWO\ PRGHO WKH WRSLFV DQG LQWHQWV
0(7+2'  *00/'$ LV D WRSLF PRGHOLQJ EDVHG %D\HVLDQ
PRGHO WKDW HPSOR\V JHQHUDOL]HG 0DOORZV PRGHO WR FDSWXUH WKH
LQWHQWRUGHUVWUXFWXUHDQGLQWURGXFHVELQDU\YDULDEOHVWRLQGLFDWH
WKHW\SHVRIZRUGV5(68/7([SHULPHQWDOUHVXOWVRQ&KHPLFDO
DQG(OHPHQWVGDWDVHWVGHPRQVWUDWHWKHVXSHULRULW\RIRXUPRGHO

Modeling document structure is of great importance for discourse analysis and related applications. The goal of this research is to capture the document intent structure by modeling
documents as a mixture of topic words and rhetorical words.
While the topics are relatively unchanged through one document, the rhetorical functions of sentences usually change following certain orders in discourse. We propose GMM-LDA,
a topic modeling based Bayesian unsupervised model, to analyze the document intent structure cooperated with order information. Our model is ﬂexible that has the ability to combine the annotations and do supervised learning. Additionally, entropic regularization can be introduced to model the
signiﬁcant divergence between topics and intents. We perform experiments in both unsupervised and supervised settings, results show the superiority of our model over several
state-of-the-art baselines.

Figure 1: Demonstration of the intent and topic words. Stop
words (in gray) can be removed by preprocessing.

tent. For example, the sentences in a scientiﬁc paper may
have different intents such as “background”, “objective”,
“method” and “result”. Fig 1 presents an example of the intent structure of an abstract.
Document-level topics and sentence-level intents usually
show contradictory characteristics. For example, it is often
sensible to assume that the topics are relatively unchanged
through one document (e.g., in LDA), while the sentences’
intents usually change following certain order in discourse.
Furthermore, each document often follows a progression of
nonrecurring coherent intents (Halliday and Hasan 1976),
and the sentences with the same intent tend to appear within
the same block of a document. Based on these observations,
it’s natural to think that jointly considering these two incompatible structures can help to model document better.
In this paper, we present a hierarchical Bayesian model to
discover both the topic structure and rhetorical structure of
documents by jointly considering topics and the above order
structure in discourse. To this end, we assume that all the
words can be divided into two types: topic word and intent
word. Speciﬁcally, topic words in a document are relevant to
the document’s topic and spread throughout the document,
while intent words mainly contribute to the rhetorical functions of the sentences. Following the example in Fig. 1, the
words “document”, “discourse” and “intent” are likely to be
topic words; they indicate the speciﬁc research domain of
this document. Meanwhile, the words “result”, “dataset” and
“demonstrate” are likely to be intent words and a sentence
with these words may have the intent structure label “result”.

Introduction
People often organize utterances into meaningful and coherent documents, conforming to certain conventions and underlying structures. For example, scripts (Frermann, Titov,
and Pinkal 2014), scientiﬁc papers (Ó Séaghdha and Teufel
2014), ofﬁcial mails, news and encyclopedia articles all have
relatively ﬁxed discourse structure and exhibit recurrent patterns. Learning the document structure is of great importance for discourse analysis and has various applications,
such as text generation (Prasad et al. 2005) and text summarization (Louis, Joshi, and Nenkova 2010).
There are two important aspects of document structure
learning: topic modeling and rhetorical structure modeling.
Topic modeling assumes multiple topics often exist within a
domain. It aims to discover the latent semantics of the documents, with many popular models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), in which
each document is posited as an admixture over an underlying set of topics, and each word is draw from a speciﬁc topic.
Rhetorical structure modeling aims to uncover the underlying organization of documents. Inspired by the discourse
theory (Mann and Thompson 1988), each sentence in a document can be assigned a rhetorical function, or called in∗

Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2711

