Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fast Nonsmooth Regularized Risk Minimization with Continuation
Shuai Zheng, Ruiliang Zhang, James T. Kwok
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
{szhengac, rzhangaf, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk
√
with the much faster O(1/ T ) and O(1/T ) rates, respectively (Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan 2012; Shamir and
Zhang 2013). Recently, Shamir and Zhang (2013) recovered
these rates by using a polynomial-decay averaging scheme
on the SGD iterates. However, a major drawback is that it
does not exploit properties of the regularizer. For example,
when used with a sparsity-inducing regularizer, its solution
obtained may not be sparse (Duchi and Singer 2009).
Nesterov (2005b) proposed to smooth the nonsmooth objective so that it can then be efﬁciently optimized. This
smoothing approach is now popularly used for nonsmooth
optimization. However, the optimal smoothness parameter needs to be known in advance. This restriction is later
avoided by the (batch) excessive gap algorithm (Nesterov
2005a). In the stochastic setting, Ouyang and Gray (2012)
combined Nesterov’s smoothing with SGD. Though these
methods achieve the fastest known convergence rates in
the batch and stochastic settings respectively, they assume
a Lipschitz-smooth regularizer, and nonsmooth regularizers
(such as the sparsity-inducing regularizers) cannot be used.
Recently, based on the observation that the training set is
indeed ﬁnite, a number of fast stochastic algorithms are proposed for both smooth and composite optimization problems
(Schmidt, Roux, and Bach 2013; Johnson and Zhang 2013;
Xiao and Zhang 2014; Mairal 2013; Defazio, Bach, and
Lacoste-Julien 2014). They are based on the idea of variance reduction, and attain comparable convergence rates as
their batch counterparts. However, they are not applicable
when both the loss and regularizer are nonsmooth. To alleviate this, Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang (2014) suggested running these algorithms on the smoothed approximation obtained by Nesterov’s smoothing. However, as in (Nesterov
2005b), it requires a careful setting of the smoothness parameter. Over-smoothing deteriorates solution quality, while
under-smoothing slows down convergence.
The problem of setting the smoothness parameter can
be alleviated by continuation (Becker, Bobin, and Candès
2011). It solves a sequence of smoothed problems, in which
the smoothing parameter is gradually reduced from a large
value (and the corresponding smoothed problem is easy to
solve) to a small value (which leads to a solution closer to
that of the original nonsmooth problem). Moreover, solution of the intermediate problem is used to warm-start the
next smoothed problem. This approach is also similar to that

Abstract
In regularized risk minimization, the associated optimization
problem becomes particularly difﬁcult when both the loss
and regularizer are nonsmooth. Existing approaches either
have slow or unclear convergence properties, are restricted
to limited problem subclasses, or require careful setting of
a smoothing parameter. In this paper, we propose a continuation algorithm that is applicable to a large class of nonsmooth regularized risk minimization problems, can be ﬂexibly used with a number of existing solvers for the underlying
smoothed subproblem, and with convergence results on the
whole algorithm rather than just one of its subproblems. In
particular, when accelerated solvers are used, the proposed
algorithm achieves the fastest known rates of O(1/T 2 ) on
strongly convex problems, and O(1/T ) on general convex
problems. Experiments on nonsmooth classiﬁcation and regression tasks demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
In regularized risk minimization, one has to minimize the
sum of an empirical loss and a regularizer. When both are
smooth, it can be easily optimized by a variety of solvers
(Nesterov 2004). In particular, a popular choice for big data
applications is stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which is
easy to implement and highly scalable (Kushner and Yin
2003). For many nonsmooth regularizers (such as the 1 and
nuclear norm regularizers), the corresponding regularized
risks can still be efﬁciently minimized by the proximal gradient algorithm and its accelerated variants (Nesterov 2013).
However, when the regularizer is smooth but the loss is nonsmooth (e.g., the hinge loss and absolute loss), or when both
the loss and regularizer are nonsmooth, proximal gradient
algorithms are not directly applicable.
On nonsmooth problems, SGD can still be used, by simply replacing the gradient with subgradient. However, the
information contained in the subgradient is much less informative (Nemirovski and Yudin 1983), and convergence
is hindered. On general
√ convex problems, SGD converges
at a rate of O(log T / T ), where T is the number of iterations; whereas on strongly convex problems, the rate is
O(log T /T ). In contrast, its smooth counterparts converge
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2393

