Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient Computation of Emergent Equilibrium in Agent-Based Simulation
Zehong Hu1,2 , Meng Sha2 , Moath Jarrah1,2 , Jie Zhang2 , Hui Xi3
1

Rolls-Royce@NTU Corporate Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Rolls-Royce Singapore Pte Ltd, Singapore

2

This method is very time-consuming as the simulation of
each realization has to start from the very beginning in every iteration. The same problem has also appeared in simulating dynamic systems based on partial differential equations, and it has been solved using the numerical continuation (NC) theory (Allgower and Georg 2003). In the NC theory, when a parameter value changes, new steady states are
predicted based on previous ones. Afterwards, the predicted
states are corrected through Newton iterations, which avoids
recomputing the whole simulation from the beginning to
generate the new steady states (Chan and Keller 1982;
Shroff and Keller 1993). In addition, the pseudo-arclength
method of the NC theory can adaptively select a suitable
parameter step size for fast-changing and slow-changing
solutions (Chan and Keller 1982). Nevertheless, it is very
difﬁcult to apply the NC theory to capture the emergent
equilibrium in ABS for two reasons. Firstly, there are no
closed-form equations available in ABS models to depict the
macroscopic emergent dynamics. The reﬁned simulation is
conducted at the micro-level while the numerical computation is conducted at the macro-level. Secondly, the Newton
iteration used for correcting the prediction in the NC theory
can be of a low efﬁciency because ABS is highly complex
and stochastic which results in great difﬁculty to eliminate
the prediction error with numeric iterations.

Abstract
In agent-based simulation, emergent equilibrium describes
the macroscopic steady states of agents’ interactions. While
the state of individual agents might be changing, the collective behavior pattern remains the same in macroscopic equilibrium states. Traditionally, these emergent equilibriums are
calculated using Monte Carlo methods. However, these methods require thousands of repeated simulation runs, which
are extremely time-consuming. In this paper, we propose
a novel three-layer framework to efﬁciently compute emergent equilibriums. The framework consists of a macro-level
pseudo-arclength equilibrium solver (PAES), a micro-level
simulator (MLS) and a macro-micro bridge (MMB). It can
adaptively explore parameter space and recursively compute
equilibrium states using the predictor-corrector scheme. We
apply the framework to the popular opinion dynamics and
labour market models. The experimental results show that our
framework outperformed Monte Carlo experiments in terms
of computation efﬁciency while maintaining the accuracy.

Introduction
Agent-based simulation (ABS) has become one of the dominant methods for simulating complex systems with interacting agents (Picault and Mathieu 2011). Emergent ABS
systems are a class of ABS models where the evolution of
their agents leads to a certain macroscopic steady state. This
steady state, termed emergent equilibrium, exists where the
aggregated behaviors are maintained despite time-varying
states of individual agents. The past few decades have seen
the development of many ABS models (Bert et al. 2014;
Teose et al. 2011) and powerful simulation platforms (Allan 2010). However, very limited work has been done in efﬁcient computing emergent behaviors in complex systems,
including the emergent equilibrium.
To search for the emergent equilibrium of ABS models,
one of the most widely used approaches is to conduct Monte
Carlo experiments. This approach usually consists of four
steps: selecting different parameter values, setting up many
initial conditions for each parameter, creating hundreds of
ensemble realizations for each initial condition, and executing detailed simulation for each realization long enough to
investigate collective behaviours (Tsoumanis et al. 2010).

Thus, in this paper, we propose a novel three-layer framework aiming to achieve efﬁcient computation of emergent
equilibrium in ABS. To our best knowledge, this represents
the ﬁrst systematic effort to apply NC theory to ABS. The
proposed framework consists of: 1) a macro-level recursive
equilibrium solver with the predictor-corrector scheme to
adaptively explore the system parameter space, 2) a microlevel simulator to control the execution of ABS, and 3) a
bridge to connect the simulator with the numerical solver
and translate macroscopic evolution dynamics into approximated short bursts of suitably initialized microscopic simulation. The macro-level recursive equilibrium solver utilizes
the previously obtained equilibrium points to predict the new
equilibrium at ﬁrst. Then, the corrector controls the microlevel simulator through the proposed bridge to obtain short
bursts of the microscopic simulation and correct the prediction. As a result, computing the emergent equilibrium from
the beginning in every iteration is avoided and the parameter is adaptively adjusted, through which we can signiﬁ-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2501

