Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Variable Agent Decomposition for DCOPs
Ferdinando Fioretto

William Yeoh

Enrico Pontelli

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM 88003, U.S.
fﬁorett@cs.nmsu.edu

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM 88003, U.S.
wyeoh@cs.nmsu.edu

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM 88003, U.S.
epontell@cs.nmsu.edu

In this paper, we propose a novel decomposition method,
called Multi-Variable Agent (MVA) DCOP decomposition,
to overcome these limitations; MVA decomposition enables
a separation between the agents’ local subproblems, which
can be solved independently using centralized solvers, and
the DCOP global problem, which requires coordination of
the agents. The decomposition does not lead to any additional privacy loss. The MVA framework enables the
use of different centralized and distributed solvers in a hierarchical and parallel way. We explore the use of two
centralized solvers, Depth-First Branch and Bound (DFBnB) and Gibbs, to solve the agents’ local subproblems.
For the global coordination, we consider three representative DCOP algorithms: Asynchronous Forward Bounding
(AFB) (Gershman, Meisels, and Zivan 2009), as an example of a search algorithm, Distributed Pseudo-tree Optimization Procedure (DPOP) (Petcu and Faltings 2005), as an
example of an inference algorithm, and Distributed Gibbs
(D-Gibbs) (Nguyen, Yeoh, and Lau 2013), as an example
of a sampling algorithm. Our work is motivated by the
increasing interest in modeling complex distributed multiagent applications, where each agent needs to solve complex
subproblems (Kim and Lesser 2013; Giuliani et al. 2014;
Amigoni, Castelletti, and Giuliani 2015).
This paper advances the state of the art by: (1) deﬁning
a separation between the distributed DCOP resolution process and the centralized agent subproblem resolution process, enabling the use of efﬁcient centralized solvers to solve
independent subproblems; (2) enabling the use of hierarchical parallel models during DCOP resolution and proposing a general model to exploit Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) for DCOP resolution; (3) proposing search-based
and sampling-based GPU-accelerated local solvers to speed
up the DCOP resolution process; and (4) providing empirical evidence of the efﬁciency in computation and communication of MVA decomposition with respect to existing
DCOP reformulation techniques.

Abstract
The application of DCOP models to large problems faces two
main limitations: (i) Modeling limitations, as each agent can
handle only a single variable of the problem; and (ii) Resolution limitations, as current approaches do not exploit the
local problem structure within each agent. This paper proposes a novel Multi-Variable Agent (MVA) DCOP decomposition technique, which: (i) Exploits the co-locality of each
agent’s variables, allowing us to adopt efﬁcient centralized
techniques within each agent; (ii) Enables the use of hierarchical parallel models and proposes the use of GPUs; and
(iii) Reduces the amount of computation and communication
required in several classes of DCOP algorithms.

Introduction
The Distributed Constraint Optimization Problem (DCOP)
model is an elegant formalism to describe cooperative multiagent problems and has been applied to solve coordination
and resource allocation problems (Maheswaran et al. 2004;
Léauté and Faltings 2011; Zivan et al. 2015; Miller, Ramchurn, and Rogers 2012). However, the applicability of
DCOPs to more general classes of problems, where agents
control multiple variables, faces two important challenges:
(i) Modeling limitations, due to the common assumption
that each agent controls only one variable; and (ii) Resolution limitations, which prevent agents from exploiting local
problem structure. To cope with such restrictions, reformulation techniques are commonly used to transform a general DCOP into one where each agent controls exclusively
one variable. There are two commonly used reformulation
techniques (Burke and Brown 2006; Yokoo 2001): (i) Compilation, where each agent creates a new pseudo-variable,
whose domain is the Cartesian product of the domains of
all variables of the agent; and (ii) Decomposition, where
each agent creates a pseudo-agent for each of its variables.
While both techniques are relatively simple, they can be inefﬁcient. In compilation, the memory requirement for each
agent grows exponentially with the number of variables that
it controls. In decomposition, the DCOP algorithms will
treat two pseudo-agents as independent entities, resulting in
unnecessary computation and communication costs.

Background
DCOP: A DCOP (Modi et al. 2005; Yeoh and Yokoo
2012) is described by a tuple X , D, F, A, α, where: X =
{x1 , . . . , xn } is a set of variables; D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } is a
set of ﬁnite domains (i.e., xi ∈ Di
); F = {f1 , . . . , fm } is a
set of cost functions, where fi : xj ∈xi Di → N ∪ {∞}

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2480

