Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Poker-CNN: A Pattern Learning Strategy for Making Draws
and Bets in Poker Games Using Convolutional Networks
Nikolai Yakovenko

Liangliang Cao

PokerPoker LLC, Las Vegas
nickyakovenko@gmail.com

Columbia University and Yahoo Labs, New York
liangliang.cao@gmail.com

Colin Raffel

James Fan

Columbia University, New York
craffel@gmail.com

Columbia University, New York
jfan.us@gmail.com
to condense a particular variation of poker’s massive number of possible states into a more manageable set of similar
states. As a result, existing poker playing systems are difﬁcult to build, and their success is limited to a speciﬁc game,
e.g., heads-up limit Texas Hold’em (Sandholm 2015b). In
contrast, human poker players show more general expertise,
as they are usually good at many poker variations.
We classify previous works (Rubin and Watson 2011)
(Sandholm 2015b) as expert knowledge based approaches.
This paper proposes a data driven approach which uses the
same machinery to learn patterns for different poker games
from training data produced by inferior simple heuristic
players, as well as from self-play. The training data are game
histories, and the output is a neural network that estimates
the gain/loss of each legal game action in the current game
context. We believe that this data-driven approach can be
applied to a wide variety of poker games with little gamespeciﬁc knowledge.
However, there are several challenges in learning from
these synthesized training data:

Abstract
Poker is a family of card games that includes many variations. We hypothesize that most poker games can be solved
as a pattern matching problem, and propose creating a strong
poker playing system based on a uniﬁed poker representation. Our poker player learns through iterative self-play, and
improves its understanding of the game by training on the
results of its previous actions without sophisticated domain
knowledge. We evaluate our system on three poker games:
single player video poker, two-player Limit Texas Hold’em,
and ﬁnally two-player 2-7 triple draw poker. We show that our
model can quickly learn patterns in these very different poker
games while it improves from zero knowledge to a competitive player against human experts.
The contributions of this paper include: (1) a novel representation for poker games, extendable to different poker variations, (2) a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based
learning model that can effectively learn the patterns in three
different games, and (3) a self-trained system that significantly beats the heuristic-based program on which it is
trained, and our system is competitive against human expert
players.

• Representation. A learning model requires a good representation which includes rich information present in different poker games, such as the player’s private cards, any
known public information, and the actions taken on previous rounds of the game.

Introduction
Poker, a family of different card games with different rules,
is a challenging problem for artiﬁcial intelligence because
the game state space is huge and the numerous variations
require different domain knowledge.
There have been a number of efforts to design an AI system for poker games over the past few years, focusing on
the Texas Hold’em style of poker (Rubin and Watson 2011)
(Sandholm 2015b). They have achieved competitive performance against the worlds best heads-up No Limit Texas
Hold’em players (Rutkin 2015), and found an effective equilibrium solution for heads-up Limit Texas Hold’em (Bowling et al. 2015). These systems treat poker as imperfectinformation games, and develop search strategies speciﬁc
to Texas Hold’em to ﬁnd the game equilibrium, with various abstractions to group similar game states together, thus
reducing the complexity of the game. However, equilibriumﬁnding requires domain knowledge and considerable effort

• Sophistication. The training data obtained from simulation is far from perfect. Our training data ﬁrst came
from simple heuristic players, which are not competitive
against serious poker players.
To solve these challenges, we employ a number of techniques. We propose a novel representation for poker games,
which can be used across different poker games with different rules to capture the card information as well as betting sequences. Based on this representation, we develop a
deep neural network which can learn the knowledge for each
poker game, and embed such knowledge into its parameters.
By acknowledging that the training data is not perfect, we
propose to improve our network by learning on its own. At
every step, our network can be used to simulate more data.
As a result, our trained model is always more competitive
than the model generating the training data.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

360

