Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Seeing the Unseen Network:
Inferring Hidden Social Ties from Respondent-Driven Sampling
1

Lin Chen1,2 and Forrest W. Crawford2,3 and Amin Karbasi1,2

Department of Electrical Engineering, 2 Yale Institute for Network Science, 3 Department of Biostatistics
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520
{lin.chen, forrest.crawford, amin.karbasi}@yale.edu

researchers have developed a variety of social link-tracing
survey designs. The most popular is respondent-driven sampling (RDS) (Heckathorn 1997).
In RDS, a small set of initial subjects, known as “seeds”
are selected, not necessarily simultaneously, from the target
population. Subjects are given a few coupons, each tagged
with a unique identiﬁer, which they can use to recruit other
eligible subjects. Participants are given a reward for being
interviewed and for each eligible subject they recruit using
their coupons. Each subject reports their degree, the number
of others whom they know in the target population. No subject is permitted to enter the study twice and the date and
time of each interview is recorded.
While RDS can be an effective recruitment method, it reveals only incomplete social network data to researchers.
Any ties between recruited subjects along which no recruitment took place remain unobserved. The social network of
recruited subjects is of great interest to sociologists, epidemiologists and public health researchers since it may induce dependencies in the outcomes of sampled individuals.
Fortunately, RDS reveals information about the underlying
social network that can be used to (approximately) reconstruct it. By leveraging the time series of recruitments, the
degrees of recruited subjects, coupon information, and who
recruited whom, it is possible to interpret the induced subgraph of RDS respondents as a simple random graph model
(Crawford 2016).
In this paper, we introduce a ﬂexible and expressive
stochastic model of RDS recruitment on a partially observed
network structure. We derive the likelihood of the observed
time series; the model admits any edgewise inter-recruitment
time distribution. We propose a stochastic optimization algorithm R ENDER (REspoNdent-Driven nEtwork Reconstruction) to estimate unknown parameters and the underlying
social network. We conduct extensive experiments, on synthetic and real data, to conﬁrm the accuracy and the reconstruction performance of R ENDER. In particular, we apply
R ENDER to reconstruct the network of injection drug users
from an RDS study in St. Petersburg, Russia.

Abstract
Learning about the social structure of hidden and hard-toreach populations — such as drug users and sex workers
— is a major goal of epidemiological and public health research on risk behaviors and disease prevention. Respondentdriven sampling (RDS) is a peer-referral process widely used
by many health organizations, where research subjects recruit
other subjects from their social network. In such surveys, researchers observe who recruited whom, along with the time
of recruitment and the total number of acquaintances (network degree) of respondents. However, due to privacy concerns, the identities of acquaintances are not disclosed. In this
work, we show how to reconstruct the underlying network
structure through which the subjects are recruited. We formulate the dynamics of RDS as a continuous-time diffusion process over the underlying graph and derive the likelihood of the
recruitment time series under an arbitrary inter-recruitment
time distribution. We develop an efﬁcient stochastic optimization algorithm called R ENDER (REspoNdent-Driven nEtwork
Reconstruction) that ﬁnds the network that best explains the
collected data. We support our analytical results through an
exhaustive set of experiments on both synthetic and real data.

Introduction
Random sampling is an effective way for researchers to
learn about a population of interest. Characteristics of the
sample can be generalized to the population of interest using standard statistical theory. However, traditional random
sampling may be impossible when the target population is
hidden, e.g. drug users, men who have sex with men, sex
workers and homeless people. Due to concerns like privacy,
stigmatization, discrimination, and criminalization, members of hidden populations may be reluctant to participate in
a survey. In addition to the hidden populations for which no
sampling “frame” exists, there are rare populations of great
research interest, marked by their tiny fractions in the entire population. It is unlikely that random sampling from
the general population would accrue a reasonable sample
from a very rare population. However, it is often the case
that members of hidden or rare populations know each other
socially. This suggests that social referral would be an effective method for accruing a large sample. To this end,

Related Work
RDS has been modeled as a random walk with replacement
on a graph at its equilibrium distribution (Heckathorn 1997;
Salganik and Heckathorn 2004; Volz and Heckathorn 2008;

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1174

