Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Model AI Assignments 2016
Todd W. Neller

Laura E. Brown

James B. Marshall

Gettysburg College
tneller@gettysburg.edu

Michigan Technological University
lebrown@mtu.edu

Sarah Lawrence College
jmarshall@sarahlawrence.edu

Lisa Torrey

Nate Derbinsky

Andrew A. Ward

St. Lawrence University
ltorrey@stlawu.edu

Wentworth Institute of Technology
derbinskyn@wit.edu

andrew.ward.cs@gmail.com

Thomas E. Allen, Judy Goldsmith, and Nahom Muluneh
University of Kentucky
{teal223,goldsmit}@cs.uky.edu

of changing certain “genes”, monitoring the amount of “genetic drift” in the population over time for certain genes, etc.
This assignment can serve as a sequel to the Model AI Assignment “A Simple Genetic Algorithm”.

Abstract
The Model AI Assignments session seeks to gather and
disseminate the best assignment designs of the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) Education community. Recognizing that assignments form the core of student learning
experience, we here present abstracts of six AI assignments from the 2016 session that are easily adoptable,
playfully engaging, and ﬂexible for a variety of instructor needs. Assignment speciﬁcations and supporting resources may be found at http://modelai.gettysburg.edu.

An Introduction to k-Means Clustering
Todd W. Neller and Laura E. Brown
An informal survey of attendees at EAAI-2014 yielded the
insight that unsupervised learning was a topic perceived as
most in need of curricular support materials. Within unsupervised learning, clustering was deemed most important, and among clustering algorithms, k-Means Clustering
was deemed most essential. We have thus developed and
gathered signiﬁcant resources to support the teaching of kMeans Clustering.
Included in our offering are:
• a set of programming exercises with a programmingcontest style input/output speciﬁcation for basic and iterated k-Means Clustering, as well as implementation of
a simpliﬁed gap statistic for determining the number of
clusters k,
• sample datasets that do or do not conform to the assumptions of k-Means Clustering,
• Matlab/Octave scripts for visualizing data and clustering
results for 2D data,
• a short Weka tutorial illustrating feature selection for clustering,
• a PowerPoint presentation including worked examples
and many visual illustrative examples,
• suggested readings for the different learning objectives
with a mapping to Computer Science 2013 curricular
topic areas,
• a notation translation guide for suggested readings, and

A Genetic Algorithm for Robby the Robot
James Marshall
In this assignment, students implement a genetic algorithm in Python to evolve cleaning strategies for Robby the
Robot, as described in Chapter 9 of Melanie Mitchell’s book
Complexity: A Guided Tour (Mitchell 2009). Robby’s task
is to collect empty soda cans that lie scattered around his
rectangular grid world, by following instructions encoded
as 243-character genome strings. An easy-to-use graphical
simulator written in Python is included, which avoids the
need for students to write one themselves, allowing them to
focus on implementing the core ideas of the GA. Robby’s
actions are controlled through method calls to the simulator. The simulator makes it easy to watch Robby’s behavior
improve dramatically over time as the GA evolves, providing students with immediate and satisfying visual conﬁrmation that simulated evolution really works. Many potential
avenues exist for experimenting with or extending the GA,
such as by varying crossover and mutation rates or population size, adding elitism, trying out different selection strategies, analyzing evolved strategies by observing the effect
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4139

