Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fast Lasso Algorithm via Selective Coordinate Descent
Yasuhiro Fujiwara† , Yasutoshi Ida† , Hiroaki Shiokawa‡† , Sotetsu Iwamura†
†

‡

NTT Software Innovation Center, 3-9-11 Midori-cho Musashino-shi, Tokyo, 180-8585, Japan
Center for Computational Science, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8573, Japan
{fujiwara.yasuhiro, ida.yasutoshi, iwamura.sotetsu}@lab.ntt.co.jp, shiokawa@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

led to many approached applying the lasso to a variety of
problems such as the elastic Net (Zou and Hastie 2005)
and grouped Lasso (Yuan and Lin 2006). In 2007, a research team of Tibshirani et al. proposed the coordinate descent algorithm, which is faster than the LARS algorithm
as demonstrated in (Friedman et al. 2007). The coordinate
descent algorithm iteratively updates weights of predictors
one at a time to ﬁnd the solution. The subsequent papers
of 2010 and 2012 improved the efﬁciency of the coordinate
descent algorithm (Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2010;
Tibshirani et al. 2012). The coordinate descent algorithm is
now regarded as the standard approach for implementing the
lasso (Zhou et al. 2015)1 ; this paper refers to the coordinate
descent algorithm based approach as the standard approach.
However, current applications must handle large data sets.
In the proposal of mid-1990s, the lasso was applied to
prostate cancer data which has at most ten predictors (Tibshirani 1996). Recent image processing applications, however, handle data containing thousands of predictors (Liu
et al. 2014). Moreover, in topic detection, the number of
predictors reaches the tens of thousands (Kasiviswanathan
et al. 2011). In order to increase the processing speed of
the lasso, many researchers focused on screening techniques
(Ghaoui, Viallon, and Rabbani 2010; Tibshirani et al. 2012;
Liu et al. 2014). Since screening can detect predictors that
have weights of zero as a solution before the iterations, it can
improve the efﬁciency of the coordinate descent algorithm.
However, as mentioned in the previous paper, the efﬁciency
of the coordinate descent algorithm should be improved to
handle the large size of data (Tibshirani 2011).
This paper proposes Sling as a novel and efﬁcient algorithm for the lasso. In the standard approach, weights of
predictors are iteratively updated in a round-robin manner
until convergence if they are not pruned by the screening
technique. The standard approach computes a weight for
each predictor by using nonzero weights of other predictors. Therefore, once a predictor has a nonzero weight in
the iterations, it induces additional computation cost even
if the weight of the predictor is zero after the convergence.
The same as the standard approach, Sling is based on the
coordinate descent algorithm. However, it updates weights

Abstract
For the AI community, the lasso proposed by Tibshirani is
an important regression approach in ﬁnding explanatory predictors in high dimensional data. The coordinate descent algorithm is a standard approach to solve the lasso which iteratively updates weights of predictors in a round-robin style until convergence. However, it has high computation cost. This
paper proposes Sling, a fast approach to the lasso. It achieves
high efﬁciency by skipping unnecessary updates for the predictors whose weight is zero in the iterations. Sling can obtain
high prediction accuracy with fewer predictors than the standard approach. Experiments show that Sling can enhance the
efﬁciency and the effectiveness of the lasso.

Introduction
The lasso is a popular l1 -regularized least squares regression approach for high dimensional data (Tibshirani 1996).
It continues to attract more attention in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (Zhou et al. 2015; Gong and Zhang 2011).
In many practical learning problems, it is important to identify predictors that have some relationship with a response
(Nakatsuji and Fujiwara 2014; Nakatsuji et al. 2011). The
central requirement for good predictors is that they should
have high correlations with the response but should not be
correlated with each other. The main challenge is to ﬁnd
the smallest possible set of predictors while achieving high
prediction accuracy for the response (Hastie, Tibshirani, and
Friedman 2011). The most appealing property of the lasso is
the sparsity of the solution by adding an l1 -norm regularization term to the squared loss term; the lasso effectively uses
the l1 -norm constraint to shrink/suppress predictors in ﬁnding the sparse set of predictors. Due to its effectiveness, the
lasso is used in a variety of applications such as image processing (Liu et al. 2014), topic detection (Kasiviswanathan
et al. 2011), and disease diagnosis (Xin et al. 2014).
Although the lasso was developed in the mid-1990s, it
did not receive much attention until the early 2000s since
its computation cost is high (Tibshirani 2011). The original lasso paper used an off-the-shelf approach that did not
scale well for large data. In 2002, Tibshirani et al. developed the LARS algorithm to efﬁciently solve the lasso. This
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The glmnet R language package is an implementation of the
coordinate descent algorithm.

1561

