Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Semi-Supervised Multinomial Naive Bayes for Text Classiﬁcation
by Leveraging Word-Level Statistical Constraint
Li Zhao, Minlie Huang, Ziyu Yao, Rongwei Su*, Yingying Jiang*, Xiaoyan Zhu
State Key Lab. of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China
*Samsung R&D Institute China - Beijing
zhaoli19881113@126.com aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
+
ﬁed as either positive or negative. Let Nloves
represent how
−
for
many times “loves” occurs in positive documents, Nloves
+
negative documents. ploves represents the probability that
word “loves” appears in positive documents, and can be es+
+
−
/(Nloves
+ Nloves
). In general, we use pcw
timated by Nloves
to represent the class distribution on word.
As shown in Table 1, we can get an estimation of p+
loves
based on word statistics on labeled documents. Since MNBEM assign a posterior P (+|d) for each unlabeled document
+
d, we can calculate
 word statistics Nw on unlabeled data
approximately by d Nd,w ×P (+|d), where Nd,w represent
how many times word w appears in document d. Thus we
can get another estimation of p+
loves based on unlabeled data
and MNB-EM.

Abstract
Multinomial Naive Bayes with Expectation Maximization
(MNB-EM) is a standard semi-supervised learning method
to augment Multinomial Naive Bayes (MNB) for text classiﬁcation. Despite its success, MNB-EM is not stable, and
may succeed or fail to improve MNB. We believe that this
is because MNB-EM lacks the ability to preserve the class
distribution on words.
In this paper, we propose a novel method to augment MNBEM by leveraging the word-level statistical constraint to preserve the class distribution on words. The word-level statistical constraints are further converted to constraints on
document posteriors generated by MNB-EM. Experiments
demonstrate that our method can consistently improve MNBEM, and outperforms state-of-art baselines remarkably.

Introduction

labeled data
unlabeled data with
posteriors by MNB-EM

Multinomial Naive Bayes(MNB) has been widely used in
text classiﬁcation. MNB adopts a Bayesian learning principle, which assumes that word distributions in documents are
generated by a speciﬁc parametric model. And the parameters can be learned
 by maximizing the likelihood of labeled
data, i.e. max d∈L logP (c, d) where c, d, and L indicate

+
Nloves
18

−
Nloves
2

p+
loves
0.9

266.1

296.9

0.402

Table 1: MNB-EM can’t preserve the polarity(/class) information on word “loves”. We sample 512 documents as labeled data from dataset “kitchen”, and use MNB-EM to generate posteriors for the unlabeled data.

θ

class, document, and labeled data respectively.
Since labeled data is usually scarce, but large scale unlabeled data is readily available, it’s desirable to augment
MNB to learn from both labeled data and unlabeled data. To
this end, numerous semi-supervised learning methods have
been proposed, and Multinomial Naive Bayes with Expectation Maximization(MNB-EM)(Nigam et al. 2000) is perhaps the most popular one. MNB-EM maximizes the likelihood of labeled data,
and the marginal likelihood
of un
labeled data, i.e. max d∈L logP (c, d) + d∈U logP (d)

From the above table, we can see that we have fairly
enough observations for word “loves” on labeled data, to
ensure that it bears positive polarity. However, the objective function of MNB-EM includes the marginal likelihood
(P (d)) for unlabeled data, which may cause MNB-EM to
make prediction such that the polarity(/class) distribution on
word “loves” is not maintained. This is obviously unreasonable. We believe that forcing MNB-EM to preserve the class
distribution on words may guide the learning process and
lead to better classiﬁcation performance.
However, we don’t want MNB-EM to preserve class distribution on words strictly all the time, because sometimes
we may obtain a quite unstable estimation of p+
w due to a
limited number of labeled data. Consider the following case
for word “worthless” in Table 2. We know “worthless” is
a strong indicator for negative polarity. However, we have
limited observations for this word, and it happened to occur
more in positive documents on labeled data. This estimation
of p+
worthless is unreliable, and we don’t want to let this in-

θ

where U indicates unlabeled data.
Despite the success of MNB-EM, it is not stable, and may
increase or decrease the prediction performance of MNB,
as reported in the literature(Chawla and Karakoulas 2005).
We believe that this is because MNB-EM lacks the ability to
preserve the class distribution on words.
To be speciﬁc, let us consider the word “loves” in a sentiment classiﬁcation task, where each document is classic 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2877

