Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Towards Optimal Binary Code Learning via Ordinal Embedding
†

Hong Liu†‡ , Rongrong Ji†‡ , Yongjian Wu , Wei Liu
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, 361005, China
‡
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005, China

BestImage, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, China

Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
lynnliuxmu@outlook.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com, wliu@ee.columbia.edu
map the original data from a d-dimensional real-valued feature space to a r-bits Hamming space, such that the distance
among original data can be approximated by Hamming distance efﬁciently.
One issue in binary code learning is how to preserve the
similarity among data points in the high-dimensional realvalued space. To this end, the existing binary code learning schemes can be classiﬁed into either data-independent
or data-dependent ones. Data-independent hashing like Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Gionis et al. 1999) typically
adopts random projection to ﬁnd a set of random sign functions to produce binary codes. For instance, Shift-Invariant
Kernel Hashing (Raginsky and Lazebnik 2009) learns binary
code by using random Fourier features with shift-invariant
kernel transformation. For another instance, Kernelized Locality Sensitive Hashing (Kulis and Grauman 2012) extends the general LSH to Kernelized space to support arbitrary similarity. However, the above data-independent hashing methods always require long bits to achieve satisfactory
search accuracy.
Data-dependent hashing can be categorized into either supervised or unsupervised ones, Unsupervised hashing, such
as Spectral Hashing (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2009), Anchor Graph Hashing (Liu et al. 2011), Iterative Quantization
(Gong et al. 2013), Spherical Hashing (Heo et al. 2012), Discrete Graph Hashing (Liu et al. 2014), and Scalable Graph
Hashing (Jiang and Li 2015), models the data structure or
distribution as constraints to achieve high search accuracy
with short binary codes. Differently, supervised hashing preserves the label relation (e.g., pairwise similarity or dissimilarity) in Hamming space to learn semantic-aware binary codes, for instance Binary Reconstructive Embedding
(Kulis and Darrell 2009), Minimal Loss Hashing (Norouzi
and Blei 2011), Kernel-based Supervised Hashing (Liu et al.
2012), Hamming Distance Metric Learning (Norouzi, Blei,
and Salakhutdinov 2012), and Supervised Discrete Hashing (Shen et al. 2015). Although supervised hashing typically provides superior performance, it is typically labourintensive to obtain sufﬁcient semantic labels in real application.
In this paper, we focus on unsupervised hashing. To learn
accurate binary codes, the key design lies in preserving the
similarity among data points in the high-dimensional realvalued feature space. To this end, existing unsupervised

Abstract
Binary code learning, a.k.a., hashing, has been recently popular due to its high efﬁciency in large-scale similarity search
and recognition. It typically maps high-dimensional data
points to binary codes, where data similarity can be efﬁciently
computed via rapid Hamming distance. Most existing unsupervised hashing schemes pursue binary codes by reducing
the quantization error from an original real-valued data space
to a resulting Hamming space. On the other hand, most existing supervised hashing schemes constrain binary code learning to correlate with pairwise similarity labels. However, few
methods consider ordinal relations in the binary code learning process, which serve as a very signiﬁcant cue to learn the
optimal binary codes for similarity search. In this paper, we
propose a novel hashing scheme, dubbed Ordinal Embedding
Hashing (OEH), which embeds given ordinal relations among
data points to learn the ranking-preserving binary codes. The
core idea is to construct a directed unweighted graph to capture the ordinal relations, and then train the hash functions using this ordinal graph to preserve the permutation relations in
the Hamming space. To learn such hash functions effectively,
we further relax the discrete constraints and design a stochastic gradient decent algorithm to obtain the optimal solution.
Experimental results on two large-scale benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed OEH method can achieve superior performance over the state-of-the-arts approaches. At
last, the evaluation on query by humming dataset demonstrates the OEH also has good performance for music retrieval
by using user’s humming or singing.

Introduction
Large-scale visual search has attracted extensive research
focus recently in computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence
communities (Dean et al. 2013; Grauman and Fergus 2013;
Li et al. 2011). One fundamental challenge lies in its heavy
computational cost, i.e. linearly comparing massive realvalued features to ﬁnd the nearest neighbours of the query.
Hashing techniques have been recently popular to tackle
such challenge, which encodes the real-valued data points
into binary codes with signiﬁcant efﬁciency in storage and
computation. In principle, most existing hashing methods
learn a set of hash functions {hk : Rd → {0, 1}}rk=1 , which
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1258

