Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Extraction of One Maximal Information Subset
That Does Not Conﬂict with Multiple Contexts
Éric Grégoire, Yacine Izza, Jean-Marie Lagniez
CRIL
Université d’Artois & CNRS
rue Jean Souvraz SP18
F-62307 Lens France
{gregoire,izza,lagniez}@cril.fr
not conﬂict with any goal of any of the involved agents or
negotiators.
In this paper, this issue is investigated from a computational point of view in clausal Boolean logic, when maximality is about set-theoretic inclusion. An original method
is proposed that experimentally outperforms the most efﬁcient current technique.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section,
the main logical and computational concepts used in the paper are recalled. Then, the problem is deﬁned formally. The
currently most efﬁcient approaches are described before our
original algorithm is introduced in a progressive way. Experimentations that compare the new approach with its competitors are then reported and discussed. Finally, the conclusion
elaborates on promising paths for further research.

Abstract
The efﬁcient extraction of one maximal information
subset that does not conﬂict with multiple contexts or
additional information sources is a key basic issue in
many A.I. domains, especially when these contexts or
sources can be mutually conﬂicting. In this paper, this
question is addressed from a computational point of
view in clausal Boolean logic. A new approach is introduced that experimentally outperforms the currently
most efﬁcient technique.

Introduction
The efﬁcient extraction of one maximal information subset
that does not conﬂict with multiple contexts or additional
information sources is a key basic issue in many A.I. domains, especially when these contexts or sources can be mutually conﬂicting. As illustrated in (Besnard, Grégoire, and
Lagniez 2015), it is central in belief change, model-based diagnosis, planning, decision making, argumentation and nonmonotonic reasoning, among other A.I. ﬁelds.
Consider for example a logic-based agent that needs to
take her decisions under very tight time constraints and on
the basis of the part of her information that does not conﬂict
with mutually conﬂicting assumptions about what she does
not know for sure. Speciﬁcally, her decisions must be compatible with any of these assumptions since it can eventually
be true. Due to the time constraints, she quickly extracts one
maximal information subset that does not contradict any assumption and considers this subset as a satisfactory basis for
decision making. Indeed, every assumption remains compatible with this set and adopting any additional piece of the
available information would violate at least one of the assumptions. Alternatively, this extraction can be the kernel of
a method that aims at enumerating all these maximal subsets when enough computing time is available. It can also be
adapted to obey some preference ordering between information pieces.
The extraction of one maximal information subset that
does not contradict possibly mutually conﬂicting sources
can also play a role in negotiation and multi-agent systems
since it can amount to ﬁnding one maximal subset that does

Technical Background
We consider standard clausal Boolean logic. ¬, ∨, ∧ and ⇒
represent the negation, disjunction, conjunction and material implication connective, respectively. A clause is a disjunction of literals and literals are possibly negated Boolean
variables, denoted by a, b . . ., which can thus be assigned either true or false. Clauses are denoted by α, β, γ, . . . Sets
of clauses are denoted by Δ, Σ, . . . Sets of sets of clauses
are denoted by C, D, . . . The cardinality of a set Δ is written card(Δ). A set of clauses Δ is satisﬁable iff there exists at least one model of Δ, namely a truth assignment of
all Boolean variables of Δ making all clauses of Δ to be
true according to usual compositional rules. SAT is the NPcomplete problem that consists in checking whether a ﬁnite
set of clauses is satisﬁable (Cook 1971).
From now on, we assume that Δ is a ﬁnite set of clauses,
that Φ and Ψ are subsets of Δ and that C is a ﬁnite set of ﬁnite sets Γi of Boolean clauses, each of the Γi being (individually) satisﬁable and representing one context. Key concepts
in this paper are inclusion-Maximal and Minimal Correction
Subsets.
Deﬁnition 1. Φ is an (inclusion-)Maximal Satisﬁable Subset of Δ (in short, Φ is a MSS(Δ)) iff Φ is satisﬁable and
∀α ∈ Δ \ Φ, Φ ∪ {α} is unsatisﬁable.
A Minimal Correction Subset (MCS) (also called CoMSS) of Δ is the set-theoretical complement in Δ of the
corresponding MSS.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3404

