Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Computing Possible and Necessary Equilibrium Actions
(and Bipartisan Set Winners)
Markus Brill, Rupert Freeman and Vincent Conitzer
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{brill,rupert,conitzer}@cs.duke.edu
However, out in the world, we generally also do not ﬁnd
this other extreme. Usually, some existing systems are in
place and place constraints on what the designer can do.
This is true to some extent even in the contexts where mechanism design is most fruitfully applied. For example, one
can imagine that it would be difﬁcult and costly for a major
search engine to entirely redesign its existing auction mechanism for allocating advertisement space, because of existing users’ expectations, interfacing software, etc. But this
does not mean that aspects of the game played by the advertisers cannot be tweaked in the designer’s favor.
In this paper, we introduce a general framework for addressing intermediate cases, where the designer has some
but not full control over the game. We focus on incompletely
speciﬁed games, where some entries of the game matrix contain sets of payoffs, from among which the designer must
choose. The designer’s aim is to choose so that the resulting equilibrium of the game is desirable to her. This problem is conceptually related to k-implementation (Monderer
and Tennenholtz 2004) and the closely related internal implementation (Anderson, Shoham, and Altman 2010), where
one of the parties is also able to modify an existing game
to achieve better equilibria for herself. However, in those
papers the game is modiﬁed by committing to payments,
whereas we focus on choosing from a ﬁxed set of payoffs
in an entry.
We focus on two-player zero-sum games, both symmetric
and not (necessarily) symmetric, and show NP-hardness in
both cases. (Due to a technical reason explained later, hardness for the symmetric case does not imply hardness for the
not-necessarily-symmetric case.) The hardness result for the
symmetric case holds even for weak tournament games, in
which the payoffs are all −1, 0, or 1, and for tournament
games, in which the off-diagonal payoffs are all −1 or 1.
These results have direct implications for related problem in computational social choice, another important research area in multiagent systems. In social choice (specifically, voting), we take as input a vector of rankings of
the alternatives (e.g., a  c  b) and as output return
some subset of the alternatives. Some social choice functions are based on the pairwise majority graph which has a
directed edge from one alternative to another if a majority
of voters prefers the former. One attractive concept is that
of the essential set (Laffond, Laslier, and Le Breton 1993a;

Abstract
In many multiagent environments, a designer has some, but
limited control over the game being played. In this paper, we
formalize this by considering incompletely speciﬁed games,
in which some entries of the payoff matrices can be chosen from a speciﬁed set. We show that it is NP-hard for the
designer to make this choices optimally, even in zero-sum
games. In fact, it is already intractable to decide whether a
given action is (potentially or necessarily) played in equilibrium. We also consider incompletely speciﬁed symmetric
games in which all completions are required to be symmetric. Here, hardness holds even in weak tournament games
(symmetric zero-sum games whose entries are all −1, 0, or 1)
and in tournament games (symmetric zero-sum games whose
non-diagonal entries are all −1 or 1). The latter result settles
the complexity of the possible and necessary winner problems for a social-choice-theoretic solution concept known as
the bipartisan set. We ﬁnally give a mixed-integer linear programming formulation for weak tournament games and evaluate it experimentally.

1

Introduction

Game theory provides the natural toolkit for reasoning about
systems of multiple self-interested agents. In some cases, the
game is exogenously determined and all that is left to do
is to ﬁgure out how to play it. For example, if we are trying to solve heads-up limit Texas hold’em poker (as was recently effectively done by Bowling et al., 2015), there is no
question about what the game is. Out in the world, however,
the rules of the game are generally not set in stone. Often,
there is an agent, to whom we will refer as the designer or
principal, that has some control over the game played. Consider, for example, applications of game theory to security
domains (Pita et al. 2009; Tsai et al. 2009; An et al. 2012;
Yin et al. 2012). In the long run, the game could be changed,
by adding or subtracting security resources (Bhattacharya,
Conitzer, and Munagala 2011) or reorganizing the targets
being defended (roads, ﬂights, etc.).
Mechanism design constitutes the extreme case of this,
where the designer typically has complete freedom in choosing the game to be played by the agents (but still faces a
challenging problem due to the agents’ private information).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

418

