Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Integrating Planning and Recognition to Close the Interaction Loop
Richard G. Freedman
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
freedman@cs.umass.edu

Introduction

some degree of foresight into the observed agent’s behavior. Collectively, these ﬁelds of recognition are referred to as
PAIR and have become a more popular area of research recently, including the topic of a Dagstuhl Seminar (Goldman
et al. 2011). Various problems in PAIR are studied in other
ﬁelds which has made the literature vast, but they are still
studied independently or pipelined in most these works.

In many real-world domains, the presence of machines is
becoming more ubiquitous to the point that they are usually
more than simple automation tools. As part of the environment amongst human users, it is necessary for these computers and robots to be able to interact with them reasonably by
either working independently around them or participating
in a task, especially one with which a person needs help.
This interactive procedure requires several steps: recognizing the user and environment from sensor data, interpreting the user’s activity and motives, determining a responsive behavior, performing the behavior, and then recognizing everything again to conﬁrm the behavior choice and replan if necessary. At the moment, the research areas addressing these steps, activity recognition, plan recognition, intent
recognition, and planning, have all been primarily studied
independently. However, pipelining each independent process can be risky in real-time situations where there may be
enough time to only run a few steps. This leads to a critical question: how do we perform everything under time constraints? In this thesis summary, I propose a framework that
integrates these processes by taking advantage of features
shared between them. This includes my current work towards this preliminary system and outlines how I plan to
complete the integration for time-constrained interaction.

Simultaneous Plan and Activity Recognition
The formulation of a typical recognition problem is as follows: given a sequence O of observations o1 , o2 , . . ., on , determine which task(s) in library L the agent is performing. In
AR, each oi is a sensor reading and L is a set of actions or activities. Supervised machine learning and graphical models
are usually used to infer the label in L which best describes
O. For PR, each oi is a STRIPS action and L contains the
set of all tasks. A weighted matching method is often used to
compare O to some of each task’s solutions called plans, a
sequence of STRIPS actions satisfying the goal conditions.
A recent method used to perform this matching is parsing
hierarchical task networks, revealing a parallel between PR
and natural language processing (NLP) (Geib and Steedman 2007). O is like a sentence and the breakdown of a
complex task into subtasks is like a grammar of derivations.
I began the extension of this analogy by considering
another problem in NLP: topic modeling. Unlike parsing
which determines the underlying structure of a sentence,
topic modeling investigates the concepts discussed in a collection of documents by ﬁnding clusters of related words
called topics. For the popular Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) topic model (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), each topic
is simply a distribution over the set of words and each document is a distribution over the set of topics; the distributions
are learned using unsupervised learning to model the training data. For interaction in a variety of domains, an unsupervised approach is more appealing because it is possible
to learn activities in each domain as it is added to the system. Furthermore, LDA’s bag-of-words assumption where
each oi is independent of the rest of O was appealing to
begin integrating AR and PR due to the mismatch of the two
sequence formations. A sensor records over time so that a
single action has multiple consecutive oi for AR, but a single STRIPS action is only one oi for PR. Figure 1 illustrates
how this analogously treats actions like topics. Each word
is a sensor reading and the distribution over these readings

Background
One of the earliest areas of artiﬁcial intelligence, planning
is the study of automated action selection. Early approaches
usually involved representing the world as a list of logic
statements and searching for a sequence of actions which
would modify the list until it contained the set of goal conditions; the notation used for this is called STRIPS. Modern
approaches range from improving search over STRIPS to
decision theoretic planning with MDPs and its variants to
approximation methods to handle uncertainties in the world.
As its inverse problem, plan recognition (PR) tries to
identify the problem an agent is solving given its observed
actions. The actions and problems are usually represented at
a higher level such as STRIPS. Activity recognition (AR)
works at the lower level by interpreting sensor data as
higher-level actions. Intent recognition (IR) tries to predict
the agent’s speciﬁc goal or upcoming actions which allows
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4295

