Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Inferring Multi-Dimensional Ideal Points
for US Supreme Court Justices
Mohammad Raihanul Islam∗ , K.S.M. Tozammel Hossain∗ ,
Siddharth Krishnan, and Naren Ramakrishnan
Discovery Analytics Center, Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
Email: {raihan8, tozammel, siddkris, naren}@cs.vt.edu

Existing research for modeling ideological preferences
and voting behavior of justices uses metadata of cases as a
primary data source and represents ideological preferences
of justices with real values in a dimension (Martin and Quinn
2002; Segal and Cover 1989). Such simplistic models do
not capture ideological preferences beyond a vanilla liberalconservative ideological spectrum, and limit our ability to
pose and answer more interesting research questions regarding the leanings of justices (Lauderdale and Clark 2014). Although there is an abundance of textual artifacts (e.g., opinions, briefs) associated with various stages of a case, few
methods incorporate such textual data into their modeling.
A notable exception is the work of Lauderdale and
Clark (2014) who propose the idea of higher-dimensional
preferences for justices. They propose to solve the identiﬁcation problem in multidimensional ideal point estimation by harvesting text underlying the opinions using topic
models. We were motivated by this work and interested in
generalizing it since, in modeling higher-dimensional preferences, this approach merges all opinions in a given case
to estimate the proportion of issues discussed in the case
and uses these issue proportions for estimating ideal points
of justices. Merging all the opinions for a case together
without considering their types and endorsement attributes
is likely to lose many important aspects of judicial preferences. In particular, as we will show, this approach tends to
dichotomize justices into partisan divides (which holds for
only some issues). Incorporating opinions into the models by
modeling their types and endorsement information promises
to capture greater rationale behind judicial decisions. Note
that there are methods that model legislative voting behavior
and preferences of lawmakers using textual data (e.g., bills)
(Gerrish and Blei 2012; Gu et al. 2014). As there are differences between bills (mostly single authored) and opinions
(multi-authored and multi-endorsed) these models are not
applicable to ﬁne-grained modeling of the Court’s opinions.
We propose SCIPM (Supreme Court Ideal Point Miner),
a new approach to model justices’ judicial preferences and
voting behavior by mining the different types of opinions delivered in cases. SCIPM is a generative model that couples
the modeling of opinions written and taken part in by justices with the modeling of their ideological preferences and
voting behavior. SCIPM estimates multidimensional ideal
points and situates them in either an inferred or imposed

Abstract
In Supreme Court parlance and the political science literature,
an ideal point positions a justice in a continuous space and can
be interpreted as a quantiﬁcation of the justice’s policy preferences. We present an automated approach to infer such ideal
points for justices of the US Supreme Court. This approach
combines topic modeling over case opinions with the voting
(and endorsing) behavior of justices. Furthermore, given a
topic of interest, say the Fourth Amendment, the topic model
can be optionally seeded with supervised information to steer
the inference of ideal points. Application of this methodology
over ﬁve years of cases provides interesting perspectives into
the leaning of justices on crucial issues, coalitions underlying
speciﬁc topics, and the role of swing justices in deciding the
outcomes of cases.

1

Introduction

The Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS) is one
of the most fascinating institutions of study for political scientists, constitutional scholars, and laymen alike. All members (justices) of this nine-member body are appointed by
the President and have lifetime tenure. As a result, Supreme
Court Justices can have a long-lasting inﬂuence on the country’s affairs. Their opinions and decisions are scrutinized
very carefully in order to fathom (and forecast) the overall
direction of the country on key societal issues.
It has long been accepted that how a justice votes along
with his/her rationale for the vote is a window into the justice’s judicial temperament, personal philosophy, and policy ideology (Lauderdale and Clark 2014; Martin and Quinn
2002). Since cases build upon each other for rationale, opinions are typically well reasoned, carefully scoped, and set
in the context of prior rulings. The classical approach to
model ideological leanings of justices is using ideal point
models, a well-established methodology in political science
for analyzing legislative and judicial voting records (Sim,
Routledge, and Smith 2014). An ideal point for a justice is
a position of the justice in a continuous space, which can be
either unidimensional (Martin and Quinn 2002) or multidimensional (Lauderdale and Clark 2014), and is interpreted
as a quantiﬁcation of policy preferences.
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4

