Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reconstructing Hidden Permutations Using the
Average-Precision (AP) Correlation Statistic
Lorenzo De Stefani, Alessandro Epasto, Eli Upfal

Fabio Vandin

Brown University
Providence, RI 02906, United States
{lorenzo, epasto, eli}@cs.brown.edu

University of Padova
Padova, PD 35131, Italy
vadinfa@dei.unipd.it

where dK (π, σ) is the Kendall’s tau distance between π and
σ, and Nβ is a normalization factor independent of σ (see
Section 3 for more details). Since the Kendall’s tau distance
simply counts the number of pairs of items whose order is
inverted in σ with respect to their order in π, a permutation
with inversions of elements occupying positions towards the
end of the ranking has the same probability as a permutation
with the same number of inverted pairs near the top of the
ranking.
In many practical applications, such as web search ranking, voter preferences surveys, consumer evaluation systems
and recommendation systems we expect the input samples
to provide a more reliable order for items at the top of the
ranking than for “less important” items at the bottom of
the ranking (Melucci 2007; Vigna 2015; Yilmaz, Aslam,
and Robertson 2008). The limitation of the Kendall’s tau
distance and the associated Mallows model, when applied
to such data has been pointed out in a number of recent
works (Vigna 2015; Yilmaz, Aslam, and Robertson 2008;
Kumar and Vassilvitskii 2010). Note that the Spearman’s
footrule distance (Spearman 1904), another widely used
statistic, suffers from the same problem.
In this work we address the limitation of the standard
Mallows distribution by proposing an alternative exponential distribution of permutations, MAP (β, π), in which the
Kendall’s tau distance of the Mallows distribution is replaced by a new distance based on the widely used Average Precision (AP) correlation statistic (Yilmaz, Aslam,
and Robertson 2008). The AP statistic (and hence the AP
model) takes into account not only the number of missranked pairs but also the locations (and hence the importance) of the miss-placed pairs in the ranking. Let [n] be the
set of natural numbers {1, . . . , n}, and let Sn be the set of
all permutations over [n]. Given a ﬁxed center permutation
π ∈ Sn and a dispersion parameter β > 0, the probability associated with a permutation σ ∈ Sn according to the
new model is PrMAP (β,π) (σ) = Zβ−1 exp(−βdAP (π, σ)),
where dAP (π, σ) is the AP-distance between π and σ and
Zβ is a normalization factor independent of σ (see Section 3
for more details). To the best of our knowledge, no work has
addressed the problem of modeling permutations with provable guarantees subject to such properties.
We now summarize the main contributions of this work:
• We introduce a novel variant of the standard Mallows

Abstract
We study the problem of learning probabilistic models for permutations, where the order between highly
ranked items in the observed permutations is more reliable (i.e., consistent in different rankings) than the order
between lower ranked items, a typical phenomena observed in many applications such as web search results
and product ranking. We introduce and study a variant
of the Mallows model where the distribution is a function of the widely used Average-Precision (AP) Correlation statistic, instead of the standard Kendall’s tau distance. We present a generative model for constructing
samples from this distribution and prove useful properties of that distribution. Using these properties we develop an efﬁcient algorithm that provably computes an
asymptotically unbiased estimate of the center permutation, and a faster algorithm that learns with high probability the hidden central permutation for a wide range of
the parameters of the model. We complement our theoretical analysis with extensive experiments showing that
unsupervised methods based on our model can precisely
identify ground-truth clusters of rankings in real-world
data. In particular, when compared to the Kendall’s tau
based methods, our methods are less affected by noise
in low-rank items.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models of ranking data have been studied
extensively in statistics (Mallows 1957), machine learning (Awasthi et al. 2014) and theoretical computer science (Braverman and Mossel 2008; Chierichetti et al. 2014).
Applications of ranking models include understanding user
preferences in electoral systems, ordering web search results, aggregating crowd-sourcing data, and optimizing recommendation systems results (Vigna 2015; Saari 2006;
Dwork et al. 2001; Sorz et al. 2015; Brian 2008; Yilmaz,
Aslam, and Robertson 2008; Melucci 2007).
Most of the analytic work in this area has focused on the
Mallows model (1957) which deﬁnes a probability distribution over a set of permutations of n elements given a ﬁxed
center permutation π (the ground truth), and a dispersion
parameter β > 0. The probability of a permutation σ in
Mallows model is PrM(β,π) (σ) = Nβ−1 exp(−βdK (π, σ)),
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1526

