Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Global Model Checking on Pushdown Multi-Agent Systems∗
Taolue Chen

Fu Song

Zhilin Wu

Department of Computer Science
Middlesex University
London, United Kingdom
t.chen@mdx.ac.uk

Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Trustworthy Computing
East China Normal University
Shanghai, P.R.China
fsong@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, P.R.China
wuzl@ios.ac.cn

ify the behavior of multi-agent systems, a well-known logical formalism is Alternating-Time Temporal Logics (Alur,
Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002) for which a model checking algorithm for ﬁnite-state concurrent game structures is
also given therein. Model checking algorithms for various other temporal logics on ﬁnite multi-agent systems have
been proposed in several works, e.g. (Bourahla and Benmohamed 2005; Bulling and Jamroga 2011; Jamroga and
Murano 2015).
More recently, on a different dimension, model checking for ATL∗ on a class of inﬁnite-state multi-agent systems, i.e., pushdown multi-agent systems, was also studied
in (Murano and Perelli 2015). The authors introduced pushdown game structures (PGSs) as the model, showed that
the model checking problem is 2EXPSPACE-hard, and proposed a model checking algorithm in 3EXPTIME. Our work
follows the direction of (Murano and Perelli 2015).
We note that in the literature there is a distinction between
local and global model checking. In the former setting one is
given a speciﬁc state of the system and determines whether
it satisﬁes a given property. In the latter setting one computes (a ﬁnite representation of) the set of states that satisfy
a given property. The importance of global model checking has been discussed in (Piterman and Vardi 2004). In a
nutshell, it is crucial when repeated checks are required, or
where the model checking is only a component of the veriﬁcation process. As a matter of fact, for many years global
model checking algorithms were the standard. Moreover,
obviously one can reduce local model checking to the global
counterpart, but not vice versa when an inﬁnite state space
is concerned, as in the current setting.
The algorithm of (Murano and Perelli 2015), which is
based on (a variant of) tree automata, is local. (Technically
the algorithm works on the product of PGSs and tree automata in a top-down fashion, and it is open whether this can
be done in a bottom-up way, as mentioned by the authors.)
In contrast, we investigate the global model checking problem for alternating-time temporal logics on PGSs. Namely
we aim to compute the set of all of the conﬁgurations satisfying the formula in some alternating-time temporal logics.
In this work, we consider two variants of alternating-time
temporal logics: ATL∗ and alternating-time μ-calculus.
Concerning the global model checking for ATL∗ on
PGSs, as one of the main contributions, we present a re-

Abstract
Pushdown multi-agent systems, modeled by pushdown
game structures (PGSs), are an important paradigm
of inﬁnite-state multi-agent systems. Alternatingtime temporal logics are well-known speciﬁcation formalisms for multi-agent systems, where the selective
path quantiﬁer is introduced to reason about strategies
of agents. In this paper, we investigate model checking algorithms for variants of alternating-time temporal logics over PGSs, initiated by Murano and Perelli
at IJCAI’15. We ﬁrst give a triply exponential-time
model checking algorithm for ATL∗ over PGSs. The
algorithm is based on the saturation method, and is the
ﬁrst global model checking algorithm with a matching
lower bound. Next, we study the model checking problem for the alternating-time μ-calculus. We propose
an exponential-time global model checking algorithm
which extends similar algorithms for pushdown systems
and modal μ-calculus. The algorithm admits a matching
lower bound, which holds even for the alternation-free
fragment and ATL.

1

Introduction

Over the last two decades, model checking has become
an attractive approach for verifying correctness of systems.
Given a model of a system, model checking exhaustively
and automatically checks whether this model meets a given
speciﬁcation. It is widely used to verify protocol, hardware
design and software (Baier and Katoen 2008). Classical
model checking usually focuses on (ﬁnite) Kripke structures
against properties speciﬁed in logical formulae such as Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) (Pnueli 1977) and Computational
Tree Logic (CTL) (Clarke and Emerson 1981).
Model checking has been extended to multi-agent systems which have been successfully employed as a modeling paradigm in a number of scenarios such as autonomous
spacecraft control (Muscettola et al. 1998). A multi-agent
system is a complex decentralized computing system composed of multiple interacting intelligent agents within an
environment, in which the behavior of each agent is determined by its observed information of the system. To spec∗

Authors are alphabetically ordered.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2459

