Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Re-Active Learning: Active Learning with Relabeling
Christopher H. Lin

Mausam

Daniel S. Weld

University of Washington
Seattle, WA
tchrislin@cs.washington.edu

Indian Institute of Technology
Delhi, India
mausam@cse.iitd.ac.in

University of Washington
Seattle, WA
weld@cs.washington.edu

bel. Another method for learning with multiple, noisy annotators never relabels examples, and instead, ﬁnds the best
worker for a new example so that it is likely labeled at a high
accuracy (Yan et al. 2011). Yet another approach suggests a
single level of redundancy for each label, and samples points
uniformly (Lin, Mausam, and Weld 2014). To our knowledge, no existing method answers the important question:
“Which data point should one actively label or relabel in order to learn the best classiﬁer?” We call this generalization
of active learning “re-active learning.”
Standard active learning strategies like uncertainty sampling (Lewis and Catlett 1994) and expected error reduction (Roy and McCallum 2001; Kapoor, Horvitz, and Basu
2007) can be naı̈vely extended for re-active learning by allowing them to pick any (labeled or unlabeled) point using
their existing approaches. Unfortunately, we show that such
extensions do not perform well, because they do not utilize
all sources of knowledge, are myopic, or both. These extensions often suffer from inﬁnite looping, when the learner
repeatedly annotates the same example, starving others. In
addition to considering information gleaned from the classiﬁer, a re-active learner must also leverage information from
the number and agreement of the gathered labels themselves.
Therefore, we introduce alternative extensions of uncertainty sampling that can reason about the information in the
labels. We also propose a new class of algorithms, impact
sampling, which picks the example to label that has the potential to change the classiﬁer the most. By reasoning about
whether an additional label can change the classiﬁer, impact sampling elegantly eliminates the starvation problems
described above. Many active learning methods use greedy
search to reduce combinatorial explosion, but the resulting
myopia is especially problematic with relabeling — if the
ﬁrst two labels agree, then a third may have no effect. To
combat this problem, we introduce a novel technique, called
pseudo-lookahead, that can tractably mitigate myopia. We
then characterize the relationship between impact sampling
and uncertainty sampling, and show that, surprisingly, in
many noiseless settings, impact sampling can be viewed as
a generalization of uncertainty sampling. Finally, we conduct empirical experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets, showing that our new algorithms signiﬁcantly outperform traditional active learning techniques and other natural baselines on the problem of re-active learning.

Abstract
Active learning seeks to train the best classiﬁer at the lowest annotation cost by intelligently picking the best examples
to label. Traditional algorithms assume there is a single annotator and disregard the possibility of requesting additional
independent annotations for a previously labeled example.
However, relabeling examples is important, because all annotators make mistakes — especially crowdsourced workers,
who have become a common source of training data. This
paper seeks to understand the difference in marginal value
between decreasing the noise of the training set via relabeling and increasing the size and diversity of the (noisier) training set by labeling new examples. We use the term re-active
learning to denote this generalization of active learning. We
show how traditional active learning methods perform poorly
at re-active learning, present new algorithms designed for
this important problem, formally characterize their behavior,
and empirically show that our methods effectively make this
tradeoff.

Introduction
In order to minimize the expense of labeling training data,
active learning algorithms reason about the best examples
to annotate. Traditional active-learning methods assume
a single annotator, either perfect (Settles 2012) or noisy
(Kearns, Schapire, and Sellie 1994). In this setting, such
algorithms always pick a new example to label, since they
can gather no new information about examples which have
already been labeled. However, the single annotator assumption is increasingly violated because machine learning
practitioners routinely employ multiple annotators (crowdsourced or professional) to label each training example in
order to increase its accuracy (e.g., (Snow et al. 2008;
LDC 2015)). In response, modern active learning algorithms
must deal with a fundamentally new tradeoff: whether to
gather the ﬁrst label for an unlabeled example, or instead reduce the noise of an existing labeled example by asking for
an additional annotation of that example.
Previous work identiﬁes this tradeoff (Sheng, Provost, and
Ipeirotis 2008; Ipeirotis et al. 2013), but does not deliver a
solution, instead assuming no unlabeled examples and restricting attention to the choice of the best example to relac 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1845

