Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Supervised Hashing via Uncorrelated Component Analysis
SungRyull Sohn

Hyunwoo Kim

CG Research Team
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
sungluol@etri.re.kr

Kakao Corp.
eugene.kim@kakaocorp.com

Junmo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
junmo@ee.kaist.ac.kr
designed in various ways, but a trade-off is generally required between the encoding complexity (Tencode ) and performance in terms of quantization (or coding) error. There
are two main types of hash functions: projection-based and
codebook-based.
Projection-based hashing functions: Applications of the
ANN search problem require a constant encoding complexity (Tencode ) for scalability. One promising way to guarantee Tencode =O(k) complexity with a certain level of performance is known as projection-based hashing. This is
characterized by the transform matrix W and quantization function Q(·) that produce a k-bit hash code. For
an input vector (hash key) x, the resulting output vector
(hash code) z can be written as z = Q(WT x). Various researchers have developed projection-based methods,
e.g., spectral hashing (SH) (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus
2008), locality sensitive hashing (LSH) (Indyk and Motwani 1998), iterative-quantization (ITQ) (Gong and Lazebnik 2011), LDA-hash (Strecha et al. 2012), minimal loss
hashing (MLH) (Norouzi and Fleet 2011), and locality preserving hashing (LPH) (Zhao, Lu, and Mei 2014).
Codebook-based hashing functions: Other researchers
have developed codebook-based hashing functions, which
assign a data point to one of the Ncentroid nearest codebook centroids in terms of the Euclidean distance. However, the complexity of this method becomes intractable
when directly applied to a large-scale dataset (i.e., Tencode
= O[Ncentroid ] = O[2k ]). To overcome this problem, product quantization (PQ)-based methods (Ge et al. 2013; He,
Wen, and Sun 2013; Jegou, Douze, and Schmid 2011;
Heo, Lin, and Yoon 2014) decompose the space of the data
into low-dimensional subspaces, which are quantized separately.
More recently, a number of non-linear hash functions that
exhibit much improved performance have been proposed.
These include kernelized locality sensitive hashing (KLSH),
supervised hashing with kernel (KSH), self-taught hashing (STH), two-step hashing (TSH), fast hashing (FastH),
and supervised discrete hashing (SDH) (Kulis and Grauman
2012; Liu et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2010; Lin et al. 2013;

Abstract
The Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search
problem is important in applications such as information retrieval. Several hashing-based search methods
that provide effective solutions to the ANN search problem have been proposed. However, most of these focus
on similarity preservation and coding error minimization, and pay little attention to optimizing the precisionrecall curve or receiver operating characteristic curve.
In this paper, we propose a novel projection-based hashing method that attempts to maximize the precision and
recall. We ﬁrst introduce an uncorrelated component
analysis (UCA) by examining the precision and recall,
and then propose a UCA-based hashing method. The
proposed method is evaluated with a variety of datasets.
The results show that UCA-based hashing outperforms
state-of-the-art methods, and has computationally efﬁcient training and encoding processes.

Introduction
The nearest neighbor search problem is a central challenge
in large-scale data processing and analysis. Its applications
include information retrieval, data mining, and classiﬁcation problems. The inherent challenges of the nearest neighbor search are now receiving more attention because of
the growing availability of large databases. The inevitable
difﬁculty of ﬁnding an exact nearest neighbor in largescale datasets has led to the Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search problem, which aims to ﬁnd the nearest neighbor point approximately but rapidly. Recent studies
have shown that hashing is a promising approach to solving
this problem. This is because the resulting binary hash code
is highly compressed, allowing the main memory to be used
to compute the distance, and because the distance between
two binary hash codes can be calculated using the XOR
operation, which is computationally efﬁcient. The hashing
method uses a hash function to encode the hash code, and
the nearest neighbor is determined by thresholding the Hamming distance between hash codes. Hash functions can be
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

236

