Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Machine Learning Methods for Computational Psychology
Sarah M. Brown
Northeastern University, Boston, MA
Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, MA

ward a PTSD Diagnosis system that scores patients while
they view Virtual Reality videos using peripheral (distant
from the brain) physiological measures. The second data
set considers basic affect, but innovates from standard fMRI
data sets by presenting subjects with 900 images instead of
the typical 30 to enable the study of dynamics and interactions. The solutions provided by algorithms must be understood by clinical and psychological researchers to enable
further hypothesizing and support decision making.

Abstract
Advances in sensing and imaging have provided psychology researchers new tools to understand how the brain creates the mind and simultaneously revealed the need for a new
paradigm of mind-brain correspondence– a set of basic theoretical tenets and an overhauled methodology. I develop machine learning methods to overcome three initial technical
barriers to application of the new paradigm. I assess candidate solutions to these problems using two test datasets representing different areas of psychology: the ﬁrst aiming to
build more objective Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
diagnostic tools using virtual reality and peripheral physiology, the second aiming to verify theoretical tenets of the
new paradigm in a study of basic affect using functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). Speciﬁcally I address
three technical challenges: assessing performance in small,
real datasets through stability; learning from labels of varying
quality; and probabilistic representations of dynamical systems.

Stability as a Performance Measure
Re-analysis of existing datasets in light of new theoretical tenets is a convenient method for validating the new
paradigm and generating preliminary results to facilitate design of new experiments. These datasets may be statistically
small relative to the class of analysis techniques suggested
by the new paradigm, so differentiating between a weak signal and an overﬁt model is an important capability for promotion of the new paradigm. Intuitively motivated, stability
has served as a useful heuristic for similar settings in unsupervised learning (Von Luxburg, Ben-david, and Luxburg
2005) and feature selection (Kalousis, Prados, and Hilario
2005). We relate these empirical applications as a performance measure to theoretical results for stability as a guarantee for good generalization (Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002)
to position stability as a framework for deriving applicationappropriate performance measures. First, I design a general
framework for deﬁning and comparing machine learning applications of stability and show how to recover deﬁnitions
from the literature. This framework reveals necessary analytical gaps to extend and relate the theoretical and practical
uses, thus enabling theoretical analysis of the empirical applications. I am working to ﬁll these theoretical gaps and
anticipate results by February. I will apply stability-based
performance metrics derived from this template to each of
the subsequent analyses.

Introduction
Improvements in neuroimaging technology enable psychologists to consider how the brain creates the mind with a
degree of complexity that has been inaccessible to date.
Increasingly, however, existing theory is unable to explain
the observed phenomena, revealing the need for a new
paradigm: core theoretical tenets and methodology. In a joint
research effort we have developed a candidate paradigm
for psychology research, the Uniﬁed Framework for BrainMind Modeling (UFBMM) (Barrett et al. 2015). In my thesis, I develop machine learning solutions to enable preliminary analysis of data in light of the new paradigm. First we
consider the task of re-analyzing old, likely undersized data
sets for preliminary result and to guide experimental design.
Second, we take such an intermediate step in a Post Traumatic Stress Disorder diagnosis setting using traditional features but relaxing constraints and interpreting the result as a
proof of preliminary concept. Finally, we consider time series analysis in light of some of the core theoretical tenets of
the new paradigm.
We approach these problems through two speciﬁc experimental data sets. The ﬁrst is an exploratory experiment to-

Learning from a catch-all label
Virtual reality has been used for PTSD treatment (Rizzo
et al. 2010) and a number of physiological measures have
been shown to vary with PTSD diagnosis (Orr, Metzger,
and Pitman 2002; Webb et al. 2013). Combined, these technologies present an opportunity for closed-loop treatment

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4291

