Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A CP-Based Approach to Popular Matching
Danuta Sorina Chisca, Mohamed Siala, Gilles Simonin, Barry O’Sullivan
Insight Centre for Data Analytics, Department of Computer Science, University College Cork, Ireland
{sorina.chisca|mohamed.siala|gilles.simonin|barry.osullivan}@insight-centre.org

to tackle these situations. Using a CP-based approach, the
problem is formulated as a set constraints (or sub-problems)
deﬁned over a set of variables. CP solvers rely on propagating these constraints to reduce the search space as efﬁciently
as possible.
Stable matching problems, introduced by (Gale and Shapley 1962), have been exhaustively studied over recent
decades. Different formulations are proposed, distinguishing between one-sided matching (Garg et al. 2010) and twosided matching, e.g. the stable marriage (SM) problem (Gale
and Shapley 1962). Some attention has focused on encoding SM and its variants in CP, e.g. (Manlove et al. 2007;
Gent et al. 2001). Surprisingly, popular matching has never
been studied in the context of CP. In this paper we study
this problem and propose the ﬁrst CP formulation of it. We
consider two cases of the problem of popular matching –
instances with and without ties in the preference lists – and
show that one can elegantly encode these problems using the
global cardinality global constraint (Régin 1996).

Abstract
We propose a constraint programming approach to the popular matching problem. We show that one can use the Global
Cardinality Constraint to encode the problem even in cases
that involve ties in the ordinal preferences of the applicants.

Introduction & Brief Background
The notion of popular matching was introduced by (Gardenfors 1975), but this notion has its roots in the 18th century
and the notion of a Condorcet winner. Popular matching and
its extensions have been an exciting area of research in the
last decade. An instance of the popular matching problem is
a bipartite graph G = (A ∪ P, E), where A is the set of
applicants, P is the set of posts, and E is a set of edges . If
(a, p) ∈ Ei and (a, p ) ∈ Ej with i < j then we say that a
prefers p to p . If i = j we say that a is indifferent between p
and p . This ordering of posts adjacent to a is called a’s preference list. If applicants can be indifferent between posts we
say that preference lists contain ties. Let M be a matching of
G, a vertex u ∈ A∪P is either unmatched in M , or matched
to some vertex denoted by M (u) (i.e. (u, M (u)) ∈ M ). An
applicant a prefers a matching M  to M if a is matched in
M  and unmatched in M , or a prefers M  (a) to M (a). M 
is said more popular than M if the number of applicants that
prefer M  to M exceeds the number of applicants that prefer
M to M  .
Deﬁnition 1 (Popular Matching) A matching M is popu
lar if and only if there is no matching M that is more popular than M .

Modelling Popular Matching in CP
Similar to (Abraham et al. 2007), we assume that every applicant ai ∈ A, has in its preference list an extra unique post
li , called the last resort, that is worst than any other post in
P. In this way every applicant is guaranteed to be matched.
We use one integer variable xi per applicant ai . The domain of each xi represents all posts that are neighbours of ai ,
denoted by N (ai ), plus the unique last post li . We decide to
represent the assignment of ai by the index of the post; each
li is indexed by a unique value |P| + i. Therefore, the domain is initialised as D(xi ) = {j|pj ∈ N (ai )} ∪ {|P| + i}.
Assigning a value k to xi is interpreted as ai is matched to
post pk if k ≤ |P|, and to li otherwise.
Our CP model is based on the global cardinality constraint (gcc) (Régin 1996), which
n restricts the number of
occurrences of any value j ∈ i=1 D(xi ) in the sequence
[x1 , ..., xn ] to be in an interval [lb(j), ub(j)] where lb(j) ≤
ub(j) ∈ Z.

Example 1 A = {a1 , a2 , a3 }, P = {p1 , p2 , p3 } and each
applicant prefers p1 to p2 and p2 to p3 . This instance does
not admit a popular matching.

Motivation
There exist in the literature a number of efﬁcient algorithms
for solving popular matching problems, e.g. (Abraham et
al. 2007). However, in real world situations, additional constraints are often needed. In many cases, the new problem
is intractable and the original algorithms become useless.
Constraint programming (CP) is a rich declarative paradigm

Preferences Without Ties
For each applicant ai , we denote by f (ai ) the best post in its
preference list. A post pj ∈ P is called an f -post if ∃ai ∈ A
such that f (ai ) = pj . We denote by s(ai ) the best post for
ai that is not an f -post. Our CP model is based on Lemma 1.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4202

