Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Sparse Latent Space Policy Search
Kevin Sebastian Luck

Joni Pajarinen

Erik Berger

Arizona State University
Interactive Robotics Lab
AZ 85281 Tempe, USA
mail@kevin-luck.net

Aalto University
Intelligent Robotics Group
02150 Espoo, Finland
Joni.Pajarinen@aalto.ﬁ

Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg
Institute of Computer Science
09599 Freiberg, Germany
erik.berger@informatik.tu-freiberg.de

Ville Kyrki

Heni Ben Amor

Aalto University
Intelligent Robotics Group
02150 Espoo, Finland
ville.kyrki@aalto.ﬁ

Arizona State University
Interactive Robotics Lab
AZ 85281 Tempe, USA
hbenamor@asu.edu
in a lower-dimensional latent space for control which, in
turn, reduces cognitive effort and training time during skill
acquisition. The existence of synergies has been reported
in a variety of human motor tasks, e.g., grasping (Santello,
Flanders, and Soechting 1998), walking (Wang, O’Dwyer,
and Halaki 2013), or balancing (Torres-Oviedo and Ting
2010).
Recently, various synergy-inspired strategies have been
put forward to improve the efﬁciency of RL for motor
skill acquisition (Bitzer, Howard, and Vijayakumar 2010;
Kolter and Ng 2007). Typically, these approaches use dimensionality reduction as a pre-processing step in order to
extract a lower-dimensional latent space of control variables.
However, extracting the latent space using standard dimensionality reduction techniques requires a signiﬁcantly large
training set of (approximate) solutions, prior simulations,
or human demonstrations. Even if such data exists, it may
drastically bias the search by limiting it to the subspace of
initially provided solutions. In our previous work, we introduced an alternative approach called latent space policy
search that tightly integrates RL and dimensionality reduction (Luck et al. 2014). Using an expectation-maximization
(EM) framework (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977) we
presented a latent space policy search algorithm that iteratively reﬁnes both the estimates of the low-dimensional latent space, as well as the policy parameters. Only samples
produced during the search process were used.
In this paper, we propose a different kind of latent space
policy search approach, which similarly to our previous
work combines RL and dimensionality reduction, but which
also allows for prior structural knowledge to be included.
Our method is based on the Variational Bayes (VB) (Neumann 2011; van de Meent et al. 2015) framework. Variational Bayes is a Bayesian generalization of the expectationmaximization algorithm, which returns a distribution over
optimal parameters instead of a single point estimate. It is a
powerful framework for approximating integrals that would
otherwise be intractable. Our RL algorithm exploits these
properties in order to (1) perform efﬁcient policy search,
(2) infer the low-dimensional latent space of the task, and

Abstract
Computational agents often need to learn policies that
involve many control variables, e.g., a robot needs to
control several joints simultaneously. Learning a policy with a high number of parameters, however, usually requires a large number of training samples. We
introduce a reinforcement learning method for sampleefﬁcient policy search that exploits correlations between
control variables. Such correlations are particularly frequent in motor skill learning tasks. The introduced
method uses Variational Inference to estimate policy
parameters, while at the same time uncovering a lowdimensional latent space of controls. Prior knowledge
about the task and the structure of the learning agent
can be provided by specifying groups of potentially
correlated parameters. This information is then used to
impose sparsity constraints on the mapping between
the high-dimensional space of controls and a lowerdimensional latent space. In experiments with a simulated bi-manual manipulator, the new approach effectively identiﬁes synergies between joints, performs efﬁcient low-dimensional policy search, and outperforms
state-of-the-art policy search methods.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach to automated motor skill acquisition (Peters et al. 2011). Instead
of a human hand-coding speciﬁc controllers, an agent autonomously explores the task at hand through trial-and-error
and learns necessary movements. Yet, reinforcement learning of motor skills is also considered to be a challenging
problem, since it requires sample-efﬁcient learning in highdimensional state and action spaces. A possible strategy to
address this challenge can be found in the human motor
control literature (Bernstein 1967). Research on human motor control provides evidence for motor synergies; joint coactivations of a set of muscles from a smaller number of neural commands. The reduction in involved parameters results
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1911

