Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Knowledge Transfer with Interactive Learning of Semantic Relationships
Jonghyun Choi

Sung Ju Hwang

Leonid Sigal

Larry S. Davis

University of Maryland
College Park, MD
jhchoi@umiacs.umd.edu

UNIST
Ulsan, Korea
sjhwang@unist.ac.kr

Disney Research
Pittsburgh, PA
lsigal@disneyresearch.com

University of Maryland
College Park, MD
lsd@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel learning framework for object categorization with interactive semantic feedback. In this framework,
a discriminative categorization model improves through
human-guided iterative semantic feedbacks. Speciﬁcally, the
model identiﬁes the most helpful relational semantic queries
to discriminatively reﬁne the model. The user feedback on
whether the relationship is semantically valid or not is incorporated back into the model, in the form of regularization,
and the process iterates. We validate the proposed model in
a few-shot multi-class classiﬁcation scenario, where we measure classiﬁcation performance on a set of ‘target’ classes,
with few training instances, by leveraging and transferring
knowledge from ‘anchor’ classes, that contain larger set of
labeled instances.

Figure 1: Approach Overview. Our model is a discriminative
manifold with embedded semantic entities. The discriminative categorization model is reﬁned by iteratively generating
semantic questions and obtaining user feedback. Thumbnail
images denote category prototypes in the embedding space.

Introduction
Semantic information has been exploited extensively in recent years to improve object category recognition accuracy since object categories are essentially semantic entities
that are human-deﬁned. Various types of semantic sources
have been exploited such as attributes (Hwang, Sha, and
Grauman 2011; Akata et al. 2013), taxonomies (Weinberger
and Chapelle 2008; Zhou, Xiao, and Wu 2011), and analogies (Hwang, Grauman, and Sha 2013), as auxiliary information to aid categorization. These methods often require a
large knowledge base. However, construction of such knowledge bases could be expensive as it takes human effort to
obtain, and such knowledge base might be especially challenging to obtain for highly speciﬁc sets of object categories,
e.g., recognizing the speciﬁc year/model of a vehicle, or cartoon characters from animation database.
Further, not all knowledge is equally useful in the discriminative classiﬁcation sense. For example, knowing that
an apple is more similar to a pear than a dragon, while semantically meaningful, may not be helpful in distinguishing
apple from other fruits. Thus, ﬁnding and using relevant semantic information (e.g., that an apple is more similar to a
pear than a melon) to enhance recognition accuracy is challenging. In addition, it is difﬁcult to identify an appropriate vocabulary of semantic information without prior knowledge about the object category itself and/or other categories

that are potential confusers. This is evident from the game
of 20-questions. Every question asked (and answered) has
a signiﬁcant effect on the distribution of questions a player
may ask next. It is clear that if a player needed to ask all the
questions at once, upfront, he may need considerably more
than 20 questions to identify the object in question.
To address such challenges, we propose a method to obtain and leverage a focused set of semantic queries by examining a discriminatively learned model for object categorization in an interactive learning framework. Starting
from a base model with no semantic information, we iteratively improve it by generating semantic queries for human(s) to answer, then in turn update the existing model
with feedback. Such an interactive learning system effectively transfers knowledge from anchor categories, that are
well learned, to target categories that have very few labeled
training samples.
Figure 1 shows the overview of our approach. The categories are partitioned into two sets: Anchor classes, that have
reasonable number of samples per class, and Target classes,
that have few labeled instances, and to which the semantic
knowledge is transferred. From a semantic embedding space
in which both Anchor and Target samples are embedded, we
detect relational hypotheses based on classiﬁcation confusion among target and anchor classes. The approach consists

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1505

