Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Group Cost-Sensitive Boosting for
Multi-Resolution Pedestrian Detection
Chao Zhu and Yuxin Peng∗
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
{zhuchao, pengyuxin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
As an important yet challenging problem in computer
vision, pedestrian detection has achieved impressive
progress in recent years. However, the signiﬁcant performance decline with decreasing resolution is a major
bottleneck of current state-of-the-art methods. For the
popular boosting-based detectors, one of the main reasons is that low resolution samples, which are usually
more difﬁcult to detect than high resolution ones, are
treated by equal costs in the boosting process, leading
to the consequence that they are more easily being rejected in early stages and can hardly be recovered in late
stages as false negatives. To address this problem, we
propose in this paper a new multi-resolution detection
approach based on a novel group cost-sensitive boosting algorithm, which extends the popular AdaBoost by
exploring different costs for different resolution groups
in the boosting process, and places more emphases on
low resolution group in order to better handle detection
of hard samples. The proposed approach is evaluated on
the challenging Caltech pedestrian benchmark, and outperforms other state-of-the-art on different resolutionspeciﬁc test sets.

Figure 1: Example test images in Caltech pedestrian benchmark and ground truth annotations. Note that people are in a
wide range of resolutions.

The boosting-based approaches are popular for training
pedestrian detectors due to their both high effectiveness and
efﬁciency. The basic idea is to linearly combine a series of
weak classiﬁers to produce a strong classiﬁer. Each training
sample is assigned by a weight which is updated iteratively
in order to emphasize on those wrongly classiﬁed samples.
In pedestrian detection, the fact is that rare positive targets
need to be detected from enormous negative windows. Thus
more weights should be placed on positive samples during
training to achieve a higher detection rate. To do so, several
cost-sensitive boosting algorithms have been proposed (Viola and Jones 2001) (Sun et al. 2007) (Masnadi-Shirazi and
Vasconcelos 2011) to penalize more on false negatives than
on false positives. However, these methods are not optimal
for multi-resolution detection, since they still treat the whole
positive samples equally and ignore the intra-class variations. Features extracted from low resolution pedestrians are
usually less discriminative than that from high resolution
ones, so that they are more easily being rejected in early
stages and can hardly be recovered in late stages as false negatives. Thus the trained detector can be biased towards high
resolution pedestrians, leading to poorer performance on low
resolution pedestrians. To address this problem, we propose
a new multi-resolution detection approach based on a novel
group cost-sensitive boosting algorithm, which can explore
different costs for different resolution groups in the boosting process, and emphasize more on low resolution pedestrians in order to better handle detection of hard samples. The
experimental results show its superior performance to other
state-of-the-art on different resolution-speciﬁc test sets.

Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a challenging problem in computer
vision, and has attracted plenty of attention for decades
for its importance in practical applications such as video
surveillance, driving assistance, etc. Thanks to various effective detection techniques, pedestrian detection has achieved
great progress in recent years. However, detecting multiresolution pedestrians (as in Fig. 1) is still hard, and a major
bottleneck of current state-of-the-art methods is their significant performance decline with decreasing resolution. For
example, the mean miss rate of the best detector (Paisitkriangkrai, Shen, and van den Hengel 2014a) achieves 8% for
pedestrians taller than 80 pixels in Caltech pedestrian benchmark (Dollár et al. 2012), while signiﬁcantly increases to
63% for pedestrians of 30-80 pixels high. Nevertheless, robust detection of low resolution pedestrians is also very important in certain occasions like driving assistant systems to
provide enough time for reaction.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3676

