Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Temporal Vaccination Games under Resource Constraints
†

Abhijin Adiga† and Anil Vullikanti∗,†
Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory,
Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech
∗
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
{abhijin, akumar}@vbi.vt.edu

active area of research both in epidemiology and network
security, e.g. (Bauch and Earn 2004; Grossklags, Christin,
and Chuang 2008; Khouzani, Sarkar, and Altman 2011;
Reluga and Galvani 2011; Saha, Adiga, and Vullikanti 2014);
see the related works section for a more detailed discussion.
In practice, most people do not take a preventive vaccine before the start of the epidemic, and instead wait for
some time. Often, the vaccination rate grows with the epidemic outbreak rate. There are many different and complex reasons for vaccination decisions being made at different times, and understanding this remains a big open
problem, as well as an important public health issue. Almost all the work on vaccination games only considers
vaccination decision made only at the start of the epidemic, in a simultaneous game setting. The only studies
on temporal vaccination are by (Reluga and Galvani 2011;
Adiga, Venkataramanan, and Vullikanti 2016). The work
by (Reluga and Galvani 2011) uses a differential equation
approach, which assumes simpliﬁed and homogeneous connectivity among individuals.
We build on the approach of (Adiga, Venkataramanan, and
Vullikanti 2016), which studies this as a repeated game on
a network, in the SI (Susceptible-Infectious) model of epidemics. They characterize Nash equilibria in such games,
and show that these exhibit interesting temporal structure,
such as a large fraction of nodes defer their vaccination decisions. An important open question from their work is the
effect of resource constraints— they assume there are no
bounds on the number of individuals who can get vaccinated
at any time, and this is reﬂected in the solutions they ﬁnd. In
practice, there are important resource constraints of various
kinds, e.g., capacity of hospitals and pharmacies in administering vaccines, or the production capacity–see e.g., (CDC ;
Orenstein and Schaffner 2008). In this paper, we study the
temporal vaccination problem with resource constraints at
different times. Our main contributions are:

Abstract
The decision to take vaccinations and other protective interventions for avoiding an infection is a natural game-theoretic
setting. Most of the work on vaccination games has focused
on decisions at the start of an epidemic. However, a lot of
people defer their vaccination decisions, in practice. For example, in the case of the seasonal ﬂu, vaccination rates gradually
increase, as the epidemic rate increases. This motivates the
study of temporal vaccination games, in which vaccination decisions can be made more than once. An important issue in the
context of temporal decisions is that of resource limitations,
which may arise due to production and distribution constraints.
While there has been some work on temporal vaccination
games, resource constraints have not been considered.
In this paper, we study temporal vaccination games for epidemics in the SI (susceptible-infectious) model, with resource
constraints in the form of a repeated game in complex social
networks, with budgets on the number of vaccines that can
be taken at any time. We ﬁnd that the resource constraints
and the vaccination and infection costs have a signiﬁcant impact on the structure of Nash equilibria (NE). In general, the
budget constraints can cause NE to become very inefﬁcient,
and ﬁnding efﬁcient NE as well as the social optimum are
NP-hard problems. We develop algorithms for ﬁnding NE and
approximating the social optimum. We evaluate our results
using simulations on different kinds of networks.

Introduction
Despite a lot of progress in medical diagnostics and pharmaceutical tools, infectious diseases remain a major challenge for governments all over the world. Even the annual
inﬂuenza epidemic in the US has a signiﬁcant social and
economic burden, which is estimated to exceed $87.1 billion
(e.g., (Molinari et al. 2007)). For many diseases, especially
the annual inﬂuenza, there exist vaccines, though their efﬁcacy might be quite variable. However, taking a vaccine
has a cost (economic cost, inconvenience and health effects).
Further, an individual can get protected without any intervention if enough other people he/she comes in contact with
in the population are protected— this is referred to as herd
immunity in mathematical epidemiology, and is a natural setting for a game-theoretical analysis. This has been a very

1. We formalize the temporal vaccination game with resource
constraints, B UDGET T EMP VACC, as a multi-stage game
on a network, and study the structure of Nash equilibria
(NE) in such games. There can be multiple NE even when
the network of interactions is a tree, and ﬁnding one with
the minimum cost is NP-complete.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. We show that many nodes defer their vaccination deci-

2438

