Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

An Online Logic Programming Development Environment
Christian Reotutar,1 Mbathio Diagne,2 Evgenii Balai,3 Edward Wertz,3
Peter Lee,4 Shao-Lon Yeh, 5 Yuanlin Zhang3
1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA
Department of Mathematics, Minneapolis Community and Technical College, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University, USA
4
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley, USA
5
Lubbock High School, Lubbock, Texas, USA
1
creotut1@jhu.edu, 2 rv6793jp@go.minneapolis.edu, 3 {evgenii.balai, edward.wertz, y.zhang}@ttu.edu,
4
peter.lee@berkeley.edu, 5 shaolonyeh@yahoo.com
2

Abstract

Background

Recent progress in logic programming, particularly answer set programming, has enabled us to teach it to undergraduate and high school students. We developed
an online answer set programming environment with
simple interface and self contained ﬁle system. It is expected to make the teaching of answer set programming
more effective and help us to reach more students.

Answer set programming is variation of Logic Programming, whose semantics is based on stable models (Gelfond and Kahl 2014). To show the ease of representation
of some interesting problems, we consider the map coloring problem here. We have a few states such as Texas, New
Mexico and Colorado. We use neigbor(X,Y) to denote
that state X is a neighbor of state Y. We can represent our
knowledge of the connectedness of states as fact such as
neighbor(texas, newMexico). We noted that X is
a neighbor of Y if Y is a neighbor X. This knowledge is
represented as an ASP rule
neighbor(X, Y) :- neighbor(Y, X).
where :- is read as if. To express the intention that we
would like to assign a color for r, g, b to a state, we
introduce a relation colorOf (S, C) which denotes that the
color of state S is C. The knowledge that a color is assigned
to a state is represented as an ASP rule
color(S,r) | color(S,g) | color(S,b).
where | is read as or. The rule reads, for any state S, S
has a color of r, g, or b.
To express the fact that no two neighbors have the same
color, we use the rule
¬color(S2, C1) :- color(S1, C1),
neighbor(S1, S2), S1 != S2.
where ¬ is the classical negation. The rules says for any
distinct states S1 and S2, if the color of S1 is C1, the color
of S2 is not C1, i.e., its color is different from that of S1.
Now we ﬁnish the full ASP program for map coloring. As
one can see, the rule is close to the speciﬁcation of the problem in English. A stable model of the program is a set of
relations that is believed by a rational agent in terms of
the program. For example, a rational agent has to believe
neighbor(texas,newMexico) because it is a fact. An
example of a stable model the program is tt {color(texas,r),
color(newMexico,g), color(colorado,b), ...} where we list
only color information while ignoring the neighbor relations
among the three states. We can prove that the mapping coloring problem for these states has a solution if and only if
the program has a stable model.
As ASP has been applied to more and more problems,
the importance of software development tools for ASP has

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Kahl 2014)
becomes a dominating language in knowledge representation community because it has offered elegant and effective solutions not only to the classical Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Problems but also many challenging application problems.
Thanks to its simplicity and clarity in both informal and formal semantics, Answer Set Programming provides natural
modeling of many problems.
ASP has been taught to undergraduate students, in the
course of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, at Texas Tech for more than
a decade. We believe ASP has become mature enough to be
a language for us to introduce programming and problem
solving to high school students. We had offered 4 sessions
to students at New Deal High School and a three week long
ASP course to high school students involved in TexPREP
program (http://www.math.ttu.edu/texprep/). In our teaching
practice, we found that ASP is well accepted by the students
and the students were able to focus on the problem solving, instead of the language itself. The students were able
to write programs to answer questions about the relationship
(e.g., parent, ancestor) among family members and to ﬁnd
solutions for Sudoku problems.
However, we have some major issues with the use of the
existing tools: installation of the tools to computers at lab
or home is complex and the existing tools are sensitive to
local settings of a computer. As a result, the ﬂow of the class
teaching were often interrupted by the problems associated
with the use of the tools. The aim of the work reported here
is to develop an easy to use ASP tool for teaching ASP.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4130

