Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Discriminative Structure Learning of Arithmetic Circuits
Amirmohammad Rooshenas and Daniel Lowd
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97401, USA
{rooshena,lowd}@uoregon.edu

a slightly better ﬁt to our methods. Compared to Bayesian
and Markov networks, SPN and AC structures are often very
difﬁcult to specify by hand. In response, several structure
learning algorithms have been developed.
However, most work on learning the structure of SPNs,
ACs, and other tractable models has focused exclusively on
generative models, which represent a full joint distribution
over all random variables. In many problem domains, some
variables are always known at query time and can be assumed to be evidence. For example, in most language modeling tasks, the words in the document are observed, and in
most computer vision problems, the pixels in the image are
known. Discriminative models represent the conditional distribution P (Y|X) of the query variables Y given evidence
X, which allows them to avoid the difﬁcult and expensive
task of modeling a full joint distribution over the evidence,
P (X).
In this paper, we present DACLearn (Discriminative
AC Learner), a ﬂexible and powerful method for learning
tractable discriminative models.

Abstract
The biggest limitation of probabilistic graphical models is
the complexity of inference, which is often intractable. An
appealing alternative is to use tractable probabilistic models,
such as arithmetic circuits (ACs) and sum-product networks
(SPNs), in which marginal and conditional queries can be
answered efﬁciently. In this paper, we present the ﬁrst discriminative structure learning algorithm for ACs, DACLearn
(Discriminative AC Learner), which optimizes conditional
log-likelihood. Based on our experiments, DACLearn learns
models that are more accurate and compact than other
tractable generative and discriminative baselines.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models such as Bayesian and Markov
networks have been widely used for knowledge representation and reasoning in diverse domains such as natural
language processing, coding theory, data mining, computational biology, computer vision, information extraction, and
social networks. However, the problem of inference limits
their effectiveness and broader applicability: in many realworld problems, exact inference is intractable and approximate inference can be unreliable and inaccurate. This poses
difﬁculties for parameter and structure learning as well,
since most learning methods rely on inference.
A compelling alternative is to work with model classes
where inference is efﬁcient, such as bounded treewidth models (Chechetka and Guestrin 2008), mixtures of tractable
models (Meila and Jordan 2000), sum-product networks
(SPNs) (Poon and Domingos 2011; Gens and Domingos
2013), and arithmetic circuits (ACs) (Lowd and Domingos
2008; Lowd and Rooshenas 2013).
ACs and SPNs are closely related representations that
represent probability distributions as computation graphs,
consisting of the sums and products necessary to answer
any probability query. Marginal and conditional probability queries can be computed in linear time in the number
of edges in their graphs.
In discrete domains, ACs can be translated into SPNs in
linear time and space, and vice versa (Rooshenas and Lowd
2014). We focus on ACs as our representation since they are

DACLearn
DACLearn builds on methods for learning tractable Markov
networks (ACMN algorithm) (Lowd and Rooshenas 2013).
Like ACMN, DACLearn searches through a combinatorial
space of log-linear models with conjunctive features, such
as x4 = true ∧ y3 = false. DACLearn begins with an initial AC structure and set of candidate features. In each iteration, DACLearn scores candidate features based on how
much they increase the model accuracy, penalized by how
much they increase the size of the AC. The highest-scoring
features are added to the AC, and new features are added to
the set of candidate features.
The key difference between ACMN and DACLearn is that
ACMN optimizes log-likelihood while DACLearn optimizes
conditional log-likelihood (CLL):

(θj fj (xi , yi ) − log Z(xi )),
(1)
CLL(D) =
i∈D

j

where fj is a conjunctive feature over the state of a subset of
query and evidence variables, and θj is the feature weight.
Z is the partition function which depends on evidence xi .
Since DACLearn is learning a conditional distribution,
P (Y|X), it does not need to represent a valid probability

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4258

