Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Local Search for Hard SAT Formulas:
The Strength of the Polynomial Law
Sixue Liu

Periklis A. Papakonstantinou

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University

Management Science and Information Systems
Rutgers University

What is a hard random k-CNF? To specify a distribution over formulas we ﬁrst limit the number of variables
n and clauses m. Then, we sample formulas uniformly. It
turns out that the ratio m/n is the important parameter. The
ﬁrst hardness result for random k-CNFs (Mitchell, Selman,
and Levesque 1992) shows that the ratio controls the difﬁculty of Random-SAT in a fashion “easy-hard-easy” as
the ratio grows. In (Friedgut, Bourgain, and others 1999)
it was shown that there exists a threshold r such that if
the ratio r(n) for n variables is such that r > r(n) then
almost certainly the formula is non-satisﬁable (and viceversa). Following that (Achlioptas and Moore 2002) gave a
lower bound on the threshold of random k-SAT. There is also
a spade of important works following up these two. There
are well-believed conjectures about the precise location of
the threshold but no formal proof. In practice, the state-ofthe-art SAT solvers are capable of solving random k-CNFs
with millions of variables (Cai, Luo, and Su 2014) but the
ratio regime where these algorithms work is not the conjectured/anticipated ratio (Mertens, Mézard, and Zecchina
2006).
Our SLS algorithm is a result of a rigorous study regarding the ﬂipping probability of variables during SLS. More
precisely, we explore the notion of critical variables. Our
analysis also shows that random k-CNF at the threshold are
hard for SLS algorithms, which is consistent with previous
work (Iwama and Tamaki 2004). In addition to the SLS algorithm we introduce a new technology for speeding up our
SAT-solver. This is dubbed as separated-non-caching implementation and is shown to further improve the efﬁciency of
our solver by ≈ +20%. The same technology is shown to
improve the best known implementation for WalkSAT.

Abstract
Random k-CNF formulas at the anticipated k-SAT phasetransition point are prototypical hard k-SAT instances. We
develop a stochastic local search algorithm and study it both
theoretically and through a large-scale experimental study.
The algorithm comes as a result of a systematic study that
contrasts rates at which a certain measure concentration phenomenon occurs. This study yields a new stochastic rule for
local search. A strong point of our contribution is the conceptual simplicity of our algorithm. More importantly, the
empirical results overwhelmingly indicate that our algorithm
outperforms the state-of-the-art. This includes a number of
winners and medalist solvers from the recent SAT Competitions.

Introduction
The propositional Satisﬁability problem (SAT) is the most
well-known NP-complete problem. SAT is of great theoretical and practical importance. Given a propositional formula
in conjunctive normal form (CNF), the computational CNFSAT (or SAT) problem asks to ﬁnd a boolean assignment to
the variables such that all clauses become true. SAT has been
extensively scrutinized. Within the last two decades alone
this study resulted in numerous, powerful SAT-solvers.
We propose an algorithm that falls within the stochastic
local search (SLS) framework. There are two main types
of SLS solvers: the greedy search and focused random
walk. Greedy search solvers approach the optimal rapidly
but get occasionally trapped in local optima, whereas focused random walk has the ability to recover from local
optima (Kautz, Sabharwal, and Selman 2009). Most SLS
solvers are a combination of these two paradigms (Cai
and Su 2012). The art of building such SAT-solvers often
times yields rather complicated algorithms. Note that our
SLS algorithm has a very simple description. This algorithm is based on the fundamental work of focused random
walk (Selman, Kautz, and Cohen 1994), including its theoretical analysis (Schöning 1999), and its follow-ups. Our
SAT-solver is shown to empirically outperform the state-ofthe-art SAT solvers, including the champions of SAT Competitions from 2012 to 2014 on large-scale hard instances of
random formulas.

Preliminaries
We introduce notation used throughout the paper and the
main algorithmic framework of this work.
Notation A formula
F is in conjunctive normal form


(CNF) if F = c1 · · · cm , where each clause ci is a disjunction of literals, i.e. variables or its negations from V =
{v1 , . . . , vn }. We say that F is a k-CNF formula if each ci
has at most k literals. A truth assignment α : V → {0, 1}n
is a function from variables to truth values 0/1 (false/true).

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

732

