Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Acquiring Knowledge of Affective Events
from Blogs Using Label Propagation
Haibo Ding and Ellen Riloff
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
{hbding, riloff}@cs.utah.edu
The goal of our research is to acquire knowledge of common affective events from a large collection of personal
blogs. While some events can be identiﬁed as positive or
negative by virtue of their lexical semantics (e.g., a “celebration” is inherently good and a “catastrophe” is bad) or by
identifying emotional contexts, our aim is to acquire sets of
events that are implicitly affective due to world knowledge
and cultural norms. For example, being “rushed to the hospital”, “hit by a car”, and “calling 911” describe emergency
situations which indicate that the experiencer is in a negative
state. Similarly, “watching a sunset”, “playing games”, and
“having a cookout” are recreational activities which indicate
that the experiencer is in a positive state. Existing sentiment
analysis tools do not recognize many of these events as being affective because the individual words do not carry sentiment. Our research automatically identiﬁes and harvests affective events from a large text corpus, toward the long-term
goal of creating a resource of affective event knowledge.
To identify events that are typically associated with a positive or negative state, we explore semi-supervised learning with graphs using a large collection of personal blogs.
First, we extract all of the events in the blog posts using
a shallow event representation. We then construct an enormous Event Context Graph that contains nodes representing the events and sentences in the corpus. Our approach
is based on the intuition that some instances of affective
events will occur in emotional contexts, so the graph is designed to link event mentions with their contexts. We explore graph conﬁgurations that incorporate three types of
contexts as edges: event-sentence edges capture local context, sentence-sentence edges capture discourse proximity
context, and event-event edges capture event co-occurrence
in documents. We then assign initial affective polarities
with a sentiment classiﬁer to “seed sentences” and use a
semi-supervised label propagation algorithm to spread affective evidence across edges of the graph. Our results show
that graph-based label propagation learns to identify many
stereotypically positive and negative affective events with
good accuracy.

Abstract
Many common events in our daily life affect us in positive
and negative ways. For example, going on vacation is typically an enjoyable event, while being rushed to the hospital is an undesirable event. In narrative stories and personal
conversations, recognizing that some events have a strong affective polarity is essential to understand the discourse and
the emotional states of the affected people. However, current NLP systems mainly depend on sentiment analysis tools,
which fail to recognize many events that are implicitly affective based on human knowledge about the event itself and
cultural norms. Our goal is to automatically acquire knowledge of stereotypically positive and negative events from personal blogs. Our research creates an event context graph from
a large collection of blog posts and uses a sentiment classiﬁer
and semi-supervised label propagation algorithm to discover
affective events. We explore several graph conﬁgurations that
propagate affective polarity across edges using local context,
discourse proximity, and event-event co-occurrence. We then
harvest highly affective events from the graph and evaluate
the agreement of the polarities with human judgements.

Introduction
We experience many events in our daily lives that affect
us in positive and negative ways. Sometimes we express
our feelings about an event using emotional words, such
as “Just graduated, I’m so happy!” or “Got laid off, really bummed”. But many events are easily understood to be
positive (desirable) or negative (undesirable) even if we do
not explicitly express an emotion. For example, if Mary tells
John that she just graduated from college, John will typically
congratulate her. Conversely, if Mary tells John that she just
got laid off, John will likely offer consolation.
We will refer to events that are typically associated with a
positive or negative emotional state as affective events. Recognizing affective events and their polarity is essential for
many natural language processing tasks. Understanding the
emotional states of people is important for narrative story
comprehension (e.g., (Lehnert 1981)), response generation
(e.g., (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011)), sarcasm detection
(e.g., affective dissonance (Riloff et al. 2013)), and other applications related to sentiment analysis.

Related Work
NLP researchers have been studying the problem of constructing lexicons and knowledge bases for sentiment analysis (Pang and Lee 2008). Many sentiment-related resources

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2935

