Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Extending the Modelling Capacity of
Gaussian Conditional Random Fields while Learning Faster
Jesse Glass

Mohamed Ghalwash

Milan Vukicevic

Zoran Obradovic

Temple University
Philadelphia, USA
tud25892@temple.edu

Temple University
Philadelphia, USA
tuc30491@temple.edu

University of Belgrade
Belgrade, Serbia
vukicevicm@fon.bg.ac.rs

Temple University
Philadelphia, USA
zobrad@gmail.com

convex parameter search space that guarantees global optimum and efﬁcient learning and inference.
There exist two major approaches to GCRF algorithms:
network link weight optimization algorithms and hidden network learning algorithms. Network link weight optimization
algorithms incorporate link weights as a feature. For example, one could have a network weight indicating the number of times someone posts on their friend’s Facebook page.
These network weights are used to build a lens that shifts
predictions in order to improve accuracy. The algorithm actually learns a new space in which it is able to make more
accurate predictions. Optimizing the input predictions in the
new space is similar to using Generalized Least Squares, but
here we are also learning the space. This can be seen in (Radosavljevic, Vucetic, and Obradovic 2010).
The other group of algorithms, hidden network learning,
focus on directly updating the precision matrix. Instead of
incorporating link weights it learns pairwise connections
that affect the ﬁnal prediction. This group of algorithms has
shown success on data where networks are known to exist
yet no network data is available. This is by its nature more
restrictive on input data and the resulting learned relationships are less interpretable than relationships optimized in
link weight feature GCRF. An example of this algorithm
can be found in (Wytock and Kolter 2012). A more general
framework for hidden network learning that goes beyond the
scope of this paper is documented in (Lee and Hastie 2013).
These two different groups of algorithms are for different purposes. For example, an growing area of biomedical research is to use biomedical literature database to construct a symptom-based human disease network (Zhou et al.
2014), therefore, incorporating such disease similarity network, which cannot be represented in traditional formats for
many machine learning methods, is very valuable. Hence,
the focus of this paper will be on link weight feature GCRF
The network operator in GCRF acts as a smoothing function. But sometimes over-smoothing can occur. With the extensions to the parameter space shown in this paper one can
include de-smoothing weights between targets so as to push
their values away from one another.
In this research we propose a new algorithm that introduces a mathematical formulation that extends the GCRF
parameter space to include negative values Unimodal GCRF
(UmGCRF). The requirement is that we maintain positive

Abstract
Gaussian Conditional Random Fields (GCRF) are a
type of structured regression model that incorporates multiple predictors and multiple graphs. This is
achieved by deﬁning quadratic term feature functions in
Gaussian canonical form which makes the conditional
log-likelihood function convex and hence allows ﬁnding the optimal parameters by learning from data. In this
work, the parameter space for the GCRF model is extended to facilitate joint modelling of positive and negative inﬂuences. This is achieved by restricting the model
to a single graph and formulating linear bounds on convexity with respect to the models parameters. In addition, our formulation for the model using one network
allows calculating gradients much faster than alternative implementations. Lastly, we extend the model one
step farther and incorporate a bias term into our link
weight. This bias is solved as part of the convex optimization. Beneﬁts of the proposed model in terms of
improved accuracy and speed are characterized on several synthetic graphs with 2 million links as well as on a
hospital admissions prediction task represented as a human disease-symptom similarity network corresponding to more than 35 million hospitalization records in
California over 9 years.

Modelling complex phenomena through instances that are
highly structured and interdependent is a challenging task
which traditional predictive modelling techniques cannot address efﬁciently. Many high impact applications have such
properties and they are usually modelled by applying graphical structure learning theory. Still, state-of-the-art probabilistic graphical models often do not deﬁne convex parameter search space and thus, cannot guarantee global optimum
and efﬁcient search. Structured models for regression have
been researched less than classiﬁcation problems. But, several research teams within the past 5 years have independently proposed methods for prediction using Gaussian Conditional Random Fields.
It has been shown that if the relationship among the output is represented as a quadratic form, then the traditional
Continuous Conditional Random Field model has the form
of multivariate Gaussian distribution (hence the name Gaussian Conditional Random Fields - GCRF). This results in a
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1596

