Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Identifying Sentiment Words Using an Optimization Model
with L1 Regularization
Zhi-Hong Deng † and Hongliang Yu † ‡ and Yunlun Yang †

†
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education),
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
‡
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
zhdeng@cis.pku.edu.cn, yuhongliang@cs.cmu.edu, incomparable-lun@pku.edu.cn

the help of the context. However, the content of a document
is unambiguous, thus the sentiment of a document is more
explicit than that of a word. Therefore, we think labeled documents (documents with sentiment labels) should be a useful
resource when recognizing sentiment words. This observation inspires us to explore how to identify sentiment words
by using labeled documents and seed words.
In this paper, we study the problem of automatically identifying sentiment words from the corpus, by an optimization
model with L1 regularization, called ISOMER (abbreviation for “Identifying Sentiment words using an Optimization
Model with L1 regularizer”). The distinctive aspect of our
approach is that ISOMER adopts both labeled documents
and seed words, or either one if the other is hard to obtain.
In our model, the sentiment polarities of words are treated
as parameters to be determined. The probabilistic estimation
is composed of two parts, the generative probabilities of labeled documents and seed words. We use maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) to form objective function which hybridizes these two. Since most words in the corpus have no
sentiment, we expect a sparse solution only providing nonzero values to the sentiment words. Therefore, the 1 regularizer, also called lasso penalty (Tibshirani 1996) is added
to the objective function. After solving the problem, we obtain the sentiment polarity of each word and the corresponding strength, which is vital for determining the signiﬁcant
sentiment words. To the best of our knowledge, this paper
is the ﬁrst work to identify sentiment words by employing
both labeled documents and sentiment words.
Our main contributions are summarized below:

Abstract
Sentiment word identiﬁcation is a fundamental work in
numerous applications of sentiment analysis and opinion mining, such as review mining, opinion holder ﬁnding, and twitter classiﬁcation. In this paper, we propose
an optimization model with L1 regularization, called
ISOMER, for identifying the sentiment words from the
corpus. Our model can employ both seed words and
documents with sentiment labels, different from most
existing researches adopting seed words only. The L1
penalty in the objective function yields a sparse solution since most candidate words have no sentiment. The
experiments on the real datasets show that ISOMER
outperforms the classic approaches, and that the lexicon learned by ISOMER can be effectively adapted to
document-level sentiment analysis.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of Web 2.0, loads of user-generated
messages expressing sentiment spread throughout the internet. Some messages imply a user’s predilection, such as his
preference for a certain product, or mood after watching a
ﬁlm. Discovering such hidden information is a demanding
task. That is why sentiment analysis (Pang and Lee 2008;
Liu 2012) has become a hotspot in recent years.
Sentiment word identiﬁcation is a fundamental work in
numerous applications of sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. (Dave, Lawrence, and Pennock 2003) develop a
method for automatically distinguishing positive and negative product reviews. In (Kim and Hovy 2004), the algorithm can ﬁnd the opinion holder and sentiment given a topic
by determining the word sentiment ﬁrst. In the information
extracting system for review mining, (Popescu and Etzioni
2007) present a component to evaluate the sentiment polarity of words in the context of given product features and
sentences. Also, according to (Chen et al. 2012), sentiment
word identiﬁcation can be applied to twitter classiﬁcation.
But how do we recognize sentiment words? Several researchers have addressed this problem by supervised learning. Most work needs to use seed words (the known sentiment words), which are usually manually selected. It is
well known that a word sense is often ambiguous without

(1) We study the problem of sentiment word identiﬁcation
and formulate it as an optimization problem, which employs both the document labels and seed words. Our approach can not only assign sentiment to each word, but
also learn the strength.
(2) Since most candidate words have no sentiment, we introduce L1 penalty to our model, yielding a sparse solution.
(3) The experiments on English and Chinese datasets
demonstrate that our model outperforms the classic approaches for sentiment word identiﬁcation. Further experiments show that the lexicon learned by our model
can be effectively implemented to document-level sen-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

115

