Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Labeling the Semantic Roles of Commas∗
Naveen Arivazhagan, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Dan Roth
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{arivazh2, christod, danr}@illinois.edu

In this paper we build on the corpus previously annotated
by (Srikumar et al. 2008) by reﬁning existing relations and
adding new ones. While the original corpus had extracted
relations for only 57% of the commas (with every other
comma having an OTHER label), with the new relations we
add, we are able to label the relations that 99% of the commas entail. The new data set can be used to learn the new
relations that have been identiﬁed. We also show that certain
modeling assumptions made in previous work, speciﬁcally
creating a mapping between the local constituency parse
context of a comma to the comma role (Bayraktar, Say, and
Akman 1998), are inherently ambiguous and do not hold as
well as expected.
Finally, we build a simple model to learn these new relations and outperform previous systems. In doing so, we
have identiﬁed a set of features that are important to consider when addressing the problem of semantic comma role
labeling.

Abstract
Commas and the surrounding sentence structure often
express relations that are essential to understanding the
meaning of the sentence. This paper proposes a set of
relations commas participate in, expanding on previous
work in this area, and develops a new dataset annotated
with this set of labels. We identify features that are important to achieve a good performance on comma labeling and then develop a machine learning method that
achieves high accuracy on identifying comma relations,
improving over previous work. Finally, we discuss a variety of possible uses, both as syntactic and discourseoriented features and constraints for downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Understanding the relations expressed in text is important
to many practical tasks such as question answering, information extraction, and textual entailment. A key element of
written text that is used to connect ideas is the comma. It has
been described as “the most ubiquitous, elusive and discretionary of all stops” (Jarvie 1995, p. 10). While the comma
is on par with the period in that both account for „45% of
all marks in the Brown corpus (Francis and Kucera 1982),
(Meyer 1987, p. 24–25) observes that “[t]he comma is the
most versatile mark of punctuation”.
Commas often mark a relation between the segments of
text they connect. This can be used as a cue to extract
relations or information from the corresponding segments.
While it has been argued (Meyer 1987), that the semantics
of commas relate only to their function (and hence limited
to being either delimiter or separator commas), we view the
commas themselves as explicit markers of semantic relations between the segments they are separating or delimiting. For example, in the sentence, ‘We invited the computer
scientists , Susan and Hanna’, knowing that the comma
marks a S UBSTITUTE, rather than a L IST relation, means
that we can tell that Susan and Hanna are the scientists and
not just two random guests.

2

Related Work

Previous work in natural language processing has recognized the semantic importance of commas and made
progress in classifying them according to their roles.
(Bayraktar, Say, and Akman 1998) analyzed the WSJ portion of the Penn Treebank (PTB; (Marcus, Santorini, and
Marcinkiewicz 1993)), and identiﬁed a set of seven roles
that commas can have in a sentence. They deﬁned a commasyntax-pattern to be the syntactic parent of a comma and
all the siblings of a comma, in the parse tree of the sentence. They postulated that there exists a function from these
comma-syntax-patterns to the roles of the commas and created a mapping from 211 comma-syntax-patterns to comma
roles by analyzing a candidate sentence for each commasyntax-pattern. This gave them an 80% coverage of all the
commas in the annotated portion of the WSJ, however they
did not test their approach against a set of manually annotated commas.
Also using the WSJ corpus, (Srikumar et al. 2008) label
commas with their semantic roles and extract entailed relations. They do this by mining for templates of the entailed
relations in the parse trees of these sentences which can then
be matched to the parse trees of new sentences to classify
the comma and extract relations.
The problem of Chinese sentence segmentation has been

∗

This material is based on research sponsored by DARPA under agreement number FA8750-13-2-0008. This research is also
supported by NIH grant R01-HD054448-07
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2885

