Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Moodee: An Intelligent Mobile Companion
for Sensing Your Stress from Your Social Media Postings
Huijie Lin1 , Jia Jia1∗ , Jie Huang1 , Enze Zhou1 , Jingtian Fu2 , Yejun Liu2 , and Huanbo Luan1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
2
Academy of Art and Design, Tsinghua University
linhuijie@gmail.com, jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

In this demo, we build a practical mobile application,
Moodee, to help detect and release users’ psychological stress
by leveraging users’ social media data in online social networks, and provide an interactive user interface to present
users’ and friends’ psychological stress states in an visualized and intuitional way. Given users’ online social media
data as input, Moodee intelligently and automatically detects
users’ stress states. Moreover, Moodee would recommend
users with different links to help release their stress. The main
technology of this demo is a novel hybrid model - a factor
graph model combined with Deep Neural Network, which
can leverage social media content and social interaction information for stress detection. We think that Moodee can be
helpful to people’s mental health, which is a vital problem in
modern world.

Figure 1: Workﬂow of the application
on our proposed model. The main technical contributions of
Moodee are:
1) We design a convolutional neural network (CNN) with
cross autoencoders (CAE) to generate user-level content attributes from tweet-level content attributes.
2) We deﬁne a partially-labeled factor graph (PFG) to
combine social interaction attributes with user-level content
attributes for stress detection.

Introduction
Nowadays, psychological stress has become a severe
threat to public health. Excessive stress may cause many
mental and physical health problems such as insomnia, cancer, depressions etc., or even suicide. Existing stress detection methods are mainly face-to-face interviews, selfreport psychological questionnaires and wearable physiological sensors. However, these methods are usually laborconsuming, time-costing and hysteretic.
While with the development of social networks like Twitter and Sina Weibo, people are willing to share their daily
events and moods, and interact with friends through the social networks. Detecting stress from users’ social media data
maybe a feasible way.
In this paper, we present Moodee, a practical mobile application based on a novel hybrid model of factor graph
model combined with a deep neural network (DNN), to automatically detect one’s psychological stress states from social media data. A user just need to log into her/his social
media account by OAuth2 protocol, to let Moodee get access to users’ public social media data. Moodee will analyze and extract features from users’ social media data, and
get users’ detailed stress states and the stress sources based

APP Interface and workﬂow
The input of Moodee is users’ social media data, and the output is users’ stress states, including stress level, stress keywords and stress sources (work, social, affection, physiological and others). In this demo, we formalize stress level into
0-100, with 0-40 to be non-stressed, 40-60 to be moderate
stressed(normal), 60-100 to be highly stressed. As shown in
Figure 1, the workﬂow of Moodee consists of the following
steps: 1) Log into users’ social media accounts, and authorize moodee to access the public data in social networks.
2) Moodee would analyze the input data, based on an our
model. Moodee would show how stressed the user is in different states (colors, expressions etc.). Moodee would get
stressed if the user is stressed, and vise versa. 3) According to users’ stress levels, Moodee would also recommend
to users different links to the psychological counselling centers, soothing music or articles to help release their stress. 4)
A user can check the detailed stress report by click into the

∗

Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4371

