Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Text Matching as Image Recognition
Liang Pang∗ , Yanyan Lan† , Jiafeng Guo† ,
Jun Xu† , Shengxian Wan∗ , and Xueqi Cheng†
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
∗
{pangliang,wanshengxian}@software.ict.ac.cn, † {lanyanyan,guojiafeng,junxu,cxq}@ict.ac.cn

T2 : Down the ages dumplings and noodles were popular in
China.

Abstract
Matching two texts is a fundamental problem in many
natural language processing tasks. An effective way is
to extract meaningful matching patterns from words,
phrases, and sentences to produce the matching score.
Inspired by the success of convolutional neural network
in image recognition, where neurons can capture many
complicated patterns based on the extracted elementary
visual patterns such as oriented edges and corners, we
propose to model text matching as the problem of image
recognition. Firstly, a matching matrix whose entries
represent the similarities between words is constructed
and viewed as an image. Then a convolutional neural
network is utilized to capture rich matching patterns in
a layer-by-layer way. We show that by resembling the
compositional hierarchies of patterns in image recognition, our model can successfully identify salient signals
such as n-gram and n-term matchings. Experimental results demonstrate its superiority against the baselines.

We can see that the interaction structures are of different
levels, from words, phrases to sentences. Firstly, there are
many word level matching signals, including identical word
matching between “down” in T1 and “down” in T2 , and similar word matching between “famous” in T1 and “popular”
in T2 . These signals compose phrase level matching signals, including n-gram matching between “down the ages”
in T1 and “down the ages” in T2 , unordered n-term matching between “noodles and dumplings” in T1 and “dumplings
and noodles” in T2 , and semantic n-term matching between
“were famous Chinese food” in T1 and “were popular in
China” in T2 . They further form sentence level matching signals, which are critical for determining the matching degree
of T1 and T2 . How to automatically ﬁnd and utilize these
hierarchical interaction patterns remains a challenging problem.
In image recognition, it has been widely observed that
the convolutional neural network (CNN) (LeCun et al. 1998;
Simard, Steinkraus, and Platt 2003) can successfully abstract
visual patterns from raw pixels with layer-by-layer composition (Girshick et al. 2014). Inspired by this observation, we
propose to view text matching as image recognition and use
CNN to solve the above problem. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst construct a word level similarity matrix, namely matching matrix, to capture the basic word level matching signals. The
matching matrix can be viewed as: 1) a binary image if we
deﬁne the similarity to be 0-1, indicating whether the two
corresponding words are identical; 2) a gray image if we deﬁne the similarity to be real valued, which can be achieved
by calculating the cosine or inner product based on the word
embeddings. Then we apply a convolutional neural network
on this matrix. Meaningful matching patterns such as n-gram
and n-term can therefore be fully captured within this architecture. We can see that our model takes text matching
as a multi-level abstraction of interaction patterns between
words, phrases and sentences, with a layer-by-layer architecture, so we name it MatchPyramid.
The experiments on the task of paraphrase identiﬁcation
show that MatchPyramid (with 0-1 matching matrix) outperforms the baselines, by solely leveraging interactions between texts. While for other tasks such as paper citation
matching, where semantic is somehow important, Match-

Introduction
Matching two texts is central to many natural language
applications, such as machine translation (Brown et al.
1993), question and answering (Xue, Jeon, and Croft 2008),
paraphrase identiﬁcation (Socher et al. 2011) and document retrieval (Li and Xu 2014). Given two texts T1 =
(w1 , w2 , . . . , wm ) and T2 = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ), the degree of
matching is typically measured as a score produced by a
scoring function on the representation of each text:


match(T1 , T2 ) = F Φ(T1 ), Φ(T2 ) ,
(1)
where wi and vj denotes the i-th and j-th word in T1 and
T2 , respectively. Φ is a function to map each text to a vector,
and F is the scoring function for modeling the interactions
between them.
A successful matching algorithm needs to capture the rich
interaction structures in the matching process. Taking the
task of paraphrase identiﬁcation for example, given the following two texts:
T1 : Down the ages noodles and dumplings were famous
Chinese food.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2793

