Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Near-Optimal Active Learning of Multi-Output Gaussian Processes
Yehong Zhang,† Trong Nghia Hoang,∗ Kian Hsiang Low,† and Mohan Kankanhalli†
Department of Computer Science† , Interactive Digital Media Institute∗
National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
{yehong, lowkh, mohan}@comp.nus.edu.sg† , idmhtn@nus.edu.sg∗

complex and time-consuming extraction from soil samples
can be alleviated by supplementing its prediction with correlated auxiliary types of soil measurements (e.g., pH) that
are easier to sample (Goovaerts 1997). Similarly, to monitor
algal bloom in the coastal ocean, plankton abundance correlates well with auxiliary types of ocean measurements (e.g.,
chlorophyll a, temperature, and salinity) that can be sampled
more readily. Other examples of real-world applications include remote sensing, trafﬁc monitoring (Chen et al. 2012;
Chen, Low, and Tan 2013; Chen et al. 2015), monitoring
of groundwater and indoor environmental quality (Xu et al.
2014), and precision agriculture (Webster and Oliver 2007),
among others. All of the above practical examples motivate
the need to design and develop an active learning algorithm
that selects not just the most informative sampling locations
to be observed but also the types of measurements (i.e., target and/or auxiliary) at each selected location for minimizing the predictive uncertainty of unobserved areas of a target
phenomenon given a sampling budget, which is the focus of
our work here1 .
To achieve this, we model all types of coexisting phenomena (i.e., target and auxiliary) jointly as a multi-output
Gaussian process (MOGP) (Álvarez and Lawrence 2011;
Bonilla, Chai, and Williams 2008; Teh and Seeger 2005),
which allows the spatial correlation structure of each type
of phenomenon and the cross-correlation structure between
different types of phenomena to be formally characterized.
More importantly, unlike the non-probabilistic multivariate regression methods, the probabilistic MOGP regression
model allows the predictive uncertainty of the target phenomenon (as well as the auxiliary phenomena) to be formally quantiﬁed (e.g., based on entropy or mutual information criterion) and consequently exploited for deriving the
active learning criterion.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to
present an efﬁcient algorithm for active learning of a MOGP
model2 . We consider utilizing the entropy criterion to mea-

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of active learning of a
multi-output Gaussian process (MOGP) model representing
multiple types of coexisting correlated environmental phenomena. In contrast to existing works, our active learning
problem involves selecting not just the most informative sampling locations to be observed but also the types of measurements at each selected location for minimizing the predictive uncertainty (i.e., posterior joint entropy) of a target
phenomenon of interest given a sampling budget. Unfortunately, such an entropy criterion scales poorly in the numbers of candidate sampling locations and selected observations when optimized. To resolve this issue, we ﬁrst exploit
a structure common to sparse MOGP models for deriving a
novel active learning criterion. Then, we exploit a relaxed
form of submodularity property of our new criterion for devising a polynomial-time approximation algorithm that guarantees a constant-factor approximation of that achieved by the
optimal set of selected observations. Empirical evaluation on
real-world datasets shows that our proposed approach outperforms existing algorithms for active learning of MOGP and
single-output GP models.

1

Introduction

For many budget-constrained environmental sensing and
monitoring applications in the real world, active learning/sensing is an attractive, frugal alternative to passive
high-resolution (hence, prohibitively costly) sampling of the
spatially varying target phenomenon of interest. Different
from the latter, active learning aims to select and gather the
most informative observations for modeling and predicting
the spatially varying phenomenon given some sampling budget constraints (e.g., quantity of deployed sensors, energy
consumption, mission time).
In practice, the target phenomenon often coexists and
correlates well with some auxiliary type(s) of phenomena
whose measurements may be more spatially correlated, less
noisy (e.g., due to higher-quality sensors), and/or less tedious to sample (e.g., due to greater availability/quantity,
higher sampling rate, and/or lower sampling cost of deployed sensors of these type(s)) and can consequently be
exploited for improving its prediction. For example, to monitor soil pollution by some heavy metal (e.g., Cadmium), its

1
Our work here differs from multivariate spatial sampling algorithms (Bueso et al. 1999; Le, Sun, and Zidek 2003) that aim
to improve the prediction of all types of coexisting phenomena,
for which existing active learning algorithms for sampling measurements only from the target phenomenon can be extended and
applied straightforwardly, as detailed in Section 3.
2
Refer to (Zhang et al. 2016) for other related work.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2351

