Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Commonsense Interpretation of Triangle Behavior
Andrew S. Gordon
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
12015 Waterfront Drive
Los Angeles, California 90094 USA
gordon@ict.usc.edu

Artiﬁcial Intelligence researchers have sought to model
people’s abilities for commonsense social reasoning in
software-based cognitive systems, directing their efforts toward three fundamental challenges. First, researchers have
worked to represent commonsense knowledge of human
psychology and social interaction as formal theories for use
in automated reasoning systems. Steady progress continues on the logical formalization of commonsense knowledge, both in the formalization of speciﬁc domain theories
of commonsense psychology and sociology (Davis and Morgenstern 2005; Gordon and Hobbs 2011) as well as general commonsense knowledge (Panton et al. 2006). Second, other researchers have focused on the challenge of designing the cognitive architectures for automated reasoning, and have increasingly worked to apply these architectures to social reasoning problems (Meadows, Langley, and
Emery 2014; Pynadath, Rosenbloom, and Marsella 2014).
The third challenge is the evaluation of automated social reasoning systems, which has received comparably little attention. Natural-language commonsense reasoning evaluations
are becoming increasingly popular (Levesque, Davis, and
Morgenstern 2012; Roemmele, Bejan, and Gordon 2012),
but the gap between formal theories of social interaction and
the lexical semantics of these evaluations make them difﬁcult to use for benchmarking current approaches. Needed
are integrative approaches that incorporate rich representations of commonsense theories in practical reasoning systems that demonstrate their effectiveness in comprehensive
evaluations.

Abstract
The ability to infer intentions, emotions, and other unobservable psychological states from people’s behavior is a hallmark of human social cognition, and an essential capability
for future Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems. The commonsense
theories of psychology and sociology necessary for such inferences have been a focus of logic-based knowledge representation research, but have been difﬁcult to employ in
robust automated reasoning architectures. In this paper we
model behavior interpretation as a process of logical abduction, where the reasoning task is to identify the most probable
set of assumptions that logically entail the observable behavior of others, given commonsense theories of psychology and
sociology. We evaluate our approach using Triangle-COPA,
a benchmark suite of 100 challenge problems based on an
early social psychology experiment by Fritz Heider and Marianne Simmel. Commonsense knowledge of actions, social
relationships, intentions, and emotions are encoded as defeasible axioms in ﬁrst-order logic. We identify sets of assumptions that logically entail observed behaviors by backchaining with these axioms to a given depth, and order these sets
by their joint probability assuming conditional independence.
Our approach solves almost all (91) of the 100 questions in
Triangle-COPA, and demonstrates a promising approach to
robust behavior interpretation that integrates both logical and
probabilistic reasoning.

Introduction
In an early study of human social perception, psychologists
Fritz Heider and Marianne Simmel (1944) presented subjects with a short animated ﬁlm depicting the movements of
two triangles and a circle in and around a box with a hinged
opening. Asked what they saw in the ﬁlm, subjects each responded with similar narratives that anthropomorphized the
moving shapes as intentional characters with beliefs, goals,
emotions, and social relationships. The simplicity of the ﬁlm
was in sharp contrast with the richness of the subjects’ narratives, highlighting the role of knowledge and personal experience in the process of interpretation. In his inﬂuential
book, The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations (1958),
Heider argued that the interpretation of intentional behavior was driven by commonsense theories of psychology and
sociology, and was the basis of human social interaction.

In this paper we describe our efforts to overcome all three
challenges (representation, reasoning, and evaluation) in a
computational model of behavior interpretation using commonsense theories of psychology and sociology. To make
progress in each of these areas, we restrict the scope of the
reasoning challenge to the domain of Heider and Simmel’s
original ﬁlm, depicting the actions of two triangles and a
circle around a box with a hinged door. Although this narrative setting is constrained, interpreting the behavior of moving shapes in a humanlike manner required us to formalize hundreds of commonsense axioms concerning actions,
intentions, emotions, and social relationships, among others. Using these axioms, we identify possible interpretations
of action sequences via logical abduction, backchaining to
distinct sets of assumptions that logically entail the obser-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3719

