Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Learning from
Demonstration Techniques and Tools
William Curran
Oregon State University
Corvallis, Oregon
curranw@oregonstate.edu

research (Argall et al. 2009). My dissertation addresses these
assumptions.
The PR2 robot has two 7 DoF arms. When learning position, velocity, and acceleration control, this leads to a 21
dimensional state space per arm. Learning in these highdimensional spaces is computationally intractable without approximation techniques. My dissertation introduces
Dimensionality Reduced Reinforcement Learning (DRRL)
to speed up learning in high-dimensional spaces. DRRL
uses demonstrations to compute a projection to a lowdimensional manifold. In each learning iteration, we project
the current state onto this manifold, compute and execute an
action, project the new state onto the manifold, and perform
a reinforcement learning update. This reduces the number
of demonstrations and increases the resistance to suboptimal outliers. These are desirable characteristics in general,
but especially for non-expert use of the learning algorithm.
Additionally, we plan to develop a movie-reel style interface for detailed, time-insensitive feedback. This gives the
user as much time as they need for demonstrations and feedback.

Abstract
Large state spaces and the curse of dimensionality contribute
to the complexity of a task. Learning from demonstration
techniques can be combined with reinforcement learning to
narrow the exploration space of an agent, but require consistent and accurate demonstrations, as well as the state-action
pairs for an entire demonstration. Individuals with severe motor disabilities are often slow and prone to human errors
in demonstrations while teaching. My dissertation develops
tools to allow persons with severe motor disabilities, and individuals in general, to train these systems. To handle these
large state spaces as well as human error, we developed Dimensionality Reduced Reinforcement Learning. To accommodate slower feedback, we will develop a movie-reel style
learning from demonstration interface.

Introduction
The main goal of my dissertation is to help put robots into
real homes to help those with severe physical disabilities.
Some individuals have minimal ability to move and speak,
and need extended care all day, every day. The strain on families needing to take care of these individuals is enormous.
Inexperienced family caregivers use prescription drugs for
depression, anxiety, and insomnia two to three times more
often than the average population (Gallagher et al. 1989).
Robotics can be used to assist those with extreme disabilities and remove much of this burden on the family.
These individuals with disabilities are often non-experts,
and currently cannot be part of the development process.
Yet, most don’t want to wait for someone to program autonomous behaviors for all household tasks. We propose to
give disabled non-expert users the tools to teach robots tasks
by themselves. This will give the disabled user both independence and personal customization.
There are two key difﬁculties with learning from demonstration interfaces for individuals with disabilities; resolving
these are the key contributions of my dissertation. State-ofthe-art personal robots need to perform complex manipulation tasks to be viable in assistive scenarios. These complex
robots lead to large dimensional state spaces. Also, the ability to perform good demonstrations and give timely feedback are key assumptions in learning from demonstration

Learning from Demonstration in
High-Dimensional Spaces
To handle high-dimensional spaces, we performed dimensionality reduction on a set of demonstrated trajectories. We
used these demonstrations to compute a projection to a lowdimensional manifold. In each learning iteration, we projected the current state onto this manifold, computed and
executed an action, projected the new state onto the manifold, and performed a reinforcement learning update.
We have shown that an agent can learn quickly in the
low-dimensional manifold. However, this led to a critical
trade-off. By projecting onto a low-dimensional manifold,
we discarded low variance, yet potentially important data.
By adding DRRL to an existing algorithm, we showed that
the agent can quickly converge to a good, yet suboptimal,
policy much faster.
We extended DRRL to add an iterative component
(IDRRL). Instead of learning entirely in one manifold, we
iteratively learned in all manifolds by using transfer learning. The agent can quickly learn in a low-dimensional space
d, and transfer that knowledge to the d + 1 dimensional

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4293

