Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Coupled Dictionary Learning for Unsupervised Feature Selection
Pengfei Zhu1 , Qinghua Hu1 , Changqing Zhang1 , Wangmeng Zuo2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{zhupengfei}@tju.edu.cn

methods use indices that reﬂect data properties, e.g., variance, Fisher score, Laplacian Score (He, Cai, and Niyogi
2005), consistency (Dash and Liu 2003), to evaluate features. Different from ﬁlter methods, wapper methods rely
on the learning machines. The classiﬁcation or clustering
performances of the learning machines are used to evaluate features (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003). For employing
greedy or genetic algorithms to search a subset of features,
wrapper methods are computationally intensive and therefore intractable for large-scale problems. Embedding methods perform feature selection in model construction. A feature weight vector or matrix can be learned to reﬂect the
feature importance (Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015).
Among of these approaches, unsupervised feature selection (UFS) is more challenging due to the lack of label information. In unsupervised scenarios, the key factors for feature selection are locality preserving, cluster structure, and
self-representation. Motivated by the intuition that nearby
samples should belong to the same topic, locality preserving is widely used in feature selection, subspace learning, semi-supervised learning, etc. Laplacian Score is proposed to reﬂect the locality preserving power of features
(He, Cai, and Niyogi 2005). In manifold learning, it is assumed that the high-dimensional data are nearly lying on a
low-dimensional manifold. Hence, manifold regularization
is used in unsupervised feature selection algorithms to preserve sample similarity (Li et al. 2012; Tang and Liu 2012;
Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015). Similar to the class labels in supervised cases, cluster structure indicates the afﬁliation relations of samples, and it can be discovered by spectral clustering (SPEC (Zhao and Liu 2007), MCFS (Cai, Zhang, and He
2010), matrix factorization (NDFS (Li et al. 2012), RUFS
(Qian and Zhai 2013), EUFS (Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015)
) or linear predictors (UDFS (Yang et al. 2011), JELSR
(Hou et al. 2011)). Due to the feature correlations, the selfrepresentation property of features considers that one feature can be represented by a linear combination of other features. The self-representation matrix reﬂects the importance
of features in reconstruction (Zhu et al. 2015). For different
feature selection methods, the three key factors are considered individually or simultaneously.
Beyond the success in feature selection (Xiang, Tong, and
Ye 2013), sparse learning has shown its power for data reconstruction (Mairal, Elad, and Sapiro 2008). For embed-

Abstract
Unsupervised feature selection (UFS) aims to reduce the time
complexity and storage burden, as well as improve the generalization performance. Most existing methods convert UFS
to supervised learning problem by generating labels with speciﬁc techniques (e.g., spectral analysis, matrix factorization
and linear predictor). Instead, we proposed a novel coupled
analysis-synthesis dictionary learning method, which is free
of generating labels. The representation coefﬁcients are used
to model the cluster structure and data distribution. Specifically, the synthesis dictionary is used to reconstruct samples, while the analysis dictionary analytically codes the samples and assigns probabilities to the samples. Afterwards,
the analysis dictionary is used to select features that can
well preserve the data distribution. The effective L2,p -norm
(0 < p ≤ 1) regularization is imposed on the analysis dictionary to get much sparse solution and is more effective in
feature selection. We proposed an iterative reweighted least
squares algorithm to solve the L2,p -norm optimization problem and proved it can converge to a ﬁxed point. Experiments
on benchmark datasets validated the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
With the ubiquitous use of digital imaging devices, mobile terminals and social networks, mountains of highdimensional data explosively emerge and grow. Curse of dimensionality leads to great storage burden, high time complexity and failure of the classic learning machines (Wolf
and Shashua 2005). Feature selection searches the most
representative and discriminative features by keeping the
data properties and removing the redundancy. According to
the availability of the label information, feature selection
can be categorized into unsupervised (He, Cai, and Niyogi
2005), semi-supervised (Benabdeslem and Hindawi 2014),
and supervised (Nie et al. 2010) ones. Because of the diverse data structure, algorithms are also developed for multitask (Hernández-Lobato, Hernández-Lobato, and Ghahramani 2015), multi-label (Chang et al. 2014) and multi-view
(Qian and Zhai 2014) feature selection.
Researchers developed many feature selection methods,
including ﬁlter, wrapper, and embedding methods. Filter
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2422

