Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Identifying Search Keywords for Finding Relevant Social Media Posts
Shuai Wang† , Zhiyuan Chen† , Bing Liu† and Sherry Emery‡
†

Department of Computer Science
Institute for Health Research and Policy
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois, USA
{shuaiwanghk, czyuanacm}@gmail.com, liub@cs.uic.edu, slemery@uic.edu
‡

to help users identify search keywords to reduce the tedious
manual effort.
Although related, our task is different from the classic task
of keyword extraction from documents (e.g., Turney 2000,
Zhao et al. 2011, El-Kishky et al. 2014) because we also
need to ensure that the keywords are on target (topic) and not
too general for use in search. These are not concerns of traditional keyword extraction. Additionally, we need an iterative process to ﬁnd more and more suitable search keywords.
Our task is also very different from term and query recommendation and query expansion in Web search and search
advertising (e.g., Carpineto and Romano 2012). We will discuss these prior works in the related work section.
Note that ﬁnding a set of keywords to search for possibly relevant posts from a social media data source is just the
ﬁrst step. The resulting set of posts from the search can still
be quite noisy because many posts containing the keywords
may not be relevant to the user topic. A supervised classiﬁcation step, which involves manual labeling of relevant and
irrelevant posts and machine learning, is typically needed to
identify the ﬁnal set of relevant posts for analysis. This paper does not study this classiﬁcation step as there are already
many papers studying social media text classiﬁcation.
However, one may ask why not skip the keyword ﬁnding/search step and directly go to the classiﬁcation step because classiﬁcation is needed anyway. Unfortunately, this
approach is very hard, if not impossible, in practice. Let us
use Twitter as a social media data source to explain.
1. Twitter is huge and people on it talk about everything
under the sun. The proportion of relevant tweets (which
are posts on Twitter) to a particular topic (e.g., electronic
cigarettes or e-cig) is often very tiny. Thus, randomly sampling a set of tweets and labeling them as relevant or irrelevant tweets to create a training set for learning is almost
impossible because the sampled tweets may contain few or
no relevant tweets. Keyword search is thus necessary. A reasonable sized set of keywords is also necessary because the
user needs to ﬁnd tweets with a good coverage, rather than a
biased coverage, of the topic, which may miss out tweets of
many sub-topics of the research topic.
2. Even if by some means one can ﬁnd a set of labeled
relevant and irrelevant tweets to build a supervised classiﬁer,
it is almost impossible to apply it to classify all tweets on
Twitter due to the computational difﬁculties.

Abstract
In almost any application of social media analysis, the user is
interested in studying a particular topic or research question.
Collecting posts or messages relevant to the topic from a social media source is a necessary step. Due to the huge size of
social media sources (e.g., Twitter and Facebook), one has to
use some topic keywords to search for possibly relevant posts.
However, gathering a good set of keywords is a very tedious
and time-consuming task. It often involves a lengthy iterative process of searching and manual reading. In this paper,
we propose a novel technique to help the user identify topical
search keywords. Our experiments are carried out on identifying such keywords for ﬁve (5) real-life application topics
to be used for searching relevant tweets from the Twitter API.
The results show that the proposed method is highly effective.

Introduction
In the past few years, we witnessed a rapidly growing trend
of using social media posts to mine useful information for
businesses and consumers, and to investigate social, economic, health, and political research questions. These applications are not only done by computer scientists, but are increasingly also done by researchers in management science,
health science, and social sciences due to the rich social media content and its importance to these disciplines.
To perform an analysis, the user (often a researcher) ﬁrst
forms a research question, e.g., what do people talk about
electronic cigarettes on Twitter? He/she then collects social
media posts or data (e.g., tweets) that are relevant to the target topic. Due to the fact that social media data sources such
as Twitter and Facebook are often huge, the user has to employ some keywords to search for possibly relevant posts.
However, gathering a representative set of search keywords
with a good coverage is a very tedious and time-consuming
task. It often involves lengthy and iterative processes of
searching and manual reading. Typically, the user ﬁrst comes
up with one or more keywords to search for posts from a
social media data source. He/she then reads some returned
posts and in the process identiﬁes some additional keywords.
He/she may search again using the new keywords and read
more. We call this problem search keyword mining. In this
paper, we study this problem and propose a novel method
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3052

