Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Spatially Regularized Streaming Sensor Selection
Changsheng Li† , Fan Wei‡ , Weishan Dong† , Xiangfeng Wang§ ,
†

Junchi Yan§∗ , Xiaobin Zhu¶ , Qingshan Liu , Xin Zhang†

IBM Research-China, China, {lcsheng,dongweis,zxin}@cn.ibm.com
Department of Mathematics, Stanford University, USA, fanwei@stanford.edu
§
East China Normal University, China, {xfwang, jcyan}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
¶
Beijing Technology and Business University, China, brucezhucas@gmail.com

Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China, qsliu@nuist.edu.cn
‡

and Krause 2010). By this assumption, the data collected
would have no redundancy. However, in many real-life applications, the sensor network is redundant, i.e., a small fraction of the sensor nodes in the whole network are necessary
to collect the data and describe the underlying phenomenon.
An example of redundant sensor network is that different
cameras are installed in a room monitoring people’s activities. In order to stress sensor selection in the real-life scenarios, we do not make the assumption that the sensor network
is not redundant. On the contrary, we follow the method (Aggarwal, Xie, and Yu 2011) to use the assumption that the
sensor network is inherently redundant. In such a case, the
goal of sensor selection is to select a suitable subset of sensors so as to minimize the loss of information (e.g., prediction errors of inactive sensors), subject to the battery power
consumption constraint.
In a redundant sensor network, data streams collected
by different sensor nodes usually have predictable relationships, and such relationships can be used to determine
which subset of sensors are necessary and thus be in active
mode (Aggarwal, Bar-Noy, and Shamoun 2011). Recently,
the distributed online greedy (DOG) method proposed in
(Golovin, Faulkner, and Krause 2010) aims to take advantage of utility-feedback to repeatedly select sensors online.
The method in (Aggarwal, Bar-Noy, and Shamoun 2011)
uses external domain-speciﬁc linkage knowledge for sensor
selection. However, such linkage information is often hard
to acquire beforehand in practice. The key idea of the technique in (Aggarwal, Xie, and Yu 2011) is to use regression
analysis to determine an active sensor subset with minimal
power consumption. This small active sensor set is used to
predict the observation values of the other inactive sensors.
In the methods above, the most relevant previous work to
this paper is (Aggarwal, Xie, and Yu 2011), where the authors address a similar problem for sensor selection. However, their method has the following limitations. i) The connection between sensor selection and multi-variate interpolation is not fully utilized in their method. But these two
parts are actually interleaved and can beneﬁt from each
other, so it is natural to incorporate multi-variate interpolation into not only prediction, but also sensor selection.
ii) The location information of sensor nodes is not considered in their sensor selection method. However, sensors with
smaller distances usually collect more similar data, which

Abstract
Sensor selection has become an active topic aimed at energy
saving, information overload prevention, and communication
cost planning in sensor networks. In many real applications,
often the sensors’ observation regions have overlaps and thus
the sensor network is inherently redundant. Therefore it is
important to select proper sensors to avoid data redundancy.
This paper focuses on how to incrementally select a subset of
sensors in a streaming scenario to minimize information redundancy, and meanwhile meet the power consumption constraint. We propose to perform sensor selection in a multivariate interpolation framework, such that the data sampled
by the selected sensors can well predict those of the inactive
sensors. Importantly, we incorporate sensors’ spatial information as two regularizers, which leads to signiﬁcantly better
prediction performance. We also deﬁne a statistical variable
to store sufﬁcient information for incremental learning, and
introduce a forgetting factor to track sensor streams’ evolvement. Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Moreover, our
method is over 10 times faster than the state-of-the-art sensor
selection algorithm.

1. Introduction
In recent years, sensor networks have become very popular for collecting continuous data streams, such as audio
and visual data. In many real-world scenarios, a sensor network may consist of a large number of sensor nodes; The
large quantity of sensors may cause bottlenecks in the areas
such as battery supplies, communication, and information
overload (Kollios et al. 2005; Zhang and Ji 2005). In order
to overcome these limitations, sensor selection becomes a
promising and effective way to reduce the number of sensor nodes used. Up to now, sensor selection has been widely
studied for various applications, such as trafﬁc ﬂow forecasting (Chan et al. 2012), robotics (Hovland and McCarragher
1997), target tracking (Wang et al. 2004), wireless sensor
networks (Abrams, Goel, and Plotkin 2004), and sensor network management (Rowaihy et al. 2007). However, many of
the approaches above are based on a simpliﬁed assumption
that the “sensors can perfectly observe a particular sensing
region, and nothing outside the region” (Golovin, Faulkner,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3871

