Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Detection of Plan Deviation in Multi-Agent Systems
Bikramjit Banerjee

Steven Loscalzo

Daniel Lucas Thompson

School of Computing
University of Southern Mississippi
Hattiesburg, MS 39402
tBikramjit.Banerjee@usm.edu

AFRL Information Directorate
26 Electronic Parkway
Rome, NY 13441
Steven.Loscalzo@us.af.mil

School of Computing
University of Southern Mississippi
Hattiesburg, MS 39402
Daniel.L.Thompson@eagles.usm.edu

The problem of diagnosing multi-agent plan execution
has been approached from various perspectives. Nearly two
decades ago, Tennenholtz (1997) formulated the concept of
stable joint plans, and proceeded to explore the computability and computational procedures for such plans. This was a
mechanism design perspective of the planning problem with
an additional constraint that plans must be such that any deviation by one agent is detectable by the other agents. This
interesting initiative at the intersection of multi-agent planning and plan monitoring does not appear to have been pursued further in either literature. Later, Kalech and Kaminka
(2003) introduced the idea of social diagnosis, using an abstract representation for multi-agent plans based on behaviors, to explain why agents selected conﬂicting behaviors.
This approach adds communication among agents as a diagnostic tool, in addition to those required by the agents’ plans.
In view of the signiﬁcant added communication complexity,
Kalech and Kaminka also extended their approach for scalability (Kalech and Kaminka 2005). In contrast with social
diagnosis, many authors have used more explicit representation of multi-agent plans in terms of agents’ actions and resources. For instance, de Jonge, Roos and Witteveen (2009)
introduced the notion of plan diagnosis—a subset of actions
which when assumed to be executed anomalously make the
plan execution consistent with the protagonist’s observation.
When the same observation sequence may be consistent with
multiple plan diagnoses, the authors identify preferred diagnoses based on their predictive power. The diagnostic inference procedure is, however, largely centralized.
Through a series of papers, Micalizio and Torasso (2008;
2009; 2014), developed a relational framework with explicit representation of multi-agent plans and extended action models to include both nominal and faulty evolutions.
A distinct advantage of this framework is that it is fully distributed and does not rely on synchronized action executions
by the agents. However, it does impose cooperative communications among agents to share beliefs and mutually facilitate the diagnostic process. Similar to de Jonge, Roos and
Witteveen (2009), Micalizio and Torasso also distinguish
primary failures (original failures) from secondary failures
(caused by primary failures), with an eye toward plan repair
which typically targets primary failures.
In this paper, we derive a procedure for the detection
of deviation in a teammate’s plan in partially observable

Abstract
Plan monitoring in a collaborative multi-agent system
requires an agent to not only monitor the execution
of its own plan, but also to detect possible deviations
or failures in the plan execution of its teammates. In
domains featuring partial observability and uncertainty
in the agents’ sensing and actuation, especially where
communication among agents is sparse (as a part of a
cost-minimized plan), plan monitoring can be a signiﬁcant challenge. We design an Expectation Maximization
(EM) based algorithm for detection of plan deviation of
teammates in such a multi-agent system. However, a direct implementation of this algorithm is intractable, so
we also design an alternative approach grounded on the
agents’ plans, for tractability. We establish its equivalence to the intractable version, and evaluate these techniques in some challenging tasks.

Introduction
The problem of computing multi-agent plans, when the domain features partial observability and uncertainty in the
agents’ sensing and actuation, is computationally very challenging. This problem of planning in multi-agent systems
has received signiﬁcant attention in the past. However, the
related problem of multi-agent plan monitoring has hardly
garnered similar attention during the same time. Plan monitoring allows an agent to monitor the execution of its own
plan, and detect possible failures or deviations that might
entail the need to repair its plan, or replan. By contrast,
a multi-agent system is particularly fragile to plan deviations, because one agent’s deviation may affect other agents,
and the debilitating effects may snowball quickly leading
to catastrophic failures. Therefore in a collaborative multiagent setting, an agent needs to detect any deviation or failure on part of its teammates. This activity is an important
part of multi-agent plan monitoring. In a partially observable setting where agents cannot directly observe the actions
of its teammates, it may be challenging for an agent to perform such monitoring. It must rely on its local observations
and information to deduce the probability of deviation of its
teammates from their part of the joint plans.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2445

