Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Data Poisoning Attacks against Autoregressive Models
Scott Alfeld,∗ Xiaojin Zhu,∗ and Paul Barford∗†
∗

Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin – Madison
Madison WI 53706, USA
†
comScore, Inc.
11950 Democracy Drive, Suite 600
Reston, VA 20190, USA.
{salfeld, jerryzhu, pb}@cs.wisc.edu

h future values with a recursive strategy. We illustrate the
concecpts described herein with a running “One Week” example where Bob uses an order 2 AR process to forecast
h = 3 days into the future. Speciﬁcally, Bob uses the values
of Monday and Tuesday to forecast Wednesday, Thursday,
and Friday with model θ = [0.5, −0.6] . Thus, for the One
Week example, if Monday’s value is 1 and Tuesday’s is 2,
Bob forecasts Wednesday as 0.5 × 2 − 0.6 × 1 = 0.4, he
then forecasts Thursday as 0.5 × 0.4 − 0.6 × 2 = −1, and
Friday as 0.5 × (−1) − 0.6 × 0.4 = −.74.
With a linear AR model and recursive forecasting strategy,
Bob is especially vulnerable to intelligent adversaries – once
Alice has observed enough sequential forecasts, she can infer the underlying model exactly given minimal additional
information. If Alice observes Bob forecast 0.4, −1, −.74,
and she knows that Tuesday’s value is 2, then she only need
know d = 2 to deduce Bob’s model.
Our speciﬁc contributions are as follows. (i) We present a
general, mathematical framework for deﬁning Alice’s optimal attack. (ii) We demonstrate how real world settings may
be encoded into our framework such that the resulting optimization problem is solvable with standard convex optimization methods. (iii) We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of the optimal attack, compared to random and
greedy baselines using both synthetic and real world data.

Abstract
Forecasting models play a key role in money-making ventures in many different markets. Such models are often
trained on data from various sources, some of which may
be untrustworthy. An actor in a given market may be incentivised to drive predictions in a certain direction to their own
beneﬁt. Prior analyses of intelligent adversaries in a machinelearning context have focused on regression and classiﬁcation. In this paper we address the non-iid setting of time series forecasting. We consider a forecaster, Bob, using a ﬁxed,
known model and a recursive forecasting method. An adversary, Alice, aims to pull Bob’s forecasts toward her desired
target series, and may exercise limited inﬂuence on the initial values fed into Bob’s model. We consider the class of
linear autoregressive models, and a ﬂexible framework of encoding Alice’s desires and constraints. We describe a method
of calculating Alice’s optimal attack that is computationally
tractable, and empirically demonstrate its effectiveness compared to random and greedy baselines on synthetic and realworld time series data. We conclude by discussing defensive
strategies in the face of Alice-like adversaries.

Introduction
Forecasting is important in a variety of markets including
commodities, energy, new products and others. For example
in commodity markets, forecasting volatility is the basis for
the pricing of options contracts. In general, high volatility
forecasts result in higher prices for options. Better forecasts
result in better returns.
A standard assumption in forecasting is that data used in
models is reported honestly i.e., in a way that does not seek
to inﬂuence the outcome. However, this may not be the case.
Indeed, one can easily imagine an actor with a proﬁt motive
and access to inputs that will attempt to inﬂuence outcomes
to her own advantage.
In this paper we consider linear, autoregressive forecasting models. The forecaster Bob uses an order-d linear aud
toregressive model: xt = α + i=1 θi (xt−i ), and forecasts

Mathematical Formulation
We use boldface lowercase letters to denote column vectors,
and capital letters to denote matrices. We denote elementwise inequalities with , , and equality by deﬁnition as .
Elements of a vector v are vi . Bob’s ﬁrst prediction is for
time 0, and xi , i < 0 denote past values. For ease of notation, we ignore the offset term α to obtain the AR(d) model,
standard in time series analysis literature (Box, Jenkins, and
Reinsel 2011). We note, however, that the methods describe
here directly extend to including α.
Alice’s objective is to move Bob’s forecasts as close as
possible to her desired target t ∈ Rh . Alice’s actions are
to augment the initial values, x , fed into Bob’s model, by
selecting a vector δ = [δ−d , . . . , δ−1 ] and augmenting

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1452

