Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

The Ostomachion Process
Xuhui Fan, Bin Li, Yi Wang, Yang Wang, Fang Chen
Machine Learning Research Group, National ICT Australia, Eveleigh, NSW 2015, Australia
{xuhui.fan, bin.li, yi.wang, yang.wang, fang.chen}@nicta.com.au

to the restriction of axis-aligned cuts. The axis-aligned partitions are based on the assumption that two sets of interacted
entities have the same intensity. This is an over-simpliﬁed
assumption in many scenarios. Take relational modeling of
emails in a company for example, a rectangular block implies that the staff involved play an equal role to one another; while in reality staff may play asymmetric roles such
that the partition may exhibit a triangular block (e.g., leaders
may send emails to many staff while interns may only send
emails to her mentor). The limitation of axis-aligned cuts is
more obvious if the partition structure is used as a prior for
a decision tree, where the decision boundaries are usually a
linear combination of multiple dimensions.
In this paper, we relax the axis-aligned partitions by allowing for oblique cuts on a product space (the unit square).
Since the resulting components are convex polygons, which
resemble a dissection puzzle Ostomachion, the proposed
stochastic partition process is named the Ostomachion process (OP). Through this relaxation, the two dimensions can
be considered simultaneously to capture more complex partition structures with inter-dimensional dependence (see example in Figure 1).
An OP is generated by recursively bi-partitioning the leaf
components (polygons) on the product space with oblique
cuts. For each oblique cut, its slope and position are random variables drawn from certain distributions and the OP
can thus have the following properties: 1) The times of the
cutting events along the time line comply with a homogeneous Poisson process and 2) the areas of the leaf components on the unit square comply with a Dirichlet distribution. Due to these two properties, we can easily control the
expected number of cuts and the expected areas of components through hyper-parameters of the OP process.
We adapt the reversible-jump MCMC algorithm (Green
1995) for inferring the partition structure of an OP with three
types of cutting operations. In addition to “cut-adding” and
“cut-removing”, a new type of proposal “cut-translation” is
introduced which can help alleviate inferior local optima and
reduce the inference variance.
We demonstrate the advantages of the OP in two applications. Firstly, we apply the OP as a partition prior for relational modeling. The visualization of the partition results
and the link prediction performance have validated the merit
of oblique cuts in the OP. Secondly, we use the OP partition

Abstract
Stochastic partition processes for exchangeable graphs produce axis-aligned blocks on a product space. In relational
modeling, the resulting blocks uncover the underlying interactions between two sets of entities of the relational data. Although some ﬂexible axis-aligned partition processes, such
as the Mondrian process, have been able to capture complex interacting patterns in a hierarchical fashion, they are
still in short of capturing dependence between dimensions.
To overcome this limitation, we propose the Ostomachion
process (OP), which relaxes the cutting direction by allowing
for oblique cuts. The partitions generated by an OP are convex polygons that can capture inter-dimensional dependence.
The OP also exhibits interesting properties: 1) Along the time
line the cutting times can be characterized by a homogeneous
Poisson process, and 2) on the partition space the areas of
the resulting components comply with a Dirichlet distribution. We can thus control the expected number of cuts and
the expected areas of components through hyper-parameters.
We adapt the reversible-jump MCMC algorithm for inferring
OP partition structures. The experimental results on relational
modeling and decision tree classiﬁcation have validated the
merit of the OP.

Introduction
Stochastic partition processes for exchangeable graphs have
found broad applications ranging from relational modelling (Kemp et al. 2006; Airoldi et al. 2009), community
detection (Nowicki and Snijders 2001; Karrer and Newman
2011), collaborative ﬁltering (Porteous, Bart, and Welling
2008), to random forests (Lakshminarayanan, Roy, and Teh
2014). Most work on the stochastic partition process only
considers axis-aligned cuts and the resulting partitions form
regular grids (rectangular blocks). In relational modeling,
these blocks are able to capture the underlying interactions
between two sets of entities of the relational data. The recent
advances in irregular grid partitions have introduced more
ﬂexibility, such as the Mondrian process (Roy and Teh 2009)
and the rectangular tiling process (Nakano et al. 2014b).
Despite the success of these stochastic partition processes
in uncovering complex interacting patterns, they are still in
short of capturing the dependence between dimensions due
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1547

