Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Sequence–Form and Evolutionary Dynamics:
Realization Equivalence to Agent Form and Logit Dynamics
Nicola Gatti and Marcello Restelli
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
I-20133, Milan, Italy
{nicola.gatti, marcello.restelli}@polimi.it
are known for extensive–form games and no coherent treatment is available so far (Cressman 2003). The most of the
works focus on the application of the replicator dynamic
(one of the most famous dynamic equations) to the normal
form of extensive–form games. However, the normal form is
exponentially large in the size of the game tree, making its
application affordable only to toy instances. Very few works
study the application of the replicator dynamic to the agent
form of extensive–form games (Cressman, Gaunersdorfer,
and Wen 2000; Cressman 2000), showing that in games
with nature the agent–form dynamics may be not realization equivalent to the normal–form ones (i.e., the probability distributions over the terminal nodes may be different).
The agent form is more compact than the normal form, but it
is exponentially large in the size of the game tree. Recently,
Gatti, Panozzo, Restelli (2013) resorted to the sequence form
to design polynomially (in the game tree size) concise dynamics. However, the constraints over the sequence–form
strategies (different from those of agent and normal forms)
obstacle the design of evolutionary dynamics directly in
the sequence form. Nevertheless, the sequence form may
be an effective tool to provide, without loss of information, an exponentially concise representation of dynamics
deﬁned in the normal form, as shown in (Gatti, Panozzo,
and Restelli 2013), where the authors provide a dynamic
deﬁned on the sequence form that is realization equivalent
to the normal–form replicator dynamic and that requires
polynomial time and space in the game tree size. Interestingly, this result paved the way to the design of novel multi–
agent learning algorithms working directly on the sequence
form and whose dynamics can be modeled as variation of
the replicator dynamic (Panozzo, Gatti, and Restelli 2014;
Lanctot 2014).

Abstract
Evolutionary game theory provides the principal tools
to model the dynamics of multi–agent learning algorithms. While there is a long–standing literature on evolutionary game theory in strategic–form games, in the
case of extensive–form games few results are known
and the exponential size of the representations currently
adopted makes the evolutionary analysis of such games
unaffordable. In this paper, we focus on dynamics for
the sequence form of extensive–form games, providing three dynamics: one realization equivalent to the
normal–form logit dynamic, one realization equivalent
to the agent–form replicator dynamic, and one realization equivalent to the agent–form logit dynamic. All
the considered dynamics require polynomial time and
space, providing an exponential compression w.r.t. the
dynamics currently known and providing thus tools that
can be effectively employed in practice. Moreover, we
use our tools to compare the agent–form and normal–
form dynamics and to provide new “hybrid” dynamics.

Introduction
Evolutionary game theory provides the most elegant tools
to model the dynamics of players’ strategies in strategic–
interaction situations (Cressman 2003). Differently from
classical game theory, it drops the assumption of rationality
and assumes players to be adaptive. Nevertheless, the steady
states of evolutionary dynamics constitute a subset of solutions of (non–evolutionary) game theory, e.g., in the inner of
the strategy space only Nash equilibria can be steady states.
Evolutionary game theory plays a prominent role in artiﬁcial intelligence, especially in multi–agent learning (Tuyls
and Parsons 2007), where it is shown that the dynamics
of any multi–agent learning algorithm can be modeled by
means of evolutionary equations, providing thus a formal
tool to study the expected dynamics of the algorithms and
to design novel algorithms starting from known evolutionary dynamics (Tuyls, Hoen, and Vanschoenwinkel 2006;
Panait, Tuyls, and Luke 2008)—see also the recent comprehensive survey (Bloembergen et al. 2015).
While there is a long–standing literature on evolutionary
game theory for strategic–form games, only sporadic results

Original contributions In this paper, we extend the state
of the art on evolutionary dynamics deﬁned on the sequence form. Speciﬁcally, we provide a sequence–form logit
dynamic that is realization–equivalent to the normal–form
logit dynamic (Blume 1993; Ferraioli 2013) and that requires polynomial time and space—the logit dynamic is
strictly related to Quantal Response Equilibrium (Mckelvey and Palfrey 1998), that is widely used in literature
to model bounded–rational players (Yang, Ordóñez, and
Tambe 2012). Furthermore, we show that the agent–form

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

509

