Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Face Video Retrieval via Deep Learning of Binary Hash Representations
Zhen Dong1 and Su Jia2 and Tianfu Wu3,4 and Mingtao Pei1∗
1. Beijing Laboratory of IIT, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2. Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, USA
3. Institute of Sensing Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4. Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA

Abstract
Retrieving faces from large mess of videos is an attractive
research topic with wide range of applications. Its challenging problems are large intra-class variations, and tremendous time and space complexity. In this paper, we develop a new deep convolutional neural network (deep CNN)
to learn discriminative and compact binary representations
of faces for face video retrieval. The network integrates feature extraction and hash learning into a uniﬁed optimization
framework for the optimal compatibility of feature extractor and hash functions. In order to better initialize the network, the low-rank discriminative binary hashing is proposed
to pre-learn hash functions during the training procedure. Our
method achieves excellent performances on two challenging
TV-Series datasets.

Faces
… …

… …
… …

Given a face video of a person, face video retrieval aims to
search videos containing the person from the video database.
Face video retrieval is an attractive research area with wide
range of applications, such as locating and tracking a criminal suspect from surveillance videos, retrieving masses of
long videos to annotate face data for vision researchers,
collecting all videos of a person from videos captured by
his/her family digit camera, and the intelligent fast-forward
of movies.
The challenging problems of face video retrieval are large
intra-class variations of faces, and the strong demands of
time and space saving. The faces in Figure 1 show the dramatic intra-class variations caused by poses, lighting conditions, expressions, clothes, background interferences, and
the orientation of the actor in TV-Series, which indicates
that good representations of faces should be robust to these
variations and discriminative between classes. Moreover, the
representations have to be compact for fast retrieval and
space saving. Existing video based face recognition methods (Huang et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2013) represent face
videos by features with thousands of ﬂoating point numbers
or more, resulting in tremendous time and space complexity and being unapplicable to the face video retrieval task.
To solve these problems, we propose to learn discriminative

Hashing

… …
… …

DeepCNN

Ͳ1 ࢞ࢊ

࢞૚ 1 1 1 1
࢞૛ Ͳ1 Ͳ1 Ͳ1 Ͳ1
… …

… …

FeatureExtraction

… …
… …

…

Introduction

1 ࢞૚
1 ࢞૛

࢞ࢊ 1 1 1 1
1

2

… n

BinaryHash
Representations

Figure 1: The hash learning is integrated into the deep CNN
to obtain discriminative and compact representations for
face video retrieval. An actor (Leonard Hofstadter) in TVSeries (the BigBang Theory) has dramatic intra-class variations mainly caused by pose, lighting, expression, clothes,
background interferences, and the orientation of the actor.
The deep CNN is able to generate similar representations
for faces with large intra-variations.

and compact representations of faces by deep convolutional
neural network (deep CNN) for face retrieval in videos.
Recently, deep CNN has been successfully applied on
many vision tasks, such as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and image segmentation
(Sharma, Tuzel, and Jacobs 2015), which shows the powerful ability of deep CNN for describing complex non-linear
mappings and learning rich mid-level representations. The
CNN features learned from data are discriminative, but still
high dimensional for the retrieval task. In retrieval tasks,
the hashing-based methods which project high dimensional
features to a low dimensional space are often used (Liu et
al. 2012; Li et al. 2015b), but feature extraction and hash
function learning in these methods are independent, in other
words, the extracted features may not be compatible with
the hash coding process. Therefore, we fuse the hash learn-

∗

corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3471

