Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Human-Robot Trust and Cooperation Through a Game Theoretic Framework
Erin Paeng, Jane Wu, and James C. Boerkoel Jr.
Human Experience & Agent Teamwork Laboratory (http://cs.hmc.edu/HEAT/)
Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA
{epaeng, jhwu, boerkoel}@g.hmc.edu

Introduction
Trust and cooperation are fundamental to human interactions. How much we trust other people directly inﬂuences
the decisions we make and our willingness to cooperate. It
thus seems natural that trust be equally important in successful human-robot interaction (HRI), since how much a
human trusts a robot affects how they might interact with it.
As a result, considerable research has been done to explore
factors that inﬂuence trust in HRI, particularly using game
theory (Lee and Hwang 2008; Mathur and Reichling 2009).
Unfortunately, these approaches lack a comparative analysis
of trust and cooperation as distinct qualities.
We propose using a coin entrustment game (explained
later), a variant of prisoner’s dilemma, to measure trust and
cooperation as separate phenomenon between human and
robot agents. With this game, we test the following hypotheses: (1) Humans will achieve and maintain higher levels of trust when interacting with what they believe to be a
robot than with another human; and (2) humans will cooperate more readily with robots and will maintain a higher
level of cooperation. This work contributes an experimental
paradigm that uses the coin entrustment game as a way to
test our hypotheses. Our empirical analysis shows that humans tend to trust robots to a greater degree than other humans, while cooperating equally well in both.

Player A

C
D

Player B
C
D
2x, 2y
−x, 2y + x
2x + y, −y y − x, x − y

Table 1: Coin Entrustment Payoff Matrix.
by the number of coins entrusted, and the level of cooperation by keeping or returning the opponent’s coins.

Experimental Design
Our experiment was run on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(AMT), a crowd-sourcing site, with a total of 229 players.
Participants navigated through three sections: a consent page
with game instructions, 16 rounds of the CE game (the number of rounds is unknown to the player), and a post-game
survey. While all participants played against the same strategy algorithm, we told half that their opponent was a robot
and the other half that their their opponent was a human. Descriptive characteristics about both agents were left undisclosed, as the experiment’s intent was to explore how people’s perceptions about robots vs. humans inﬂuenced their
trust and cooperation.

Gameplay

Experimental Paradigm

Algorithm 1 describes how we compute the number of coins
to entrust in each round (recall that each player begins each
round with 10 coins). In general, our algorithm tended towards more cooperative behavior and encouraged higher entrustment by readily exhibiting greater trust. Our strategy is
based on a Pavlovian model, where entrustments are based
on the strategy’s payoff in the previous round.
The decision to keep or return coins followed the Tit for
Two Tats (TFTT) strategy used in IPD literature. Our algorithm cooperates on the ﬁrst round, and defects only if
the opponent has defected twice in a row. To explore both
the initial emergence of trust and cooperation and its reemergence after a betrayal of trust, our strategy also defects
on round 8 if it has not already defected in the previous
rounds. Our strategy is entirely deterministic and controls
for variance in strategy, leaving perceived opponent type as
the only manipulated variable.

To measure both cooperation and trust separately, we use
the Coin Entrustment (CE) game, a variant of Iterative Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD) that attempts to separately measure
trust and cooperation (Yamagishi et al. 2005). In each of
an undisclosed number of game rounds, each player begins
with 10 coins and must make two decisions: (1) How many
of their coins to entrust to the other player; and (2) whether
to keep or return the coins that were entrusted to them by the
other player. Coins that are returned double in value. The
payoff matrix for a single round of this game is expressed
in Table 1 and depends on both Player A’s entrustment x,
and player B’s entrustment y. C refers to a player cooperating (returning coins), while D refers to defection (keeping
coins). In CE, the level of trust between players is measured
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4246

