Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Concepts Not Alone: Exploring Pairwise Relationships
for Zero-Shot Video Activity Recognition
Chuang Gan1 , Ming Lin3 , Yi Yang2 , Gerard de Melo1 and Alexander G. Hauptmann4
1

3

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 QCIS, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
DCM&B, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA 4 SCS, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

However, due to the large number of possible search
queries, query-speciﬁc training is not always feasible. Zeroshot learning (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009) addresses this problem by providing an alternative paradigm
that does not require positive training exemplars for every
class of videos. Given a textual query, one aims to retrieve
videos that are most relevant to it, exploiting visual attributes
of the videos.
While several algorithms (Jiang et al. 2015a; Wu et al.
2014; Dalton, Allan, and Mirajkar 2013; Habibian, Mensink,
and Snoek 2014; Liu et al. 2013; Singh et al. 2015) have recently been proposed for such zero-shot video activity recognition, state-of-the-art systems still suffer from brittleness
and low precision.
Contributions. In this paper, we show how to make zeroshot learning more robust. Similar to previous work, our
system consists of two main components. The ﬁrst of these
aims at a semantic query interpretation, in which the system
selects concepts pertaining to the query description from
a large pool of potential candidate concepts. The second
component produces an aggregation of the individual conceptspeciﬁc video ranking lists. We propose important strategies
for making both more robust:

Abstract
Vast quantities of videos are now being captured at astonishing rates, but the majority of these are not labelled. To cope
with such data, we consider the task of content-based activity
recognition in videos without any manually labelled examples,
also known as zero-shot video recognition. To achieve this,
videos are represented in terms of detected visual concepts,
which are then scored as relevant or irrelevant according to
their similarity with a given textual query. In this paper, we
propose a more robust approach for scoring concepts in order
to alleviate many of the brittleness and low precision problems
of previous work. Not only do we jointly consider semantic
relatedness, visual reliability, and discriminative power. To
handle noise and non-linearities in the ranking scores of the
selected concepts, we propose a novel pairwise order matrix
approach for score aggregation. Extensive experiments on the
large-scale TRECVID Multimedia Event Detection data show
the superiority of our approach.

1

Introduction

Motivation. The increasing ubiquity of devices capable of
capturing videos has led to an explosion in the amount of
recorded video content. Smartphones, action cameras, as well
as surveillance cameras mean that ever-increasing amounts
of our daily activities are captured on videos. Due to the
torrential volume of this data, the vast majority of videos are
never labeled. Moreover, even for those that are shared online,
the human-supplied metadata is often vague or unspeciﬁc
(e.g. “Albufeira, Summer 2015”). Unfortunately, video search
engines such as Youtube, Yahoo, and Bing, crucially depend
on textual keyword matching. Their approach works well for
popular videos but fails hopelessly for long-tail content or
personal video collections with insufﬁcient metadata.
Fortunately, encouraging progress has been made on
content-based video analysis in recent years. Standard approaches rely on low-level audio/visual input features that
are fed into machine learning algorithms such as support vector machines (SVMs) (Chang and Lin 2011) or
deep convolutional neural networks (Karpathy et al. 2014;
Gan et al. 2015b). These achieve promising results when
there are sufﬁcient numbers of labeled training examples for
every search query of interest.

• We propose a simple yet effective concept selection approach in representing queries. Unlike previous work, concept reliability and discriminative power are considered
as critical indicators in order to ensure robust zero-shot
activity recognition.
• We devise a novel robust video ranking approach that relies
on the recovery of a low-rank order matrix from multiple
pairwise order matrices for different concept ranking lists.
• Experimental results on challenging unconstrained video
data conﬁrm that the proposed system outperforms the
state-of-the-art zero-shot approaches.

2

Related Work

Video analysis has attracted a lot of research interest in the
past decade. A recent review can be found in (Jiang et al.
2013). Standard video activity recognition systems, despite
their reasonable recognition performance, rely on custom
low-level representations, such as improved dense trajectories (Wang and Schmid 2013), and Mel-FrequencyCepstral
Coefﬁcients (MFCC) (Rabiner and Schafer 2007). These

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3487

