Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Inferring a Personalized Next Point-of-Interest
Recommendation Model with Latent Behavior Patterns
1

Jing He1 , Xin Li1 , Lejian Liao1 , Dandan Song1 , William K.Cheung2
BJ ER Center of HVLIP&CC, School of Comp. Sci., Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University , Hong Kong, China
{skyhejing, xinli, liaolj, sdd}@bit.edu.cn, william@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

venue they visited in physical world are in fact rare. Next
POI recommendation is a even harder task which is to be
accurate on predicting user’s very next move among tens of
thousands of location candidates, as the successive checkin interactions are more sparse. In the literature, there exist only few works investigating next POI recommendation.
C. Cheng et al. propose to introduce the distance restriction
to a tensor-based pairwise ranking model to solve the next
POI recommendation problem(Cheng et al. 2013). The intuition behind is that the checked-in POIs are usually geographically dense(Liu et al. 2013). However, the periodicity
of mobility and the user preference varying with the change
of contextual scenario e.g., the type of POIs, checked-in time
stamps have not yet been deeply exploited.
Human mobility has been well known for its periodic
property (Eagle and Pentland 2009; Li et al. 2010; Cho,
Myers, and Leskovec 2011). For next POI recommendation,
we focus more on the transition periodicity of location categories. For example, people may regularly stop by coffee
stalls, starbucks stores, to grab a cup of coffee on their way
to work in the morning, which can be explained as a periodic
transition pattern from coffee shop to workplace on weekday
morning. The next POI is highly likely related to the previous POI. For example, after taking part in intense outdoor
activities, e.g., hiking, running, some user may prefer to have
high-protein meals in restaurants like Steakhouse rather than
Juicy Bar. Fig.1(a) and Fig.1(b) plot the check-in probabilities of the top-4 most popular location categories over time
of day(hours) and day of week respectively, based on the
check-in data of LA, collected from Foursquare. The categorical mobility periodicity is very obvious, e.g., the outdoor
places are often checked on weekends. Another interesting
observation is that the check-ins of nightspots occur most often on Friday and least often on Sunday. Fig.2 plots the transition probabilities between categories along with the day
of week. We observe that the transition preference shown in
Fig.2(a) is signiﬁcantly different from that of Fig.2(e) but
somehow similar to that of Fig.2(b), which indicates that
there exist several latent transition patterns and such patterns
may play a key role for our next POI recommendation.
In this paper, we attempt to jointly model next POI recommendation under the inﬂuence of user’s latent behavior
pattern. We propose to adopt a third-rank tensor to model
the successive check-in behaviors. By incorporating the soft-

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of personalized
next Point-of-interest (POI) recommendation which has
become an important and very challenging task in
location-based social networks (LBSNs), but not well
studied yet. With the conjecture that, under different
contextual scenario, human exhibits distinct mobility
patterns, we attempt here to jointly model the next POI
recommendation under the inﬂuence of user’s latent behavior pattern. We propose to adopt a third-rank tensor to model the successive check-in behaviors. By incorporating softmax function to fuse the personalized
Markov chain with latent pattern, we furnish a Bayesian
Personalized Ranking (BPR) approach and derive the
optimization criterion accordingly. Expectation Maximization (EM) is then used to estimate the model parameters. Extensive experiments on two large-scale LBSNs datasets demonstrate the signiﬁcant improvements
of our model over several state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
In recent years, there have been an increased emphasis
on developing the location-based social networks(LBSNs),
such as Foursquare, Gowalla, Facebook Place, and GeoLife,
etc., where users can check-in at venues and share their
experiences towards point-of-interest(POIs) in the physical
world using mobile devices. This so called check-in behavior has become a new culture of a modern life and could
be used to study life patterns of millions of LBSN users.
POI recommendation is one of the most important tasks in
LBSN, which is to provide recommendations of places to
users, and has attracted much attention as it not only improves user viscosity to LBSN service provider but also beneﬁts for advertising agency to provide an effective way of
launching advertisement to target the potential clients.
POI recommendation has become a popular research issue and attracted much effort(Gao et al. 2015; Yuan et al.
2014). Yet achieving accurate personalized POI recommendation is challenging as the data available for each user is
highly sparse. The sparsity is due to the fact that check-in interactions are conducted by the users on the voluntary basis.
“Diligent” users who keep checking-in on LBSN for every
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

137

