Implicit Coordination in Crowded Multi-Agent Navigation
Julio Godoy and Ioannis Karamouzas and Stephen J. Guy and Maria Gini
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota
200 Union St SE, Minneapolis MN 55455
{godoy, ioannis, sjguy, gini}@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
In crowded multi-agent navigation environments, the
motion of the agents is signiﬁcantly constrained by the
motion of the nearby agents. This makes planning paths
very difﬁcult and leads to inefﬁcient global motion. To
address this problem, we propose a new distributed approach to coordinate the motions of agents in crowded
environments. With our approach, agents take into account the velocities and goals of their neighbors and optimize their motion accordingly and in real-time. We experimentally validate our coordination approach in a variety of scenarios and show that its performance scales
to scenarios with hundreds of agents.

(a) ORCA

(b) C-Nav

Figure 1: Two groups of 9 agents each move to the opposite
side of a narrow corridor. (a) ORCA agents get stuck in the
middle. (b) Using our C-Nav approach, agents create lanes
in a decentralized manner.

Introduction
Decentralized navigation of multiple agents in crowded environments has application in many domains such as swarm
robotics, trafﬁc engineering and crowd simulation. This
problem is challenging due to the conﬂicting constraints induced by the other moving agents; as agents plan paths in
a decentralized manner, they often need to recompute their
paths in real-time to avoid colliding with the other agents
and static obstacles. The problem becomes even harder
when the agents need to reach their destinations in a timely
manner while still guaranteeing a collision-free motion.
A variety of approaches have been proposed to address
this problem. Recently, velocity-based approaches have
gained popularity due to their robustness and their ability
to provide collision-free guarantees about the agents’ motions. Such approaches allow each agent to directly choose
a new collision-free velocity at each cycle of a continuous
sensing-acting loop. However, in crowded environments, velocities that are locally optimal for one agent are not necessarily optimal for the entire group of agents. This can result
in globally inefﬁcient and unrealistic behavior, long travel
times and in worst case, deadlocks.
Ideally, to reach globally efﬁcient motions, a centralized
entity needs to compute the best velocity for each agent.
In a decentralized domain, where agents have only partial
observation of the environment, such entity is not present.
Agents can only use their limited knowledge of the environment to compute their local motions. In this paper, we

hypothesize that if an agent could account for the intended
motion of its nearby agents, then it could choose a velocity
in a way that beneﬁts not only itself but also its neighboring agents. Consider, for example, the two groups of agents
in Figure 1a. Here, two groups of agents try to move past
each other in a narrow hallway. The agents navigate using
a predictive collision-avoidance technique, but still end up
getting stuck in congestion. To address this, we seek to develop a navigation method that encourages coordination to
emerge through agents’ interactions. We accomplish this, by
allowing agents to account for their neighbors’ intended velocities during their planning. Figure 1b shows an example
of such coordinated motion.
Following this idea, we propose C-Nav (short for Coordinated Navigation), a distributed approach to improve
the global motion of a set of agents in crowded environments by implicitly coordinating their local motions. This
coordination is achieved using observations of the nearby
agents’ motion patterns and a limited one-way communication, allowing C-Nav to scale to hundreds of agents. With
our approach, agents choose velocities that help their nearby
agents to move to their goals, effectively improving the timeefﬁciency of the entire crowd.
This work makes three main contributions. First, we propose a framework for multi-agent coordination that leads to
time-efﬁcient motions. Second, we show that accounting for
nearby agents when selecting an optimal velocity promotes
implicit coordination between agents. Third, we experimentally validate our approach via simulations and show that it

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2487

