Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Semi-Supervised Learning Approach to Why-Question Answering
Jong-Hoon Oh∗

Kentaro Torisawa† Chikara Hashimoto‡
Masahiro Tanaka¶ Julien Kloetzer

Ryu Iida§

National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
{∗ rovellia,† torisawa,‡ ch,§ ryu.iida,¶ mtnk, julien}@nict.go.jp

A1

Abstract
We propose a semi-supervised learning method for improving why-question answering (why-QA). The key of
our method is to generate training data (question-answer
pairs) from causal relations in texts such as “[Tsunamis are
generated]ef f ect because [the ocean’s water mass is displaced by an earthquake]cause .” A naive method for the generation would be to make a question-answer pair by simply converting the effect part of the causal relations into a
why-question, like “Why are tsunamis generated?” from the
above example, and using the source text of the causal relations as an answer. However, in our preliminary experiments,
this naive method actually failed to improve the why-QA performance. The main reason was that the machine-generated
questions were often incomprehensible like “Why does (it)
happen?”, and that the system suffered from overﬁtting to the
results of our automatic causality recognizer. Hence, we developed a novel method that effectively ﬁlters out incomprehensible questions and retrieves from texts answers that are
likely to be paraphrases of a given causal relation. Through
a series of experiments, we showed that our approach significantly improved the precision of the top answer by 8% over
the current state-of-the-art system for Japanese why-QA.

1

A2

..... Sudden vertical displacements of the seaﬂoor
by earthquakes, disturb the ocean’s surface, displace water, and generate destructive tsunami
waves. This is basically how a tsunami is generated. .....
..... It is crucial to provide immediate warnings after a potential tsunami generation because
tsunamis are often unpredictable. .....

Table 1: Answer passages to “Why are tsunamis generated?”
The vocabulary overlap between answer passages and the
expected answer from the CRcause is represented in bold.
of our proposed method is its use of causal relations in texts
for generating training data (question-answer pairs). For this
purpose, we use the causality recognition method of our previous work (Oh et al. 2013), which uses some pre-deﬁned
cue words such as “because.” The CR shown below is an
example of the recognized causal relations, where its cause
and effect parts are marked with [..]cause and [..]ef f ect . Although our target language is Japanese, for ease of explanation, we use English examples in this paper.
CR: [Tsunamis are generated]ef f ect because [the ocean’s
water mass is displaced by an earthquake.]cause

Introduction

Why-question answering (why-QA) aims to retrieve answers
to such why-questions as “Why are tsunamis generated?”
from a given text archive (Girju 2003; Higashinaka and
Isozaki 2008; Verberne et al. 2008; 2010; 2011; Oh et al.
2012; 2013). Recent works (Verberne et al. 2010; 2011;
Oh et al. 2012; 2013) have taken a machine-learning approach with a supervised classiﬁer for answer ranking and
successfully improved the why-QA performance. For the
given pairs of a question and an answer candidate passage,
the classiﬁer arranges them into correct pairs and incorrect
pairs, or gives a score indicating the likelihood that the pair
is correct, which is used for ranking the answer candidates.
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised learning
method that exploits automatically generated training data
for improving the supervised classiﬁer for answer ranking
in our baseline why-QA system, which is actually an implementation of our previous work (Oh et al. 2013). The key

Note that the cause part (CRcause ) can be regarded as an expected answer to question “Why are tsunamis generated?,”
which can be automatically generated from the effect part
(CRef f ect ). One might think that such a question-answer
pair derived from the source texts of those causal relations can be used directly as a training instance for whyQA. However, in our preliminary experiments, this naive
method failed to improve our baseline why-QA system. The
main reason was that it suffered from overﬁtting to the results of our automatic causality recognizer, which can only
recognize a limited variation of causal relations expressed
by a limited set of cue words such as “because” and that
the machine-generated questions were often incomprehensible: “Why does (it) happen?” Hence we developed a novel
method that retrieves answers to a question from web texts
to avoid the overﬁtting problem and that effectively ﬁlters
out incomprehensible questions.
First, we explain our solution to the overﬁtting problem.
We use our baseline why-QA system for retrieving answers

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3022

