Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Learning and Using Hand Abstraction Values
for Parameterized Poker Squares
Todd W. Neller and Colin M. Messinger and Zuozhi Yang
Gettysburg College
tneller@gettysburg.edu

ﬁve rows of ﬁve cards each. The object is to make as
high a total score as possible, in the ten Poker hands
formed by the ﬁve rows and ﬁve columns. Two methods of scoring are prevalent, as follows:
HAND
ENGLISH AMERICAN
Royal ﬂush
30
100
Straight ﬂush
30
75
Four of a kind
16
50
Full house
10
25
Flush
5
20
Straight
12
15
Three of a kind
6
10
Two pairs
3
5
One pair
1
2
The American system is based on the relative likelihood of the hands in regular Poker. The English system
is based on the relative difﬁculty of forming the hands
in Poker Solitaire.
You may consider that you have “won the game” if
you total 200 (American) or 70 (English).
For our purposes, players seek to commit randomly drawn
cards sequentially to 5-by-5 grid positions so as to maximize
the expected total score, i.e. the sum of the ten row and column hand scores according to the given point system. Note
that the single remaining Poker hand classiﬁcation of “high
card” scores no points in the above point systems.

Abstract
We describe the experimental development of an AI
player that adapts to different point systems for Parameterized Poker Squares. After introducing the game
and research competition challenge, we describe our
static board evaluation utilizing learned evaluations of
abstract partial Poker hands. Next, we evaluate various
time management strategies and search algorithms. Finally, we show experimentally which of our design decisions most signiﬁcantly accounted for observed performance.

Introduction
The inaugural EAAI NSG Challenge1 was to create AI to
play a parameterized form of the game Poker Squares. Our
best approach ﬁrst applies Monte Carlo -greedy reinforcement learning to the task of learning a static (i.e. heuristic)
evaluation function that estimates the expected ﬁnal score
for an abstraction of the game state. It then plays the game
with expectimax search using this static evaluation at a shallow depth cutoff.
In this section, we describe the game of Poker Squares
and the parameterization of the game. In the next section,
we focus on different approaches to the static evaluation of
nonterminal game states and experimental results comparing simple greedy play with such approaches. We then turn
our attention to time management, i.e. the apportionment of
search time during real-time play. Finally, we compare different search techniques, gaining insight to which work best
for this problem domain.

Parameterized Poker Squares
As David Parlett observed, “British scoring is based on the
relative difﬁculty of forming the various combinations in
this particular game, American on their relative ranking in
the game of Poker.” (Parlett 2008, pp. 552–553) We observe
that different point systems give rise to different placement
strategies.
For example, in playing with British or American scoring, one often has a row and column where one dumps unwanted cards so as to form higher scoring combinations in
the other rows and columns. However, a large negative score
(i.e. penalty) for the “high card” category would discourage
leaving any such row or column without a high probability
of alternative scoring.
In our parameterization of Poker Squares, we parameterize the score of each of the 10 hand categories as being an
integer in the range [−128, 127]. Given a vector of 10 integers corresponding to the hand classiﬁcation points ordered

Poker Squares
Poker Squares (BoardGameGeek.com 2015; Neller 2013a)
(a.k.a. Poker Solitaire, Poker Square, Poker Patience) is a
folk sequential placement optimization game (Neller 2013b)
appearing in print as early as 1949, but likely having much
earlier origins. Using a shufﬂed 52-card French deck, the
rules of our oldest known reference (Morehead and MottSmith 1949, p. 106) read as follows:
Turn up twenty-ﬁve cards from the stock, one by
one, and place each to best advantage in a tableau of
c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Whereas DARPA has its Grand Challenges, ours are Not-SoGrand.

4095

