Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unsupervised Lexical Simpliﬁcation for Non-Native Speakers
Gustavo H. Paetzold and Lucia Specia
University of Shefﬁeld
Western Bank, South Yorkshire S10 2TN
Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom

Abstract
Lexical Simpliﬁcation is the task of replacing complex words with simpler alternatives. We propose a
novel, unsupervised approach for the task. It relies on
two resources: a corpus of subtitles and a new type of
word embeddings model that accounts for the ambiguity of words. We compare the performance of our approach and many others over a new evaluation dataset,
which accounts for the simpliﬁcation needs of 400 nonnative English speakers. The experiments show that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art work in Lexical
Simpliﬁcation.

1

Figure 1: Lexical Simpliﬁcation Pipeline
has considerably increased in recent years. The approach of
(Horn, Manduca, and Kauchak 2014) offers an improvement
of 62.9% in accuracy over the earlier work of (Biran, Brody,
and Elhadad 2011). However, most recent work is limited to
exploiting linguistic resources that are scarce and/or expensive to produce, such as WordNets and Simple Wikipedia.
In this paper, we describe an LS approach that focuses on
the simpliﬁcation needs of non-native English speakers. We
propose an unsupervised strategy for Substitution Generation, Selection and Ranking. Instead of relying on complex
and expensive resources, our approach uses a new contextaware model for word embeddings, which can be easily
trained over large corpora, as well as n-gram frequencies extracted from a corpus of movie subtitles. We also introduce a
new domain-speciﬁc dataset for the task, which accounts for
the simpliﬁcation needs of non-native English speakers. We
evaluate the performance of our approaches for each step of
the pipeline both individually and jointly, comparing them
to several other approaches in the literature.

Introduction

Vocabulary acquisition is a process inherent to human language learning that determines the rate at which an individual becomes familiarised with the lexicon of a given language. Word recognition, however, is described as a series
of linguistic sub-processes that establishes one’s capability of identifying and comprehending individual words in
a text. It has been shown that individuals with low-literacy
levels or who suffer from certain clinical conditions, such
as Dyslexia (Ellis 2014), Aphasia (Devlin and Tait 1998)
and some forms of Autism (Barbu et al. 2015), can face impairments in either or both processes, often hindering them
incapable of recognising and/or understanding the meaning
of texts. Impairments that cause the narrowing of one’s vocabulary can be severely crippling: the results obtained by
(Hirsh, Nation, and others 1992) show that one must be familiar with at least 95% of the vocabulary of a text in order
to understand it, and 98% to read it for leisure.
Lexical Simpliﬁcation (LS) aims to address this problem
by replacing words that may challenge a certain target audience with simpler alternatives. It was ﬁrst introduced in
the work of (Devlin and Tait 1998), who inspired further research. The biggest challenge in LS is performing replacements without compromising the grammaticality or changing the meaning of the sentence being simpliﬁed.
Most strategies in the literature take LS as the series of
cognitive processes illustrated by the pipeline in Figure 1.
By following this model, the performance of LS systems

2

Complex Word Identiﬁcation

Complex Word Identiﬁcation (CWI) is the task of determining which words in a text should be simpliﬁed, given
the needs of a certain target audience. It is commonly performed before any simpliﬁcation occurs, and aims to prevent an LS system from making unnecessary substitutions.
Most existing work, however, do not provide an explicit solution to CWI, and instead model it implicitly (Biran, Brody,
and Elhadad 2011; Horn, Manduca, and Kauchak 2014;
Glavaš and Štajner 2015). In order to address CWI and still
be able to compare our LS approach to others, we have cho-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3761

