Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Pose-Guided Human Parsing by an
AND/OR Graph Using Pose-Context Features
Fangting Xia and Jun Zhu and Peng Wang∗ and Alan L. Yuille
Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California 90095

Abstract

Part Proposal Generation

Parsing human into semantic parts is crucial to human-centric
analysis. In this paper, we propose a human parsing pipeline
that uses pose cues, i.e., estimates of human joint locations,
to provide pose-guided segment proposals for semantic parts.
These segment proposals are ranked using standard appearance cues, deep-learned semantic feature, and a novel pose
feature called pose-context. Then these proposals are selected
and assembled using an And-Or graph to output a parse of the
person. The And-Or graph is able to deal with large human
appearance variability due to pose, choice of clothes, etc. We
evaluate our approach on the popular Penn-Fudan pedestrian
parsing dataset, showing that it signiﬁcantly outperforms the
state-of-the-arts, and perform diagnostics to demonstrate the
eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent stages of our pipeline.

- pose cues
(a)

Part Assembling

Part Ranking & Selection

- pose cues
- deep cues

+ pose cues
- deep cues
(c)

+ pose cues
(b)

+ pose cues
+ deep cues

- pose cues
- deep cues

+ pose cues
- deep cues

+ pose cues
+ deep cues

(d)

Introduction
Figure 1: Human parsing using pose (pose-guided-proposals
and pose-context features) and deep-learned part semantic
cues. (a) Left: original image with estimated pose joints.
Right: the inferred part label map by deep semantic cues.
(b) Pose-guided part proposal generation. Left: without pose
information. Right: with pose information. (c) Top-ranked
part segments after part ranking and selection. Left: without pose-context and deep semantic features. Middle: using
pose-context feature only. Right: using both pose-context
and deep semantic features. (d) Final parsing results. Left:
without pose-context and deep semantic features. Middle:
using pose-context feature only. Right: using both posecontext and deep semantic features.

The goal of human parsing is to partition the human
body into diﬀerent semantic parts such as hair, face, torso,
arms, and legs. This provides rich descriptions for humancentric image analysis which is increasingly important
for many computer vision applications such as contentbased image/video retrieval (Weber et al. 2011), person reidentiﬁcation (Ma et al. 2011; Cheng et al. 2011), video
surveillance (Yang and Yu 2011), action recognition (Wang
et al. 2012; Zhu et al. 2013; Wang, Wang, and Yuille 2013),
and clothes fashion recognition (Yamaguchi et al. 2012).
But human parsing is very challenging in real-life scenarios
due to extreme variability in human appearance and shape
caused by human poses, clothes types, and occlusion/selfocclusion patterns.
The leading approach to human parsing uses a segmentbased graphical model, which ﬁrst generates segment/region
proposals for human parts (Yamaguchi et al. 2012; Yang,
Luo, and Lin 2014) based on low-level appearance cues
(e.g., similarity of color/texture, or grouping edges) and
then selects and integrates these proposed segments using
a graphical model (Bo and Fowlkes 2011; Yang, Luo, and
Lin 2014; Dong et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2015). But the lowlevel cue for part proposal generation and ranking is problematic for complex images. To select proposals, a proposed

solution is to use pose information. But this pose information is only used at the ﬁnal stage (Dong et al. 2014) and
so cannot correct errors made in the original proposal generation. As illustrated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, our approach
uses pose-guided-proposals and pose-context, obtained from
high-level pose analysis, to improve the quality of part proposals (in Fig.1(b)), to provide eﬀective features for ranking
proposals (in Fig.1(c)), and to enable us to select and integrate these proposals using a graphical model (in Fig.1(d)).

∗

equal contribution with Jun Zhu.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The overall strategy of our approach is illustrated in
Fig. 2. Given an input image, we ﬁrst (bottom left) use a

3632

