Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Factorization Ranking Model for
Move Prediction in the Game of Go
Chenjun Xiao and Martin Müller
Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
{chenjun,mmueller}@ualberta.ca

each move is to be played by an expert. A selective search
algorithm can then focus on the most promising moves.
Most state-of-the-art computer Go programs rely heavily on
such knowledge (Browne et al. 2012). Using simple features
such as patterns, popular ofﬂine training algorithms such as
Minorization-Maximization (MM) (Coulom 2007) and Latent Factor Ranking (LFR) (Wistuba and Schmidt-Thieme
2013) produce models that are fast enough to evaluate at every node in a MCTS game tree.
Recently, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN)
have achieved human-level performance and have outperformed traditional techniques for predicting expert moves
(Clark and Storkey 2015; Maddison et al. 2014). However, well-performing networks are very large, with millions of weights (Maddison et al. 2014), and even on specialized hardware their evaluation speed is orders of magnitude slower than traditional techniques. How to best combine DCNN with MCTS is still an open question. Therefore,
it makes sense to continue research on high performance
move prediction algorithms as well.
The current paper proposes and evaluates the Factorization Bradley-Terry model for move prediction. In popular
move prediction algorithms for the game of Go, such as
(Coulom 2007; Wistuba and Schmidt-Thieme 2013), each
move in a game is modeled as a group of features which describe it. Best move selection then becomes a competition
among the groups representing all legal moves in a Go position.
The major innovation of the proposed Factorization
Bradley-Terry (FBT) model is to combine the strengths
of the two leading approaches (Coulom 2007; Wistuba
and Schmidt-Thieme 2013), and consider the interaction
between individuals within the same group as part of a
probability-based framework, which is inspired by the Factorization Machine model (Rendle 2010).
The expert move prediction problem is formulated within
this new model. Similar to (Wistuba and Schmidt-Thieme
2013), a Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm is
used to train a model. Two techniques accelerate the training process: an efﬁcient incremental gradient update, and
a Monte Carlo method for unbiased approximate gradient
computation. The experiments test FBT by varying the size
of data sets as well as the expressiveness of the feature sets.
Results show that FBT outperforms Latent Factor Ranking.

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the move prediction problem in the game of Go by proposing a new ranking
model named Factorization Bradley Terry (FBT) model.
This new model considers the move prediction problem
as group competitions while also taking the interaction
between features into account. A FBT model is able
to provide a probability distribution that expresses a
preference over moves. Therefore it can be easily compiled into an evaluation function and applied in a modern Go program. We propose a Stochastic Gradient Decent (SGD) algorithm to train a FBT model using expert
game records, and provide two methods for fast computation of the gradient in order to speed up the training
process. Experimental results show that our FBT model
outperforms the state-of-the-art move prediction system
of Latent Factor Ranking (LFR).

Introduction
Go is an ancient Chinese board game. Two players, Black
and White, take turns to place a single stone on an empty
intersection on a Go board. Stones cannot be moved once
placed, but are removed if surrounded by opponent stones.
Both players’ objective is to surround a larger total area of
the board with their stones than the opponent by the end of
the game. Even though its rules are very simple, Go is an
very complex and deeply strategic game. Due to the fact that
it’s very difﬁcult to construct a suitable evaluation function
(Müller 2002), Go is one of the last classical board games
that have not been mastered by computer programs.
When playing Go, human experts rely heavily on pattern
recognition. Using their strong intuition, they can recognize
promising moves and important regions of a Go board at
a glance, without simulating many thousands of continuations like modern Go programs. Machine learning techniques can be used to acquire pattern knowledge from human game records. Such move prediction systems can directly serve as Go playing programs, but more importantly,
they can play the role of an evaluation function to guide the
tree search in an algorithm such as Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) (Coulom 2006). A fast move prediction system
can estimate all candidate moves and estimate how likely
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1359

