Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

The Complexity Landscape of Decompositional Parameters for ILP
Robert Ganian and Sebastian Ordyniak
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria

Despite the importance of the problem, an understanding of the inﬂuence of structural restrictions on the complexity of ILP is still in its infancy. This is in stark contrast to another well-known and general paradigm for the
solution of problems in Computer Science, the Satisﬁability
problem (SAT). There, the parameterized complexity framework (Downey and Fellows 2013) has yielded deep results
capturing the tractability and intractability of SAT with respect to a plethora of structural restrictions. In the context of
SAT, one often considers structural restrictions on a graphical representation of the formula (such as the primal graph),
and the aim is to design efﬁcient ﬁxed-parameter algorithms
for SAT, i.e., algorithms running in time O(f (k)nO(1) )
where k is the value of the considered structural parameter for the given SAT instance and n is its input size. It is
known that SAT is ﬁxed-parameter tractable w.r.t. a variety
of structural parameters, such as treewidth (Szeider 2003) or
the directed variants of clique-width (Fischer, Makowsky,
and Ravve 2008) and rank-width (Ganian, Hliněný, and
Obdržálek 2010), but is not ﬁxed-parameter tractable (under
standard assumptions) for others, such as undirected cliquewidth (Ordyniak, Paulusma, and Szeider 2013).

Abstract
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) can be seen as the
archetypical problem for NP-complete optimization problems, and a wide range of problems in artiﬁcial intelligence
are solved in practice via a translation to ILP. Despite its huge
range of applications, only few tractable fragments of ILP
are known, probably the most prominent of which is based
on the notion of total unimodularity. Using entirely different
techniques, we identify new tractable fragments of ILP by
studying structural parameterizations of the constraint matrix
within the framework of parameterized complexity.
In particular, we show that ILP is ﬁxed-parameter tractable
when parameterized by the treedepth of the constraint matrix
and the maximum absolute value of any coefﬁcient occurring
in the ILP instance. Together with matching hardness results
for the more general parameter treewidth, we draw a detailed
complexity landscape of ILP w.r.t. decompositional parameters deﬁned on the constraint matrix.

Introduction
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) is among the most successful and general paradigms for solving computationally
intractable optimization problems in computer science. In
particular, a wide variety of problems in artiﬁcial intelligence are efﬁciently solved in practice via a translation
into an Integer Linear Program, including problems from
areas such as process scheduling (Floudas and Lin 2005),
planning (van den Briel, Vossen, and Kambhampati 2005;
Vossen et al. 1999), vehicle routing (Toth and Vigo 2001),
packing (Lodi, Martello, and Monaci 2002), and network
hub location (Alumur and Kara 2008). In its most general
form ILP can be formalized as follows:

Our contribution In this work, we initiate a similar line
of research for ILP by studying the parameterized complexity of ILP w.r.t. various structural parameterizations. In particular, we consider parameterizations of the primal graph
of the ILP instance, i.e., the undirected graph whose vertex set is the set of variables of the ILP instance and whose
edges represent the occurrence of two variables in a common expression. We obtain a complete picture of the parameterized complexity of ILP w.r.t. well-known decompositional parameters of the primal graph, speciﬁcally treedepth,
treewidth, and cliquewidth; our results are summarized in
Table 1.
Our main algorithmic result (Theorem 5) shows that ILP
is ﬁxed-parameter tractable parameterized by the treedepth
of the primal graph and the maximum absolute value  of
any coefﬁcient occurring in A or b. Together with the classical results for totally unimodular matrices (Papadimitriou
and Steiglitz 1982, Section 13.2.) and ﬁxed number of variables (Lenstra and Jr. 1983), which use entirely different
techniques, our result is one of the surprisingly few tractability results for ILP in its full generality.
We complete our complexity landscape (given in Table 1) with matching lower bounds, provided in terms
of W[1]-hardness and paraNP-hardness results (see the

I NTEGER L INEAR P ROGRAM
Input:
A matrix A ∈ Zm×n and two vectors
b ∈ Zm and c ∈ Zn .
Question: Maximize cx for every x ∈ Zn with
Ax ≤ b.
Closely related to ILP is the ILP- FEASIBILITY problem,
where given A and b as above, the problem is to decide
whether there is an x ∈ Zn such that Ax ≤ b. ILP, ILPFEASIBILITY and various other highly restricted variants are
well-known to be NP-complete (Papadimitriou 1981).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

710

