Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Age of Exposure: A Model of Word Learning
Mihai Dascalu1, Danielle S. McNamara2, Scott Crossley3 and Stefan Trausan-Matu1
1

University Politehnica of Bucharest, 313 Splaiul Indepententei, Bucharest, Romania
2
Arizona State University, PO Box 872111, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
3
Georgia State University, 25 Park Place, Ste 1500, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA
mihai.dascalu@cs.pub.ro, danielle.mcmamara@asu.edu, scrossley@gsu.edu, stefan.trausan@cs.pub.ro

corresponding complexity. This qualitative method would
provide important information, but it is not scalable and
continuous updates may be required. In addition, the approach is not adaptable to different educational/domain
contexts that can vary greatly. Therefore, automatic quantitative formulas of lexical complexity such as the Lexile
reader measure (Stenner, 1996), the Flesch–Kincaid index
(Kincaid, Fishburne, Rogers, & Chissom, 1975) or the
Coleman-Liau index (Coleman & Liau, 1975) have become viable alternatives. These formulas provide automated estimates of text difficulty level based on the difficulty
of the words and the sentences. Although these empirical
and heuristic metrics do not provide perfect outputs, they
work well in general and are widely adopted (about half of
U.S. students from 3rd to 12th grade levels receive a Lexile
measure each year; (Nelson, Perfetti, Liben, & Liben,
2012). However, a major problem with these metrics is that
more in-depth discourse structures are not considered. For
instance, Lexile measures are based on word frequencies
and sentence length, whereas the Flesch-Kincaid index is
built on average syllables per word. More modern research
has indicated that lexical complexity is more complicated
than these simple approaches and thus new approaches are
necessary (Crossley, Greenfield, & McNamara, 2008). For
instance, a word can have multiple meanings that are acquired gradually by students and allowing appropriate associations between concepts to be created over time. In
order to model such a timeline, Landauer, Kireyev, and
Panaccione (2011) adopted an approach for examining the
evolution of a word’s meaning through a large corpus
analysis. They termed this approach “word maturity.”
The aim of the research presented in this paper is to
build on the word maturity metric proposed by Landauer et
al. (2011) and create a model of lexical complexity that
simulates the learning process as a function of experience
with language. Therefore, in this study we present a model
of lexical complexity that evaluates the learning curve of a
word, the word's complexity, and the relations of its underlying meaning and associations to other concepts. Our new
metric, named Age of Exposure (AoE), describes a word's

Abstract
Textual complexity is widely used to assess the difficulty of
reading materials and writing quality in student essays. At a
lexical level, word complexity can represent a building
block for creating a comprehensive model of lexical networks that adequately estimates learners’ understanding. In
order to best capture how lexical associations are created
between related concepts, we propose automated indices of
word complexity based on Age of Exposure (AoE). AOE
indices computationally model the lexical learning process
as a function of a learner's experience with language. This
study describes a proof of concept based on the on a largescale learning corpus (i.e., TASA). The results indicate that
AoE indices yield strong associations with human ratings of
age of acquisition, word frequency, entropy, and human lexical response latencies providing evidence of convergent validity.

Introduction
Measuring and quantifying the complexity of texts has
been of particular interest in terms of aligning reading materials to a learner’s level. However, determining a material’s textual complexity is a difficult task as any potential
measure is relative to the reader and individual differences
that may arise due to prior knowledge, language familiarity
or personal motivation and general interests. In addition to
aligning reading material, as proposed in the Common
Core State Standards Initiative (National Governors
Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief
State School Officers, 2010), textual complexity has a
strong role in the evaluations of students' readiness for college and their later careers (Dascalu, 2014).
The words that comprise a text are one textual constituent that contributes to the complexity of a text. Hence,
measuring a text’s difficulty relies on determining the underlying complexity of its words. One approach to estimating lexical complexity might depend on experts to annotate
data and dictionaries and to create lists of words with their
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2928

