Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Joint Multi-View Representation Learning and Image Tagging
1

2

Zhe Xue1,2 , Guorong Li1,2,∗ , Qingming Huang1,2,3,∗

School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
3
Key Lab. of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
xuezhe10@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {liguorong, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn

is represented by a tag matrix. By searching the optimal tag
matrix that is consistent with both the textual and the visual
similarity, the images are tagged by relevant tags. A critical
factor affecting the annotation performance is the description abilities of the visual features. It is easier to annotate
images by using more powerful image descriptors.
Compared with single feature based representation, images can be described by multiple features such as SIFT,
HOG and LBP. Different features capture different aspects
of visual characteristics, and each type of feature can be
treated as a view for describing an instance. Multiple views
can complement with each other and generate more powerful descriptions for learning tasks. Thus, some image annotation methods are proposed based on multi-view data
(Kalayeh, Idrees, and Shah 2014; Gao et al. 2014). NMFKNN (Kalayeh, Idrees, and Shah 2014) ﬁrst learns a queryspeciﬁc nearest neighbour model and then predict tags by
the matrix product of the learned coefﬁcients with the basis
of tags. OGL (Gao et al. 2014) is a semi-supervised method
that learns an optimal graph from multiple views, which can
accurately represent the relationships among image data.
Nevertheless, most of the methods predict tags based on
low-level visual descriptors, which may contain noise and
redundant features. In addition, since there exists a semantic gap between low-level visual features and high-level semantics, it is difﬁcult to derive the true semantic information directly utilizing the low-level features. A practical solution is to ﬁnd an appropriate representation to enhance the performance of learning tasks. Subspace learning methods (Belhumeur, Hespanha, and Kriegman 1997;
1997; Roweis and Saul 2000; Belkin and Niyogi 2001) are
proposed to obtain new representations from original features and achieves promising performance. However, most
of these methods ignore the semantic information associated
with images such as tags and the learning process are relatively independent with the follow-up tasks. So the obtained
representation are not optimal for the learning tasks and their
performance is limited.
In fact, representation learning and image tagging are two
closely correlated works. On one hand, an appropriate image representation can well reﬂect the semantic relations of
images and facilitate tag prediction. On the other hand, image tags are high-level semantic information and can guide
the representation learning. Thus, joint conducting the two

Abstract
Automatic image annotation is an important problem in several machine learning applications such as image search.
Since there exists a semantic gap between low-level image
features and high-level semantics, the description ability of
image representation can largely affect annotation results. In
fact, image representation learning and image tagging are
two closely related tasks. A proper image representation can
achieve better image annotation results, and image tags can be
treated as guidance to learn more effective image representation. In this paper, we present an optimal predictive subspace
learning method which jointly conducts multi-view representation learning and image tagging. The two tasks can promote
each other and the annotation performance can be further improved. To make the subspace to be more compact and discriminative, both visual structure and semantic information
are exploited during learning. Moreover, we introduce powerful predictors (SVM) for image tagging to achieve better
annotation performance. Experiments on standard image annotation datasets demonstrate the advantages of our method
over the existing image annotation methods.

With the rapid development of social network and digital
equipment, large amounts of unlabeled or weakly labeled
images are shared on websites such as Flicker and Facebook.
To quickly access the interesting content from numerous images, an effective retrieval mechanism is required. Although
image search has been studied for years, the search engines
still mainly rely on textual queries instead of images. Since
automatic image annotation can assign relevant tags to unlabeled images enriching their textual description, it is becoming an essential tool for searchable image databases and
attracting more and more research interest.
A variety of methods have been developed for image annotation (Makadia, Pavlovic, and Kumar 2008; Guillaumin et al. 2009; Lin et al. 2013; Gao et al. 2014). Some
methods adopt nearest neighbour method to annotate images
by propagating tags from their nearest neighbours (Makadia, Pavlovic, and Kumar 2008; Guillaumin et al. 2009).
Some methods adopt linear predictors or linear reconstruction for image tagging (Chen, Zheng, and Weinberger 2013;
Lin et al. 2013). Moreover, matrix completion is adopted in
TMC (Wu, Jin, and Jain 2013) where the tag-image relation
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1366

