Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Linear-Time Learning on Distributions with Approximate Kernel Embeddings
Dougal J. Sutherland∗ and Junier B. Oliva∗ and Barnabás Póczos and Jeff Schneider
Carnegie Mellon University
{dsutherl,joliva,bapoczos,schneide}@cs.cmu.edu

the distribution of interest, rather than having to develop a
per-problem ad-hoc set of summary statistics.
Distributions are inherently inﬁnite-dimensional objects,
since in general they require an inﬁnite number of parameters for their exact representation. Hence, it is not immediate how to extend traditional ﬁnite vector machine learning techniques to distributional instances. However, recent
work has provided various approaches for dealing with distributional data in a nonparametric fashion. For example,
regression from distributional covariates to real or distributional responses is possible via kernel smoothing (Póczos et
al. 2012a; Oliva, Póczos, and Schneider 2013), and many
learning tasks can be solved with RKHS approaches (Muandet et al. 2012; Póczos et al. 2012b). A major shortcoming
of both approaches is that they require computing N kernel
evaluations per prediction, where N is the number of training instances in a dataset. Often, this implies that one must
compute a N × N Gram matrix of pairwise kernel evaluations. Such approaches fail to scale to datasets where the
number of instances N is very large. Another shortcoming
of these approaches is that they are often based on Euclidean
metrics, either working over a linear kernel, or one based on
the L2 distance over distributions. While such kernels are
useful in certain applications, better performance can sometimes be obtained by considering non-Euclidean based kernels. To this end, Póczos et al. (2012b) use a kernel based
on Rényi divergences; however, this kernel is not positive
semi-deﬁnite (PSD), leading to even higher computational
cost and other practical issues.
This work addresses these major shortcomings by developing an embedding of random features for distributions.
The dot product of the random features for two distributions will approximate kernels based on various distances
between densities (see Figure 1). With this technique, we
can approximate kernels based on total variation, Hellinger,
and Jensen-Shannon divergences, among others. Since one

Abstract
Many interesting machine learning problems are best
posed by considering instances that are distributions,
or sample sets drawn from distributions. Most previous work devoted to machine learning tasks with distributional inputs has done so through pairwise kernel
evaluations between pdfs (or sample sets). While such
an approach is ﬁne for smaller datasets, the computation of an N × N Gram matrix is prohibitive in large
datasets. Recent scalable estimators that work over pdfs
have done so only with kernels that use Euclidean metrics, like the L2 distance. However, there are a myriad of other useful metrics available, such as total variation, Hellinger distance, and the Jensen-Shannon divergence. This work develops the ﬁrst random features
for pdfs whose dot product approximates kernels using
these non-Euclidean metrics. These random features allow estimators to scale to large datasets by working in
a primal space, without computing large Gram matrices. We provide an analysis of the approximation error
in using our proposed random features, and show empirically the quality of our approximation both in estimating a Gram matrix and in solving learning tasks in
real-world and synthetic data.

Introduction
A great deal of effort in machine learning has been devoted to learning functions on vectors of ﬁxed dimension.
While complex static vector instances are useful in a myriad of applications, many machine learning problems in
datasets with richer, more complex instances are more naturally posed by considering instances that are distributions,
or sets drawn from distributions. For instance, political scientists can learn a function from community demographics
to vote percentages to understand who supports a candidate
(Flaxman, Wang, and Smola 2015). The mass of dark matter halos can be inferred from the velocity of galaxies in a
cluster (Ntampaka et al. 2015). Expensive expectation propagation messages can be sped up by learning a “just-in-time”
regression model (Jitkrittum et al. 2015). All of these applications are aided by working directly over sets drawn from



c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
These two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: We approximate kernels between densities pi , pj
iid

iid

with random features of sample sets χi ∼ pi , χj ∼ pj .

2073

