Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Minimizing User Involvement for Learning
Human Mobility Patterns from Location Traces
Basma Alharbi, Abdulhakim Qahtan, Xiangliang Zhang
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences & Engineering Division
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal, 23955, Saudi Arabia

Abstract

15

Number of Users

Number of Users

Utilizing trajectories for modeling human mobility often involves extracting descriptive features for each individual, a
procedure heavily based on experts’ knowledge. In this work,
our objective is to minimize human involvement and exploit
the power of community in learning ‘features’ for individuals
from their location traces. We propose a probabilistic graphical model that learns distribution of latent concepts, named
motifs, from anonymized sequences of user locations. To handle variation in user activity level, our model learns motif distributions from sequence-level location co-occurrence of all
users. To handle the big variation in location popularity, our
model uses an asymmetric prior conditioned on per-sequence
features. We evaluate the new representation in a link prediction task and compare our results to those of baseline approaches.

10
5
0

×10 4

2

0

1
2
User Activity Level

1.5
1
0.5
0

3
×10 4

0

(a) MDC dataset

2000

(b) GW dataset
10 5
Number of Locations

10 5
Number of Locations

1000
User Activity Level

10 3

10 1

Introduction

10 1
10 3
Location Popularity Level

With the increasing popularity of mobile devices and Location Based Social Networks (LBSNs), location traces for
a large sample of the population become instantly available. The availability of such data allows for large-scale social analysis (Song et al. 2010), studies of human behavior
(Gonzalez, Hidalgo, and Barabasi 2008) and urban analysis (Zheng, Zhang, and Yu 2015; Idé and Sugiyama 2011;
Toole et al. 2012; Yuan, Zheng, and Xie 2012).
Although trajectory data convey indisputable patterns,
employing them in basic applications usually involves layers of preprocessing and feature extraction. For example, the
process followed to achieve a task such as demographic prediction often involves: 1) Trajectory preprocessing, which
includes noise ﬁltering, segmentation and stay point detection (Zheng 2015b). 2) Feature engineering, where trajectories are analyzed for extracting usable features, often based
on rules initiated by experts. 3) Dimensionality reduction,
for reducing the feature space. 4) Learning tasks are then
completed in the reduced space. 5) Finally, these steps may
be repeated until satisfactory results are obtained. Despite
the evident advantage of this approach, minimizing human
involvement is always preferable in knowledge execution
(Schumann and Lécué 2015). Rule-based feature engineering often ends up ignoring latent patterns which are impor-

(c) MDC dataset

10 5

10 3

10 1
10 1
10 3
Location Popularity Level

10 5

(d) GW dataset

Figure 1: The distribution of user activity level and location
popularity in MDC (a,c) and GW (b,d) dataset.
tant to the task under study but not obvious to the experts.
More importantly, it is based on predeﬁned knowledge of
the data and the speciﬁc task under study, which restricts the
use of extracted features to other applications.
Our objective in this work is to propose a representation
learning model that infers latent patterns from user trajectories with minimum human intervention. The new representation can be used in various applications. Inspired by Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGM) in text mining, we propose
a Human Mobility Representation model (HuMoR), which
models trajectory data in an analogous manner to text corpora, where users are mapped to documents and locations
are mapped to words. Similarly to modeling latent topics
from documents using Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
(Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), our proposed model learns distribution of latent concepts, named motifs, from sequences
of locations based on sequence-level location co-occurrence.
Each user is then represented by a mixture of latent concepts, i.e., a probability distribution over motifs. Comparing
to building users’ representation based on human efforts, the

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

865

