Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Label Manifold Learning
Peng Hou, Xin Geng∗ , Min-Ling Zhang
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration,
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{hpeng, xgeng, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper gives an attempt to explore the manifold in the
label space for multi-label learning. Traditional label space
is logical, where no manifold exists. In order to study the
label manifold, the label space should be extended to a Euclidean space. However, the label manifold is not explicitly
available from the training examples. Fortunately, according
to the smoothness assumption that the points close to each
other are more likely to share a label, the local topological
structure can be shared between the feature manifold and the
label manifold. Based on this, we propose a novel method
called ML2 , i.e., Multi-Label Manifold Learning, to reconstruct and exploit the label manifold. To our best knowledge,
it is one of the ﬁrst attempts to explore the manifold in the label space in multi-label learning. Extensive experiments show
that the performance of multi-label learning can be improved
signiﬁcantly with the label manifold.

1

x3

x2
x1

(a)
3
2
1

y3

y2
y1

(c)

(b)

Figure 1: Transformation of the local topological structure
from the feature space to the label space. (a) The manifold
in the feature space; (b) The traditional logical label space;
(c) The manifold in the Euclidean label space.

Introduction
and the element of yi can be called logical label. In order to
study the label manifold, the label space should be extended
to a Euclidean space. Each dimension of the space still corresponds to one label in Y, but the value is extended from
logical to real. Such label is called numerical label, which
carries more semantic information and can describe the instance more comprehensively than the logical label.
However, the label manifold is not explicitly available
from the training examples. To reconstruct the label manifold, the key issue is the topological structure. Fortunately,
there is one commonly adopted assumption by many machine learning methods called smoothness assumption (Zhu,
Lafferty, and Rosenfeld 2005; Chapelle et al. 2006), which
says that the points close to each other are more likely to
share a label. With the extension from the logical label
space to the Euclidean label space, we can naturally induce
from the smoothness assumption that, the local topological
structure can be transferred from the feature space to the label space. One example is shown in Fig. 1. The subﬁgure
(a) shows the manifold in the feature space where the blue
square, green rhombus and purple star points are the neighbors of the red point. The subﬁgure (b) shows the traditional
logical label space where the vertex points represent the logical label vectors for the neighbors, respectively. The subﬁgure (c) shows the manifold in the Euclidean label space

In multi-label learning, there are multiple labels associated
to the same instance simultaneously (Tsoumakas, Katakis,
and Vlahavas 2009; Zhang and Zhou 2014). Formally speaking, let X = Rd be the d-dimensional feature space and
Y = {y1 , . . . , yq } be the label set with q possible labels.
Given a training set D = {(xi , yi )|1 ≤ i ≤ n}, where
xi ∈ X is the feature vector and yi ∈ {0, 1}q is the label
vector, the task of traditional multi-label learning is to learn
a predictor which maps from the space of feature vectors to
the space of label vectors. Each element of the label vector
yi is a logical indicator of whether the corresponding label
is relevant or irrelevant to the instance xi . During the past
decade, multi-label learning has been applied successfully
to learn from the data with rich semantics, such as text (Rubin et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2009), image (Cabral et al. 2011;
Wang, Huang, and Ding 2009), audio (Lo et al. 2011;
Sanden and Zhang 2011), video (Wang et al. 2011), etc.
In this paper, we give an attempt to improve the multilabel learning performance with the manifold in the label
space. To our best knowledge, it is one of the ﬁrst attempts
to explore the label manifold in multi-label learning. Traditional label space spanned by the label vector yi is logical,
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1680

