Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Hashtag-Based Sub-Event Discovery
Using Mutually Generative LDA in Twitter
Chen Xing,†‡ Yuan Wang,†‡ Jie Liu,†‡ Yalou Huang,†‡ Wei-Ying Ma∗
†

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
‡
College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
∗
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
v-chxing@microsoft.com {nkwangyuan,nkjieliu}@gmail.com huangyl@nankai.edu.cn wyma@microsoft.com
such event-related information in Twitter a cumbersome or
even impossible task.
Pohl(Pohl, Bouchachia, and Hellwagner 2012a) ﬁrstly deﬁned the task of sub-event discovery to solve this problem in
emergency management domain. Sub-event discovery aims
to divide the large number of event-related information into
several sub-sets through clustering and identiﬁes these subsets as sub-events. Thus the sub-event discovery task is able
to automatically organize the huge amount of complex and
unstructured event-related data in Twitter. It separates a social event into signiﬁcant and distinct parts and semantically
represents them for further analysis and is recently considered as an effective method for event analysis.
Several clustering-based methods(Pohl, Bouchachia, and
Hellwagner 2012a)(Pohl, Bouchachia, and Hellwagner
2012b)(Abhik and Toshniwal 2013) have been proposed to
fulﬁll the sub-event discovery task. Pohl(Pohl, Bouchachia,
and Hellwagner 2012a) ﬁrstly represented texts using tfidf features and implemented Self Organizing Map(SOM)
to cluster texts. Each cluster represented a speciﬁc subevent. Pohl(Pohl, Bouchachia, and Hellwagner 2012b)
and Abhik(Abhik and Toshniwal 2013) further employed
more complex text representation methods that took different structural information, such as article titles, tags and
geography coordinates, into consideration. However, these
methods merely employed shallow features such as tf-idf for
social media messages. These features contain basic and
limited statistical information for the messages and take seldom advantage of the deep semantic information of social
media texts. While, the semantic meanings of texts are of
great importance in both the discovery and representation
process of sub-events.
In order to ﬁll this gap, we seek for topic model related
methods. Topic models have long been considered as a
powerful method for learning semantic representations of
documents, with the topic distributions of which be considered as representation vectors. Latent Dirichlet Allocation(LDA)(Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) is one of the most
popular topic models and has been followed by many others. However, the severe sparsity problem of short text poses
a new challenge to traditional topic models like LDA. This
is because LDA reveals latent topics by capturing documentlevel word co-occurrence patterns(Wang et al. 2014). Moreover, the informality and typos of the tweet language make

Abstract
Sub-event discovery is an effective method for social event
analysis in Twitter. It can discover sub-events from large
amount of noisy event-related information in Twitter and semantically represent them. The task is challenging because
tweets are short, informal and noisy. To solve this problem,
we consider leveraging event-related hashtags that contain
many locations, dates and concise sub-event related descriptions to enhance sub-event discovery. To this end, we propose
a hashtag-based mutually generative Latent Dirichlet Allocation model(MGe-LDA). In MGe-LDA, hashtags and topics of
a tweet are mutually generated by each other. The mutually
generative process models the relationship between hashtags
and topics of tweets, and highlights the role of hashtags as a
semantic representation of the corresponding tweets. Experimental results show that MGe-LDA can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art methods for sub-event discovery.

Introduction
Social events, including large-scale emergencies(such as
the Ebola outbreak in December 2013), political movements(such as Egyptian Revolution of 2011), and global
inﬂuential sports games(such as Super Bowl), etc., could
not only cause hot discussions among people, but also
bring about widely-related, sophisticated and long-lasting
social effects. In order to handle or to react to these social events, it is necessary for the related crowds to gain
as much information as possible about the ongoing situation(Pohl, Bouchachia, and Hellwagner 2012a) and analyze
them thoroughly. Twitter, as one of the most popular global
social networking sites, attracts people worldwide to record
details and share their opinions about social events, hence
gradually making itself a very valuable data source for social event analysis. However, global social events usually
have huge amount of related tweets, most of which are written in a short, informal and non-declarative style. Moreover,
a global social event normally consists of many underlying
and subtle constituent parts which lead to different aspects
of social effects. Thus these constituent parts of one event
require to be noticed and analyzed separately by respective
related parties. These two factors make manually analyzing
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2666

