Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Deep Architecture for Semantic Matching
with Multiple Positional Sentence Representations
Shengxian Wan∗ , Yanyan Lan† , Jiafeng Guo† , Jun Xu† , Liang Pang∗ , and Xueqi Cheng†
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
∗
{wanshengxian, pangliang}@software.ict.ac.cn, † {lanyanyan, guojiafeng, junxu, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

CNTN (Qiu and Huang 2015) and LSTM-RNN (Palangi et
al. 2015). In general, this paradigm is quite straightforward
and easy to implement, however, the main disadvantage lies
in that important local information is lost when compressing
such a complicated sentence into a single vector. Taking a
question and two answers as an example:
Q: “ Which teams won top three in the World Cup?”
A1: “ Germany is the champion of the World Cup.”
A2: “The top three of the European Cup are Spain,
Netherlands and Germany. ”
We can see that the keywords such as “top three” and
“World Cup” are very important to determine which answer
(between A1 and A2) is better for Q. When attending to “top
three”, obviously A2 is better than A1; while if attending to
“World Cup”, we can get an opposite conclusion. However,
single sentence representation methods cannot well capture
such important local information, by directly representing a
complicated sentence as a single compact vector (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2014).
Some other works focus on taking multiple granularity,
e.g. word, phrase, and sentence level representations, into
consideration for the matching process. Examples include
ARC-II (Hu et al. 2014), RAE (Socher et al. 2011), DeepMatch (Lu and Li 2013), Bi-CNN-MI (Yin and Schütze
2015a) and MultiGranCNN (Yin and Schütze 2015b). They
can alleviate the above problem, but are still far from completely solving the matching problem. That is because they
are limited to well capture the contextualized local information, by directly involving word and phrase level representations. Taking the following answer as an example:
A3: “The top three attendees of the European Cup are
from Germany, France and Spain.”
Obviously, A2 is better than A3 with respect to Q, although both of them have the important keywords “top
three”. This is because the two terms of “top three” have
different meanings from the whole sentence perspective.
“top three” in A2 focuses on talking about top three football
teams, while that in A3 is indicating the top three attendees
from different countries. However, existing multiple granularity deep models cannot well distinguish the two “top
three”s. This is mainly because the word/phrase level representations are local (usually depend on contexts in a ﬁxed
window size), thus limited to reﬂect the true meanings of
these words/phrases (e.g. top three) from the perspective of

Abstract
Matching natural language sentences is central for many
applications such as information retrieval and question
answering. Existing deep models rely on a single sentence representation or multiple granularity representations for matching. However, such methods cannot
well capture the contextualized local information in the
matching process. To tackle this problem, we present a
new deep architecture to match two sentences with multiple positional sentence representations. Speciﬁcally,
each positional sentence representation is a sentence
representation at this position, generated by a bidirectional long short term memory (Bi-LSTM). The matching score is ﬁnally produced by aggregating interactions between these different positional sentence representations, through k-Max pooling and a multi-layer
perceptron. Our model has several advantages: (1) By
using Bi-LSTM, rich context of the whole sentence is
leveraged to capture the contextualized local information in each positional sentence representation; (2) By
matching with multiple positional sentence representations, it is ﬂexible to aggregate different important contextualized local information in a sentence to support
the matching; (3) Experiments on different tasks such
as question answering and sentence completion demonstrate the superiority of our model.

Introduction
Semantic matching is a critical task for many applications
in natural language processing (NLP), such as information
retrieval (Li and Xu 2013), question answering (Berger et
al. 2000) and paraphrase identiﬁcation (Dolan, Quirk, and
Brockett 2004). Taking question answering as an example,
given a pair of question and answer, a matching function
is required to determine the matching degree between these
two sentences.
Recently, deep neural network based models have been
applied in this area and achieved some important progresses.
A lot of deep models follow the paradigm to ﬁrst represent
the whole sentence to a single distributed representation, and
then compute similarities between the two vectors to output
the matching score. Examples include DSSM (Huang et al.
2013), CDSMM (Shen et al. 2014), ARC-I (Hu et al. 2014),
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2835

