Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multi-Objective Self-Paced Learning
1

Hao Li1 , Maoguo Gong1,∗ , Deyu Meng2,∗ , Qiguang Miao3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
omegalihao@gmail.com, gong@ieee.org, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, qgmiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn
∗
Corresponding author

lum is assumed to be given beforehand, and remains unchanged thereafter. However, the curriculum design is determined independently of the subsequent learning. Then
SPL was proposed by Kumar et al. to dynamically generate the curriculum according to what the learner has already
learned. In SPL, a regularization term is introduced into the
learning objective to jointly learn the curriculum and model
parameters, which is called self-paced (SP) regularizer.
In SPL, a binary variable is used in hard weighting scheme (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010) to indicate
whether the sample is easy or not. Then Jiang et al. proposed
a soft weighting method (Jiang et al. 2014a), which assigns
real-valued weights to reﬂect the importance of samples and
presents three efﬁcient SPL regularizers for different kinds
of data sets with different characteristics. SPL has been successfully applied to various applications, such as segmentation (Kumar et al. 2011), domain adaption (Tang et al. 2012),
dictionary leaning (Tang, Yang, and Gao 2012), long-term
tracking (Supančič and Ramanan 2013), reranking (Jiang et
al. 2014a), action and event detection (Jiang et al. 2014b;
2015), and matrix factorization (Zhao et al. 2015).
Compared to traditional machine learning methods, SPL
exploits a weight variable to measure the easiness of samples and introduces a gradually increasing pace parameter
to control the pace at which the model learns new samples.
However, there are some weaknesses in these SPL methods.
First, the SPL implementation is generally very sensitive to
initialization, which has been indicated by previous investigations (Jiang et al. 2014b; 2015). Second, it is difﬁcult to
determine when to stop the iteration in real implementation
of a SPL regime. That is, it is hard to select a proper pace
where the self-paced learning process should be terminated.
Such selection issue is critical since when the pace parameter is large, SPL is prone to get a bad solution in the presence
of noisy samples. Third, only a single solution with respect
to (wrt) a certain pace parameter can be obtained after SPL
calculation. This, however, loses insights for the entire solution spectrum wrt different pace parameters to a certain
extent. We always expect to achieve the entire solution path
wrt the pace to observe the whole self-paced evolution process and recover useful intrinsic patterns from it.
In this study, we clarify that the SPL model can be equivalently understood as a multi-objective model. It is interesting
that by employing multi-objective evolutionary algorithms

Abstract
Current self-paced learning (SPL) regimes adopt the greedy
strategy to obtain the solution with a gradually increasing
pace parameter while where to optimally terminate this increasing process is difﬁcult to determine. Besides, most SPL
implementations are very sensitive to initialization and short
of a theoretical result to clarify where SPL converges to with
pace parameter increasing. In this paper, we propose a novel
multi-objective self-paced learning (MOSPL) method to address these issues. Speciﬁcally, we decompose the objective
functions as two terms, including the loss and the self-paced
regularizer, respectively, and treat the problem as the compromise between these two objectives. This naturally reformulates the SPL problem as a standard multi-objective issue.
A multi-objective evolutionary algorithm is used to optimize
the two objectives simultaneously to facilitate the rational selection of a proper pace parameter. The proposed technique
is capable of ameliorating a set of solutions with respect to a
range of pace parameters through ﬁnely compromising these
solutions inbetween, and making them perform robustly even
under bad initialization. A good solution can then be naturally
achieved from these solutions by making use of some offthe-shelf tools in multi-objective optimization. Experimental
results on matrix factorization and action recognition demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method against the existing issues in current SPL research.

Introduction
In the ﬁeld of machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence,
curriculum learning (CL) (Bengio et al. 2009) and selfpaced learning (SPL) (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010)
have been attracting increasing attention to deal with the
difﬁculty of training in the presence of non-convex training
criteria and complex data with heavy noises and outliers.
Both the learning paradigms are inspired by the learning
process of humans/animals, which learns with easier concepts at ﬁrst and then gradually involves more complex ones
into training. It has been proved that this learning paradigm
is beneﬁcial in avoiding bad local minima and in achieving
a better generalization result (Khan, Mutlu, and Zhu 2011;
Basu and Christensen 2013; Tang, Yang, and Gao 2012).
A curriculum deﬁnes a set of training samples organized
in ascending order of learning difﬁculty. In CL, the curricuc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1802

