Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Using Decomposition-Parameters for QBF:
Mind the Preﬁx!
Eduard Eiben, Robert Ganian, Sebastian Ordyniak
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria

merical parameter k, which represents the ﬁtness of the decomposition. The goal is then to obtain algorithms whose
running time is polynomial in the input size n and exponential only in k, i.e., with a running time of f (k) · nO(1)
where f is some computable function; such algorithms
are called FPT algorithms, and problems which admit an
FPT algorithm w.r.t. some parameter belong to the class
FPT. Prominent examples of decompositions used in such
techniques include decompositions for the structural parameters treewidth (Robertson and Seymour 1986), pathwidth (Robertson and Seymour 1983), clique-width (Courcelle and Olariu 2000) and rank-width (Oum and Seymour
2006); all of these are known to support FPT algorithms
for SAT (Szeider 2004; Ganian, Hliněný, and Obdržálek
2013), but the same is not true for QBF (Atserias and Oliva
2014) under established complexity assumptions. As a consequence, many classes of QBFs which have a natural and
seemingly “simple” structure remained beyond the reach of
current algorithmic techniques. For completeness, we remark that formally our results consider QBFs which have
been transformed into so-called alternating prenex form (see
the Preliminaries).
In this work we introduce and develop preﬁx pathwidth,
which is the ﬁrst decomposition-based parameter that allows
an FPT algorithm for QBF. Preﬁx pathwidth is an extension
of pathwidth which takes into account not only the structure
of clauses in the formula, but also the structure contained
in the quantiﬁcation of variables. To achieve the latter, we
make use of the dependency schemes introduced by Samer
and Szeider (2009; 2014), see also the work of Biere and
Lonsing (2010). Dependency schemes capture how the assignment of individual variables in a QBF depends on other
variables, and research in this direction has uncovered a
large number of distinct dependency schemes. The most
basic dependency scheme is called the trivial dependency
scheme (Samer and Szeider 2009), which stipulates that each
variable depends on all variables with distinct quantiﬁcation,
which come before it in the preﬁx. When using this dependency scheme, our main result (Theorem 3) yields:

Abstract
Similar to the satisﬁability (SAT) problem, which can be
seen to be the archetypical problem for NP, the quantiﬁed
Boolean formula problem (QBF) is the archetypical problem for PSPACE. Recently, Atserias and Oliva (2014) showed
that, unlike for SAT, many of the well-known decompositional parameters (such as treewidth and pathwidth) do not
allow efﬁcient algorithms for QBF. The main reason for this
seems to be the lack of awareness of these parameters towards
the dependencies between variables of a QBF formula. In this
paper we extend the ordinary pathwidth to the QBF-setting
by introducing preﬁx pathwidth, which takes into account the
dependencies between variables in a QBF, and show that it
leads to an efﬁcient algorithm for QBF. We hope that our approach will help to initiate the study of novel tailor-made decompositional parameters for QBF and thereby help to lift
the success of these decompositional parameters from SAT to
QBF.

Introduction
Many important computational tasks such as veriﬁcation,
planning, and several questions in knowledge representation and automated reasoning can be naturally encoded
as the problem of evaluating quantiﬁed Boolean formulas (Egly et al. 2000; Otwell, Remshagen, and Truemper
2004; Rintanen 1999; Sabharwal et al. 2006), a generalization of the propositional satisﬁability problem (SAT). In
recent years quantiﬁed Boolean formulas have become a
very active research area. The problem of evaluating quantiﬁed Boolean formulas, called QBF, is the archetypical
PS PACE-complete problem and is therefore believed to be
computationally harder than the NP-complete propositional
satisﬁability problem (Kleine Büning and Lettman 1999;
Papadimitriou 1994; Stockmeyer and Meyer 1973).
In spite of the close connection between QBF and SAT,
many of the tools and techniques which work for SAT are
not known to help for QBF, and this is especially true for
so-called decomposition-based techniques (Aschinger et al.
2011). Such techniques use various kinds of decompositions to capture the structure of the input, leading to efﬁcient algorithms for computing solutions with runtime guarantees. Decomposition-based techniques are tied to a nu-

Theorem 1. QBF is FPT parameterized by the preﬁx pathwidth with respect to the trivial dependency scheme.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

However, preﬁx pathwidth can be used in conjunction
with any dependency scheme that is cumulative (Samer and

964

