Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Community-Based Question Answering via
Heterogeneous Social Network Learning
Hanyin Fang, Fei Wu, Zhou Zhao,∗ Xinyu Duan, and Yueting Zhuang
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
and the Key Lab of Big Data Intelligent Computing of Zhejiang Province, China
{fhy881229, wufei, zhaozhou, duanxinyu, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn

Martin Ester
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
ester@cs.sfu.ca
Although the cQA service has shown its promising applicability and the rapid increasing of crowdsourced cQA data
provides an opportunity to comprehend the implicit knowledge of crowdsourced questions and answers better, a major
challenge for cQA tasks comes from the sparsity of QA data
(Li and King 2010). As shown in the upper part of Figure
1, the links between questions and answers are sparse (all
the four questions are isolated and only answer 2 and answer 3 are connected by question 2). Due to this sparsity of
cQA data, existing methods which only utilize the contents
of Q-A can merely learn the global semantics from different
questions. Since the questions and answers are all posted by
users and a reliable user may be followed by another users,
it is attractive to introduce user context (e.g., who posts an
answer and one followed by others) into cQA in order to
tackle the data sparsity. Moreover, the rating scores voted
by community users provide the relative quality rank of different answers w.r.t the same question. Thus, how to leverage these valuable social information is very signiﬁcant for
cQA tasks. Figure 1 shows our intuition of the used heterogeneous social networks (the links between questions and
askers are not presented because of the unavailability of the
corresponding data in this paper).

Abstract
Community-based question answering (cQA) sites have accumulated vast amount of questions and corresponding
crowdsourced answers over time. How to efﬁciently share the
underlying information and knowledge from reliable (usually
highly-reputable) answerers has become an increasingly popular research topic. A major challenge in cQA tasks is the
accurate matching of high-quality answers w.r.t given questions. Many of traditional approaches likely recommend corresponding answers merely depending on the content similarity between questions and answers, therefore suffer from the
sparsity bottleneck of cQA data. In this paper, we propose
a novel framework which encodes not only the contents of
question-answer(Q-A) but also the social interaction cues in
the community to boost the cQA tasks. More speciﬁcally, our
framework collaboratively utilizes the rich interaction among
questions, answers and answerers to learn the relative quality
rank of different answers w.r.t a same question. Moreover, the
information in heterogeneous social networks is comprehensively employed to enhance the quality of question-answering
(QA) matching by our deep random walk learning framework. Extensive experiments on a large-scale dataset from
a real world cQA site show that leveraging the heterogeneous
social information indeed achieves better performance than
other state-of-the-art cQA methods.

Besides the valuable social information, the textual contents of questions and answers are also very important for
cQA tasks. Most of the existing works treat the QA problem as a short text matching task, such as recommending
high quality answers to questions or the retrieval of similar
questions (Shen et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2013). An important
issue in short text matching task is the insufﬁciency of discriminative features for the textual contents. Though the traditional hand-crafted feature (e.g., bag-of-words) has been
proven successful in a range of text modeling tasks (Fang
et al. 2015; Qu et al. 2009; Gabrilovich and Markovitch
2007), it is unable to capture the word sequence information which is critical for short text matching task, as mentioned in (Qiu and Huang 2015). In recent years, various methods are proposed to learn the semantics of similar words (Mikolov et al. 2013b) and encode the order information of word sequence to enhance the semantic representation of sentences and paragraphs (Socher et al. 2013;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Hu et al. 2014) in a low-

Introduction
Community-based question answering (cQA) is an Internetbased crowdsourcing service which enables users to post
their questions on a cQA website and be answered by other
users later. Some cQA sites are becoming more and more
popular in the real world such as Yahoo! Answers and
Quora. The answers in these cQA sites are highly speciﬁc
for personal questions and facilitate different users to directly quest answers from complex and heterogeneous information. The beneﬁts of cQA have been proven in (Jurczyk and Agichtein 2007; Li, Lyu, and King 2012) and cQA
has attracted lots of attention in the ﬁelds of information retrieval and natural language processing research (Bilotti et
al. 2010).
∗

Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

122

