Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Steiner Tree Problems with Side
Constraints Using Constraint Programming
Diego de Uña1 and Graeme Gange1 and Peter Schachte1 and Peter J. Stuckey1,2
1

Department of Computing and Information Systems – The University of Melbourne
2
National ICT Australia, Victoria Laboratory
{d.deunagomez@student.,gkgange@,schachte@,pstuckey@}unimelb.edu.au

other network problems (Winter 1987), (Hwang, Richards,
and Winter 1992). Nevertheless, in many of these applications, the STP is not pure. In most real world applications
there are side constraints that affect the topology of the solution. Sometimes we need terminal nodes to be leafs of the
tree (e.g.: in VLSI or phylogenetics). In other cases, we only
want to use nodes that can be connected in multiple ways to
increase the reliability of the network (Agrawal, Klein, and
Ravi 1995). In transportation we ﬁnd the hierarchical STP
where terminals are divided in size (by city population).
In this paper we present a novel Constraint Programming
(CP) approach using explanations to solve the STP that allows any kind of side constraint. We implemented this in the
C HUFFED CP solver (Chu 2011). Section 2 introduces some
notions from CP along with the model that we use. Section
3 presents some basic data structures. Section 4 presents the
implementation of a tree propagator with explanation. Section 5 explores two lower bounds to prune the search space.
Section 6 shows the experimental results solving the pure
STP and two of its variants (comparing different versions of
our propagator against the C HOCO 3 solver).

Abstract
The Steiner Tree Problem is a well know NP-complete problem that is well studied and for which fast algorithms are
already available. Nonetheless, in the real world the Steiner
Tree Problem is almost always accompanied by side constraints which means these approaches cannot be applied. For
many problems with side constraints, only approximation algorithms are known. We introduce here a propagator for the
tree constraint with explanations, as well as lower bounding
techniques and a novel constraint programming approach for
the Steiner Tree Problem and two of its variants. We ﬁnd our
propagators with explanations are highly advantageous when
it comes to solving variants of this problem.

1

Introduction

The Steiner Tree Problem (STP) is a combinatorial problem on graphs. Given a non-empty graph G = (V, E) and a
subset of its nodes T ⊆ V called terminals, a Steiner Tree
ST = (VST , EST ) is a tree such that T ⊆ VST ⊆ V and
EST ⊆ E. That is to say, ST spans all the nodes in T . We
call the non-terminal nodes Steiner nodes.
Following the deﬁnition of (Dreyfus and Wagner 1971),
the STP is an NP-complete problem (proved by (Karp
1972)) stated as follows: given a graph G and a weight function ws, ﬁnd the Steiner Tree of minimal weight where the
total weight is the sum of the weights of the edges in EST
given by ws.
a

58

58

100

a

100

58

s

b

100

c
Cost =200

c
Cost =174

Previous Work

To our knowledge, the state-of-the-art in pure Steiner Tree
problems was reached by (Polzin and Daneshmand 2001),
and little room for improvement was left by their work.
Nonetheless, their ideas focused on the pure STP. Indeed,
several of the techniques they used to solve the problem
(called “reductions” in their paper) are only valid for the
pure version. Reductions remove edges or nodes based on
the fact that they cannot be part of the minimum Steiner tree.
We are searching for a Steiner tree that is minimum given a
set of side constraints, thus the reductions they used are not
valid in our setting.
It is worth noting that the Steiner Tree Problem resembles the Minimum Spanning Tree problem (MST), but it
is substantially different in terms of computational complexity. The NP-completeness of the STP comes from not
knowing which nodes we need to span. Existing MST or
Weighted-Spanning Tree constraints (Dooms and Katriel
2006), (Régin 2008) do not apply in our case as they either
look for a minimum spanning tree (not allowing side constraint) or try to include all nodes in the tree.
There has also been work in “tree” constraints that are ac-

100

58

s

b

58

58

100

100

1.1

Figure 1: Two Steiner trees (highlighted) of the same graph
where s is the only Steiner node and a, b and c are terminals.
The STP has been well studied because of its applications in computer networks, VLSI design, transportation and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3383

