Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

False-Name-Proof Locations of Two Facilities:
Economic and Algorithmic Approaches
Akihisa Sonoda and Taiki Todo and Makoto Yokoo
Department of Informatics, Kyushu University,
Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan
{sonoda@agent., todo@, yokoo@}inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

result in undesirable locations. For the problem of locating a single facility, Moulin (1980) characterized a class
of strategy-proof mechanisms known as generalized median mechanisms. Heo (2013) extended this idea for locating two or more facilities and proposed a class of mechanisms called double median mechanisms. Sui, Boutilier,
and Sandholm (2013) suggested percentile mechanisms for
multi-dimensional and multi-facility location problems.
Another type of cheating has also been studied in mechanism design for open and anonymous environments. If a
mechanism is anonymous, i.e., ignoring who reports which
preference, an agent may report more than one preference
by creating and using fake identiﬁers (e.g., different email
addresses or repeatedly logging onto an online forum).
Such unfair practices are called false-name manipulations.
There are several discussions on mechanisms that are robust
against false-name manipulations (i.e., false-name-proof),
traditionally in combinatorial auctions (Yokoo, Sakurai, and
Matsubara 2004), more recently in such social choice situations as voting (Conitzer 2008; Wagman and Conitzer 2014),
two-sided matching (Todo and Conitzer 2013), and singlefacility locations (Todo, Iwasaki, and Yokoo 2011). However, to the best of our knowledge, no work has considered
the case of two facilities.
In addition to these incentive issues, the quality of a mechanism’s outcomes is also important for evaluating it. In this
paper, we focus on two evaluation criteria. Pareto efﬁciency,
which is one of the most standard economic efﬁciency criteria, requires that under any outcome from the mechanism,
it is not possible to make any agent better off without making at least one agent worse off. Approximation analysis is
a very popular approach in algorithm design for evaluating
worst-case performance. To deﬁne an approximation factor
of mechanisms, we use the two well-studied cost functions:
the social and maximum costs.
Our contribution presented in this paper is two-fold. From
an economic perspective, we characterize possible outcomes
by false-name-proof mechanisms that also satisfy Pareto efﬁciency and another mild condition called peak-onlyness.
For any given preferences of agents, (i) any two cyclicallyadjacent peaks (i.e., two adjacent peaks and two extreme
peaks) can be an outcome from one such mechanism and (ii)
any such mechanism must return one of such two cyclicallyadjacent peaks as the outcome. We also clarify what loca-

Abstract
This paper considers a mechanism design problem for locating two identical facilities on an interval, in which an agent
can pretend to be multiple agents. A mechanism selects a pair
of locations on the interval according to the declared singlepeaked preferences of agents. An agent’s utility is determined
by the location of the better one (typically the closer to her
ideal point). This model can represent various application domains. For example, assume a company is going to release
two models of its product line and performs a questionnaire
survey in an online forum to determine their detailed specs.
Typically, a customer will buy only one model, but she can
answer multiple times by logging onto the forum under several email accounts. We ﬁrst characterize possible outcomes
of mechanisms that satisfy false-name-proofness, as well as
some mild conditions. By extending the result, we completely
characterize the class of false-name-proof mechanisms when
locating two facilities on a circle. We then clarify the approximation ratios of the false-name-proof mechanisms on a line
metric for the social and maximum costs.

1

Introduction

Facility location problems are traditional economic models
that represent several social choice situations, such as elections and committee voting. One of their main objectives
is to design social choice rules, or mechanisms, that satisfy
several desirable properties. In this paper, we consider locating two identical facilities on an interval in which each agent
only accesses the one closer to her ideal point, or peak. Such
a preference structure is described as single-peaked and has
several realistic applications, even for the case of two facilities. For example, in September 2015, Apple Inc. released
two new models of its iPhone series; customers who prefer a smaller size/weight can choose iPhone 6s, while others who prefer a larger/higher display resolution can choose
iPhone 6s Plus.
From the perspective of mechanism design, a mechanism
is expected to satisfy an incentive property called strategyproofness, which requires that reporting a true preference
over the interval is a dominant strategy for each agent. Otherwise, agents may have an incentive to misreport their preferences and cheat on outcomes of mechanisms, which would
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

615

