Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Inverse Reinforcement Learning
through Policy Gradient Minimization
Matteo Pirotta and Marcello Restelli
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
I-20133, Milan, Italy
{matteo.pirotta, marcello.restelli}@polimi.it
using a model-free approach that is based only on the data
provided by the expert’s demonstrations. Contrary to most
existing algorithms, the proposed approach does not require
to repeatedly solve the “direct” MDP. Although no assumption on the reward model is needed, for the case of linear
parametrization we provide an efﬁcient algorithm for computing the solution to the optimization problem. Empirical
results on the Linear-Quadratic Regulator (LQR) test case
allow to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method in
recovering the parameters of the reward function optimized
by the expert both when the expert’s policy is known and
when it has to be estimated from demonstrated trajectories.
Comparisons with the state-of-the-art is performed on the
well-known mountain-car domain.

Abstract
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) deals with the
problem of recovering the reward function optimized by
an expert given a set of demonstrations of the expert’s
policy. Most IRL algorithms need to repeatedly compute the optimal policy for different reward functions.
This paper proposes a new IRL approach that allows to
recover the reward function without the need of solving any “direct” RL problem. The idea is to ﬁnd the
reward function that minimizes the gradient of a parameterized representation of the expert’s policy. In particular, when the reward function can be represented as
a linear combination of some basis functions, we will
show that the aforementioned optimization problem can
be efﬁciently solved. We present an empirical evaluation of the proposed approach on a multidimensional
version of the Linear-Quadratic Regulator (LQR) both
in the case where the parameters of the expert’s policy are known and in the (more realistic) case where
the parameters of the expert’s policy need to be inferred
from the expert’s demonstrations. Finally, the algorithm
is compared against the state-of-the-art on the mountain
car domain, where the expert’s policy is unknown.

Preliminaries
A Markov Decision process without reward MDP\R is deﬁned by M = S, A, P, γ, D, where S is the state space,
A is the action space, P is a Markovian transition model
where P(s |s, a) deﬁnes the transition density between state
s and s under action a, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor, and
D is the distribution of the initial state. A stochastic policy
is deﬁned by a density distribution π(·; s) that speciﬁes for
each state s the density distribution over the action space A.
We observe the behavior of an expert that follows a policy π E that is optimal w.r.t. some reward function RE . We
assume that RE can be represented through a linear or nonlinear function R(s, a; ω), where ω ∈ Rq .
We consider inﬁnite horizon problems where the future
rewards are exponentially discounted with γ. Policies can
be ranked by their expected discounted reward starting from
the state distribution D:


π
dμ (s)
π(a; s)R(s, a; ω)dads,
JD (π) =

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are an effective mathematical tool in modeling decision making in uncertain dynamic environments, where tasks are simply deﬁned by
providing a reward function. However, in many real-world
problems, even the speciﬁcation of the reward function
can be problematic and it is easier to provide demonstrations from a desired policy. Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(IRL) aims at ﬁnding the reward function that is (implicitly
or explicitly) optimized by the demonstrated policy.
The approach proposed in this paper is based on the following observation: given a differentiable parametric representation of the expert’s policy, that is optimal w.r.t. to some
unknown reward function RE , its policy gradient computed
according to RE is zero. So, given a parametrized representation of the reward function, we solve the IRL problem by
searching the reward function that minimizes some norm of
the policy gradient. We show how this result can be obtained

S

A

where dπμ is the γ–discounted feature state distribution for
starting state distribution D (Sutton et al. 1999). In this work
we limit our attention to parametrized differentiable policies
π(a; s, θ), where θ ∈ Rd . Where possible we will use the
compact notation πθ .

Gradient Inverse Reinforcement Learning
In the ﬁrst scenario we consider the problem of recovering the reward function RE when the expert’s policy π E

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1993

