Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Containment of SPARQL
Queries under Entailment Regimes
Melisachew Wudage Chekol
Data and Web Science Group
University of Mannheim
Mannheim, Germany
mel@informatik.uni-mannheim.de
Rudolph 2007; Calvanese et al. 2000). Contrary to the automata techniques, the logic based approaches are fairly
implementable. In this respect, recently in (Genevès and
Schmitt 2015), the authors study logical combinators whose
beneﬁt is to provide an exponential gain in succinctness in
terms of the size of a logical formula. This allows us to study
containment for expressive query languages in exponentialtime, even though their direct formulation into the underlying logic results in an exponential blow up of the formula
size. Consequently, in this paper, we take advantage of this
approach to study the containment of SPARQL queries over
OWL EL ontologies under OWL DL entailment by a reduction into the μ-calculus. OWL 2 has three tractable proﬁles
called OWL EL, OWL QL, and OWL RL. In particular, we
are interested in OWL EL which is based on the description logic EL++ and is a maximal subset of OWL 2 DL
in which reasoning problems can be decided in polynomial
time. EL++ is very attractive and has been used widely as a
language of choice for terminological reasoning in biomedical applications (Kazakov, Krötzsch, and Simancik 2014;
Baader, Brandt, and Lutz 2005). Query answering over
OWL EL ontologies under the OWL DL entailment regime
can be done via ontology-based data access (OBDA – query
answering in the presence of ontologies) which requires
queries to be expanded using the terminological part of the
ontology (Hansen et al. 2015; Bienvenu, Lutz, and Wolter
2012). Likewise, checking query containment under an entailment regime can be reduced to testing the containment
of the rewritten or expanded queries. Indeed, for conjunctive
queries query containment and query answering are equivalent problems. Thus, containment can be reduced to query
answering as shown in (Calvanese, Giacomo, and Lenzerini
2008).
The fact that conjunctive query answering over unrestricted EL++ ontologies is undecidable was proved at the
same time and independently by (Krötzsch and Rudolph
2007) and by (Rosati 2007). In particular combining role
atoms in queries and complex role inclusion axioms can
make reasoning more difﬁcult. Thus, for this work, we consider OWL EL without role composition and nominals, precisely, the fragment based on the ELHdr
⊥ (EL extended with
role hierarchies, domain and range restrictions, and a bottom
concept) (Baader, Brandt, and Lutz 2008). With this restriction, we obtained a double exponential upper bound in the

Abstract
Most description logics (DL) query languages allow instance
retrieval from an ABox. However, SPARQL is a schema
query language allowing access to the TBox (in addition to
the ABox). Moreover, its entailment regimes enable to take
into account knowledge inferred from knowledge bases in the
query answering process. This provides a new perspective for
the containment problem. In this paper, we study the containment of SPARQL queries over OWL EL axioms under entailment. OWL EL is the language used by many large scale
ontologies and is based on EL++ . The main contribution is a
novel approach to rewriting queries using SPARQL property
paths and the μ-calculus in order to reduce containment test
under entailment into validity check in the μ-calculus.

Introduction
Recently, the study of SPARQL query containment has attracted a lot of attention. In (Kostylev et al. 2015), the
authors explore the complexity of containment and evaluation problems for fragments of SPARQL 1.1 property
paths. Interestingly, in their study they allow negated property paths. The study in (Pichler and Skritek 2014) provides
complexity analysis for several fragments of SPARQL: the
results ranging from NP-completeness for AND-UNION
queries to undecidability for the full SPARQL. Additionally, in (Letelier et al. 2013) the containment and optimization of OPTIONAL queries is investigated while providing
a ΠP
2 -complete complexity for query subsumption (a solution ρ1 subsumes another solution ρ2 , if ρ2 extends ρ1
with more variables). However, these studies do not consider the containment problem under schema nor entailment regimes. On the contrary, the authors in (Chekol et al.
2012b) and (Chekol et al. 2012a) address containment under
SHI schema axioms and RDFS entailment regime respectively and establish a double exponential upper bound complexity. For this study, we consider the OWL DL entailment.
Automata theoretic notions and a reduction into validity
test in a logic have been widely used to address the problem
of query answering and containment (Kostylev et al. 2015;
Chekol et al. 2012b; Calvanese, Giacomo, and Lenzerini
2008; Genevès, Layaı̈da, and Schmitt 2007; Krötzsch and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

936

