Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bayesian Inference of Recursive Sequences
of Group Activities from Tracks
Ernesto Brau,1 Colin Dawson,2 Alfredo Carrillo,3 David Sidi,3 Clayton T. Morrison3
1

Computer Science Department, Boston College; brauavil@bc.edu
Department of Mathematics, Oberlin College; cdawson@oberlin.edu
3
School of Information, University of Arizona; {isaac85,dsidi,claytonm}@email.arizona.edu
2

ity structure. (2) Activities are described hierarchically and
recursively, entailing multiple levels of granularity both in
time and membership. (3) Arbitrarily sized groups of actors
participate in activities and fulﬁll roles. (4) Hierarchical descriptions and temporally changing groupings consist of the
best joint explanation of the full set of individual trajectories, as found via posterior probabilistic inference.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we review prior research, with a focus on work modeling group membership, hierarchically structured activities,
and the identiﬁcation of roles. In Section 3 we present our
probabilistic generative model. In Section 4 we present an
MCMC sampling framework for performing joint inference
using the model. In Section 5 we evaluate the model on synthetic and real-world data from the VIRAT (Oh et al. 2011)
and UCLA Aerial Event (Shu et al. 2015) video data sets,
demonstrating the model’s expressive power and effectiveness. We conclude with a discussion of future work.

Abstract
We present a probabilistic generative model for inferring a description of coordinated, recursively structured
group activities at multiple levels of temporal granularity based on observations of individuals’ trajectories.
The model accommodates: (1) hierarchically structured
groups, (2) activities that are temporally and compositionally recursive, (3) component roles assigning different subactivity dynamics to subgroups of participants,
and (4) a nonparametric Gaussian Process model of trajectories. We present an MCMC sampling framework
for performing joint inference over recursive activity
descriptions and assignment of trajectories to groups,
integrating out continuous parameters. We demonstrate
the model’s expressive power in several simulated and
complex real-world scenarios from the VIRAT and
UCLA Aerial Event video data sets.

1

Introduction

Human activity recognition comprises a range of open challenges and is a very active research area (Aggarwal and
Ryoo 2011; Vishwakarma and Agrawal 2013; Sukthankar
et al. 2014), spanning topics from visual recognition of individual behavior (Poppe 2010), pairwise interactions among
individuals participating in different roles in a joint activity (Barbu et al. 2012; Kwak, Han, and Han 2013), coordinated sequences of actions as expressions of planned activity
(Geib and Goldman 2009), and multiple groups of individuals interacting across broad time scales. In this paper, we
address the last of these, presenting a framework for automatically constructing an interpretation of high-level human
activity structure as observed in surveillance video, across
multiple, interleaved instances of activities. We assume that
lower-level visual processing provides high quality tracks of
individuals moving through the scene. Our goal is to construct accurate descriptions of the events in the video at different levels of granularity, based on the tracks alone. We
develop a probabilistic generative model that combines multiple features that to our knowledge have not been previously
incorporated into a single framework for joint inference. To
wit: (1) Activities have composite structure with roles representing semantically distinct aspects of the overall activ-

2

Related Work

A number of researchers have proposed models that distinguish the different roles that individuals play in a coordinated activity (Ryoo and Aggarwal 2011; Barbu et al. 2012;
Lan, Sigal, and Mori 2012; Kwak, Han, and Han 2013).
These models capture the semantics of activities with component structure. It can be difﬁcult to scale role identiﬁcation
in scenes with an arbitrary number of individuals, in particular while properly handling identiﬁcation of non-participants
(Kwak, Han, and Han 2013). A consequence of our joint inference over role assignments and groups is that our model
naturally distinguishes and separates participants of different activities playing different roles.
Considerable work has been devoted to developing more
expressive models in which activities are decomposed into
hierarchical levels of description, across different spatial and
temporal granularities. Some prior models account for a speciﬁc number of hierarchical levels of description, with up to
3 levels being a popular choice (Choi and Savarese 2012;
Lan et al. 2010; Chang, Krahnstoever, and Ge 2011; Cheng
et al. 2014). Other models permit a potentially greater number of levels of activity description, but the activity hierarchy is ﬁxed prior to inference (Kwak, Han, and Han 2013;
Garate et al. 2014; Zaidenberg, Boulay, and Bremond 2012).
In only a few cases, including our model, are the levels of ac-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1129

