Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Closeness Centrality for Networks with Overlapping Community Structure
Mateusz K. Tarkowski1 and Piotr Szczepański2
Talal Rahwan3 and Tomasz P. Michalak1,4 and Michael Wooldridge1
2

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
2
Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
3
Masdar Institute of Science and Technology, United Arab Emirates
4
Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
One aspect of networks that has been largely ignored in
the literature on centrality is the fact that certain real-life
networks have a predeﬁned community structure. In public
transportation networks, for example, bus stops are typically
grouped by the bus lines (or routes) that visit them. In coauthorship networks, the various venues where authors publish can be interpreted as communities (Szczepański, Michalak, and Wooldridge 2014). In social networks, individuals
grouped by similar interests can be thought of as members
of a community. Clearly for such networks, it is desirable
to have a centrality measure that accounts for the predeﬁned community structure. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, only one such measure has been developed to date
(Szczepański, Michalak, and Wooldridge 2014), which extends Degree centrality to networks with community structure. Despite this recent development, one important aspect
of real-life networks remains missing from existing centrality measures: the ability to consider overlapping communities. Take social networks, for example, where such overlaps
are widespread due to the various afﬁliations and interests
of the individuals involved (Kelley et al. 2012). Likewise, in
our example of transportation networks, a bus stop may be
on the route of multiple (i.e., overlapping) bus lines. If such
a stop becomes inaccessible, then all the bus lines that visit
it would no longer function properly. As such, the importance of a bus stop clearly depends (at least partially) on the
importance of the bus lines to which it belongs.
In an attempt to deﬁne a centrality measure that accounts
for overlapping communities, we focused on game-theoretic
centrality measures.1 The inspiration behind this line of research comes from solution concepts in cooperative game
theory. In essence, given a set of players, a cooperative solution concept typically deﬁnes a payoff for each player by
comparing his or her contribution to the various groups of
players (more on this in the next section). The rich repository of solution concepts has been extensively reﬁned and
expanded over the past decades, making it an ideal toolkit
for quantifying the importance of individuals in a setting
where those individuals co-exist and operate in groups. In
the context of game-theoretic network centrality, the indi-

Abstract
Certain real-life networks have a community structure in
which communities overlap. For example, a typical bus network includes bus stops (nodes), which belong to one or more
bus lines (communities) that often overlap. Clearly, it is important to take this information into account when measuring the centrality of a bus stop—how important it is to the
functioning of the network. For example, if a certain stop becomes inaccessible, the impact will depend in part on the bus
lines that visit it. However, existing centrality measures do not
take such information into account. Our aim is to bridge this
gap. We begin by developing a new game-theoretic solution
concept, which we call the Conﬁguration semivalue, in order
to have greater ﬂexibility in modelling the community structure compared to previous solution concepts from cooperative game theory. We then use the new concept as a building
block to construct the ﬁrst extension of Closeness centrality
to networks with community structure (overlapping or otherwise). Despite the computational complexity inherited from
the Conﬁguration semivalue, we show that the corresponding
extension of Closeness centrality can be computed in polynomial time. We empirically evaluate this measure and our
algorithm that computes it by analysing the Warsaw public
transportation network.

Introduction
One of the key problems in network science involves identifying the most important (or central) nodes (Freeman 1979;
Dezső and Barabási 2002; Keinan et al. 2004; Page et al.
1999). The four best-known centrality measures are Degree, Betweenness, Closeness and Eigenvector centralities
(Bonacich 1972; Freeman 1979), each of which views centrality from a different perspective, focusing on certain traits
that make nodes important, or, “central,” to the functioning of a network (Brandes and Erlebach 2005; Koschutzki
et al. 2005). Our focus in this paper is on Closeness centrality. This measure considers the important nodes to be
those that are relatively close to all other nodes in the
network: the closer a node is to the others, the higher
its centrality. Closeness centrality has many applications,
from coauthorship networks (Yan and Ding 2009), through
tourism (Shih 2006), to social networks (Barabasi 2003;
Karinthy 2006).

See www.game-theoretic-centrality.com and
www.network-centrality.com for an overview of this line
of research.
1

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

622

