Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Word Embedding and a Josa Vector
for Korean Unsupervised Semantic Role Induction
Kyeong-Min Nam and Yu-Seop Kim
Department of Convergence Software
Hallym University 1 Hallymdaehak-gil, Chuncheon,Gangwon-do, 200-702 Korea
jkre4030@naver.com, yuseop.kim@gmail.com

In this paper we describe an unsupervised approach to argument classiﬁcation or role induction that does not make
use of role annotated data. We treat role induction as a clustering problem. To resolve the sparsity issue for agglutinative languages, we employ a word representation and a
feature vector of the sufﬁxes. Word embedding is, largely
due to their ability to capture subtle syntactic and semantic
patterns, useful in a variety of NLP tasks, such as semantic relatedness (Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski 2014). We
construct word embeddings by using Canonical Correlation
Analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1935). We present an unsupervised Korean SRL method which achieves up to a 65.43%
of F1-score and 73.35% of accuracy.

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised semantic role labeling method
for Korean language, one of the agglutinative languages
which have complicated sufﬁx structures telling much of syntactic. First, we construct an argument embedding and then
develop a indicator vector of the sufﬁx such as a Josa. And,
we construct an argument tuple by concatenating above two
vectors. The role induction is performed by clustering the argument tuples. These method which achieves up to a 65.43%
of F1-score and 73.35% of accuracy.

Introduction
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) is the task of identifying
the arguments of lexical predicates in a sentence and labeling them with semantic roles. Most of the current statistical
approaches to SRL are supervised, requiring large quantities of human annotated data to estimate model parameters.
Unsupervised semantic role induction has attracted significant interest recently due to a problem of the limited size
of annotated corpora. (Lang and Lapata 2010) used predicate features associated with their syntactic functions. In
their later works (Lang and Lapata 2011), they also used the
relative position (left/right) of the argument to its predicate.
(Grenager and Manning 2006) used an ordering of the linking of semantic roles and syntactic relations.
Agglutinative languages such as Japanese, Korean, and
Turkish tend to have a high number of sufﬁxes/morphemes
per a word, making them computationally difﬁcult due to
word-form sparsity and variable word order (Kim et al.
2014).

Role Labeling Process
Our method will allocate a separate set of clusters for each
predicate and assign the arguments of a speciﬁc predicate to
one of the clusters associated with it. For clustering, we ﬁrst
induce vector representations for all argument types through
canonical correlation analysis (CCA) — a powerful and ﬂexible technique for deriving low-dimensional representations.
Also, we can induce the Josa representation of the argument
as an indicator vector.

Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA)
CCA is a powerful technique for inducing general representations that operates on a pair of multi-dimensional variables. CCA ﬁnds k dimensions in which these random variables are maximally correlated. The new k-dimensional representation of each variable now contains information about
the other variable.

Let x1 . . . xm ∈ Rn and y1 . . . ym ∈ Rn be m samples
of the two variables. Then CCA computes the following for
i = 1 . . . k:

1. a.[Chul-su]A0 neun [doseogwan]LOC eseo[gongbu]A1 rull
handa
b.[Doseogwan]LOC eseo [Chul-su]A0 neun [gongbu]A1
rull handa

arg max

The semantic roles in examples (1-a) and (1-b) are labeled
like PropBank (Palmer, Gildea, and Kingsbury 2005). For
both sentences and word order, which plays an important
role in English SRL, contributes nothing. The sufﬁxes such
as josa(neun, eseo and rull in these examples), rather than
the position, of arguments determine semantic roles.



ui ∈Rn , vi ∈Rn :

u
i ui =0 ∀i <i



m



l=1 (ui xl )(vi yl )

m

2
l=1 (ui xl )



m

2
l=1 (vi yl )

(1)

vi vi =0 ∀i <i

Inducing argument embedding
We now describe how to use CCA to induce vector representations for argument. Using the same notation, let m be
the number of instances of argument in the entire data. Let

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4240

