Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Counterfactual Regret Minimization in Sequential Security Games
Viliam Lisý and Trevor Davis and Michael Bowling
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2E8
{lisy,trdavis1,bowling}@ualberta.ca

We focus on an abstract class of sequential games that can
model many sequential security games, such as games taking place in physical space that can be discretized as a graph.
This class of games is called normal-form games with sequential strategies (NFGSS) (Bosansky et al. 2015) and it includes, for example, existing game theoretic models of ticket
inspection (Jiang et al. 2013), border patrolling (Bosansky et
al. 2015), and securing road networks (Jain et al. 2011).
In this work we formally prove that any NFGSS can
be modelled as a slightly generalized chance-relaxed skew
well-formed imperfect-recall game (CRSWF) (Lanctot et al.
2012; Kroer and Sandholm 2014), a subclass of extensiveform games with imperfect recall in which counterfactual
regret minimization is guaranteed to converge to the optimal
strategy. We then show how to adapt the recent variant of
the algorithm, CFR+ , directly to NFGSS and present experimental validation on two distinct domains modelling search
games and ticket inspection. We show that CFR+ is applicable and efﬁcient in domains with imperfect recall that are
substantially different from poker. Moreover, if we are willing to sacriﬁce a negligible degree of approximation, CFR+
can ﬁnd a solution substantially faster than methods traditionally used in research on security games, such as formulating the game as a linear program (LP) and incrementally
building the game model by double oracle methods.

Abstract
Many real world security problems can be modelled
as ﬁnite zero-sum games with structured sequential
strategies and limited interactions between the players. An abstract class of games unifying these models
are the normal-form games with sequential strategies
(NFGSS). We show that all games from this class can
be modelled as well-formed imperfect-recall extensiveform games and consequently can be solved by counterfactual regret minimization. We propose an adaptation of the CFR+ algorithm for NFGSS and compare
its performance to the standard methods based on linear programming and incremental game generation. We
validate our approach on two security-inspired domains.
We show that with a negligible loss in precision, CFR+
can compute a Nash equilibrium with ﬁve times less
computation than its competitors.

Game theory has been recently used to model many real
world security problems, such as protecting airports (Pita et
al. 2008) or airplanes (Tsai et al. 2009) from terrorist attacks, preventing fare evaders form misusing public transport (Yin et al. 2012), preventing attacks in computer networks (Durkota et al. 2015), or protecting wildlife from
poachers (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015). Many of these security problems are sequential in nature. Rather than a single
monolithic action, the players’ strategies are formed by sequences of smaller individual decisions. For example, the
ticket inspectors make a sequence of decisions about where
to check tickets and which train to take; a network administrator protects the network against a sequence of actions an
attacker uses to penetrate deeper into the network.
Sequential decision making in games has been extensively studied from various perspectives. Recent years have
brought signiﬁcant progress in solving massive imperfectinformation extensive-form games with a focus on the game
of poker. Counterfactual regret minimization (Zinkevich et
al. 2008) is the family of algorithms that has facilitated much
of this progress, with a recent incarnation (Tammelin et al.
2015) essentially solving for the ﬁrst time a variant of poker
commonly played by people (Bowling et al. 2015). However, there has not been any transfer of these results to research on real world security problems.

Game Model
NFGSS is a class of two-player zero-sum sequential games
in which each player i’s strategy space has the structure of a
ﬁnite directed acyclic Markov decision process (MDP) with
the set of states Si , set of actions Ai and a stochastic transition function T : Si × Ai → Δ(Si ). The transition function
deﬁnes the probability of reaching next states after an action
is executed in the current state. We denote by Δ(·) a set of
probability distributions over a set; A(si ) ⊆ Ai the actions
applicable in state si ; and s0i the initial state of the MDP.
A player’s strategy is a probability distribution over actions applicable in each state. We denote δi (si , ai ) to be the
probability that a player following strategy δi reaches state
si and then executes action ai . An important restriction in
this class of games is that the utility is deﬁned in terms of
marginal utilities for simultaneously executed state-action
pairs (si , ai ) ∈ Si × Ai by the players. The ﬁrst player’s

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

544

