Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Exploring Multiple Feature Spaces for Novel Entity Discovery
†

Zhaohui Wu†∗ , Yang Song , C. Lee Giles‡†

Computer Science and Engineering, ‡ Information Sciences and Technology
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA

Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052, USA
zzw109@psu.edu, yangsong@microsoft.com, giles@ist.psu.edu
While there exists plenty of related work on entity recognition and disambiguation (Shen, Li, and Doan 2005; Ji et
al. 2014; Shen, Wang, and Han 2015), novel entity discovery
has not been fully studied. Most entity linking (EL) systems either simply ignore the novel entities (Cucerzan 2007;
Han, Sun, and Zhao 2011), or treat them as NIL entities
without carefully modeling their representation. Existing
work (Ratinov et al. 2011; Hoffart, Altun, and Weikum 2014)
have shown that identifying NIL entities is challenging, especially for those entities with ambiguous names.
Most EL systems address NIL entities by predeﬁning a
threshold on the conﬁdence score of linking a mention to the
top ranked candidate entity. If the score is below the threshold, the mention will be marked as a NIL entity (Bunescu
and Pasca 2006; Gottipati and Jiang 2011). However, this
approach may not work for real-world applications because
tuning a robust threshold for all possible novel entities is
impractical, especially when NIL entity mentions are underrepresented due to the lack of informative context. Hoffart
et al. (2014) addressed the problem by remodeling NIL entities in a KB and reestimating the threshold based on the
output conﬁdence score of their EL system. However, their
keyphrase based context modeling approach may lack capability on capturing the semantics of novel entity mentions, as
the mentions may have very few effective contextual words
that overlap with the predeﬁned keyphrase set, especially at
the early emerging time of novel entities.
Other EL systems such as Ratinov et al. (2011) train a binary classiﬁer to determine whether the top ranked candidate
is a NIL or a correct matching entity, using the same features
as the entity candidate ranking plus additional features that
are indicative of NIL. The mentions for which the top-ranked
candidate did not match the gold entity are treated as negative
(NIL) examples, while the mentions that got correct matching serve as positive (in-KB) examples. However, this would
result in incorrect negative labels on in-KB mentions (if their
top-ranked candidate is incorrect) thus decrease the quality
of the trained classiﬁer. For example, if the entity candidate
ranker mistakenly ranks the entity “Apple Corp.” at the top
for the mention “Apple” in a news about Apple Inc. while
the gold entity “Apple Inc.” is in the second or third position,
then their system will incorrectly label the mention “Apple”
as a NIL example.
Previous methods focus mostly on addressing NIL entities as a submodule of entity linking, without crafting welldesigned features or general techniques to model and identify

Abstract
Continuously discovering novel entities in news and Web data
is important for Knowledge Base (KB) maintenance. One of
the key challenges is to decide whether an entity mention
refers to an in-KB or out-of-KB entity. We propose a principled approach that learns a novel entity classiﬁer by modeling
mention and entity representation into multiple feature spaces,
including contextual, topical, lexical, neural embedding and
query spaces. Different from most previous studies that address novel entity discovery as a submodule of entity linking
systems, our model is more a generalized approach and can
be applied as a pre-ﬁltering step of novel entities for any entity linking systems. Experiments on three real-world datasets
show that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods on identifying novel entities.

Introduction
Comprehensive knowledge bases have been an elusive goal
of AI for decades (Hoffart et al. 2013), where a key challenge
is to discover new knowledge that emerges continually from
various sources such as news streams, social feeds, academic
publications, etc. It is reported that Wikipedia and its sister
projects grow at a speed of more than 10 edits per second1 ;
while the English version of Wikipedia increases by more
than 800 articles per day2 . However, manual approaches to
discover new entities is for most cases not scalable and cannot
guarantee the coverage or timeliness3 . Thus, algorithms that
automatically discover and ingest novel entities in to a KB are
critical for its freshness and completeness. Typically, entity
discovery and linking contains 3 major steps. First, entity
recognition extracts the surface forms or mentions of entities
from a data stream. Then, entity linking or disambiguation
module decides which entity entry in the KB a mention refers
to. Finally, if none of the existing entries matches the mention,
it will be treated as a novel (or NIL, unlinkable, out-of-KB)
entity.
∗
This work was primarily done when the ﬁrst author was on an
internship at Microsoft Research.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://tools.wmﬂabs.org/wmcounter/
2
http://tools.wmﬂabs.org/wmcharts/wmchart0002.php
3
Our estimation on 1381 tail entities show that the average latency of their Wikipedia article creation behind news appearance is
133 days.

3073

