Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Exponential Recency Weighted Average
Branching Heuristic for SAT Solvers
Jia Hui Liang, Vijay Ganesh,
Pascal Poupart, Krzysztof Czarnecki
jliang@gsd.uwaterloo.ca, vijay.ganesh@uwaterloo.ca
ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca, kczarnec@gsd.uwaterloo.ca
University of Waterloo, Canada
element in the success of CDCL SAT solvers is the branching heuristic, such as Variable State Independent Decaying
Sum (VSIDS) (Moskewicz et al. 2001), that dynamically select variables and assign them truth values (the process also
known as branching) as the solver searches for a solution to
the input Boolean formula.
While many branching heuristics have been invented, two
signiﬁcant issues have hampered their study in the past.
First, despite the considerable effort expended in designing
branching heuristics such as DLIS (Marques-Silva 1999),
BerkMin (Goldberg and Novikov 2007), and JeroslavWang (Jeroslow and Wang 1990), the VSIDS branching
heuristic and its variants remain as the most effective ones
in widespread use today. The success of VSIDS has dramatically raised the bar that any new heuristic has to overcome.
Second, until very recently, little was understood as to why
the VSIDS branching heuristic and its variants are so effective. Some recent papers provide insights into the inner
working of VSIDS (Liang et al. 2015; Ansótegui, GiráldezCru, and Levy 2012; Biere and Fröhlich 2015), and some of
those insights (Liang et al. 2015) are the basis and inspiration for the work presented in this paper.
In this paper, we present a new branching heuristic, we
call conﬂict history-based branching heuristic (CHB), based
on the exponential recency weighted average (ERWA) algorithm used in nonstationary multi-armed bandit problems
(i.e., single state reinforcement learning problems) to estimate the average reward of different actions (Sutton and
Barto 1998). Inspired by the bandit framework and reinforcement learning, we learn to choose good variables to
branch based on past experience. Our goal is to leverage
the theory and practice of a rich sub-ﬁeld of reinforcement
learning to explain and design an effective branching heuristic for solving real-world problems.
The branching heuristic proposed in this paper, CHB, is
completely online and learns which variable to branch on
dynamically as the input instance is being solved. By online
we mean that the heuristic learns only during the solving
process, and there is no ofﬂine learning.
We evaluated the efﬁcacy of CHB on the SAT Competition 2013 (Balint et al. 2013) and 2014 (Belov et al.
2014) benchmarks from the application and hand-crafted
categories, and show that CHB solves signiﬁcantly more
instances than VSIDS. The SAT Competition is a ﬁercely

Abstract
Modern conﬂict-driven clause-learning SAT solvers routinely
solve large real-world instances with millions of clauses and
variables in them. Their success crucially depends on effective branching heuristics. In this paper, we propose a
new branching heuristic inspired by the exponential recency
weighted average algorithm used to solve the bandit problem. The branching heuristic, we call CHB, learns online
which variables to branch on by leveraging the feedback received from conﬂict analysis. We evaluated CHB on 1200 instances from the SAT Competition 2013 and 2014 instances,
and showed that CHB solves signiﬁcantly more instances
than VSIDS, currently the most effective branching heuristic in widespread use. More precisely, we implemented CHB
as part of the MiniSat and Glucose solvers, and performed
an apple-to-apple comparison with their VSIDS-based variants. CHB-based MiniSat (resp. CHB-based Glucose) solved
approximately 16.1% (resp. 5.6%) more instances than their
VSIDS-based variants. Additionally, CHB-based solvers are
much more efﬁcient at constructing ﬁrst preimage attacks
on step-reduced SHA-1 and MD5 cryptographic hash functions, than their VSIDS-based counterparts. To the best of
our knowledge, CHB is the ﬁrst branching heuristic to solve
signiﬁcantly more instances than VSIDS on a large, diverse
benchmark of real-world instances.

Introduction
Over the past two decades, conﬂict-driven clause-learning
(CDCL) SAT solvers (Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1999;
Moskewicz et al. 2001; Audemard and Simon 2009a;
Sorensson and Een 2005; Biere 2010), designed to solve the
Boolean satisﬁability problem, have played a crucial role in
the development of many innovative techniques in AI, software engineering, and security. Examples include solverbased automated testing with symbolic execution (Cadar et
al. 2008), bounded model checking (Biere et al. 2003) for
software and hardware veriﬁcation, and planning in AI (Rintanen 2009). These solvers are surprisingly efﬁcient in solving large classes of real-world instances which may contain tens of millions of variables and clauses in them, even
though the Boolean satisﬁability problem is known to be
NP-complete and believed to be intractable in general. A key
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3434

