Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Inﬁnite Plaid Models for Inﬁnite Bi-Clustering
Katsuhiko Ishiguro, Issei Sato,* Masahiro Nakano, Akisato Kimura, Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan
*The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

(such as k-means) for matrices: the entire matrix is partitioned into many rectangle blocks, and all matrix entries are
assigned to one (or more) of these blocks (Fig. 1). However,
for knowledge discovery from the matrix, we are only interested in few sub-matrices that are essential or interpretable.
For that purpose exhaustive bi-clustering techniques require
post-processing in which all sub-matrices are examined to
identify “informative” ones, often by painful manual eﬀort.
On the contrary, the goal of non-exhaustive bi-clustering
methods is to extract the most informative or signiﬁcant
sub-matrices, not partitioning all matrix entries. Thus the
non-exhaustive bi-clustering is more similar to clique detection problems in network analysis: not all nodes in a network are extracted as clique members. Non-exhaustive biclustering would greatly reduce the man-hour costs of manual inspections and knowledge discovery, because it ignores
non-informative matrix entries (Fig. 1).
Hereafter let us use “bi-clustering” to mean “NEO biclustering”. There has been a plenty of bi-clustering researches over years, e.g. (Cheng and Church 2000; Lazzeroni and Owen 2002; Caldas and Kaski 2008; Shabalin et
al. 2009; Fu and Banerjee 2009). However, there is one fatal problem that has not been solved yet: determining the
number of sub-matrices to be extracted. Most existing biclustering methods assume that the number of sub-matrices
is ﬁxed a priori. This brings two essential diﬃculties. First,
ﬁnding the appropriate number of sub-matrices is very diﬃcult. Recall that determining “k” for classical k-means clustering is not trivial in general. And the same holds, perhaps more diﬃcult (Gu and Liu 2008), for bi-clustering.
Second, sub-optimal choices of the sub-matrix number inevitably degrade bi-clustering performances. For example,
assume there are K = 3 sub-matrices incorporated in the
given data matrix. Solving the bi-clustering by assuming
K = 2(< 3) never recover the true sub-matrices. If we solve
with K = 5(> 3), then the model seeks for two extra submatrices to fulﬁll the assumed K; e.g. splitting a correct submatrix into multiple smaller sub-matrices.
There are few works on this problem. One such
work (Ben-Dor et al. 2003) suﬀers computational complexity equivalent to the cube to the number of columns; thus it
is feasible only for matrices with very few columns. Gu and
Liu (Gu and Liu 2008) adopted the model selection approach
based on BIC. However model selection inevitably requires

Abstract
We propose a probabilistic model for non-exhaustive and
overlapping (NEO) bi-clustering. Our goal is to extract a few
sub-matrices from the given data matrix, where entries of a
sub-matrix are characterized by a speciﬁc distribution or parameters. Existing NEO bi-clustering methods typically require the number of sub-matrices to be extracted, which is
essentially diﬃcult to ﬁx a priori. In this paper, we extend
the plaid model, known as one of the best NEO bi-clustering
algorithms, to allow inﬁnite bi-clustering; NEO bi-clustering
without specifying the number of sub-matrices. Our model
can represent inﬁnite sub-matrices formally. We develop a
MCMC inference without the ﬁnite truncation, which potentially addresses all possible numbers of sub-matrices. Experiments quantitatively and qualitatively verify the usefulness
of the proposed model. The results reveal that our model can
oﬀer more precise and in-depth analysis of sub-matrices.

Introduction
In this paper, we are interested in bi-clustering for matrix
data analysis. Given the data, the goal of bi-clustering is to
extract a few (possibly overlapping) sub-matrices1 from the
matrix where we can characterize entries of a sub-matrix by
a speciﬁc distribution or parameters. Bi-clustering is potentially applicable for many domains. Assume an mRNA expression data matrix, which consists of rows of experimental conditions and columns of genes. Given such data, biologists are interested in detecting pairs of speciﬁc conditions ×
gene subsets that have diﬀerent expression levels compared
to other expression entries. From a user × product purchase
record, we can extract sub-matrices of selected users × particular products that sell very good. Successful extraction of
such sub-matrices is the basis for eﬃcient ad-targeting.
More speciﬁcally we study the non-exhaustive and overlapping (NEO) bi-clustering. Here we distinguish between
the exhaustive and non-exhaustive bi-clustering.
Exhaustive bi-clustering (e.g. (Erosheva, Fienberg, and
Laﬀerty 2004; Kemp et al. 2006; Roy and Teh 2009;
Nakano et al. 2014)) is an extension of typical clustering
Copyright c
 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
By sub-matrix, we mean a direct product of a subset of row
indices and a subset of column indices.

1701

