Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

When Can the Maximin Share Guarantee Be Guaranteed?
David Kurokawa

Ariel D. Procaccia

Junxing Wang

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
dkurokaw@cs.cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
junxingw@andrew.cmu.edu

are interested in, let us brieﬂy discuss two others. An allocation is envy free if for all i, j ∈ N , Vi (Ai ) ≥ Vi (Aj );
and it is proportional if for all i ∈ N , Vi (Ai ) ≥ Vi (G)/n.
Note that, in our setting, any envy-free allocation is also proportional. While these notions are compelling — and provably feasible in some fair division settings, such as cake cutting (Brams and Taylor 1996; Procaccia 2013) — they cannot always be achieved in our setting (say for example when
there are two players and one good).
We therefore focus on a third fairness notion: maximin
share (MMS) guarantee, introduced by Budish (2011). The
MMS guarantee of player i ∈ N is

Abstract
The fairness notion of maximin share (MMS) guarantee underlies a deployed algorithm for allocating indivisible goods
under additive valuations. Our goal is to understand when we
can expect to be able to give each player his MMS guarantee. Previous work has shown that such an MMS allocation
may not exist, but the counterexample requires a number of
goods that is exponential in the number of players; we give a
new construction that uses only a linear number of goods. On
the positive side, we formalize the intuition that these counterexamples are very delicate by designing an algorithm that
provably ﬁnds an MMS allocation with high probability when
valuations are drawn at random.

MMS(i) = max min Vi (Sj ),
S1 ,...,Sn j∈N

1

Introduction

where S1 , . . . , Sn is a partition of the set of goods G; a partition that maximizes this value is known as an MMS partition. In words, this is the value player i can achieve by
dividing the goods into n bundles, and receiving his least
desirable bundle. Alternatively, this is the value i can guarantee by partitioning the items, and then letting all other
players choose a bundle before he does. An MMS allocation is an allocation A1 , . . . , An such that for all i ∈ N ,
Vi (Ai ) ≥ MMS(i). In contrast to work on maximizing the
minimum value of any player (Bansal and Sviridenko 2006;
Asadpour and Saberi 2007; Roos and Rothe 2010), MMS is
a “Boolean” fairness notion. Also note that a proportional
allocation is always an MMS allocation, that is, proportionality is a stronger fairness property than MMS.
It is tempting to think that in our setting (additive valuations), an MMS allocation always exists. In fact, extensive
experiments by Bouveret and Lemaı̂tre (2014) did not yield
a single counterexample. Alas, it turns out that (intricate)
counterexamples do exist (Procaccia and Wang 2014). On
the positive side, approximate MMS allocations are known
to exist. Speciﬁcally, it is always possible to give each player
a bundle worth at least 2/3 of his MMS guarantee, that is,
there exists an allocation A1 , . . . , An such that for all i ∈ N ,
Vi (Ai ) ≥ 23 MMS(i) (Procaccia and Wang 2014). Furthermore, very recent work by Amanatidis et al. (2015) achieves
the same approximation ratio in polynomial time.
These theoretical results have already made a signiﬁcant
real-world impact through Spliddit (www.spliddit.org), a
not-for-proﬁt fair division website (Goldman and Procaccia
2014). Since its launch in November 2014, Spliddit has at-

We study the classic problem of fairly allocating indivisible
goods among several players. This situation typically arises
in inheritance cases, where a speciﬁc collection — containing, say, jewelry or artworks — is divided between several
heirs, without the use of monetary payments. From the AI
viewpoint, the overarching goal is to mediate such situations by constructing computer programs that can propose
intelligent compromises, and, indeed, a large body of recent
work in AI focuses on building the foundations necessary to
achieve this goal (Bouveret and Lang 2008; Procaccia 2009;
Cohler et al. 2011; Brams et al. 2012; Bei et al. 2012; Aumann, Dombb, and Hassidim 2013; Kurokawa, Lai, and Procaccia 2013; Brânzei and Miltersen 2013; Chen et al. 2013;
Aziz et al. 2014; Karp, Kazachkov, and Procaccia 2014;
Dickerson et al. 2014; Balkanski et al. 2014; Brânzei and
Miltersen 2015; Li, Zhang, and Zhang 2015).
Formally, let the set of players be N = {1, . . . , n}, and let
the set of goods be G, with |G| = m. We denote the value of
player i ∈ N for good g ∈ G by Vi (g) ≥ 0. We assume that
the valuations of the players are additive, that
is, for a bundle
of items S ⊆ G, we assume that Vi (S) = g∈S Vi (g). We
are interested in ﬁnding an allocation A1 , . . . , An — this is
a partition of G where Ai is the bundle of goods allocated to
player i ∈ N .
Let us now revisit the ﬁrst sentence above — what do we
mean by “fairly”? Before presenting the fairness notion we
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

523

