Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Approximate Probabilistic Inference via Word-Level Counting ∗ †
Supratik Chakraborty

Kuldeep S. Meel

Rakesh Mistry

Indian Institute of Technology,
Bombay

Department of Computer Science,
Rice University

Indian Institute of Technology,
Bombay

Moshe Y. Vardi
Department of Computer Science,
Rice University
is logarithmic in the size of the domain. Conditions on observed values are, in turn, encoded as word-level constraints,
and the corresponding model-counting problem asks one to
count the number of solutions of a word-level constraint. It is
therefore natural to ask if the success of approximate propositional model counters can be replicated at the word-level.
The balance between efﬁciency and strong guarantees
of hashing-based algorithms for approximate propositional
model counting crucially depends on two factors: (i) use of
XOR-based 2-universal bit-level hash functions, and (ii) use
of state-of-the-art propositional satisﬁability solvers, viz.
CryptoMiniSAT (Soos, Nohl, and Castelluccia 2009), that
can efﬁciently reason about formulas that combine disjunctive clauses with XOR clauses.
In recent years, the performance of SMT (Satisﬁability Modulo Theories) solvers has witnessed spectacular improvements (Barrett et al. 2012). Indeed, several highly optimized SMTsolvers for ﬁxed-width words are now available
in the public domain (Brummayer and Biere 2009; Jha, Limaye, and Seshia 2009; Hadarean et al. 2014; De Moura
and Bjørner 2008). Nevertheless, 2-universal hash functions
for ﬁxed-width words that are also amenable to efﬁcient reasoning by SMT solvers have hitherto not been studied. The
reasoning power of SMTsolvers for ﬁxed-width words has
therefore remained untapped for word-level model counting.
Thus, it is not surprising that all existing work on probabilistic inference using model counting (viz. (Chistikov, Dimitrova, and Majumdar 2015; Belle, Passerini, and Van den
Broeck 2015; Ermon et al. 2013)) effectively reduce the
problem to propositional model counting. Such approaches
are similar to “bit blasting” in SMT solvers (Kroening and
Strichman 2008).
The primary contribution of this paper is an efﬁcient word-level approximate model counting algorithm
SMTApproxMC that can be employed to answer inference
queries over high-dimensional discrete domains. Our algorithm uses a new class of word-level hash functions that are
2-universal and can be solved by word-level SMTsolvers capable of reasoning about linear equalities on words. Therefore, unlike previous works, SMTApproxMC is able to leverage the power of sophisticated SMT solvers.
To illustrate the practical utility of SMTApproxMC,
we implemented a prototype and evaluated it on a
suite of benchmarks. Our experiments demonstrate that

Abstract
Hashing-based model counting has emerged as a promising
approach for large-scale probabilistic inference on graphical models. A key component of these techniques is the
use of xor-based 2-universal hash functions that operate over
Boolean domains. Many counting problems arising in probabilistic inference are, however, naturally encoded over ﬁnite discrete domains. Techniques based on bit-level (or
Boolean) hash functions require these problems to be propositionalized, making it impossible to leverage the remarkable progress made in SMT (Satisﬁability Modulo Theory)
solvers that can reason directly over words (or bit-vectors). In
this work, we present the ﬁrst approximate model counter that
uses word-level hashing functions, and can directly leverage
the power of sophisticated SMT solvers. Empirical evaluation over an extensive suite of benchmarks demonstrates the
promise of the approach.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic inference on large and uncertain data sets is
increasingly being used in a wide range of applications. It
is well-known that probabilistic inference is polynomially
inter-reducible to model counting (Roth 1996). In a recent
line of work, it has been shown (Chakraborty, Meel, and
Vardi 2013; Chakraborty et al. 2014; Ermon et al. 2013; Ivrii
et al. 2015) that one can strike a ﬁne balance between performance and approximation guarantees for propositional
model counting, using 2-universal hash functions (Carter
and Wegman 1977) on Boolean domains. This has propelled
the model-counting formulation to emerge as a promising
“assembly language” (Belle, Passerini, and Van den Broeck
2015) for inferencing in probabilistic graphical models.
In a large class of probabilistic inference problems, an important case being lifted inference on ﬁrst order representations (Kersting 2012), the values of variables come from
ﬁnite but large (exponential in the size of the representation) domains. Data values coming from such domains are
naturally encoded as ﬁxed-width words, where the width
∗
The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name;
this should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions.
†
The full version is available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07663
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3218

