Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Interactive Learning and Analogical Chaining
for Moral and Commonsense Reasoning
Joseph A. Blass
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
joeblass@u.northwestern.edu

Abstract

MoralDM, SME, and Companions

Autonomous systems must consider the moral ramifications
of their actions. Moral norms vary among people and depend
on common sense, posing a challenge for encoding them
explicitly in a system. I propose to develop a model of
repeated analogical chaining and analogical reasoning to
enable autonomous agents to interactively learn to apply
common sense and model an individual’s moral norms.

MoralDM (Dehghani et al. 2009), the basis of my work, is a
computer model of moral reasoning that takes in a moral
dilemma in natural language, uses a natural language
understanding (NLU) system to generate Cyc-derived
predicate-logic representations of the dilemma, and uses
analogy over resolved cases and FPR over explicit moral
rules to make human-consistent moral decisions.
The Structure Mapping Engine (SME), based on
Gentner’s (1983) Structure Mapping Theory, aligns two
relational cases and draws inferences from the alignment.
SME can apply norms by analogy (Dehghani et al. 2009).
Analogy is good for moral reasoning because morality is
defined by the relationships between actors and events, not
their features (e.g., the instrument of harm).
MAC/FAC is a two-step model of analogical retrieval.
MAC computes in parallel dot-products between the content
vectors of the probe and each case in memory (a fast, coarse
similarity measure). FAC then performs SME mappings on
the most similar cases. MAC sees cases with mostly the
same entities as the probe as good potential matches, even if
the structures differ.
The Sequential Analogical Generalization Engine
(SAGE) builds case generalizations that emphasize shared,
and deprecate case-specific, facts. SAGE uses a case library
of generalizations and examples. Generalizations contain
facts from constituent cases: non-identical corresponding
entities are replaced by abstract ones; probabilities indicate
the proportion of cases each fact is in. Given a probe, SAGE
uses MAC/FAC to find the most similar case in its library.
If the match is strong, the case is assimilated; if not, it is
added as an example.
The Companion Cognitive Architecture emphasizes the
ubiquity of qualitative representations and analogical
reasoning in human cognition. Companions work
interactively with humans (Forbus & Hinrichs, 2006).

Challenge and Research Goals
Should a self-driving car put its passengers at risk and
swerve to avoid a jaywalker, or protect its passengers and
hit them? To participate in our society, computers need to
share our ethics. As they become more autonomous, they
must consider the moral ramifications of their actions. I
intend to build an AI moral-reasoning system that strives for
good, but can select amongst only bad options, by acquiring
and applying human morals. This system will require basic
common-sense reasoning capacities (e.g., to understand the
difference between throwing rocks vs. foam balls). The
system will use Repeated Analogical Chaining (RAC) to
acquire and apply common sense knowledge in order to
understand moral situations; will learn moral norms through
natural-language interaction with humans and analogical
generalization; and will apply these norms by analogy.
The range of moral norms and concerns (Graham et al.,
2009) make hand-encoding individuals’ morals or providing
case-by-case instructions impossible. Users also may not
have the technical skills nor understand their own morals
enough to encode them themselves. Since human morals do
not depend only on first-principles reasoning (FPR) (Haidt,
2001), and since moral rules contradict and trade off with
each other, I intend to minimize FPR in the system. A FPR
moral system would either need rules for all possible tradeoffs or would freeze when moral obligations conflict.
Analogical reasoning can avoid these problems if it can
retrieve a good case to reason from.
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4289

