Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

VBPR: Visual Bayesian Personalized
Ranking from Implicit Feedback
Ruining He

Julian McAuley

University of California, San Diego
r4he@ucsd.edu

University of California, San Diego
jmcauley@ucsd.edu

2009; Bell, Koren, and Volinsky 2007; Pan et al. 2008; Hu,
Koren, and Volinsky 2008). Despite the great success, they
suffer from cold start issues due to the sparsity of real-world
datasets.
Visual personalized ranking. Although a variety of
sources of data have been used to build hybrid models to
make cold start or context-aware recommendations (Schein
et al. 2002), from text (Bao, Fang, and Zhang 2014), to a
user’s physical location (Qiao et al. 2014), to the season or
temperature (Brown, Bovey, and Chen 1997), here we are interested in incorporating the visual appearance of the items
into the preference predictor, a source of data which is typically neglected by existing RSs. One wouldn’t buy a t-shirt
from Amazon without seeing the item in question, and therefore we argue that this important signal should not be ignored when building a system to recommend such products.
Building on the success of Matrix Factorization methods at uncovering the latent dimensions/factors of people’s
behavior, our goal here is to ask whether it is possible to
uncover the visual dimensions that are relevant to people’s
opinions, and if so, whether such ‘visual preference’ models
shall lead to improved performance at tasks like personalized ranking. Answering these questions requires us to develop scalable methods and representations that are capable
of handling millions of user actions, in addition to large volumes of visual data (e.g. product images) about the content
they consume.
In this paper, we develop models that incorporate visual
features for the task of personalized ranking on implicit
feedback datasets. By learning the visual dimensions people
consider when selecting products we will be able to alleviate cold start issues, help explain recommendations in terms
of visual signals, and produce personalized rankings that are
more consistent with users’ preferences. Methodologically
we model visual aspects of items by using representations
of product images derived from a (pre-trained) deep network
(Jia et al. 2014), on top of which we ﬁt an additional layer
that uncovers both visual and latent dimensions that are relevant to users’ opinions. Although incorporating complex
and domain-speciﬁc features often requires some amount of
manual engineering, we found that visual features are readily available out-of-the-box that are suitable for our task.
Experimentally our model exhibits signiﬁcant performance improvements on real-world datasets like Amazon

Abstract
Modern recommender systems model people and items by
discovering or ‘teasing apart’ the underlying dimensions that
encode the properties of items and users’ preferences toward
them. Critically, such dimensions are uncovered based on
user feedback, often in implicit form (such as purchase histories, browsing logs, etc.); in addition, some recommender
systems make use of side information, such as product attributes, temporal information, or review text. However one
important feature that is typically ignored by existing personalized recommendation and ranking methods is the visual appearance of the items being considered. In this paper we propose a scalable factorization model to incorporate visual signals into predictors of people’s opinions, which we apply to a
selection of large, real-world datasets. We make use of visual
features extracted from product images using (pre-trained)
deep networks, on top of which we learn an additional layer
that uncovers the visual dimensions that best explain the variation in people’s feedback. This not only leads to signiﬁcantly
more accurate personalized ranking methods, but also helps
to alleviate cold start issues, and qualitatively to analyze the
visual dimensions that inﬂuence people’s opinions.

Introduction
Modern Recommender Systems (RSs) provide personalized
suggestions by learning from historical feedback and uncovering the preferences of users and the properties of the items
they consume. Such systems play a central role in helping
people discover items of personal interest from huge corpora, ranging from movies and music (Bennett and Lanning
2007; Koenigstein, Dror, and Koren 2011), to research articles, news and books (Das et al. 2007; Lu et al. 2015), to
tags and even other users (Zhu et al. 2011; Xu et al. 2011;
Zhou et al. 2010).
The ‘historical feedback’ used to train such systems may
come in the form of explicit feedback such as star ratings,
or implicit feedback such as purchase histories, bookmarks,
browsing logs, search patterns, mouse activities etc. (Yi et al.
2014). In order to model user feedback in large, real-world
datasets, Matrix Factorization (MF) approaches have been
proposed to uncover the most relevant latent dimensions in
both explicit and implicit feedback settings (Rendle et al.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

144

