Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Qualitative Spatio-Temporal Stream Reasoning with Unobservable
Intertemporal Spatial Relations Using Landmarks
Daniel de Leng and Fredrik Heintz
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linköping University, 581 83 Linköping, Sweden
{daniel.de.leng, fredrik.heintz}@liu.se

Formalisms such as Metric Temporal Logic (MTL) (Koymans 1990) in combination with techniques such as progression can be used to apply logic-based temporal stream
reasoning, and formalisms such as ST 0 (Wolter and Zakharyaschev 2000) extend temporal formalisms with qualitative spatial expressions. One problem with reasoning about
qualitative spatial relations between different time-points is
that these relations in many cases (such as in robotic systems) cannot be observed, and must therefore be inferred.
The motivation for our work is to propose and evaluate empirically a novel stream reasoning applicable solution
to the problem of reasoning over unobserved intertemporal spatial relations. Our suggested solution makes use of
landmarks. We are particulary interested in the effectiveness of using landmarks for these reasoning purposes, and
how well our solution scales. In this paper we deﬁne the
concept of a landmark as a region that does not change between time-points and use these landmarks to infer qualitative spatio-temporal relations between spatial entities at different time-points. Landmarks provide a kind of ‘anchor’ or
frame of reference in relation to which other spatial objects
are observed to change over time. We make use of the wellknown Region Connection Calculus RCC-8 (Randell, Cui,
and Cohn 1992) to represent qualitative spatial relations between regions, but our approach is general in the sense that it
can be applied to other qualitative spatial formalisms that are
based on transitive spatial relations. Our work complements
other temporalisations of RCC-8, including ST 1 (Wolter
and Zakharyaschev 2000).

Abstract
Qualitative spatio-temporal reasoning is an active research
area in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. In many situations there is a
need to reason about intertemporal qualitative spatial relations, i.e. qualitative relations between spatial regions at different time-points. However, these relations can never be explicitly observed since they are between regions at different
time-points. In applications where the qualitative spatial relations are partly acquired by for example a robotic system it
is therefore necessary to infer these relations. This problem
has, to the best of our knowledge, not been explicitly studied
before. The contribution presented in this paper is two-fold.
First, we present a spatio-temporal logic MSTL, which allows
for spatio-temporal stream reasoning. Second, we deﬁne the
concept of a landmark as a region that does not change between time-points and use these landmarks to infer qualitative spatio-temporal relations between non-landmark regions
at different time-points. The qualitative spatial reasoning is
done in RCC-8, but the approach is general and can be applied to any similar qualitative spatial formalism.

Introduction
In many situations there is a need to reason about the spatial
relations between entities at different time-points. For example, ‘to take someone’s place’ implies a speciﬁc change
in spatial relations for two objects across two time-points.
Qualitative representations are especially useful in situations
where no quantitative representation of spatial regions exist,
for instance because they were provided by a person, or because the regions represent abstract entities for which no exact spatial information is available. A qualitative representation provides a more abstract representation which reduces
the complexity of the reasoning by focusing on the salient
aspects. It also handles some forms of uncertainty by considering equivalence classes rather than values, and it provides
a natural human-computer interface as people often think
and communicate in terms of qualitative representations.
With the amount of data that is continuously produced, AI
applications such as robotic systems are often tasked with
handling incrementally available information. These data
ﬂows are commonly modeled as streams, and the reasoning
over such streams of information is called stream reasoning.

Related Work
The temporal logic MTL captures reasoning over time using
temporal operators such as ‘until’ and ‘since’, from which
temporal operators G and F for ‘it is always going to be the
case’ and ‘at least once in the future’ can be constructed. It
does not attempt to handle spatial reasoning. MTL has been
used in previous working solutions to temporal stream reasoning (Doherty, Kvarnström, and Heintz 2009).
Qualitative spatio-temporal reasoning is concerned with
reasoning over time and space, in particular reasoning about
spatial change (Cohn and Renz 2008). Several qualitative
spatio-temporal reasoning formalisms have been created by
combining a spatial formalism with a temporal one. Examples are STCC (Gerevini and Nebel 2002) and ARCC-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

957

