Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Epitomic Image Super-Resolution

1

Yingzhen Yang,1 Zhangyang Wang,1 Zhaowen Wang,2
Shiyu Chang,1 Ding Liu,1 Honghui Shi,1 Thomas S. Huang1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA 95110, USA
{yyang58, zwang119, chang87, dingliu2, hshi10, huang}@ifp.uiuc.edu, zhawang@adobe.com

many case, external SR methods are prone to generate unreliable high-resolution patches when the input low-resolution
patches cannot be represented by the external data, and
they usually produce artifacts in this case. In contrast, Internal SR methods, such as the High Frequency Transfer
(HFT) method (Freedman and Fattal 2011), seek for example patches from the input image itself based on the selfsimilarities by local patch matching, that is, similar patches
often recur within the image. By exploiting self-similarities,
many singular and unique image patches that rarely appear
in external data can be reliably recovered by internal SR
methods.
However, the local patch matching through nearest neighbor searching used in most existing internal SR methods suffers from noise and outliers. In addition, the local matching excludes potential better global matches that are not located in the neighborhood of the target patch. We propose
epitomic patch matching to replace the nearest neighbor local patch matching in HFT, and the resultant SR method is
named Epitomic Image Super-Resolution (ESR). ESR effectively reduces the artifacts caused by nearest neighbor patch
matching, and it enables efﬁcient local and non-local patch
matching by epitomic patch matching. The effectiveness and
advantage of ESR over other internal and external SR methods are demonstrated by our extensive experimental results.

Abstract
We propose Epitomic Image Super-Resolution (ESR) to enhance the current internal SR methods that exploit the selfsimilarities in the input. Instead of local nearest neighbor
patch matching used in most existing internal SR methods,
ESR employs epitomic patch matching that features robustness to noise, and both local and non-local patch matching.
Extensive objective and subjective evaluation demonstrate the
effectiveness and advantage of ESR on various images.

Introduction
Image Super-Resolution (SR) methods construct a highresolution image from one or multiple low-resolution input images (Park, Park, and Kang 2003). SR is indeed
an ill-posed problem since the information from the lowresolution input is insufﬁcient to recover the high-resolution
image. Making different assumptions on the image priors,
various SR algorithms have been proposed. Exemplar-based
SR methods (Freedman and Fattal 2011; Yang et al. 2012;
Yang, Lin, and Cohen 2013) exhibit promising results,
which exploit the mapping from low-resolution patches
to their high-resolution counterparts. Exemplar-based SR
methods learn such mapping from high-resolution to lowresolution primarily in three ways: through a large set of external low-resolution and high-resolution patch pairs (Yang
et al. 2012; Yang, Lin, and Cohen 2013), or only relying
on the self-similarities within the given low-resolution input
(Freedman and Fattal 2011), or in a combined way (Wang
et al. 2015). We refer to the exemplar-based SR methods
that utilize external data as external SR, and the methods
that only exploit the self-similarities in the input as internal
SR. External SR methods typically use a large and representative set of external high-resolution and low-resolution
patch pairs to predict the missing high frequency information in the high-resolution image to be constructed, and the
representative external SR method (Yang et al. 2012) learns
a pair of high-resolution and low-resolution dictionaries by
coupled dictionary learning, from which the missing high
frequency information is obtained as a sparse linear combination of the dictionary atoms. Albeit being effective in

The Proposed Epitomic Super-Resolution
We ﬁrst introduce the High Frequency Transfer (HFT)
method (Freedman and Fattal 2011), then illustrate the details of Epitomic Super-Resolution.

The High Frequency Transfer method
According to the observation that similar features in
small patches often repeat across different image scales,
the High Frequency Transfer method (Freedman and Fattal
2011) searches for the high-frequency component for a target high-resolution patch by nearest neighbor patch matching across scales. For the input LR image Y, we ﬁrst obtain its initial upsampled image X , and a smoothed input
image Y . For each patch of the initial upsample image,

on Y
denoted by Xij with coordinates ij, its match Yst
is obtained by local nearest neighbor matching: (s, t) =

− Xij 2F , where Wij a local winarg min(s,t)∈Wij Yst

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4278

