Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient Nonparametric Subgraph Detection Using Tree Shaped Priors
Nannan Wu∗
∗

Feng Chen†

Jianxin Li∗ § Baojian Zhou†

Naren Ramakrishnan‡

Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
†
Dept. of Informatics, University at Albany, SUNY, Albany, NY 12203
‡
Dept. of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA 22203
{wunannan, lijx}@act.buaa.edu.cn {fchen5, bzhou6}@albany.edu naren@cs.vt.edu

Abstract
Non-parametric graph scan (NPGS) statistics are used
to detect anomalous connected subgraphs on graphs,
and have a wide variety of applications, such as disease outbreak detection, road trafﬁc congestion detection, and event detection in social media. In contrast to
traditional parametric scan statistics (e.g., the Kulldorff
statistic), NPGS statistics are free of distributional assumptions and can be applied to heterogeneous graph
data. In this paper, we make a number of contributions
to the computational study of NPGS statistics. First,
we present a novel reformulation of the problem as a
sequence of Budget Price-Collecting Steiner Tree (BPCST) sub-problems. Second, we show that this reformulated problem is NP-hard for a large class of nonparametric statistic functions. Third, we further develop
efﬁcient exact and approximate algorithms for a special
category of graphs in which the anomalous subgraphs
can be reformulated in a ﬁxed tree topology. Finally,
using extensive experiments we demonstrate the performance of our proposed algorithms in two real-world
application domains (water pollution detection in water sensor networks and spatial event detection in social media networks) and contrast against state-of-theart connected subgraph detection methods.

1

Figure 1: A potential cholera outbreak lead to elevated number of infected cases in counties near the river, which form
an irregular shaped connected subgraph (cluster) of counties. (Redrawn from (Patil, Taillie, and others 2003).)

two vertices are connected by an edge if they share a boundary. We wish to identify possible cholera outbreaks at an
early stage, which requires identifying subtle patterns (e.g.,
a 20% increase in the number of patients with symptoms
of cholera in four local (connected) counties) in the noisy
background data. These subtle signals may not be detectable
if we examine only a small part of the affected subset (e.g., a
single county) or a larger connected subset containing many
unaffected vertices (e.g., the aggregate count for the entire
state). As a result, traditional “bottom-up” methods (which
identify and aggregate individual vertices (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009)) and “top-down” methods (which detect anomalous global trends) often have low power for detecting events (Chen and Neill 2014; Neill 2012).
The underlying assumption behind anomalous pattern detection is that features of a majority of vertices are generated from the same distribution representing the (typically unknown and possibly complex) normal behavior of
the system; thus, we wish to detect connected or correlated
subgraphs of vertices which are unexpected given the typical data distribution (e.g. Gaussian, Poisson, or mixture of
Gaussians). Existing methods can be categorized into two
main groups, namely parametric and nonparametric methods. Parametric methods assume speciﬁc forms of distributions for features of normal and abnormal vertices, respectively, and formalize anomaly detection as a hypothesis testing problem. In particular, under the alternative hypothesis
(H1 (S)), an underlying anomalous phenomenon is characterized in the following manner: features of a majority of

Introduction

Anomalous subgraph detection has attracted much attention in recent years (Duczmal, Kulldorff, and Huang 2006;
Takahashi et al. 2008; Sharpnack, Singh, and Rinaldo
2013; Speakman, McFowland Iii, and Neill 2015; Qian,
Saligrama, and Chen 2014; Li et al. 2015). We consider a
graph G = (V, E), where each v ∈ V is associated with
features values xv that follow some statistical distribution.
The general goal of anomalous subgraph detection is to optimize some objective function (F (S)) of the abnormality
of the feature values over all connected subsets of vertices
(S ⊆ V). To motivate this scenario, consider the cholera outbreak problem (Patil, Taillie, and others 2003) as shown in
Figure 1. Suppose we have a network of counties (vertices)
and each vertex has a feature referring to the number of cases
of cholera in that county on a given day. Suppose further that
§

Corresponding author: Jianxin Li
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1352

