Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Deep Representation from Big and
Heterogeneous Data for Trafﬁc Accident Inference
Quanjun Chen, Xuan Song, Harutoshi Yamada, Ryosuke Shibasaki
Center for Spatial Information Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan
chen1990@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {songxuan, yamada.hal, shiba}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
With the rapid development of urbanization and public transportation system, the number of trafﬁc accidents have signiﬁcantly increased globally over the past decades and become a
big problem for human society. Facing these possible and unexpected trafﬁc accidents, understanding what causes trafﬁc
accident and early alarms for some possible ones will play a
critical role on planning effective trafﬁc management. However, due to the lack of supported sensing data, research is
very limited on the ﬁeld of updating trafﬁc accident risk in
real-time. Therefore, in this paper, we collect big and heterogeneous data (7 months trafﬁc accident data and 1.6 million
users’ GPS records) to understand how human mobility will
affect trafﬁc accident risk. By mining these data, we develop
a deep model of Stack denoise Autoencoder to learn hierarchical feature representation of human mobility. And these
features are used for efﬁcient prediction of trafﬁc accident
risk level. Once the model has been trained, our model can
simulate corresponding trafﬁc accident risk map with given
real-time input of human mobility. The experimental results
demonstrate the efﬁciency of our model and suggest that trafﬁc accident risk can be signiﬁcantly more predictable through
human mobility.

Introduction
The rapid development of modern cities has resulted in the
availability of transportation systems in a wide range and
will continue to develop. The boom of transportation vehicles causes a series of problems which need to be effectively
and promptly solved by governments. Some of them have
been alleviated, such as the trafﬁc jam. The real-time trafﬁc
volume data and vehicle navigation system based on GPS
will enable the drivers to check the trafﬁc information and
select a less congested route to avoid trafﬁc jams. While
another problem, trafﬁc accident, is not readily contained.
World report on road trafﬁc injury prevention, published by
World Health Organization in 2004, mentioned that, of all
the systems with which people have to deal every day, road
trafﬁc systems are the most complex and the most dangerous. Globally, an estimated 1.2 million people are killed in
road crashes each year and 50 million are injured. With such
an enormous suffering from trafﬁc accidents, understanding

Figure 1: Can we analyze trafﬁc accident like trafﬁc jam
through human mobility data? By mining big and heterogeneous data, we aim to understand and develop a general
model to estimate trafﬁc accident risk. With the input of realtime GPS data, our model can simulate trafﬁc accident risk
on a large scale.

what causes trafﬁc accident is crucial to creating a safer road
environment.
There are many factors that will lead to a trafﬁc accident,
like driver behavior, weather and road condition. Despite
some studies have been focusing on the correspondence between trafﬁc accident and these factors, it is greatly difﬁcult
to reveal dynamic change of accident risk with these factors. To be more speciﬁc, driver behavior varies from person
to person, which is hard to observe in real-time and on a

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

338

