Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Joint Word Representation Learning
Using a Corpus and a Semantic Lexicon
Danushka Bollegala∗† Alsuhaibani Mohammed∗
Takanori Maehara‡† Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi§†

The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.∗
Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, Japan.‡
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan. §
Japan Science and Technology Agency, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project.†
distributional hypothesis and use contexts of a word to represent that word, and prediction-based methods (Mikolov et
al., 2013) that learn word representations by predicting the
occurrences of a word in a given context (Baroni, Dinu, and
Kruszewski, 2014).
Complementary to the corpus-based data-driven approaches for learning word representations, signiﬁcant manual effort has already been invested in creating semantic lexicons such as the WordNet (Miller, 1995). Semantic lexicons explicitly deﬁne the meaning of words by specifying
the relations that exist between words, such as synonymy,
hypernymy, or meronymy. Although it is attractive to learn
word representations purely from a corpus in an unsupervised fashion because it obviates the need for manual data
annotation, there exist several limitations to this corpusonly approach where a semantic lexicon could help to overcome. First, corpus-based approaches operate on surfacelevel word co-occurrences, and ignore the rich semantic relations that exist between the two words that co-occur in the
corpus. Second, unlike in a semantic lexicon where a word
is grouped with the other words with similar senses (e.g.,
WordNet synsets), occurrences of a word in a corpus can be
ambiguous. Third, the corpus might not be sufﬁciently large
to obtain reliable word co-occurrence counts, which is problematic when learning representations for rare words.
On the other hand, purely using a semantic lexicon to
learn word representations (Bollegala et al., 2014) can also
be problematic. First, unlike in a corpus where we can observe numerous co-occurrences between two words in different contexts, in a semantic lexicon we often have only a
limited number of entries for a particular word. Therefore,
it is difﬁcult to accurately estimate the strength of the relationship between two words using only a semantic lexicon.
Second, a corpus is likely to include neologisms or novel,
creative uses of existing words. Because most semantic lexicons are maintained manually on a periodical basis, such
trends will not be readily reﬂected in the semantic lexicon.
Considering the weaknesses of methods that use either only
a corpus or only a semantic lexicon, it is a natural motivation
for us to explore hybrid approaches.
To illustrate how a semantic lexicon can potentially assist the corpus-based word representation learning process,

Abstract
Methods for learning word representations using large text
corpora have received much attention lately due to their impressive performance in numerous natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as, semantic similarity measurement,
and word analogy detection. Despite their success, these datadriven word representation learning methods do not consider
the rich semantic relational structure between words in a cooccurring context. On the other hand, already much manual
effort has gone into the construction of semantic lexicons
such as the WordNet that represent the meanings of words by
deﬁning the various relationships that exist among the words
in a language. We consider the question, can we improve the
word representations learnt using a corpora by integrating
the knowledge from semantic lexicons?. For this purpose, we
propose a joint word representation learning method that simultaneously predicts the co-occurrences of two words in a
sentence subject to the relational constrains given by the semantic lexicon. We use relations that exist between words in
the lexicon to regularize the word representations learnt from
the corpus. Our proposed method statistically signiﬁcantly
outperforms previously proposed methods for incorporating
semantic lexicons into word representations on several benchmark datasets for semantic similarity and word analogy.

1

Introduction

Learning representations for words is a fundamental step
in various NLP tasks. If we can accurately represent the
meanings of words using some linear algebraic structure
such as vectors, we can use those word-level semantic representations to compute representations for larger lexical
units such as phrases, sentences, or texts (Socher et al.,
2012; Le and Mikolov, 2014). Moreover, by using word representations as features in downstream NLP applications,
signiﬁcant improvements in performance have been obtained (Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio, 2010; Bollegala, Maehara, and Kawarabayashi, 2015; Collobert et al., 2011). Numerous approaches for learning word representations from
large text corpora have been proposed, such as countingbased methods (Turney and Pantel, 2010) that follow the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2690

