Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Face Model Compression
by Distilling Knowledge from Neurons
Ping Luo1,3∗ , Zhenyao Zhu1∗ , Ziwei Liu1 , Xiaogang Wang2,3 , and Xiaoou Tang1,3
1

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
{pluo,zz012,lz013,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2

ing data. This work addresses model compression of DNNs
for face recognition, by incorporating domain knowledge of
learning face representation.

Abstract
The recent advanced face recognition systems were built on
large Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) or their ensembles,
which have millions of parameters. However, the expensive
computation of DNNs make their deployment difﬁcult on mobile and embedded devices. This work addresses model compression for face recognition, where the learned knowledge
of a large teacher network or its ensemble is utilized as supervision to train a compact student network. Unlike previous
works that represent the knowledge by the soften label probabilities, which are difﬁcult to ﬁt, we represent the knowledge by using the neurons at the higher hidden layer, which
preserve as much information as the label probabilities, but
are more compact. By leveraging the essential characteristics
(domain knowledge) of the learned face representation, a neuron selection method is proposed to choose neurons that are
most relevant to face recognition. Using the selected neurons
as supervision to mimic the single networks of DeepID2+
and DeepID3, which are the state-of-the-art face recognition systems, a compact student with simple network structure achieves better veriﬁcation accuracy on LFW than its
teachers, respectively. When using an ensemble of DeepID2+
as teacher, a mimicked student is able to outperform it and
achieves 51.6× compression ratio and 90× speed-up in inference, making this cumbersome model applicable on portable
devices.

There have been several attempts (Ba and Caruana 2014;
Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Romero et al. 2015) in
literature to compress DNNs, so as to make their deployments easier, where a single network (i.e. a student) was
trained by using the knowledge learned with a large DNN or
a DNN ensemble (i.e. a teacher) as supervision. This knowledge can be simply represented as the probabilities of label
predictions by employing the softmax function (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). Compared with the original 1of-K hard labels, the label probabilities encode richer relative similarities among training samples and can train a
DNN more effectively. However, this representation loses
much information because most of the probabilities are close
to zeros after squashed by softmax. To overcome this problem, (Ba and Caruana 2014) represented the learned knowledge by using the logits, which are the values before softmax activation but zero-meaned, revealing the relationship
between labels as well as the similarities among samples
in the logit space. However, as these unconstrained values
(e.g. the large negatives) may contain noisy information that
overﬁts the training data, using them as supervision limits the generalization ability of the student. Recently, (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) showed that both the label
probabilities and zero-meaned logits are two extreme outputs of the softmax functions, where the temperature becomes one and positive inﬁnity, respectively. To remove target noise, they empirically searched for a suitable temperature in the softmax function, until it produced soften probabilities that were able to disclose the similarity structure
of data. As these soften target labels comprise much valuable information, a single student trained on them is able to
mimic the performance of a cumbersome network ensemble. Despite the successes of (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015), our empirical results show that training on soft targets is difﬁcult to converge when compressing DNNs for
face recognition. Previous studies (Taigman et al. 2014b;
Sun et al. 2014; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015)
have shown that the face representation learned from classifying larger amount of identities in the training data (e.g.
250 thousand in (Taigman et al. 2014b)) may have better
generalization capacity. In face recognition, it seems difﬁ-

Introduction
As the emergence of big training data, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) recently attained great breakthroughs in face
recognition (Zhu et al. 2014a; 2013) and face veriﬁcation
(Taigman et al. 2014a; Zhu et al. 2014b; Sun, Wang, and
Tang 2014; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015) and
become applicable in many commercial platforms, such as
social networks, e-commerce, and search engines. To absorb
massive supervision from big training data, existing works
typically trained a large DNN or a DNN ensemble, where
each DNN consists of millions of parameters. Nevertheless,
as face recognition shifts toward mobile and embedded devices, large DNNs are computationally expensive, which
prevents them from being deployed to these devices. It motivates research of using a small network to ﬁt very large train∗

indicates co-ﬁrst authors who contributed equally.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3560

