Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

To Swap or Not to Swap? Exploiting Dependency Word Pairs
for Reordering in Statistical Machine Translation
Christian Hadiwinoto1
1

Yang Liu2

Hwee Tou Ng1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{chrhad,nght}@comp.nus.edu.sg
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn
2014). Dependency parsing has also been used in reordering approaches integrated with decoding to determine the
next source phrase to translate after translating the current
source phrase (Cherry 2008; Bach, Gao, and Vogel 2009;
Chang et al. 2009).
In this paper, we propose a novel reordering approach integrated with translation. We propose sparse feature functions based on the pre-ordering rules of (Cai et al. 2014).
However, in contrast to the manual rule-based pre-ordering
approach of (Cai et al. 2014), the weights of our sparse feature functions are automatically learned and used during the
actual translation process, without an explicit pre-ordering
step. Our approach detects and exploits the reordering of
each dependency word pair in the source sentence during
phrase-based decoding.

Abstract
Reordering poses a major challenge in machine translation
(MT) between two languages with signiﬁcant differences
in word order. In this paper, we present a novel reordering approach utilizing sparse features based on dependency
word pairs. Each instance of these features captures whether
two words, which are related by a dependency link in the
source sentence dependency parse tree, follow the same order or are swapped in the translation output. Experiments on
Chinese-to-English translation show a statistically signiﬁcant
improvement of 1.21 BLEU point using our approach, compared to a state-of-the-art statistical MT system that incorporates prior reordering approaches.

Introduction
Reordering in machine translation (MT) is a crucial process
to get the correct translation output word order given an input source sentence, as word order reﬂects meaning. It remains a major challenge, especially for language pairs with
a signiﬁcant word order difference. Phrase-based MT systems (Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003) generally adopt a reordering model that predicts reordering based on the span
of a phrase and that of the adjacent phrase (Tillmann 2004;
Xiong, Liu, and Lin 2006; Galley and Manning 2008;
Cherry 2013).
The above methods do not explicitly preserve the relationship between words in the source sentence, which reﬂects the sentence meaning. Word relationship in a sentence
can be captured by its dependency parse tree, in which each
word w is a tree node connected to its head node hw , another
word, indicating that the former is a dependent (child) of the
latter.
Dependency parsing has been used for reordering in statistical machine translation (SMT). Its usage is well-known
in the pre-ordering approach, where a source sentence is
reordered before the actual translation. Dependency-based
pre-ordering can be performed either by a rule-based approach based on manually speciﬁed human linguistic knowledge (Xu et al. 2009; Cai et al. 2014), or by a learning approach (Xia and McCord 2004; Habash 2007; Genzel 2010;
Yang et al. 2012; Lerner and Petrov 2013; Jehl et al.

Dependency Word Pair Features
We deﬁne a set of sparse features based on dependency tree
word pairs to be learned and used in a phrase-based SMT
beam search decoding algorithm.

Capturing Word Pair Ordering in Phrase-Based
Beam Search
The phrase-based approach is a state-of-the-art approach for
SMT, taking phrases, deﬁned as a sequence of one or more
words, as its translation units. It is performed by a beam
search algorithm (Koehn 2004a), in which the search process produces translation from left to right in the translation output. The search is organized into hypotheses, each
of which represents an input sentence phrase covered and its
possible translation.
As the beam search can choose input phrases in any order,
the target-language phrase sequence in the translation output
may not follow the original source sentence order. The sequence determines the translation output order and enables
translation output reordering for language pairs with differences in word order, such as Chinese and English.
When a word fi in a source sentence f = f1N is covered by a hypothesis, it is known that the words {fl |fl ∈
f1i−1 ∧ ¬translated(fl )} on the left of fi and the words
N
∧ ¬translated(fr )} on the right of fi that
{fr |fr ∈ fi+1
have not been translated will be translated after (appearing
on the right of) the translation of fi . As fl is before fi in the

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2943

