Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Visual Learning of Arithmetic Operations
Yedid Hoshen and Shmuel Peleg
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel

each showing a 7 digit integer number written in a standard
font. The target output is also a picture, displaying the sum
of the two input numbers.
In order to succeed at this task, the network is required to
implicitly be able to learn the arithmetic operation without
being taught the meaning of numbers. This can be seen as
similar to teaching arithmetic to a person with whom we do
not possess a common language.
We model the learning process as a feed-forward artiﬁcial neural network (Bishop 1995; Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006). The input to the network are pictures of numbers, and the output is also a picture (of the sum of the input
numbers). The network is trained on a sufﬁcient number of
examples, which are only a tiny fraction of all possible inputs. After training, given pictures of two previously unseen
numbers, the network generates the picture displaying their
sum. It has therefore learned the concept of numbers without
direct supervision and also learned the addition operation.
Although initially a surprising result, we present an analysis of visual learning of addition and demonstrate that it is
realizable using simple neural network architectures. Other
arithmetic operations such as subtraction are also shown to
be learnable with similar networks. Multiplication, however,
was not learned successfully under the same setting. It is
shown that the multiplication sub-task is more difﬁcult to
realize than addition under such architecture. Interestingly,
for addition with Roman numerals both the OCR and the
arithmetic sub-tasks are shown to be realizable, but the endto-end training of the task fails. This demonstrates the extra
difﬁcultly of end-to-end training.
Our results suggest that some mathematical concepts are
learnable purely from vision. An exciting possible implication is that some arithmetic concepts can be taught visually
across different cultures. It has also been shown that end-toend learning fails for some tasks, even though their sub-tasks
can be learned easily. This work deals with arithmetic tasks,
and future research is required to characterize what other
non-visual sub-tasks can be learned visually e.g., by video
frame prediction.

Abstract
A simple Neural Network model is presented for endto-end visual learning of arithmetic operations from pictures of numbers. The input consists of two pictures,
each showing a 7-digit number. The output, also a picture, displays the number showing the result of an arithmetic operation (e.g., addition or subtraction) on the two
input numbers. The concepts of a number, or of an operator, are not explicitly introduced. This indicates that
addition is a simple cognitive task, which can be learned
visually using a very small number of neurons.
Other operations, e.g., multiplication, were not learnable using this architecture. Some tasks were not learnable end-to-end (e.g., addition with Roman numerals),
but were easily learnable once broken into two separate sub-tasks: a perceptual Character Recognition and
cognitive Arithmetic sub-tasks. This indicates that while
some tasks may be easily learnable end-to-end, other
may need to be broken into sub-tasks.

1

Introduction

Visual learning of arithmetic operations is naturally broken
into two sub-tasks: A perceptual sub-task of optical character recognition (OCR) and a cognitive sub-task of learning
arithmetic. A common approach in such cases is to learn
each sub-task separately. Examples of popular perceptual
sub-tasks in other domains include object recognition and
segmentation. Cognitive sub-tasks include language modeling and translation.
With the progress of deep neural networks it has become
possible to learn complete tasks end-to-end. Systems now
exist for end-to-end training of image to sentence generation (Vinyals et al. 2014) and speech to sentence generation
(Hannun et al. 2014). But end-to-end learning may introduce an extra difﬁculty: sub-tasks do not have unique training data, but depend on the results of other sub-tasks.
We examine end-to-end learning from a neural network
perspective as a model for perception and cognition: performing arithmetic operations (e.g., addition) for visual input and visual output. Both input and output examples of
the network are pictures (as in Fig. 1). For each training example we give the student (the network) two input pictures,

2

Arithmetic as Neural Frame Prediction

In this section we describe a visual protocol for learning
arithmetic by image prediction. This is done by training an
artiﬁcial neural network with input and output examples.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3733

