Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Component Caching in Hybrid Domains with Piecewise Polynomial Densities
Vaishak Belle∗

Guy Van den Broeck

Andrea Passerini

KU Leuven, Belgium

University of California, Los Angeles

University of Trento, Italy

vaishak@cs.kuleuven.be

guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

passerini@disi.unitn.it

can also reason about logical equivalence and deterministic (hard) constraints in a principled way. Overall, CC is
the dominant approach for solving #SAT exactly, directly by
DPLL search or through knowledge compilation (Darwiche
2004). (For approximate methods, which are the not the focus here, see, for example, (Chakraborty et al. 2014).)
In the recent years, driven by SMT technology (Barrett
et al. 2009), diverse applications from veriﬁcation in hybrid
systems (Chistikov, Dimitrova, and Majumdar 2015) to privacy (Fredrikson and Jha 2014) to inference in hybrid graphical models (Belle, Passerini, and Van den Broeck 2015) resort to counting the models of sentences from richer logical languages, especially the ﬁrst-order fragment of linear
arithmetic. This fragment includes sentences of the form
((x + y) > z) ∨ p and (0.3 ≤ x ≤ 8.2), that is, the language includes both binary and real-valued (or continuous)
variables, and so can concisely capture many complex domains. Existing exact solvers here, however, perform model
counting by means of a block-clause strategy: in each iteration of the search procedure, if a satisfying interpretation
α  b1 ∧ . . . ∧ bk is found, where bi is a literal, then ¬α
is added as a constraint for the subsequent iteration. In the
propositional context, such strategies are well-known to be
nonviable on all but small problem instances (Sang, Beame,
and Kautz 2005). To that end, it is natural to ask: can CC
be generalized to hybrid domains? Given the maturity of
propositional model counting technology, it is perhaps more
immediate to consider the conditions under which we can
leverage existing CC systems.
Our concern in this paper is the fundamental problem of
probabilistic inference in hybrid graphical models. In previous work (Belle, Passerini, and Van den Broeck 2015), we
proposed a formulation of this problem as a model counting task over linear arithmetic formulas followed by an integration over the weights of models, referred to as weighted
model integration (WMI). As a ﬁrst step in understanding
eﬀective modeling counting for hybrid domains, we develop
ideas to leverage propositional CC systems for WMI. The
key restriction needed is that the continuous random variables are assumed to have piecewise polynomial densities.
Early work by Curds (1997) and recent investigations by
Shenoy and West (2011) show that polynomial densities are
not only natural for certain distributions (e.g., piecewise linear and uniform), but can also eﬀectively approximate dif-

Abstract
Counting the models of a propositional formula is an important problem: for example, it serves as the backbone of
probabilistic inference by weighted model counting. A key
algorithmic insight is component caching (CC), in which disjoint components of a formula, generated dynamically during
a DPLL search, are cached so that they only have to be solved
once. In the recent years, driven by SMT technology and
probabilistic inference in hybrid domains, there is an increasing interest in counting the models of linear arithmetic sentences. To date, however, solvers for these are block-clause
implementations, which are nonviable on large problem instances. In this paper, as a ﬁrst step in extending CC to hybrid domains, we show how propositional CC systems can
be leveraged when limited to piecewise polynomial densities. Our experiments demonstrate a large gap in performance
when compared to existing approaches based on a variety of
block-clause strategies.

Introduction
Counting the models of a propositional formula, also referred to as #SAT, is an important problem in AI: for example, it serves as the backbone of probabilistic inference
by weighted model counting (Chavira and Darwiche 2008).
#SAT appears to be more computationally challenging than
SAT, in that #SAT is complete for the class #P which is at
least as hard as the polynomial-time hierarchy. Thus, the task
of counting all assignments calls for novel algorithmic ideas.
One such powerful algorithmic idea is component caching
(CC), in which disjoint components of a formula, generated dynamically during a DPLL search, are cached so that
they only have to be solved once. Investigations into CC revealed that not only is it a clever practical insight for harnessing an existing DPLL trace for model counting, but
it also achieves signiﬁcant time-space tradeoﬀs (Bacchus,
Dalmao, and Pitassi 2009). In a probabilistic context, CC
closely matches the competitiveness of approaches such as
recursive conditioning (Darwiche 2001) and bucket elimination (Dechter 1996). Going further, SAT-based techniques
∗
Supported by the Research Foundation-Flanders (FWOVlaanderen).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3369

