Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Is It Harmful When Advisors Only Pretend to Be Honest?
Dongxia Wang and Tim Muller and Jie Zhang and Yang liu
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
wang0915@e.ntu.edu.sg, {tmuller,zhangj,yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg

der dynamic unfair rating attacks – where attackers’ strategies are inﬂuenced by the rating history. The commonly
studied form of dynamic attacks are camouﬂage attacks
– where attackers pretend to be honest by rating strategically (Jiang, Zhang, and Ong 2013; Kamvar, Schlosser, and
Garcia-Molina 2003). To only be able to defend against camouﬂage attacks cannot guarantee the security of a trust system, however. In reality, it is hard to predict what dynamic
attacks would happen to a trust system. Hence, it is important to know whether there are more harmful dynamic attacks compared to camouﬂage attacks.
In this paper, we focus on modelling dynamic attacks and
measuring their harm. We apply the information-theoretic
measurement of harm (information leakage)which we introduced in (Wang et al. 2015a). The harm of an attack depends
on how much information a user can gain about the real observations of the attacker, which inﬂuences the difﬁculty to
construct an accurate trust opinion. Such a user-based measurement is independent of speciﬁc trust systems. As we will
discuss later, only static attacks are considered in (Wang et
al. 2015a), which has fundamentally different assumptions.
For dynamic unfair rating attacks, we introduce a stochastic process-based model. The hindsight of a user about past
ratings inﬂuences the information it can gain from a dynamic
attack. Hence, we distinguish three cases: (1) the user cannot determine whether the attacker reported the truth (blind
users), (2) the user can accurately determine whether the attacker reported the truth (aware users), and (3) the user can
determine whether the attacker reported the truth with limited accuracy (general users). For each type of users, we derive the harm of dynamic unfair rating attacks, and relate it
to the harm of merely pretending to be honest.
We found that initially purely pretending to be honest
is not the most harmful against any types of users. For
blind users who have no hindsight, camouﬂage attacks are
no more harmful than static attacks. Even for aware users,
who can perceive honest behaviour, it is not the worst to be
cheated by disguised honesty. We found that, for all users,
to cause the maximum harm, attackers must be honest with
smaller probability than to lie, even initially. Furthermore,
we found that a non-blind user can always gain some information, provided the percentage of attackers is below an
exponentially large threshold. The most harmful dynamic attacks have not been introduced in the literature.

Abstract
In trust systems, unfair rating attacks – where advisors
provide ratings dishonestly – inﬂuence the accuracy of
trust evaluation. A secure trust system should function
properly under all possible unfair rating attacks; including dynamic attacks. In the literature, camouﬂage attacks are the most studied dynamic attacks. But an open
question is whether more harmful dynamic attacks exist. We propose random processes to model and measure
dynamic attacks. The harm of an attack is inﬂuenced
by a user’s ability to learn from the past. We consider
three types of users: blind users, aware users, and general users. We found for all the three types, camouﬂage
attacks are far from the most harmful. We identiﬁed the
most harmful attacks, under which we found the ratings
may still be useful to users.

Introduction
Trust systems help users select trustworthy partners (targets), by evaluating trustworthiness based on direct experiences and ratings from other users (advisors). For example,
trust systems are applied in e-marketplaces to select honest sellers (Regan, Poupart, and Cohen 2006; Xiong and
Liu 2004), and in secure routing for wireless sensor networks to help select reliable nodes (Shaikh et al. 2009;
Bao et al. 2012). Various attacks have been found in (popular) trust systems, threatening their security (Kerr and Cohen
2009). A well-known type of attacks are unfair rating attacks, where malicious advisors (attackers) provide dishonest ratings (Şensoy et al. 2009). Unfair rating attacks inﬂuence the accuracy of trust evaluation, and accordingly, decision making of users (Jøsang 2010).
There are various formulations of the unfair rating attacks
in the literature (Sun et al. 2006; Vogiatzis, MacGillivray,
and Chli 2010; Hoffman, Zage, and Nita-Rotaru 2009).
Most commonly unfair rating attacks are deﬁned statically;
meaning attackers’ strategies are independent of history.
For instance, in the ballot-stufﬁng attacks, attackers are assumed to always report positively (Yu and Singh 2003;
Yu et al. 2012) regarding speciﬁc targets, regardless of when
they are asked for the ratings.
A secure trust system must also function properly unc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2551

