Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Exact Sampling with Integer Linear Programs and Random Perturbations
Carolyn Kim

Ashish Sabharwal

Stefano Ermon

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ckim@cs.stanford.edu

Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, WA
ashishs@allenai.org

Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

We introduce a novel approach for sampling exactly from
arbitrary discrete probability distributions. Our approach is
based on the Gumbel-max idea (Gumbel and Lieblein 1954),
a property of Gumbel random variables with numerous applications in statistics and econometric, and which has recently become popular in the ML community as well (Maddison, Tarlow, and Minka 2014; Gane, Hazan, and Jaakkola
2014; Hazan and Jaakkola 2012; Papandreou and Yuille
2011; Tarlow, Adams, and Zemel 2012; Kappes et al. 2015;
Hazan, Maji, and Jaakkola 2013). This property means that
one can obtain samples from a probabilistic model by ﬁnding the mode of a randomly perturbed distribution obtained
by perturbing the log-likelihood of each individual state with
i.i.d. Gumbel noise. Modern combinatorial optimization
tools such as integer linear programming (ILP) and weighted
constraint satisfaction solvers can often handle problems
with thousands of variables (Wolsey and Nemhauser 2014)
and are well-suited for computing modes of discrete probability distributions. Translating a sampling problem to an
optimization problem is therefore a big step forward.
Unfortunately, the Gumbel-max reduction cannot be directly used, as it requires too much “randomness” to generate an exponential number of Gumbel random variables,
and too much space to store them (i.e., the resulting optimization problem could not even be encoded compactly).
To overcome this issue, we propose an approach inspired
by the recent A* sampling algorithm for continuous probability distributions (Maddison, Tarlow, and Minka 2014).
While we share with A* sampling the idea of instantiating
the randomness as needed in a “lazy” manner, our focus on
discrete distributions presents new challenges and opportunities. We show how to make this approach practical using powerful linear programming (LP) relaxations to prune
“irrelevant” portions of the state space which can be safely
ignored without affecting exactness. We integrate this idea
into the commercial ILP solver CPLEX, transforming it into
a general-purpose sampler by introducing a Gumbel-based
randomization into its branch-and-cut search. Our approach
thus directly leverages many recent advances in combinatorial optimization, including parallel search (Boehning, Butler, and Gillett 1988; Johnson, Nemhauser, and Savelsbergh
2000). This opens a novel angle for parallelizing sampling
algorithms in a principled fashion.
Our experiments demonstrate the ILP-based sampler

Abstract
We consider the problem of sampling from a discrete probability distribution speciﬁed by a graphical model. Exact samples can, in principle, be obtained by computing the mode of
the original model perturbed with an exponentially many i.i.d.
random variables. We propose a novel algorithm that views
this as a combinatorial optimization problem and searches
for the extreme state using a standard integer linear programming (ILP) solver, appropriately extended to account for the
random perturbation. Our technique, GumbelMIP, leverages
linear programming (LP) relaxations to evaluate the quality
of samples and prune large portions of the search space, and
can thus scale to large tree-width models beyond the reach
of current exact inference methods. Further, when the optimization problem is not solved to optimality, our method
yields a novel approximate sampling technique. We empirically demonstrate that our approach parallelizes well, our
exact sampler scales better than alternative approaches, and
our approximate sampler yields better quality samples than a
Gibbs sampler and a low-dimensional perturbation method.

Introduction
Probabilistic models are a key component of modern statistical machine learning (ML) and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
systems (Murphy 2012). Inference in such models is a computational challenge that has been intensively researched
in physics, statistics, and computer science (Andrieu et al.
2003). The problem is known to be intractable in the worst
case, and approximate techniques are often used in practice. One of the most inﬂuential notions has been the idea
of Monte Carlo approximation, where the computation of
an expectation with respect to a complex model is approximated using a sample average. The problem of drawing
samples from a general probabilistic model is therefore extremely important, and it is used as a building block inside
countless learning, inference, and even numerical analysis
algorithms. By far the most popular approach is the Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method. The idea is to set up
a Markov Chain that, in the limit, will converge to the target
distribution, and then draw samples by simulating the chain
for a sufﬁciently long time. Unfortunately, for many models
of interest, such chains take exponential time to converge.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3248

