Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning to Appreciate the Aesthetic Effects of Clothing
Jia Jia1 , Jie Huang1 , Guangyao Shen1 , Tao He2 , Zhiyuan Liu1∗ , Huanbo Luan1 and Chao Yan3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
2
School of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065
3
Beijing Samsung Telecom R& D center
{jjia, liuzy}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
If it is possible to understand the aesthetic effects of clothing
based on the visual features automatically, there will be signiﬁcant progress in many applications such as clothing recommendation systems. That means we can enable the computer to learn to appreciate the aesthetic effects of clothing.
However, fulﬁlling the task is not a trivial issue. Focusing on clothing segmentation and recognition, (Hasan and
Hogg 2010) presents a method for segmenting the parts of
multiple instances using deformable spatial priors. (Wang
and Ai 2011) studies on simultaneous clothing segmentation
for grouping images. (Yamaguchi et al. 2015) proposes to
tackle the clothing parsing problem using a retrieval-based
approach. In recent years, scenario-oriented and occasionoriented clothing recommendation have attracted increasing
attentions, which shows that people begin to focus on higher
level semantics related to clothing rather than low-level visual features. (Shen, Lieberman, and Lam 2007) proposes
the scenario-oriented recommendation to satisfy users’ personal preference. (Yu-Chu et al. 2012) proposes a system
to recommend an appropriate combination from the user’s
available clothing options according to the current situation (e.g., the weather and the user’s schedule). Both works
above focus on making users wear properly. However, it is
also quite signiﬁcant for people to wear aesthetically. (Liu
et al. 2012) takes two criteria, wearing properly and aesthetically into consideration. (Kouge et al. 2015) obtains
the associated rules from color combinations to derive impressions. In the ﬁeld of aesthetics, their works train some
matching rules (e.g., a red T-shirt matches white pants better than green ones) to ensure that there is no strange collocation. Nevertheless, the matching rules cannot reveal the
aesthetic effects holistically and lack interpretability.
In this paper, we aim to bridge the gap between the visual
features and the aesthetic words of clothing. In order to capture the intrinsic and holistic relationship between them, we
introduce an intermediate layer and form a novel three-level
framework. The low level is visual features (VF) of clothing
images, including color features and pattern features. The
middle level is the image-scale space (ISS) based on the aesthetic theory proposed by (Kobayashi 1995), which is a twodimensional space (warm-cool and hard-soft) well applied in
art design. The high level is the aesthetic words space (AWS)
consisting of words like “formal” and “casual”. Speciﬁcally,
we propose a Stacked Denoising Autoencoder Guided by

Abstract
How do people describe clothing? The words like “formal” or “casual” are usually used. However, recent
works often focus on recognizing or extracting visual
features (e.g., sleeve length, color distribution and clothing pattern) from clothing images accurately. How can
we bridge the gap between the visual features and the
aesthetic words? In this paper, we formulate this task
to a novel three-level framework: visual features (VF) image-scale space (ISS) - aesthetic words space (AWS).
Leveraging the art-ﬁeld image-scale space served as an
intermediate layer, we ﬁrst propose a Stacked Denoising Autoencoder Guided by Correlative Labels (SDAEGCL) to map the visual features to the image-scale
space; and then according to the semantic distances
computed by WordNet::Similarity, we map the most
often used aesthetic words in online clothing shops
to the image-scale space too. Employing upper-body
menswear images downloaded from several global online clothing shops as experimental data, the results indicate that the proposed three-level framework can help
to capture the subtle relationship between visual features and aesthetic words better compared to several
baselines. To demonstrate that our three-level framework and its implementation methods are universally
applicable, we ﬁnally present some interesting analyses
on the fashion trend of menswear in the last 10 years.

1

Introduction

Apparel makes the man. It has been documented that people reinforce their mood and express their feelings through
their clothing (Kang, Johnson, and Kim 2013). A variety
of researches have made it possible to extract or recognize the visual features (e.g., sleeve length, color distribution
and clothing pattern) from clothing images accurately (Yang
and Ramanan 2011; Yamaguchi, Kiapour, and Berg 2013;
Yang, Luo, and Lin 2014). But how do people describe
clothing? The aesthetic words like “formal” or “casual” are
usually used rather than comments like the sleeves are long
or the collar is round. These aesthetic words are obviously
related to the visual features. For example, suits with more
than three buttons look formal, while tank tops seem casual.
∗

Corresponding author: Z. Liu (liuzy@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1216

