Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Ethical Dilemmas for Adaptive Persuasion Systems
Oliviero Stock, Marco Guerini, Fabio Pianesi
FBK-Irst
Via Sommarive 18, Trento - I-38123 Italy
stock@fbk.eu, guerini@fbk.eu, pianesi@fbk.eu

ceptability is one of the ultimate criteria for acceptability
tout court. We focus on adaptive persuasive technologies
(Kaptein, Duplinsky, and Markopoulos 2011) i.e. systems
able to pursue the goal of affecting the attitudes and/or behaviour of their interaction partners by adjusting communication to the latter’s preferences, dispositions, etc. Studies
on moral acceptability in this ﬁeld have mostly targeted the
action the persuading system intends the persuadee to perform rather than the communicative action the persuading
system exploits to this end, e.g. (Verbeek 2006). We believe,
though, that it is essential to understand the moral acceptability of the latter, i.e. of the communicative action enacted
by the persuading system to achieve its speciﬁc goal.
A preliminary issue concerns the fact that at ﬁrst sight
people simply seem not to accept the idea that a machine
persuades humans. If such a negative attitude exists, does it
affect the moral acceptability of persuasion in speciﬁc scenarios? Obtaining a negative answer to this question would
boost the construction of intelligent persuasive systems. Another important issue is what can be done to move forward toward dynamically adapting the persuasive strategies
to the target’s moral sensitivities and to the circumstances.
Optimizing the moral acceptability of the persuasive actions would require a characterization of: a) the differential effects (if any) of the adopted communicative strategies (e.g., do classical argumentation strategies fare better
than those relying on positive/negative emotions or those
exploiting lies to inﬂuence people?); b) the role of circumstances (if any), including the action the persuading system
intends the persuadee to perform; c) the purported individual differences for the adaptive system to exploit. We submit that these issues can be proﬁtably addressed by leveraging the tradition of so called natural ethics and by using
moral dilemmas as a probe (see (Wallach and Allen 2008;
Anderson and Anderson 2007)). In two recent studies, we
have taken the ﬁrst steps towards addressing this research
program by designing and executing experiments adopting
the moral dilemma paradigm.

Abstract
A key acceptability criterion for artiﬁcial agents will be the
possible moral implications of their actions. In particular,
intelligent persuasive systems (systems designed to inﬂuence humans via communication) constitute a highly sensitive topic because of their intrinsically social nature. Still,
ethical studies in this area are rare and tend to focus on the
output of the required action; instead, this work focuses on the
acceptability of persuasive acts themselves. Building systems
able to persuade while being ethically acceptable requires
that they be capable of intervening ﬂexibly and of taking decisions about which speciﬁc persuasive strategy to use. We
show how, exploiting a behavioral approach, based on human
assessment of moral dilemmas, we obtain results that will
lead to more ethically appropriate systems. Experiments we
have conducted address the type of persuader, the strategies
adopted and the circumstances. Dimensions surfaced that can
characterize the interpersonal differences concerning moral
acceptability of machine performed persuasion, usable for
strategy adaptation. We also show that the prevailing preconceived negative attitude toward persuasion by a machine is
not predictive of actual moral acceptability judgement when
subjects are confronted with speciﬁc cases.

Introduction
Autonomous agents are such because they are able to decide
suitable courses of actions for achieving their own goals, can
maintain intentions in action and so on; in all these respects,
the capability of discerning good from bad is an essential feature of autonomous artiﬁcial agents. Until recently,
though, ethical issues have concerned less machines than designers, who have been deciding about the behavior of artifacts as well as the degrees of freedom they can be allowed
in their choices. But the quest for autonomy in systems’ actions and the rising sensitivity to the moral implications it
has, requires that we move ahead and focus our attention
on ethical acceptability of machines’ choices. For example
the case of “moral dilemmas” for autonomous cars has been
discussed – e.g. (Kirkpatrick 2015) – situations in which any
available choice leads to infringing some “accepted” ethical
principle and yet a decision has to be taken.
The importance of ethical issues is heightened for systems
that interact and communicate with humans, since moral ac-

Related Work
Persuasion and artiﬁcial agents. Through the years, a
number of prototypes for the automatic generation of linguistic persuasion expressions, based on reasoning capabilities, were developed, see (Guerini et al. 2011) for an

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4157

