Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Syntactic Skeleton-Based Translation
Tong Xiao1,2 , Jingbo Zhu1,2 , Chunliang Zhang1,2
1

Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China
2
YaTrans Co., Ltd., Shenyang 110004, China

3

Tongran Liu3
Institute of Psychology (CAS)
Beijing 100101, China

syntactic skeleton or skeleton for short) which models the
high-level source syntax for MT. It combines two merits in
one framework: 1) applying tree-to-string rules to translate
the syntactic skeleton; 2) and applying hierarchical phrasebased rules to handle the lower-level lexical translation and
reordering.
Our model is very ﬂexible. It involves fully syntactic,
non-syntactic, and partially syntactic derivations via a single grammar and decoding paradigm. Thus the hierarchical
phrase-based and tree-to-string systems can be cast as two
special cases of this approach.
In addition, our model ﬁts in the general framework of
synchronous context-free grammars (SCFGs). It is very easy
to implement and speed-up if one already has an SCFG decoder. On large-scale Chinese-English and English-Chinese
translation tasks, we obtain an average improvement of +0.9
BLEU across different genres.

Abstract
In this paper we propose an approach to modeling
syntactically-motivated skeletal structure of source sentence
for machine translation. This model allows for application of
high-level syntactic transfer rules and low-level non-syntactic
rules. It thus involves fully syntactic, non-syntactic, and partially syntactic derivations via a single grammar and decoding paradigm. On large-scale Chinese-English and EnglishChinese translation tasks, we obtain an average improvement
of +0.9 BLEU across the newswire and web genres.

Introduction
The use of source-language syntax and structural information has been a popular approach to replacing surface
string translation with learning of tree-string mappings from
parsed data. Unlike word or phrase-based models, beginning in the 1990s, source-language syntactic models rely
on parse trees of input sentence. This enhances the ability of handling long-distance movement and complex reordering of multiple constituents (Liu, Liu, and Lin 2006;
Huang, Kevin, and Joshi 2006). However, source tree-based
models have robustness problems in that sparse and limitedcoverage rules can lead to poor translation. A straightforward implementation has been found to underperform the
(hierarchical) phrase-based counterpart (Liu et al. 2009).
In machine translation (MT), the power of source syntax
lies in its good ability of modeling the skeletal structure of
input sentence (Liu, Liu, and Lin 2006; Xiao et al. 2014).
This property is very promising if we use MT systems as
analogies to human translation - given a source sentence,
we ﬁrst have a high-level structure/pattern of the sentence
in mind with our syntactic knowledge. Then, we determine
the translation and order of the key elements in this structure/pattern, and then ﬁnish the remaining job of lexical selection and local reordering. As sentence structures can be
well explained with the language syntax, a natural issue that
arises is that: can we apply source syntax to where it can
contribute most - i.e., translating the skeletal structure of the
source sentence - and meanwhile beneﬁt from (hierarchical)
phrase-based models on non-syntactic segments?
To address this question, we propose an approach to learning to translate with a special syntactic structure (call it

Background
SCFG and Hiero-Style Translation
This work is based on synchronous context-free grammars
which have been widely used in statistical machine translation (SMT). More formally, an SCFG rule can be represented as: LHS → α, β, ∼, where the left hand side LHS
is a non-terminal, α and β are sequences of terminals and
non-terminals in the source and target languages, ∼ is a 1to-1 alignment between the non-terminals in α and β.
Probabilistic SCFGs can be learned from unparsed, wordaligned parallel data using Hiero-style heuristics and constraints (Chiang 2007). Once the SCFG is obtained, new
sentences can be decoded by ﬁnding the most likely derivation of SCFG rules. See Figure 1 for example Hiero-style
rules extracted from a sentence pair with word alignments,
where the non-terminals are labeled with X only. A sequence of such rules covering the source sentence is an
SCFG derivation, e.g., rules h5 , h1 and h3 generate a derivation for the sentence pair.

Learning Translation from Source Syntax
Hiero-style grammars are formally syntactic, but rules are
not constrained by source (or target) language syntax. A
natural extension is to use the source-language parse tree to

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2856

