Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

An Algorithm to Coordinate Measurements Using Stochastic Human
Mobility Patterns in Large-Scale Participatory Sensing Settings
Alexandros Zenonos, Sebastian Stein, Nicholas R. Jennings
Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton, UK
{az2g13, ss2, nrj}@ecs.soton.ac.uk

However, monitoring environmental phenomena using
the participatory sensing paradigm is challenging as users
are typically willing to take only a limited number of measurements per day (Chon et al. 2013). Furthermore, people
have limited information about the environment and are unaware about how their measurements contribute to the overall campaign. Thus, multiple participants may take measurements at the same locations and times, rather than at those
locations that are most informative. Consequently, some areas of interest remain unexplored, which might lead to a
false or partial understanding of the environmental phenomenon, or people end up doing duplicate work.
In order to address these challenges, an intelligent system
for coordinating the measurements taken by participants in
participatory sensing campaigns is needed. Such a system
can guide participants by suggesting who should take measurements where and when in order to maximize the information collected and thus improve the understanding of the
dynamic phenomenon. In doing so, it can exploit probabilistic information about the participants’ future mobility patterns, as these are often highly predictable (McInerney et al.
2013; Baratchi et al. 2014). At the same time, the system
must consider the limited number of measurements that individuals are willing to take.
Previous work has addressed these problems only partially. For instance, TRACCS (Chen et al. 2014; 2015) attempted to coordinate participants in a different domain. The
aim of that paper is to assign humans to tasks based on their
mobility patterns to maximize the payoff of tasks in a given
time period. However, there is no limit on how many tasks
people can do and the tasks are completely independent from
each other. Once executed, they are also no longer available.
In environmental monitoring, measurements are dependent
on each other and since the phenomenon is dynamic, there
is a need to re-visit locations to take more measurements.
Other work (Zenonos, Stein, and Jennings 2015), attempted
to tackle coordination of measurements for environmental
monitoring but they only did so partially. In particular, there
was no constraint on the number of measurements an individual can take and it was also assumed that there was complete knowledge of human mobility patterns, which is not
true in practice. Also, they showed results for up to 250 individuals, which is somewhat limited for a large-scale participatory sensing application. A large-scale participatory sens-

Abstract
Participatory sensing is a promising new low-cost approach for collecting environmental data. However,
current large-scale environmental participatory sensing
campaigns typically do not coordinate the measurements of participants, which can lead to gaps or redundancy in the collected data. While some work has
considered this problem, it has made several unrealistic assumptions. In particular, it assumes that complete
and accurate knowledge about the participants future
movements is available and it does not consider constraints on the number of measurements a user is willing to take. To address these shortcomings, we develop a
computationally-efﬁcient coordination algorithm (Bestmatch) to suggest to users where and when to take measurements. Our algorithm exploits human mobility patterns, but explicitly considers the inherent uncertainty
of these patterns. We empirically evaluate our algorithm
on a real-world human mobility and air quality dataset
and show that it outperforms the state-of-the-art greedy
and pull-based proximity algorithms in dynamic environments.

Introduction
Participatory sensing has gained a lot of attention in the research community in recent years. It has been established
as a de facto research methodology, engaging citizens in the
collection of information using mobile devices they carry on
them. Speciﬁcally, this concept has been successfully used
in environmental monitoring, as people are able to provide
information to help in urban planning and public health.
For instance, Noisetube (Maisonneuve, Stevens, and Ochab
2010) and Citisense (Nikzad et al. 2012) are projects that
monitor noise and air pollution in cities involving citizens
using their GPS-enabled mobile phones.
Monitoring environmental phenomena is crucial because
of their potentially detrimental effect on human health. Concretely, noise pollution is associated among others with hearing impairment, and ischematic heart disease (PasschierVermeer W 2000). Air pollution is responsible for a range
of heart-related and respiratory diseases that lead to millions
of annual deaths (Seaton et al. 1995; World Health Organization and others 2014).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3936

