Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Expected Tensor Decomposition with Stochastic Gradient Descent
Takanori Maehara1,3 Kohei Hayashi2,3 Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi2,3
1) Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, Japan
2) National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
3) JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project

X is the total number of all triplets (subject, object,
verb) appearing in document 1, . . . , T . X is thus written
T
(t)
where X (t) is the co-occurrence tenas X =
t=1 X
sor of document t. Another example appears in time series
analysis. Suppose X (t) represents the climate data at time
t. Because the data often contain random
t ﬂuctuations, averaging past T observations X = T1 s=t−T X (s) before
decomposition is more reliable than decomposing X (t) directly.

Abstract
In this study, we investigate expected CP decomposition—
a special case of CP decomposition in which a tensor to be
decomposed is given as the sum or average of tensor samples X (t) for t = 1, . . . , T . To determine this decomposition, we develope stochastic-gradient-descent-type algorithms with four appealing features: efﬁcient memory use,
ability to work in an online setting, robustness of parameter
tuning, and simplicity. Our theoretical analysis show that the
solutions do not diverge to inﬁnity for any initial value or step
size. Experimental results conﬁrm that our algorithms significantly outperform all existing methods in terms of accuracy.
We also show that they can successfully decompose a large
tensor, containing billion-scale nonzero elements.

1

When X (t) is independently and identically distributed,
target tensors in such examples are generally written as expectation E[X ].2 We term the CP decomposition of E[X ]
expected CP decomposition. A straightforward approach to
expected CP decomposition is to ﬁrst construct E[X ] and
then decompose it. However, this naive approach has several limitations. The ﬁrst is scalability. In some applications (typically in natural language processing), X (t) is very
high-dimensional but sparse and is manageable with moderate memory space. However, E[X ] may be dense and may
not ﬁt in memory. Moreover, whenever X (t+1) is additionally observed, the naive approach needs to compute from
scratch: by reconstructing E[X ], initializing the algorithm,
and updating U, V, W , which is time consuming.
Arora et al. (Arora et al. 2012), in their seminal work,
addressed the case of matrix decomposition and proposed a
stochastic optimization algorithm to overcome these limitations. However, the stochastic optimization of expected CP
decomposition is non-trivial because of its unstable convergence property. Arora et al. focused on a convex optimization problem to which the standard theory for stochastic gradient descent can be applied directly. However, CP decomposition is non-convex and ill-conditioned. This means that
the initial solution and step size must be carefully selected to
ensure that existing standard algorithms including stochastic
gradient descent do not diverge3 . Another issue is the slow
convergence rate. In the case of non-stochastic CP decomposition, the gradient descent method has poor convergence
properties (Comon, Luciani, and De Almeida 2009).

Introduction

A tensor represents data that have multiple indices or modes,
such as co-occurrence frequencies among subjects,
objects, and verbs in documents (Kang et al. 2012;
Fried, Polajnar, and Clark 2015) or climate data for separate latitude, longitude, and measurement types
(e.g., temperature and the velocity of wind) (Bahadori, Yu,
and Liu 2014). CP decomposition (Carroll and Chang 1970;
Harshman 1970), also known as canonical decomposition
(CANDECOMP) or parallel factor (PARAFAC), is a key
tool for analyzing such data tensors. Given a three-mode
tensor1 X ∈ RI×J×K , rank-R CP decomposition is written
as
R

Uir Vjr Wkr ,
(1)
Xijk ≈ [[U, V, W ]] :=
r=1
I×R

,V ∈ R
, and W ∈ RK×R are factor
where U ∈ R
matrices capturing linear relationships in X . CP decomposition is used for feature extraction, missing-value prediction, data compression, and visualization in many application ﬁelds (Kolda and Bader 2009).

1.1

J×R

Motivation

In some application ﬁelds, X is given as the sum or average
of multiple tensors. For example, co-occurrence frequencies
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Note that all the ideas of this study written for three-mode tensors also works for higher-order tensors.

2
In the subject×object×verb case, rescaling by T is
necessary.
3
We say diverge for “diverge to inﬁnity”.

1919

