Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Semantic Community Identiﬁcation in Large Attribute Networks
Xiao Wang1,5 , Di Jin1 , Xiaochun Cao2 , Liang Yang2,3 , Weixiong Zhang4,5
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China
3
School of Information Engineering, Tianjin University of Commerce, Tianjin 300134, China
4
College of Math and Computer Science, Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430056, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
{wangxiao cv, jindi}@tju.edu.cn, {caoxiaochun, yangliang}@iie.ac.cn, weixiong.zhang@wustl.edu
2

to be assigned correctly to the right communities by only relying on network topology. Therefore, it is insufﬁcient to accurately determine the community structure using network
topology alone. In addition to network topology, semantic
information, e.g., that of node attributes, is often available.
For example, a node (i.e., a person) in a social network is
often annotated by a personal proﬁle with information such
as education background, circle of friends and profession;
a node (i.e., a paper) in a citation network is typically annotated with title, abstract and key words. Different from
network topology, node semantics capture characteristics of
individual nodes and provide a piece of valuable information orthogonal to information of network topology. Integration of network topological and semantic information holds
a great potential for community identiﬁcation.

Abstract
Identiﬁcation of modular or community structures of a network is a key to understanding the semantics and functions
of the network. While many network community detection
methods have been developed, which primarily explore network topologies, they provide little semantic information of
the communities discovered. Although structures and semantics are closely related, little effort has been made to discover
and analyze these two essential network properties together.
By integrating network topology and semantic information
on nodes, e.g., node attributes, we study the problems of detection of communities and inference of their semantics simultaneously. We propose a novel nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) model with two sets of parameters, the community membership matrix and community attribute matrix,
and present efﬁcient updating rules to evaluate the parameters
with a convergence guarantee. The use of node attributes improves upon community detection and provides a semantic interpretation to the resultant network communities. Extensive
experimental results on synthetic and real-world networks not
only show the superior performance of the new method over
the state-of-the-art approaches, but also demonstrate its ability to semantically annotate the communities.

Nevertheless, it is technically challenging to effectively
combine these two pieces of valuable albeit orthogonal information. Particularly, two obstacles need to be addressed
in order to properly integrate these two types of information. First, how to adequately characterize a community. The
most existing methods for community detection mainly rely
on network topologies. However, missing, meaningless or
even erroneous edges are ubiquitous in real networks, which
casts doubts on the accuracy and/or correctness of the network communities discovered based on network topology
alone. While the nodes in a community are highly connected, they should also have similar characteristics, reﬂected by attributes. Thus, nodes attributes may carry essential information of communities that is complementary to
the information of network topology. Therefore, even though
two nodes are not directly connected, they may belong to the
same community if they share the same characteristics, and
the use of node attributes may enhance community discovery. Second, how to adequately interpret or semantically annotate communities. Functional analysis of network communities is typically and independent, post-processing task following community detection. The result from a community
discovery often provides little information beyond network
topology regarding why a group of nodes from a community, their semantic meaning, or potential functions. In order
to semantically annotate a community, supplemental information, e.g., background information and/or domain knowledge, is usually required. Even though such domain information is available, how to fully utilize such information re-

Introduction
Complex systems can be represented in networks or graphs.
One of the most prominent features of such networks is the
community structure, where the nodes within a community
are densely connected whereas nodes in different communities are sparsely connected (Girvan and Newman 2002).
Community structures help reveal organizational structures
and functional components of a complex system. Therefore,
community detection is an essential step toward characterization of a complex system.
Network topology, an important network description, has
been broadly exploited by the most existing methods for
community detection. However, network topology reﬂects
merely one aspect of a network and is often noisy. As a result, using network topology alone may not necessarily give
rise to a satisfactory partition of a network. For instance, it
is not uncommon that two nodes that belong to the same
community are not directly connected, and a node connecting to multiple communities for distinct reasons is difﬁcult
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

265

