Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

From the Lab to the Classroom and Beyond: Extending a
Game-Based Research Platform for Teaching AI to Diverse Audiences

1

Nicole Sintov1 , Debarun Kar1 , Thanh Nguyen1 , Fei Fang1 ,
Kevin Hoffman2 , Arnaud Lyet3 , Milind Tambe1

{sintov,dkar,thanhhng,feifang,tambe}@usc.edu, University of Southern California, USA
2
khoff97@gmail.com, Aspire Public Schools, USA
3
Arnaud.Lyet@wwfus.org, World Wildlife Fund, USA
goal is to ﬁnd the optimal strategy so as to maximize her expected utility, knowing she faces an adaptive adversary who
will respond to any deployed strategy.
The existing and potential applications of this work have
created the need to introduce the AI concepts underlying security games to individuals with limited AI backgrounds, and not only to students, but also to audiences beyond the classroom. This has become particularly relevant
following recent advances in the sub-ﬁeld of green security games, which use game-theoretic strategies to protect
forests (Johnson, Fang, and Tambe 2012), ﬁsheries (Haskell
et al. 2014) and wildlife (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015;
Kar et al. 2015). In fact, wildlife protection is a global concern. Many species, including tigers and rhinos, are in danger of extinction due to poaching. Although park rangers
have been conducting patrols over conservation areas to
combat this illegal activity, security resources are often limited in vast park areas. Manually generating patrol schedules
can require considerable effort from wildlife staff, and such
manual plans also can be predictable, allowing poachers to
exploit patrol schedules. Our security game-based solutions
combine different AI subﬁelds, including game theory, optimization, and machine learning, to help rangers in automatically generating randomized patrol strategies that account
for models of poachers’ behaviors.
Teaching these concepts and techniques to those with limited AI backgrounds can be challenging. In particular, as described above, the defender’s quantitative decision, which is
a probability distribution over his possible actions, is made
based on reasoning about both players’ payoffs associated
with their actions (Yin et al. 2010). This requires reviewing
general AI concepts, probability, and optimization. While
general AI concepts and techniques have been made accessible to undergraduate students (Stern and Sterling 1996;
Parsons and Sklar 2004; Wollowski 2014), no prior work
describes effective methods for teaching security games to
audiences in the classroom or beyond. Bringing these concepts to audiences beyond the classroom is particularly important: it is necessary for decision-makers and those who
may consider using AI-based decision aids in the ﬁeld to
understand the underlying theoretical framework, in part to
increase adoption of these emerging technologies.
One method that has been effective in teaching general AI
in classrooms is the use of games (Wong, Zink, and Koenig

Abstract
Recent years have seen increasing interest in AI from
outside the AI community. This is partly due to applications based on AI that have been used in real-world domains, for example, the successful deployment of game
theory-based decision aids in security domains. This paper describes our teaching approach for introducing the
AI concepts underlying security games to diverse audiences. We adapted a game-based research platform
that served as a testbed for recent research advances
in computational game theory into a set of interactive
role-playing games. We guided learners in playing these
games as part of our teaching strategy, which also included didactic instruction and interactive exercises on
broader AI topics. We describe our experience in applying this teaching approach to diverse audiences, including students of an urban public high school, university
undergraduates, and security domain experts who protect wildlife. We evaluate our approach based on results
from the games and participant surveys.

Introduction
In recent years, the ﬁeld of security games (Tambe 2011),
a subﬁeld of AI, has drawn increasing attention from outside the artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) community. In particular, game theory-based decision aids for protecting critical
infrastructure such as airports (Pita et al. 2008) and ports
(Shieh et al. 2012) have been successfully deployed, making
real-world impacts and resulting in fundamental changes to
security operations for select organizations.
As a subﬁeld of computational game theory, security
games model the strategic interaction between two players,
a defender and an adversary. The defender allocates security
resources to protect a set of critical targets of varying importance. The defender’s strategy is a probability distribution over all possible ways of allocating the resources to targets. The adversary conducts surveillance on the defender’s
strategy before selecting a target to attack. The players’ actions lead to payoff values, and the defender’s performance
is evaluated by her expected utility, i.e., her payoff in expectation when a defender strategy is played. The defender’s
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4107

