Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Structured Features in Naive Bayes Classiﬁcation
Arthur Choi

Nazgol Tavabi

Adnan Darwiche

Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
aychoi@cs.ucla.edu

Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
ntavabi@ce.sharif.edu

Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
darwiche@cs.ucla.edu

resent attributes that may have an exponential number of
values (Darwiche 2011; Xue, Choi, and Darwiche 2012;
Choi and Darwiche 2013; Van den Broeck and Darwiche
2015). The second advance is the Probabilistic Sentential
Decision Diagram (PSDD), which we use to represent and
learn distributions over such attributes (Kisa et al. 2014a;
Choi, Van den Broeck, and Darwiche 2015). Our goal is to
realize the above objective while maintaining two attractive
properties of NB classiﬁers: (1) the ability to learn and then
classify in time that is linear in the size of the classiﬁer, and
(2) the ability to use the classiﬁer in a systematic manner
across multiple domains.
NB classiﬁers are deﬁned by a class variable C and a set
of simple attributes Xi , each represented by a discrete or
continuous variable. In addition, an SNB classiﬁer includes
a set of SDDs Si , each representing a structured attribute.
The size of an NB classiﬁer is characterized by the number
of classes, the number of attributes, and the number of values
that the (discrete) variables Xi can attain. On the other hand,
the size of the SNB classiﬁer is further characterized by the
number and size of the SDDs Si . As with NB classiﬁers, we
show that one can learn and classify with SNB classiﬁers in
time that is linear in their size.
We also show that using structured attributes for a particular domain amounts to simply deﬁning the SDD corresponding to each attribute. Once the SDDs are deﬁned, learning
from data, and then classifying instances, can all proceed in
a systematic and domain independent manner. We illustrate
this systematic use of structured attributes through case studies, which delineate the domain speciﬁc investment needed.
In particular, we consider two different classiﬁcation tasks:

Abstract
We propose the structured naive Bayes (SNB) classiﬁer, which augments the ubiquitous naive Bayes classiﬁer with structured features. SNB classiﬁers facilitate
the use of complex features, such as combinatorial objects (e.g., graphs, paths and orders) in a general but
systematic way. Underlying the SNB classiﬁer is the
recently proposed Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagram (PSDD), which is a tractable representation of
probability distributions over structured spaces. We illustrate the utility and generality of the SNB classiﬁer
via case studies. First, we show how we can distinguish
players of simple games in terms of play style and skill
level based purely on observing the games they play.
Second, we show how we can detect anomalous paths
taken on graphs based purely on observing the paths
themselves.

Introduction
Naive Bayes (NB) classiﬁers and their extensions are ubiquitous in domains such as data mining, artiﬁcial intelligence, and machine learning (Domingos and Pazzani 1997;
Friedman, Geiger, and Goldszmidt 1997; Ng and Jordan
2001). In the classical version of these classiﬁers, attributes
(aka features) are represented as discrete or continuous random variables. For discrete attributes, each variable typically
has a small or manageable number of values. For continuous
attributes, it is similarly assumed that variables have manageable distributions, such as a Gaussian. As a result, these
classiﬁers are typically used to classify instances that have
simple features, such as colors or intensities, words or frequencies, scores, etc. In contrast, our interest in this paper is
in naive Bayes classiﬁers with structured features that can
have an exponential number of values, representing complex entities such as combinatorial objects (e.g., permutations, graphs, paths and game traces).
To realize this objective, we propose the structured naive
Bayes classiﬁer (SNB), which augments the NB classiﬁer by
allowing it to efﬁciently accommodate structured attributes.
This extension is enabled by two recent advances in knowledge compilation. The ﬁrst advance is the Sentential Decision Diagram (SDD), which we use to compactly rep-

1. determining the play style and skill level of players in
games such as tic-tac-toe and hex, given examples of
games that they have played;
2. detecting anomalies in paths taken on graphs, based on
observing the paths taken in a normal operating mode.
There are two alternative approaches to classiﬁcation tasks
that are targeted by the SNB classiﬁer. The ﬁrst is to simply use a classical NB classiﬁer with attributes that have an
exponential number of values (using sparse, tabular representations of the corresponding distributions). The second is
to use a dedicated approach, that is speciﬁc to the domain
at hand. We comment on both approaches in the context of

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3233

