Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Little Is Much: Bridging Cross-Platform
Behaviors through Overlapped Crowds
Meng Jiang, Peng Cui

Nicholas Jing Yuan, Xing Xie

Shiqiang Yang

Tsinghua University

Microsoft Research Asia

Tsinghua University

more broadly, maximizing the potential value of the big data
isolated in different platforms. More speciﬁcally, we are interested in the problem of cross-platform behavioral prediction: how to predict user behaviors in one platform (e.g.,
e-commerce, health care) based on user behaviors in other
platforms (e.g., social media, wearable sensor)?
A paucity of research works have investigated crossdomain behavior prediction problem based on transfer learning. C ODEBOOK (Li, Yang, and Xue 2009a) assumes the
auxiliary platform and target platform without overlapped
users, Netﬂix and MovieLens, share the same user-item
rating patterns. TPCF (Jing et al. 2014) integrates three
types of data from auxiliary domains including (1) data with
aligned users, (2) data with aligned items, and (3) homogeneous data that have the same rating scale as the target domain, but without the knowledge from the correspondences
of users and items. The previous works assume either a
fully-overlapped shape (Zhong, Fan, and Yang 2014) or a
non-overlapped shape (Li, Yang, and Xue 2009a) among
the users across different platforms or domains. However,
the real case is in the middle, where there are some common users (partially overlapped users) across the different
platforms. The number of overlapped users is often small,
and the number of explicitly known overlapped users is even
less, due to the lacking of uniﬁed ID for a user across different platforms. Thus the essential problem in cross-platform
behavioral prediction is how to fully exploit the small number of overlapped crowds to optimally bridge a user’s behaviors in different platforms. To this end, we entail several key
challenges as follow:
• Sparsity: Users often adopt only a small portion of items
in one platform. On average, a Douban user generates ratings for 60 books, 200 movies, and 100 songs from 50,000
items. A Weibo user has 4.5 tags from 10,000 and tweets
about 5,000 entities from 100,000.
• Heterogeneity: Behavioral data sets are heterogeneous
with different types of items and links. The weights of
links can be integer values, non-negative integers, or
ﬂoats: We have ratings from Douban, “Like” number from
social media, review emoticons from e-commerce, running distance and blood pressure from wearable devices.
• Different representations: Rating, tweeting and purchasing behaviors should have different patterns. Users’ behavioral patterns cannot be represented in the same la-

Abstract
People often use multiple platforms to fulﬁll their different information needs. With the ultimate goal of serving people intelligently, a fundamental way is to get comprehensive understanding about user needs. How to organically integrate and
bridge cross-platform information in a human-centric way
is important. Existing transfer learning assumes either fullyoverlapped or non-overlapped among the users. However, the
real case is the users of different platforms are partially overlapped. The number of overlapped users is often small and the
explicitly known overlapped users is even less due to the lacking of uniﬁed ID for a user across different platforms. In this
paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised transfer learning
method to address the problem of cross-platform behavior
prediction, called XPT RANS. To alleviate the sparsity issue,
it fully exploits the small number of overlapped crowds to
optimally bridge a user’s behaviors in different platforms. Extensive experiments across two real social networks show that
XPT RANS signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art. We
demonstrate that by fully exploiting 26% overlapped users,
XPT RANS can predict the behaviors of non-overlapped users
with the same accuracy as overlapped users, which means the
small overlapped crowds can successfully bridge the information across different platforms.

Introduction
An information platform acts as an information source to inform people about something or provide knowledge about
it. The diversity of people’s information needs intrinsically
determine the multiplicity of platforms that people engage
in. It is common for a user to watch videos in YouTube,
browse images in Flickr and share social information in
Facebook. The contents that the user interact with across different platforms often have explicit/implicit correlations, or
correspond to different aspects of his/her needs. With the
ultimate goal of serving people intelligently, a fundamental way is to get comprehensive understanding about user
needs. However, the current information platforms are either
isolated or their correlations are signiﬁcantly undermined.
How to organically integrate and bridge cross-platform information in a human-centric way is of paramount significance for better satisfying users’ information seeking, or
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13

