Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Optimizing Personalized Email Filtering Thresholds
to Mitigate Sequential Spear Phishing Attacks
Mengchen Zhao

Bo An

Christopher Kiekintveld

School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore 639798
zhao0204@e.ntu.edu.sg

School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore 639798
boan@ntu.edu.sg

University of Texas, El Paso
El Paso, TX 79968
cdkiekintveld@utep.edu

visit an unsafe website by clicking a link. Executing a spear
phishing attack is much more costly than sending a broad
spam message, but it is also much more likely to succeed
and the potential damage is much greater. For example, in
2011 the RSA company was breached by a spear phishing
attack (Zetter 2011). This attack resulted in privileged access to secure systems, and stolen information related to the
company’s SecurID two-factor authentication products.
Email ﬁltering systems are one of the primary defenses
against both spam and spear phishing attacks. These systems typically use black and white lists as well as machine
learning methods to score the likelihood that an email is malicious before sending it to a user (Bergholz et al. 2010). Setting the threshold for how safe a message must be to be delivered is a key strategic decision for the network administrator (Sheng et al. 2009). If the threshold is too high, malicious
emails will easily pass the ﬁltering system, but if the threshold is too low normal emails will be ﬁltered. Recent work
has proposed a game-theoretic model that can improve the
effectiveness of ﬁltering if thresholds are personalized according to individuals’ values and susceptibilities (Laszka,
Vorobeychik, and Koutsoukos 2015). They assume that the
attacker’s strategy is simply selecting a subset of users to attack that maximizes an additive expected reward, ignoring
the cost of attacks and the outcome of previous attacks.
However, in many incidents such as Operation Aurora (Varma 2010), attackers launches sophisticated attacks
toward few targets over months. In such cases, attackers
have plenty time and attack resources and they can plan long
term sequential attack strategies to achieve difﬁcult objectives (Watson, Mason, and Ackroyd 2014). In this paper
we extend the literature (and particularly the personalized
ﬁltering model of (Laszka, Vorobeychik, and Koutsoukos
2015)) to consider more sophisticated attackers who can
make sequential decisions about which users to send spear
phishing emails to. Speciﬁcally, we consider more complex
(also realistic) objective functions for both the attacker and
defender, including modeling attack costs, and situations
where it is only necessary to compromise one user from a
set of users that has access to important data or credentials
(i.e., the user values are substitutable).
Our contributions are fourfold. First, we consider the
case where there is a single important credential that the attacker seeks to gain and model the attacker’s decision mak-

Abstract
Highly targeted spear phishing attacks are increasingly
common, and have been implicated in many major security
breeches. Email ﬁltering systems are the ﬁrst line of defense
against such attacks. These ﬁlters are typically conﬁgured
with uniform thresholds for deciding whether or not to allow
a message to be delivered to a user. However, users have
very signiﬁcant differences in both their susceptibility to
phishing attacks as well as their access to critical information
and credentials that can cause damage. Recent work has
considered setting personalized thresholds for individual
users based on a Stackelberg game model. We consider
two important extensions of the previous model. First, in
our model user values can be substitutable, modeling cases
where multiple users provide access to the same information
or credential. Second, we consider attackers who make
sequential attack plans based on the outcome of previous
attacks. Our analysis starts from scenarios where there
is only one credential and then extends to more general
scenarios with multiple credentials. For single-credential
scenarios, we demonstrate that the optimal defense strategy
can be found by solving a binary combinatorial optimization
problem called PEDS. For multiple-credential scenarios, we
formulate it as a bilevel optimization problem for ﬁnding the
optimal defense strategy and then reduce it to a single level
optimization problem called PEMS using complementary
slackness conditions. Experimental results show that both
PEDS and PEMS lead to signiﬁcant higher defender utilities
than two existing benchmarks in different parameter settings.
Also, both PEDS and PEMS are more robust than the
existing benchmarks considering uncertainties.

Introduction
Email is not a secure communications channel, and attackers
have exploited this via spam emails for many years. However, in recent years cyber attacks using email have become
increasingly targeted and much more damaging to organizations (TrendLabs 2012). These targeted email attacks are
commonly known as spear phishing. They target individuals
or small groups of people, but use personal information and
social engineering to craft very believable messages with
the goal of inducing the recipient to open an attachment, or
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

658

