Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Optimal Discrete Matrix Completion
1

Zhouyuan Huo1 , Ji Liu2 , Heng Huang1∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, 76019, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 14627, USA
huozhouyuan@gmail.com, jliu@cs.rochester.edu, heng@uta.edu

ple, in Netﬂix, only a small part of users tend to rate on
the movies or series they have watched, and each user just
watches and rates a few movies or series compared to the
number of items in the whole video database.
As with the example above, our task is predicting missing
elements based on a little information already known, and
it can be thought as a matrix completion problem. In matrix
completion problem, we need to inﬁll a sparse matrix, when
only a few entries are observed. There are many methods
proposed to solve this problem, including SVD (Billsus and
Pazzani 1998), SVT (Cai, Candès, and Shen 2010), Rank-k
Matrix Recovery (Huang et al. 2013) and so on. All of these
methods hold the same assumption that the approximation
matrix has a low-rank structure.
These low-rank matrix approximation methods can be
used to solve matrix completion problems like Netﬂix movie
ratings prediction, and their outputs are in real number domain. However, continuous outputs are hard to interpret
sometimes, when the inputs of this problem are discrete values. For example, we want to know whether two users are
connected or not, 1 denotes connected and 0 means not connected. A decimal number between 0 and 1, like 0.6 (which
is not a real probability), can make us confused and is hard
to interpret. The most intuitive way is to ﬁnd a threshold and
project these continuous values to discrete ones. However,
this method is time consuming and may destroy the low-rank
structure of output matrix. There are methods, e.g. Robust
Discrete Matrix Completion (Huang, Nie, and Huang 2013)
solving matrix completion problem in discrete number domain. This method has been proved to be more effective
than those general matrix completion methods in the case
where the entries of the matrix are discrete values. However,
there are still two problems. Firstly, this method needs to go
through all the entries and discrete number domain in each
iteration, which makes it hard to process big data. Secondly,
solution via trace norm minimization may not approximate
the rank minimization well.
In this paper, we propose a new optimal discrete matrix completion algorithm to solve matrix completion problem in discrete number domain. We introduce new threshold variables such that we can integrate continuous matrix
completion and threshold learning in the same loss function.
We provide a novel error estimation loss for discrete matrix completion to learn optimal thresholds. Instead of min-

Abstract
In recent years, matrix completion methods have been successfully applied to solve recommender system applications.
Most of them focus on the matrix completion problem in real
number domain, and produce continuous prediction values.
However, these methods are not appropriate in some occasions where the entries of matrix are discrete values, such
as movie ratings prediction, social network relation and interaction prediction, because their continuous outputs are not
probabilities and uninterpretable. In this case, an additional
step to process the continuous results with either heuristic
threshold parameters or complicated mapping is necessary,
while it is inefﬁcient and may diverge from the optimal solution. There are a few matrix completion methods working
on discrete number domain, however, they are not applicable
to sparse and large-scale data set. In this paper, we propose
a novel optimal discrete matrix completion model, which is
able to learn optimal thresholds automatically and also guarantees an exact low-rank structure of the target matrix. We
use stochastic gradient descent algorithm with momentum
method to optimize the new objective function and speed up
optimization. In the experiments, it is proved that our method
can predict discrete values with high accuracy, very close to
or even better than these values obtained by carefully tuned
thresholds on Movielens and YouTube data sets. Meanwhile,
our model is able to handle online data and easy to parallelize.

Introduction
In this era of Internet, people spend much more time and
energy on the internet. We watch movies and series online
through YouTube or Netﬂix, make friends and maintain relationships online through Facebook or Twitter, place orders
and purchase products online through Yelp or Amazon, and
even meet and work online through Skype or Github. Our
traces and preferences performed on the internet are precious information and resource for these websites to improve user experience and offer customized service. However, these data are always extremely sparse and new algorithms are needed to process them effectively. For exam∗
To whom all correspondence should be addressed. This work
was partially supported by NSF-IIS 1117965, NSF-IIS 1302675,
NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NIH R01 AG049371 at
UTA and NSF-CNS 1548078 at UR.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1687

