Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Preconditioned Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics for
Deep Neural Networks∗
Chunyuan Li1 , Changyou Chen1† , David Carlson2 and Lawrence Carin1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
Department of Statistics and Grossman Center, Columbia University

2

chunyuan.li@duke.edu, cchangyou@gmail.com, david.edwin.carlson@gmail.com, lcarin@duke.edu

overﬁtting (MacKay 1992). In fact, it is possible to view
the standard dropout technique (Srivastava et al. 2014) as
a form of Bayesian approximation that incorporates uncertainty (Gal and Ghahramani 2015; Kingma, Salimans, and
Welling 2015). Many other recent works (Blundell et al.
2015; Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015; Korattikara et al.
2015) advocate incorporation of uncertainty estimates during model training to help improve robustness and performance.
While a Bayesian approach ameliorates the overﬁtting
issue in these complicated models, exact Bayesian inference in DNNs is generally intractable. Recently, several approaches have been proposed to approximate a Bayesian
posterior for DNNs, including a stochastic variational inference (SVI) method “Bayes by Backprop” (BBB) (Blundell
et al. 2015) and an online expectation propogation method
(OEP) “probabilistic backpropagation” (PBP) (HernándezLobato and Adams 2015). These methods assume the posterior is comprised of separable Gaussian distributions. While
this is a good choice for computational reasons, it can lead
to unreasonable approximation errors and underestimation
of model uncertainty.
A popular alternative to SVI and OEP is to use Stochastic
Gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) methods to generate posterior samples (Welling and Teh 2011;
Chen, Fox, and Guestrin 2014; Ding et al. 2014; Li et al.
2016). One of the most common SG-MCMC methods is the
Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) algorithm
(Welling and Teh 2011). One merit of this approach is that
it is highly scalable; it requires only the gradient on a small
mini-batch of data, as in the optimization method Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). It has been shown that these
MCMC approaches converge to the true posterior by using a slowly-decreasing sequence of step sizes (Teh, Thiéry,
and Vollmer 2014; Chen, Ding, and Carin 2015). Costly
Metropolis-Hasting steps are not required.
Unfortunately, DNNs often exhibit pathological curvature and saddle points (Dauphin et al. 2014), which render
existing SG-MCMC methods inefﬁcient. In the optimization literature, numerous approaches have been proposed to
overcome this problem, including methods based on adapting a preconditioning matrix in SGD to the local geometry (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011; Kingma and Ba 2015;
Dauphin, de Vries, and Bengio 2015). These approaches

Abstract
Effective training of deep neural networks suffers from
two main issues. The ﬁrst is that the parameter spaces
of these models exhibit pathological curvature. Recent
methods address this problem by using adaptive preconditioning for Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD).
These methods improve convergence by adapting to
the local geometry of parameter space. A second issue is overﬁtting, which is typically addressed by early
stopping. However, recent work has demonstrated that
Bayesian model averaging mitigates this problem. The
posterior can be sampled by using Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD). However, the rapidly
changing curvature renders default SGLD methods inefﬁcient. Here, we propose combining adaptive preconditioners with SGLD. In support of this idea, we give theoretical properties on asymptotic convergence and predictive risk. We also provide empirical results for Logistic Regression, Feedforward Neural Nets, and Convolutional Neural Nets, demonstrating that our preconditioned SGLD method gives state-of-the-art performance
on these models.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have recently generated signiﬁcant interest, largely due to their state-of-the-art performance on a wide variety of tasks, such as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and language modeling (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014). Despite
this signiﬁcant empirical success, it remains a challenge to
effectively train DNNs. This is due to two main problems:
(i) The function under consideration is often difﬁcult to optimize and ﬁnd a good local minima. It is believed that this
is in large part due to the pathological curvature and highly
non-convex nature of the function to be optimized (Dauphin
et al. 2014). (ii) Standard optimization techniques lead to
overﬁtting, typically addressed through early stopping (Srivastava et al. 2014).
A Bayesian approach for learning neural networks incorporates uncertainty into model learning, and can reduce
∗

Appendix is at https://sites.google.com/site/chunyuan24
Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1788

