Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Autonomous Electricity Trading Using
Time-of-Use Tariffs in a Competitive Market
Daniel Urieli and Peter Stone
Dept. of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
{urieli,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
One of the primary goals of demand-side management (DSM) is peak-ﬂattening, i.e. distributing consumption more evenly throughout the day (Schweppe, Daryanian, and Tabors 1989). Time-Of-Use (TOU) tariffs are energy selling contracts that were proposed for implementing
DSM (Joskow and Tirole 2006; Kirschen 2003). TOU tariffs
specify time-based pricing, in contrast to ﬁxed-rate contracts
that currently dominate power markets, and thus incentivize
customers to adapt their consumption to reduce costs.
TOU tariffs in competitive markets present at least three
important challenges. First, in monopolistic retail markets
the surplus resulting from reduced wholesale energy costs
directly beneﬁts the monopoly and possibly the customers.
In contrast, in competitive markets some or all of this surplus might beneﬁt the competitors (even if they do not use
TOU tariffs), since wholesale energy costs are typically a
function of the total amount bought, due to the wholesale
auction structure. As a result, brokers using ﬁxed-rate tariffs
can enjoy the reduced prices resulting from peak-ﬂattening
by another broker using TOU tariffs, while at the same time
gaining market share from this TOU broker due to the extra discomfort that TOU tariffs incur on customers. Second,
TOU tariffs may cause a herding phenomenon, where customers shift their consumption to low-price times, thus creating new peaks (Ramchurn et al. 2011). The third challenge
is addressing the aforementioned challenges of ﬂattening demand and increasing the broker’s surplus in a tractable way
in a complex, realistic, real-time environment.
This paper focuses on two questions. First, how should
an autonomous broker optimize TOU tariffs that are both 1)
attractive to customers in a competitive retail market with
ﬁxed-rate tariffs and 2) more proﬁtable for the broker than
the best ﬁxed-rate tariffs? Second, what is the economic impact of TOU tariffs in a competitive market? This paper’s
primary contributions are:

Abstract
This paper studies the impact of Time-Of-Use (TOU) tariffs
in a competitive electricity market place. Speciﬁcally, it focuses on the question of how should an autonomous broker
agent optimize TOU tariffs in a competitive retail market, and
what is the impact of such tariffs on the economy. We formalize the problem of TOU tariff optimization and propose
an algorithm for approximating its solution. We extensively
experiment with our algorithm in a large-scale, detailed electricity retail markets simulation of the Power Trading Agent
Competition (Power TAC) and: 1) ﬁnd that our algorithm results in 15% peak-demand reduction, 2) ﬁnd that its peakﬂattening results in greater proﬁt and/or proﬁt-share for the
broker and allows it to win against the 1st and 2nd place brokers from the Power TAC 2014 ﬁnals, and 3) analyze several
economic implications of using TOU tariffs in competitive
retail markets.

1

Introduction

The smart electricity grid, known as the the smart-grid, is
expected to be a main enabler of sustainable, clean, efﬁcient energy supply. One of the milestones in the smart-grid
vision is “customer participation in power markets through
demand-side-management” (U.S 2003). Demand-side management refers to adapting customer demand to supply conditions, and may be implemented using new power market structures. Due to the high cost of failure in the real
world (Borenstein 2002), it is important to test new power
market structures in simulation (Weidlich and Veit 2008).
This is the focus of the Power Trading Agent Competition
(Power TAC) (Ketter, Peters, and Collins 2013), and of this
paper.
In Power TAC, autonomous broker agents compete to
make proﬁt in a large-scale, realistic power markets simulator. Since wholesale power markets are not designed for
individual customer participation (Kirschen 2003), such brokers can represent customer populations, and make proﬁt
while reducing customer costs and stabilizing the electricity
grid (Ketter, Peters, and Collins 2013). Power TAC’s simulator models real-world markets (like ERCOT’s) with components of future markets, such as autonomous agents optimizing customer consumption.

• We formalize the problem of optimizing TOU tariffs in
competitive markets, show that it is intractable, and propose an efﬁcient optimization algorithm that approximates its solution. Our algorithm is fully implemented in
our broker agent.
• Our algorithm leads to 15% peak-demand reduction in
a complex, large-scale simulation of competitive power
markets (Power TAC). To the best of our knowledge, our

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

345

