Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Dependency Tree Representations of Predicate-Argument Structures
1

Likun Qiu1,2 , Yue Zhang2 and Meishan Zhang2
School of Chinese Language and Literature, Ludong University, China
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
qiulikun@pku.edu.cn, yue zhang@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We present a novel annotation framework for representing
predicate-argument structures, which uses dependency trees
to encode the syntactic and semantic roles of a sentence
simultaneously. The main contribution is a semantic role
transmission model, which eliminates the structural gap between syntax and shallow semantics, making them compatible. A Chinese semantic treebank was built under the proposed framework, and the ﬁrst release containing about 14K
sentences is made freely available. The proposed framework
enables semantic role labeling to be solved as a sequence labeling task, and experiments show that standard sequence labelers can give competitive performance on the new treebank
compared with state-of-the-art graph structure models.

Figure 1: PB-style structures. (“ (he)  (went to) 
 (Beijing)  (,)  (then)  (left) (le; a function
word)” (He went to Beijing, and then left.))

Introduction
Semantic role labeling (SRL) is the shallow semantic parsing task of identifying the arguments of a predicate, and assigning semantic role labels to them (Gildea and Jurafsky
2002). Predicate-argument structures of a sentence typically form a graph (Hajič et al. 2009; Choi and Palmer 2011),
where a noun phrase can be the argument of more than one
predicate semantically. For instance, in the sentence in Figure 1, the word “ (he)” acts as the A0 of the two predicates
“ (went to)” and “ (left)”, respectively.
Most available semantic resources, such as PropBank (PB) (Kingsbury and Palmer 2002), adopt this type of graphstructure representation, which makes structured prediction
computationally more expensive, compared to linear or tree
structures. As a result, many state-of-the-art SRL systems take SRL as several subtasks (Xue 2008; Björkelund,
Hafdell, and Nugues 2009), including predicate selection,
argument selection and role classiﬁcation, thereby neglecting the relation between different roles the same word or
phrase plays.
In the example in Figure 1, the role A0 of “ (he)” on
“ (left)” can be regarded as the result of a role transmission, which passes the A0 role from “ (went to)”
to “ (left)” via the syntactic coordination between the
two predicates. Many phenomena, including raising construction, control construction, relativization and nominalization, cause similar transmissions. By modeling semantic

Figure 2: Proposed representation of the same sentence as
Figure 1. The arcs are syntactic dependencies and the tags
SBJ, SS1, etc are semantic tags. Propositions are marked out
on the top of predicates; they are not a part of our annotation,
but can be derived from it.
role transmission, incompatibilities between syntactic structures and predicate-argument structures can be resolved.
Syntactic constructions here act as a media to transmit semantic information (Steedman 2000).
Inspired by this, we present a novel annotation framework, which represents predicate-argument information and
syntactic dependencies simultaneously using a uniform dependency tree structure. An instance is shown in Figure 2,
where each noun phrase is tagged with one semantic role,
and the ﬁrst predicate “ (went to)” is tagged with a
transmission tag SS1, meaning that the subject of the predicate “ (went to)” is transmitted to its parent node, the
second predicate “ (left)”. Based on these semantic role
labels and transmission tags, the two propositions “ 
(:SBJ, :FIN) (went (he:SBJ, Beijing:FIN))” and “
 (:SBJ, :TIM) (left (he:SBJ, then:TIM))” can be
inferred automatically.
Our annotation has several potential advantages. First,
modeling semantic role transmission explicitly allows not
only the modeling of all the propositions in a sentence simultaneously, but also the integration of syntactic and semantic

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2645

