Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Decentralized Robust Subspace Clustering
Bo Liu†, Xiao-Tong Yuan‡, Yang Yu†, Qingshan Liu‡, Dimitris N. Metaxas†
†Department of Computer Science, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
‡Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis Technology,
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
lb507@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of subspace clustering using
the SSC (Sparse Subspace Clustering) approach, which
has several desirable theoretical properties and has been
shown to be effective in various computer vision applications. We develop a large scale distributed framework
for the computation of SSC via an alternating direction method of multiplier (ADMM) algorithm. The proposed framework solves SSC in column blocks and only
involves parallel multivariate Lasso regression subproblems and sample-wise operations. This appealing property allows us to allocate multiple cores/machines for
the processing of individual column blocks. We evaluate our algorithm on a shared-memory architecture. Experimental results on real-world datasets conﬁrm that
the proposed block-wise ADMM framework is substantially more efﬁcient than its matrix counterpart used by
SSC, without sacriﬁcing accuracy. Moreover, our approach is directly applicable to decentralized neighborhood selection for Gaussian graphical models structure
estimation.

 1

 j

 

 

 

 

X1

...




Xj

...


Xm







 

Xj  X1 ... Xj ... Xm  Cj  Ej




 

Figure 1: The framework of the proposed distributed sparse
subspace clustering algorithm. The overall dataset is decomposed and assigned to multiple cores or machines. Ci and
Ei is learned through the communication of master core or
machine with others. Finally C and E is derived by aggrem
gating {Ci }m
i=1 and {Ei }i=1 .

Introduction
Sparse subspace clustering

In high-dimensional analysis, it is commonly assumed that
data lie in certain more interpretable low-dimensional structures instead of being randomly distributed across the ambient space. Subspace Clustering (SC) is such a tool that
assumes the intrinsic structure of data can be described by
subspace and aims to recover the underlying subspace structures from the observed high-dimensional ambient data. In
fact, when data are generated from multiple classes, it is reasonable to assume that each class can be well represented
by a subspace. Given X as a collection of samples in a
d-dimension ambient space; these samples may be partiK
tioned as X = k=1 Xk with each Xk being a collection of
samples distributed around (unknown) subspace Sk ⊂ Rd .
The task of SC is to approximately group the points in X
into their respective subspaces. The SC model is gaining
increasing attention in computer vision and machine learning due to its desirable statistical properties and promising performance on real-world datasets (Candès et al. 2011;
Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Feng et al. 2014).

Let X = [x1 , ...xn ] ∈ Rd×n be the data matrix whose
columns are the samples in X . In real-world problems, due
to the presence of noise, it is usually assumed that X is generated from the following superposition model:
X = Z + Y0 + E0

(1)

where Z = [z1 , ...zn ] is the clean data matrix with columns
sampled exactly from {Sk }K
k=1 , Y0 is a dense random matrix modeling noise and E0 is a matrix with certain sparsity
structures modeling sparse outliers. The state-of-the-art robust subspace clustering algorithms take advantage of the
so-called self-expressiveness property of linear subspaces,
i.e., each noiseless data point from one of the subspaces
can be reconstructed by a combination of the other noiseless data points from the same subspace. Formally, the selfexpressiveness model is deﬁned over the clean data as:
Z = ZC

s.t. diag(C) = 0

where C ∈ R
is the representation coefﬁcient matrix
and diag(C) is the vector of the diagonal elements of C.
n×n

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3539

