Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Recommendation with Social Dimensions
Jiliang Tang† , Suhang Wang‡ , Xia Hu∗ ,
Dawei Yin† , Yingzhou Bi , Yi Chang† and Huan Liu‡

∗
Texas A&M University, hu@cse.tamu.edu
Yahoo Labs, {jlt,daweiy,yichang}@yahoo-inc.com
‡
Arizona State University, {suhang.wang, huan.liu}@asu.edu

Guangxi Teachers Education University, yingzhou.bi@gmail.com
†

Abstract

‫ݑ‬ଶ଴

The pervasive presence of social media greatly enriches online users’ social activities, resulting in abundant social relations. Social relations provide an independent source for
recommendation, bringing about new opportunities for recommender systems. Exploiting social relations to improve
recommendation performance attracts a great amount of attention in recent years. Most existing social recommender
systems treat social relations homogeneously and make use
of direct connections (or strong dependency connections).
However, connections in online social networks are intrinsically heterogeneous and are a composite of various relations.
While connected users in online social networks form groups,
and users in a group share similar interests, weak dependency
connections are established among these users when they are
not directly connected. In this paper, we investigate how to
exploit the heterogeneity of social relations and weak dependency connections for recommendation. In particular, we
employ social dimensions to simultaneously capture heterogeneity of social relations and weak dependency connections,
and provide principled ways to model social dimensions, and
propose a recommendation framework SoDimRec which incorporates heterogeneity of social relations and weak dependency connections based on social dimensions. Experimental
results on real-world data sets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed framework. We conduct further experiments
to understand the important role of social dimensions in the
proposed framework.

‫ݑ‬ଵ଼

‫ݑ‬ଵ଺

‫ݑ‬ଵଽ
‫ݑ‬ଵ଻
‫଼ݑ‬

‫ݑ‬ଽ

‫଻ݑ‬

‫଺ݑ‬

‫ݑ‬ଵ
‫ݑ‬ଷ

‫ݑ‬ହ

‫ݑ‬ଵ଴

‫ݑ‬ଵସ

‫ݑ‬ଵଵ
‫ݑ‬ସ
‫ݑ‬ଵଶ

‫ݑ‬ଶ

‫ݑ‬ଵଷ

‫ݑ‬ଵହ

Figure 1: An illustration of u1 ’s social connections and the
groups that she participates in.

Jamali and Ester 2009; Jiang et al. 2012). Their common assumption is that a user’s preference is similar to
or inﬂuenced by their directly connected friends, which
can be explained by social correlation theories such as homophily (Miller McPherson and Cook 2001) and social inﬂuence (Marsden and Friedkin 1993).
Most existing social recommender systems treat a user’s
connections homogeneously and make use of her direct connections. However, connections in online social networks
are intrinsically heterogeneous and are a composite of various relations (Tang and Liu 2009a; Sun and Han 2012;
Tang, Gao, and Liu 2012). Users in online social networks
form groups, and they have similar interests with other users
in the same group although they may not directly connect. Figure 1 illustrates an example about u1 ’s social relations with {u2 , u3 , . . . , u9 }, and the groups that she participates in. The user u1 may treat her social relations differently in different domains (Tang, Gao, and Liu 2012).
For example, u1 may seek suggestions about “Sports” from
{u2 , u3 }, but ask for recommendation about “Electronics”
from {u4 , u5 }. Connected users in online social networks

Introduction
Recommender systems have been proven to be effective in
mitigating the information overload problem (Herlocker et
al. 1999; Sarwar et al. 2001; Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009).
The increasing popularity of social media allows online
users to participate in online activities which produce rich
social relations, such as friendships in Facebook and trust
relations in Epinions. Social relations provide an independent source for recommendation and bring about new opportunities for recommender systems. Exploiting social relations for recommendation attracts more and more attention
in recent years (Golbeck 2006; Massa and Avesani 2007;
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

251

