Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Discriminative Vanishing Component Analysis
1

Chenping Hou1 , Feiping Nie2 , Dacheng Tao3

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology
Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL), Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Center for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems and the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology,
University of Technology, Sydney
hcpnudt@hotmail.com, feipingnie@gmail.com, dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au
2

(Bishop 2006), and other nonlinear dimensionality reduction
approaches (Van der Maaten, Postma, and den Herik 2009).
The second way to do feature extraction is to transform
the original data into another space ﬁrst. For example, the
kernel methods can characterize the original data in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). By kernel trick,
they just need the kernel matrix, without knowing the explicit mapping function from the original data space to RHS
(Schölkopf and Smola 2001). Due to their effectiveness, the
kernel methods have been regarded as one of the most important tools for data mining. Compared with the ﬁrst kind
of approaches, the second type of methods have more ﬂexibility in characterizing original data and have attracted a lot
of research interests.
Recently, Livni et al have proposed a novel approach
named Vanishing Component Analysis (VCA) (Livni et al.
2013), which belongs to the above-mentioned second category. VCA uses the concept vanishing ideal in computational algebra for data transformation and feature selection,
solving the feature extraction problem in a distinctive way.
It has sound theoretical foundation and great values in applications. It not only provides a new perspective on the feature extraction problem in machine learning, but also makes
contributions to the mathematical area concerning vanishing
ideal.
In this paper, we aim to analyze this prominent work
from the kernel view. Under a weak assumption, we prove
that the projection matrix derived by VCA is located in the
same space as that of Kernel Principal Component Analysis
(KPCA) (Schölkopf, Smola, and Müller 1998) with polynomial kernel on each category respectively. The explicit linear
transformation matrices between two groups of transformed
data points are derived. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
different mapping results of KPCA and VCA have equal
discriminative power if the ratio trace criteria in traditional
LDA is adopted for measurement. The linear relations between the kernels of KPCA and VCA are also revealed.
Based on the above analysis, we propose a new Discriminative Vanishing Component Analysis (DVCA) approach.
The main contributions of this paper include,
(1) We have analyzed VCA in kernel view. The results
reveal the relationship between the two types of prominent
research, kernel methods and VCA. It also provides a new
perspective of VCA and deepens the understanding of the

Abstract
Vanishing Component Analysis (VCA) is a recently proposed
prominent work in machine learning. It narrows the gap between tools and computational algebra: the vanishing ideal
and its applications to classiﬁcation problem. In this paper,
we will analyze VCA in the kernel view, which is also another important research direction in machine learning. Under a very weak assumption, we provide a different point of
view to VCA and make the kernel trick on VCA become possible. We demonstrate that the projection matrix derived by
VCA is located in the same space as that of Kernel Principal
Component Analysis (KPCA) with a polynomial kernel. Two
groups of projections can express each other by linear transformation. Furthermore, we prove that KPCA and VCA have
identical discriminative power, provided that the ratio trace
criteria is employed as the measurement. We also show that
the kernel formulated by the inner products of VCA’s projections can be expressed by the KPCA’s kernel linearly. Based
on the analysis above, we proposed a novel Discriminative
Vanishing Component Analysis (DVCA) approach. Experimental results are provided for demonstration.

Introduction
Feature extraction is one of the most important topics in machine learning. Primarily, it addresses the problem of ﬁnding
the most relevant and informative set of features. It has been
commonly recognized that the effectiveness of feature extraction takes great inﬂuence on the subsequent procedures,
such as classiﬁcation and clustering (Guyon and Elisseeff
2003). Because of its importance, feature extraction still attracts a lot of research efforts nowadays, although it is a traditional topic and there is much literature already.
In the literature, there are mainly two distinct ways for
feature extraction. The ﬁrst kind of approaches are performed in the original data space. They use the statistical
characteristics or similarity measurements of the original
data for feature extraction. Typical statistical property based
methods include ReliefF (Robnik-Sikonja and Kononenko
2003), Fisher Score (Koller and Sahami 1996) and Laplacian Score (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2006), etc. Similarity-based
methods include linear methods, e.g., Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) and Linear Discriminative Analysis (LDA)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1666

