Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Column Sampling Based Discrete Supervised Hashing
Wang-Cheng Kang, Wu-Jun Li and Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
kwc.oliver@gmail.com, {liwujun,zhouzh}@nju.edu.cn

methods. Representative data-independent methods include
locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) (Andoni and Indyk 2006)
and its variants. The data-dependent hashing can be further
divided into unsupervised hashing and supervised hashing
methods (Liu et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2014). Unsupervised
hashing methods, such as iterative quantization (ITQ) (Gong
and Lazebnik 2011), isotropic hashing (IsoHash) (Kong and
Li 2012), discrete graph hashing (DGH) (Liu et al. 2014)
and scalable graph hashing (SGH) (Jiang and Li 2015), only
use the feature information of the data points for learning
without using any semantic (label) information. On the contrary, supervised hashing methods try to leverage semantic (label) information for hashing function learning. Representative supervised hashing methods include sequential
projection learning for hashing (SPLH) (Wang, Kumar, and
Chang 2010b), minimal loss hashing (MLH) (Norouzi and
Fleet 2011), supervised hashing with kernels (KSH) (Liu et
al. 2012), two-step hashing (TSH) (Lin et al. 2013a), latent
factor hashing (LFH) (Zhang et al. 2014), FastH (Lin et al.
2014), graph cuts coding (GCC) (Ge, He, and Sun 2014) and
supervised discrete hashing (SDH) (Shen et al. 2015).
Supervised hashing has attracted more and more attention in recent years because it has demonstrated better accuracy than unsupervised hashing in many real applications. Because the hashing-code learning problem is essentially a discrete optimization problem which is hard to
solve, most existing supervised hashing methods, such as
KSH (Liu et al. 2012), try to solve a relaxed continuous
optimization problem by dropping the discrete constraints.
However, these methods typically suffer from poor performance due to the errors caused by the relaxation, which
has been veriﬁed by the experiments in (Lin et al. 2014;
Shen et al. 2015). Some other methods, such as FastH (Lin
et al. 2014), try to directly solve the discrete optimization
problem. However, they are typically time-consuming and
unscalable. Hence, they have to sample only a small subset
of the entire dataset for training even if a large-scale training
set is given, which cannot achieve satisfactory performance
in real applications.
In this paper, we propose a novel method, called column
sampling based discrete supervised hashing (COSDISH), to
directly learn the discrete hashing code from semantic information. The main contributions of COSDISH are listed as
follows:

Abstract
By leveraging semantic (label) information, supervised
hashing has demonstrated better accuracy than unsupervised hashing in many real applications. Because the
hashing-code learning problem is essentially a discrete
optimization problem which is hard to solve, most existing supervised hashing methods try to solve a relaxed
continuous optimization problem by dropping the discrete constraints. However, these methods typically suffer from poor performance due to the errors caused by
the relaxation. Some other methods try to directly solve
the discrete optimization problem. However, they are
typically time-consuming and unscalable. In this paper,
we propose a novel method, called column sampling
based discrete supervised hashing (COSDISH), to directly learn the discrete hashing code from semantic information. COSDISH is an iterative method, in each iteration of which several columns are sampled from the
semantic similarity matrix and then the hashing code
is decomposed into two parts which can be alternately
optimized in a discrete way. Theoretical analysis shows
that the learning (optimization) algorithm of COSDISH
has a constant-approximation bound in each step of the
alternating optimization procedure. Empirical results on
datasets with semantic labels illustrate that COSDISH
can outperform the state-of-the-art methods in real applications like image retrieval.

Introduction
Although different kinds of methods have been proposed
for approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search (Indyk and
Motwani 1998), hashing has become one of the most popular candidates for ANN search because it can achieve
better performance than other methods in real applications (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008; Kulis and Grauman 2009; Zhang et al. 2010; Zhang, Wang, and Si 2011;
Zhang et al. 2012; Strecha et al. 2012; Zhen and Yeung 2012;
Rastegari et al. 2013; Lin et al. 2013b; Xu et al. 2013;
Jin et al. 2013; Zhu et al. 2013; Wang, Zhang, and Si 2013;
Zhou, Ding, and Guo 2014; Yu et al. 2014).
There have appeared two main categories of hashing
methods (Kong and Li 2012; Liu et al. 2012; Zhang et
al. 2014): data-independent methods and data-dependent
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1230

