Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Tracking Idea Flows between Social Groups
Yangxin Zhong1 , Shixia Liu1∗ , Xiting Wang1 , Jiannan Xiao1 and Yangqiu Song2
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R. China
Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, West Virginia University, United States
1
{zhongyx12,wang-xt11,xjn11}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 1 shixia@tsinghua.edu.cn, 2 yangqiu.song@mail.wvu.edu
2

concerned that an immigration bill might not solve border security problems. As they argued and debated with each other,
the immigration idea ﬂowed between Democrats and Republicans. For more details about this example, please refer to
our case study in the evaluation section. In many applications, it is desirable to track such an idea ﬂow and its leadlag relationships between different groups (Liu et al. 2015;
Wu et al. 2013).
For this reason, the study of idea (inﬂuence) propagation has received a great deal of attention (Leskovec, Backstrom, and Kleinberg 2009; Myers, Zhu, and Leskovec 2012;
Shaparenko and Joachims 2007; Wu et al. 2014; Yu et al.
2015). Existing methods range from link-based and contentbased to a hybrid approach (Nallapati et al. 2008). Although
these methods have been successful in analyzing individual
users and their connections, as well as the paths the information propagates through, less attention has been paid to
studying how the ideas correlate social groups and interact
with each other along time.
The goal of our work is to identify an idea as a word cluster
and track the lead-lag relationships between word clusters of
different user groups. To achieve this goal, we ﬁrst derive
an augmented bipartite word graph based on the correlations
and lead-lag relationships between words. Each word is represented by a time series, which encodes its term frequency
change over time. Since the correlation between two words
can be irregular and arbitrary over time, we provide a way to
automatically identify the time period in which two words
are correlated. Speciﬁcally, we use dynamic time warping
(DTW) to align two time series under the monotonic and
slope constraint conditions of different time points (Sakoe
and Chiba 1978). Then, we employ Bayesian conditional
cointegration (BCC) (Bracegirdle and Barber 2012) to discover the local correlation between two time series. After applying BCC, we can determine whether two words have a lead
or lag relationship at a particular time point. Consequently,
we formulate the augmented bipartite graph as a tensor representation. In contrast to traditional time dependent data analysis using tensor, which employs one additional dimension
to represent time information (Sun, Tao, and Faloutsos 2006;
Sun et al. 2008), we have introduced two additional dimensions to represent both time and lead-lag relationships. Moreover, we automatically discover ideas that are represented
by clusters of words by factorizing the 4-order tensor. For

Abstract
In many applications, ideas that are described by a set of
words often ﬂow between different groups. To facilitate users
in analyzing the ﬂow, we present a method to model the ﬂow
behaviors that aims at identifying the lead-lag relationships
between word clusters of different user groups. In particular,
an improved Bayesian conditional cointegration based on dynamic time warping is employed to learn links between words
in different groups. A tensor-based technique is developed
to cluster these linked words into different clusters (ideas)
and track the ﬂow of ideas. The main feature of the tensor
representation is that we introduce two additional dimensions
to represent both time and lead-lag relationships. Experiments
on both synthetic and real datasets show that our method is
more effective than methods based on traditional clustering
techniques and achieves better accuracy. A case study was
conducted to demonstrate the usefulness of our method in
helping users understand the ﬂow of ideas between different
user groups on social media.

Introduction
As stated in Webster’s Third Edition, an idea is “a formulated
thought or opinion.” Hundreds of millions of users post their
ideas on bursty events, hot topics, and personal lives on social
media. Users from different social groups tend to interact
with each other on different ideas. For example, Democrats
and Republicans often interact and communicate on ideas of
interest on Twitter. One idea is about the bipartisan senate
immigration bill, which can be described as “immigration,
bill, act, law, bipartisan.” As in this example, a set of words is
often used to represent an idea (Blei and Lafferty 2006). Frequently, idea ﬂows between different user groups on social
media to reﬂect social interaction and inﬂuence (Pentland
2014). These ﬂows facilitate the transfer of information,
opinions, and thoughts from group to group. For instance,
idea ﬂows between Democrats and Republicans disclose their
leadership and impact on different issues ranging from presidential approval ratings and immigration to health care and
women’s equality. For the immigration idea, Democrats
led the discussion of the idea since they called for this new
immigration bill. However, most Republican voters were
∗

S. Liu is the corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1436

