Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Probabilistic Approach to Knowledge Translation
Shangpu Jiang, Daniel Lowd, Dejing Dou
Computer and Information Science
University of Oregon, USA
{shangpu,lowd,dou}@cs.uoregon.edu

Knowledge acquisition is a critical process for building predictive or descriptive models for many applications. When
domain expertise is available, knowledge can be constructed
manually. When enough high-quality data is available,
knowledge can be constructed automatically using data mining or machine learning tools. Both approaches can be difﬁcult and expensive, so we would prefer to reuse or transfer
knowledge from one application or system to another whenever possible. However, different applications or systems often have different semantics, which makes knowledge reuse
or transfer a non-trivial task.
As a motivating example, suppose a new credit card company without historical data wants to use the classiﬁcation
model mined by a partner credit card company to determine
whether the applicants of the new company are qualiﬁed or
not. Since the two companies may use different schemas to
store their applicants’ data (e.g., in one schema, we have annual income recorded as a numerical attribute, while in the

other, we have salary as an attribute with discretized ranges),
we cannot simply reuse the old classiﬁer. Due to privacy
and scalability concerns, we cannot transfer the collaborative company’s data to the new schema, either. Therefore,
we want to translate the classiﬁcation model itself to the
new schema, without using any data.
In this paper, we propose knowledge translation (KT) as
a novel solution to translate knowledge across conceptually similar but semantically heterogeneous schemas or ontologies. For convenience, we refer to them generically as
“schemas.” As shown in the previous example, KT is useful
in situations where data translation/transfer is problematic
due to privacy or scalability concerns.
We formally deﬁne knowledge translation as the task of
converting knowledge KS in source schema S to equivalent knowledge KT in target schema T , where the correspondence between the schemas is given by some mapping
MS,T . In general, one schema may have concepts that are
more general or speciﬁc than the other, so an exact translation may not exist. We will therefore attempt to ﬁnd the best
translation, acknowledging that the best translation may still
be a lossy approximation of the source knowledge.
We adopt a probabilistic approach to knowledge translation, in which the knowledge in the source schema, the
mapping between the source and target schemas, and the resulting knowledge in the target schema are all represented
as probability distributions. This gives us a consistent mathematical framework for handling uncertainty at every step
in the process. This uncertainty is clearly necessary when
the source knowledge is probabilistic, but it is also necessary when there is no exact mapping between the schemas,
or when the correct mapping is uncertain. We propose to
represent these probability distributions using Markov random ﬁelds, for propositional (non-relational) domains, and
Markov logic networks, for relational domains. Given probability distributions for both the source knowledge and the
schema mapping, we can combine them to deﬁne an implicit probability distribution in the target schema. Our goal
is to ﬁnd an explicit probability distribution in the target
schema that is close to this implicit distribution in terms of
the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
Our main contributions are:

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We formally deﬁne the problem of knowledge translation
(KT), which allows knowledge to be reused for heteroge-

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on a novel knowledge reuse scenario
where the knowledge in the source schema needs to be translated to a semantically heterogeneous target schema. We refer to this task as “knowledge translation” (KT). Unlike data
translation and transfer learning, KT does not require any
data from the source or target schema. We adopt a probabilistic approach to KT by representing the knowledge in the
source schema, the mapping between the source and target
schemas, and the resulting knowledge in the target schema
all as probability distributions, specially using Markov random ﬁelds and Markov logic networks. Given the source
knowledge and mappings, we use standard learning and inference algorithms for probabilistic graphical models to ﬁnd
an explicit probability distribution in the target schema that
minimizes the Kullback-Leibler divergence from the implicit
distribution. This gives us a compact probabilistic model that
represents knowledge from the source schema as well as possible, respecting the uncertainty in both the source knowledge and the mapping. In experiments on both propositional
and relational domains, we ﬁnd that the knowledge obtained
by KT is comparable to other approaches that require data,
demonstrating that knowledge can be reused without data.

Introduction

1716

