Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Noise-Adaptive Margin-Based Active Learning and
Lower Bounds under Tsybakov Noise Condition
Yining Wang and Aarti Singh
Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh PA 15213

and Zhang 2007; Balcan, Beygelzimer, and Langford 2006;
Balcan and Long 2013).
We consider two active learning scenarios in this paper:
the stream-based selective sampling scenario (Cohn 1990;
Cohn, Atlas, and Ladner 1994), under which an algorithm
has access to a large number of unlabeled data in a stream
and can decide whether to query the label of a speciﬁc
data point, and the membership query synthesis scenario
(Angluin 1988) under which an algorithm has the capacity of synthesizing data points and obtaining their labels
from an oracle. For the stream-based setting, we analyze
a noise-robust margin-based active learning algorithm under the Tsybakov noise condition (Mammen, Tsybakov, and
others 1999; Tsybakov 2004). We show that the algorithm
automatically adjusts to unknown noise levels in the Tsybakov noise condition (TNC) while achieving the same statistical rate (up to polylogarithmic terms) as non-adaptive
algorithms. This makes margin-based active learning more
practical, as the amount of noise in label distributions is usually unknown in practice.
We also study lower bounds for the membership query
synthesis setting under Tsybakov noise conditions. Our
lower bound matches previous ones for the stream-based
selective sampling setting (Balcan and Long 2013; Hanneke to appear). Quite surprisingly, as a consequence of our
lower bound, we show that stream-based active learning algorithms cannot do better even if the underlying data distribution is as simple as the uniform distribution, It also means
the previous proposed margin-based active learning algorithms (Balcan, Broder, and Zhang 2007; Balcan and Long
2013) are optimal under their speciﬁc problem settings. To
the best of our knowledge, such results are not implied by
any previous lower bounds on active learning, as we discuss
in more detail below.

Abstract
We present a simple noise-robust margin-based active learning algorithm to ﬁnd homogeneous (passing the origin) linear
separators and analyze its error convergence when labels are
corrupted by noise. We show that when the imposed noise
satisﬁes the Tsybakov low noise condition (Mammen, Tsybakov, and others 1999; Tsybakov 2004) the algorithm is able
to adapt to unknown level of noise and achieves optimal statistical rate up to polylogarithmic factors.
We also derive lower bounds for margin based active learning
algorithms under Tsybakov noise conditions (TNC) for the
membership query synthesis scenario (Angluin 1988). Our
result implies lower bounds for the stream based selective
sampling scenario (Cohn 1990) under TNC for some fairly
simple data distributions. Quite surprisingly, we show that the
sample complexity cannot be improved even if the underlying data distribution is as simple as the uniform distribution
on the unit ball. Our proof involves the construction of a wellseparated hypothesis set on the d-dimensional unit ball along
with carefully designed label distributions for the Tsybakov
noise condition. Our analysis might provide insights for other
forms of lower bounds as well.

1

Introduction

Active learning is an increasingly popular setting in machine
learning that makes use of both unlabeled and selectively
sampled labeled data (Balcan, Beygelzimer, and Langford
2006; Cohn, Atlas, and Ladner 1994; Dasgupta 2005). In
general, an active learning algorithm has access to a large
number of unlabeled examples and has the capacity to request labels of speciﬁc examples. The hope is that by directing label queries to the most informative examples in
a feedback-driven way, we might be able to achieve signiﬁcant improvements in terms of sample complexity over
passive learning algorithms. For instance, in the problem of
learning homogeneous (passing the origin) linear separators,
an exponential improvement in sample complexity could be
achieved under the realizable case, where the labels are consistent with the optimal linear classiﬁer (Balcan, Broder, and
Zhang 2007; Balcan and Long 2013). For noisy label distributions, a polynomial improvement in sample complexity
is more typical (Castro and Nowak 2008; Balcan, Broder,

2

Related work

A margin-based active learning algorithm for learning homogeneous linear separators was proposed in (Balcan,
Broder, and Zhang 2007) with its sample complexity analyzed under the Tsybakov low noise condition for the
uniform distribution on the unit ball. The algorithm was
later extended to log-concave data distributions (Balcan and
Long 2013). Recently (Hanneke and Yang 2014) introduced
a disagreement-based active learning algorithm that works

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2180

