Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Metric Learning for Ordinal Data
Yuan Shi∗ and Wenzhe Li∗ and Fei Sha
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
{yuanshi, wenzheli, feisha}@usc.edu

and “agree” is usually different from “agree” and “neutral” (Torra et al. 2003; O’Brien 1979), despite nominally
they are just one scale apart from each other. Another common approach is to treat ordinal variables as categorical variables, which are then coded with 1-of-K encoding. However,
the major problem of this approach is that it ignores the ordering information which may be crucial for the learning
problems.
Ordinal values are qualitative in nature, and a common
view of ordinal values is that they are nonstrict monotonic
transformations of interval variables (Winship and Mare
1984). That is, one or more values within the same interval are mapped into the same ordinal value. For example,
when individuals rank categories, such as “strongly agree”,
“agree”, “neutral”, etc, an underlying continuous variable
denoting individuals degrees of agreement is mapped into
categories that are ordered but are separated by unknown
distance (Winship and Mare 1984).
The contribution of this paper is to propose a novel way
of modeling and inference with ordinal variables when they
are treated as input features. We consider the problem within
the context of measuring distances/dissimilarity, which is
a fundamental problem in machine learning. In particular,
we consider the metric learning framework (Weinberger and
Saul 2009; Weinberger and Tesauro 2007; Kedem et al.
2012; Goldberger et al. 2004). Our main idea is to discover
the intervals as well as to learn a distance metric to measure
the distance between ordinal features.
To this end, we extend the popular algorithm large margin nearest neighbors (LMNN) (Weinberger and Saul 2009).
The idea is to compute expected distances between latent
ordinal variables. In order to compute such expectation, we
consider different types of distributions for the latent variables, namely, uniform, Beta and Beta rectangular distributions. The optimization can be done efﬁciently via projected subgradient descent. Our experimental results on realworld datasets show that properly learning ordinal information from the data will improve the classiﬁcation performance. We also extend our algorithm to kernel regression
and obtain positive results (see the Supplementary Materials1 ). Although this paper focuses on metric learning, all the
methods proposed here can be easily generalized to other

Abstract
A large amount of ordinal-valued data exist in many domains, including medical and health science, social science,
economics, political science, etc. Unlike image and speech
datasets of real-valued data, learning with ordinal variables
(i.e., features) presents unique challenges. In particular, the
nominal differences between those feature values, which are
just ranks, do not necessarily correspond to the real distances
between the corresponding categories. Given their wide existence, it is imperative to develop machine learning algorithms
that speciﬁcally address the need to model and infer with such
data. In this paper, we present a novel metric learning algorithm that takes into consideration the nature of ordinal data.
Our approach treats ordinal values as latent variables in intervals. Our algorithm then learns what those intervals are as
well as distance metrics to measure distances between latent
variables in those intervals. We derive the corresponding optimization algorithm and demonstrate how that can be solved
effectively. Experimental results show that the proposed approach signiﬁcantly improves baselines that do not explicitly
model ordinal features.

Introduction
Ordinal data arises frequently in behavioral, medical, educational, psychological and social science. For these domains, people usually provide their “measurements” in the
forms of subjective and imprecise opinions. For example,
college students rate the overall quality of the class as “excellent”,“good”,“fair”,“poor” and “very poor”; consumers
rate the product on a 5-point scales; the degree of agreement can be measured by different levels such as “strongly
agree”, “agree”, “neutral”, “disagree”, etc. We can easily
ﬁnd application domains for such ordinal data where humangenerated data plays important role (Fen Xia 2007).
The focus of this paper is to investigate how we can
use ordinal data (i.e., features) in machine learning models for prediction and classiﬁcation. One popular way is to
treat them as real-valued continuous variables. However, the
difference in numerical scales does not necessarily reﬂect
the true distances between the corresponding categories.
For example, the true distance between “strongly agree”
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2030

Can be found at www-scf.usc.edu/∼yuanshi/

