Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Mitosis Detection in Breast Cancer
Histology Images via Deep Cascaded Networks
†

Hao Chen† , Qi Dou† , Xi Wang‡ , Jing Qin§ , Pheng-Ann Heng†,∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
§
School of Medicine, Shenzhen University, China
∗
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Abstract

The number of mitoses per tissue area gives an important aggressiveness indication of the invasive breast carcinoma. However, automatic mitosis detection in histology images remains a challenging problem. Traditional
methods either employ hand-crafted features to discriminate mitoses from other cells or construct a pixel-wise
classiﬁer to label every pixel in a sliding window way.
While the former suffers from the large shape variation
of mitoses and the existence of many mimics with similar appearance, the slow speed of the later prohibits
its use in clinical practice. In order to overcome these
shortcomings, we propose a fast and accurate method to
detect mitosis by designing a novel deep cascaded convolutional neural network, which is composed of two
components. First, by leveraging the fully convolutional
neural network, we propose a coarse retrieval model to
identify and locate the candidates of mitosis while preserving a high sensitivity. Based on these candidates,
a ﬁne discrimination model utilizing knowledge transferred from cross-domain is developed to further single
out mitoses from hard mimics. Our approach outperformed other methods by a large margin in 2014 ICPR
MITOS-ATYPIA challenge in terms of detection accuracy. When compared with the state-of-the-art methods
on the 2012 ICPR MITOSIS data (a smaller and less
challenging dataset), our method achieved comparable
or better results with a roughly 60 times faster speed.

Figure 1: Example of mitoses and mimics (green rectangle encloses the true mitoses and red rectangle encloses the
mimics that carry similar appearance).
time-consuming and subjective with limited reproducibility.
To this end, the development of automatic detection methods is essential for improving the efﬁciency and reliability
of pathological examination.
However, automatic mitosis detection in breast histology
images is a very challenging task for several reasons. First,
the mitosis is characterized by a large variety of shape conﬁgurations, which are related to the high variation of biological structures, as shown in the green rectangle in Figure 1. In addition, the development of mitosis can be divided into four main phases: prophase, metaphase, anaphase
and telophase. In different phases, the shape of nucleus
is quite different, which further complicates the detection
task. For instance, a mitotic cell has two distinct nuclei in
the telophase, but they are not yet full individual cells. In
this case, it must be counted as one single mitosis. Second, other cell types (e.g., apoptotic cells) usually carry
similar morphological appearance with mitosis (as shown
in the red rectangle in Figure 1), resulting in lots of false
positives in the detection process. Third, the different conditions of histology image acquisition process, including
sampling, cutting, staining, and digitalizing, increase the
variabilities of mitosis appearance (Cruz-Roa et al. 2011;
Veta et al. 2014). This is common when the tissue samples
are acquired from different patients or at different time slots.

Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women
and a major cause of death worldwide (Boyle, Levin, and
others 2008). According to the Nottingham Grading System, which is recommended by the World Health Organization for breast cancer screening (Elston and Ellis 1991),
three morphological features in histology sections, including tubule formation, nuclear pleomorphism and the number
of mitotic ﬁgures, are critical for the assessment of breast
cancer. Among them, the number of mitoses gives an important aggressiveness indicator of the invasive breast carcinoma and hence is of great signiﬁcance in diagnosis and
treatment. However, the manual annotation by histologists is
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1160

