Survival Prediction by an Integrated Learning Criterion
on Intermittently Varying Healthcare Data
Jianfei Zhang1 , Lifei Chen2 , Alain Vanasse3 , Josiane Courteau3 , Shengrui Wang1
1

PROSPCTUS Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of Sherbrooke, Canada
2
School of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fujian Normal University, China
3
PRIMUS Research Group, Department of Family Medicine, University of Sherbrooke, Canada
{jianfei.zhang, alain.vanasse, josiane.courteau, shengrui.wang}@usherbrooke.ca clfei@fjnu.edu.cn
much research. Broadly, such research attempts to qualify the effects by learning regression coefﬁcients for factors from their present measurements (PresMeas). For example, (non-)parametric models (Jenkins 2005) and semiparametric Cox proportional hazards models (Cox 1972;
Vinzamuri and Reddy 2013; Yu et al. 2008) generally aim at
time-independent coefﬁcients, while Aalen additive hazards
models (Gaı̈ffas and Guilloux 2012) and logistic regression
models (Lin et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2010) estimate coefﬁcients
that vary with time, i.e., time-varying coefﬁcients.
Nowadays, the general healthcare data collected by everincreasing electronic health record (EHR) databases includes a wealth of unaligned historical measurements (HistMeas) due to the patients’ checkups at various time intervals (Beirne, Clarkson, and Worthington 2007). For example, of two patients, say p1 and p2 , diagnosed with COPD
(Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) routinely scheduled for review, p1 may undergo a monthly checkup while p2
is examined bimonthly. This means we will acquire a COPD
data for which p2 has intermittent measurements of prognostic factors in contrast to p1 ’s monthly measurements. Such
COPD data is a typical type of intermittently varying (IV)
data which is quite general in healthcare. Besides, COPD patients are probably readmitted to hospital frequently due to
the need for an emergency treatment; this, as a consequence,
makes COPD data involve more intermittent measurements
made at unexpected emergency time intervals.
IV data has by far outpaced the processing and analytical
capacities of the aforementioned models, mainly because: 1)
the observation of PresMeas for a patient indicates (s)he was
alive all the time in history, and therefore estimating the survival probabilities at historical measurement time snapshots
does not make sense, as stated in (Kalbﬂeisch and Prentice
2011); 2) the process of estimating coefﬁcients at each snapshot is conducted on only part of patients in the context of
IV HistMeas; this may lead to a biased estimate that cannot adequately ﬁt the whole body of data, especially without
information exploited from HistMeas for coefﬁcient optimization. Much work such as (Moghaddass and Rudin 2014;
Chen et al. 2014; Cortese and Andersen 2010) has demonstrated the signiﬁcance of HistMeas to survival prediction.
This in turn suggests the need for a study on HistMeas in IV
data. To our knowledge, there is as yet no documented work
concerned with such study in survival prediction.

Abstract
Survival prediction is crucial to healthcare research, but is
conﬁned primarily to speciﬁc types of data involving only the
present measurements. This paper considers the more general class of healthcare data found in practice, which includes
a wealth of intermittently varying historical measurements in
addition to the present measurements. Making survival predictions on such data bristles with challenges to the existing
prediction models. For this reason, we propose a new semiproportional hazards model using locally time-varying coefﬁcients, and a novel complete-data model learning criterion
for coefﬁcient optimization. Experiments on the healthcare
data demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of our
model and its promise in practical applications.

Introduction
Survival prediction in healthcare research examines the time
that elapses from the beginning of follow-up until the event
(also “failure”) of interest occurs. This event may be adverse, for instance, biological death, readmission; or sometimes be beneﬁcial, such as hospital discharge and healing of
a wound. Basically, the goal of survival prediction is to generate prognostic models for understanding disease processes
(Ghassemi et al. 2015), exploring interaction between prognostic factors (Khosla et al. 2010), and predicting how new
patients will behave in the context of known data (Hong and
Hauskrecht 2015). The employment of survival prediction
would allow clinicians to answer patients’ queries as when
and how probable that a certain disease will recur, how long
they are likely to live, and how well they will respond to a
speciﬁc therapy. These can be crucial in healthcare, to assess lifestyle appropriateness and make early decisions on
treatment and sometimes on end-of-life care.
Usually, one predicts the clinical outcome (typically, survival time) for patients using measurements of various prognostic factors collected during the follow-up period (e.g.,
1-year study). These factors include demographic variable
such as age, gender, race, etc, and diagnostic information like blood test results, tumor size, hemoglobin level,
etc (Lin et al. 2011). Exploring the simultaneous effects
of these factors on survival time is of practical interest
for researchers and clinicians, and has been the subject to
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

72

