Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Representing Verbs as Argument Concepts
Yu Gong 1 and Kaiqi Zhao 2 and Kenny Q. Zhu 3
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
gy910210@163.com, 2 kaiqi zhao@163.com, 3 kzhu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

is very coarse-grained. For example, in FrameNet, the verb
“eat” has just one frame, namely “Ingestion”, and its direct
object has just one role, “Ingestibles”. Furthermore, the lexical coverage of these resources are very limited. FrameNet,
which is the most popular and best maintained among the
three, consists of just 3000 verbs and 1200 frames.
The BoW approach is too ﬁne-grained while the semantic
role approach is too coarse-grained. In this paper, we seek
to strike a balance between these two extremes. Our goal
is to automatically infer a tunable set of human-readable
and machine-computable abstract concepts for the immediate arguments 1 of each verb from a large text corpus. By
“tunable”, we mean that the granularity of the concepts can
be parameterized by the size of the set to be returned. The
larger the set, the ﬁner-grained the semantics. The vocabulary of the concepts comes from an existing taxonomy of
concepts or terms such as Probase (Wu et al. 2012) or WordNet (Miller and Fellbaum 1998). For instance, the direct object of verb “eat” may be conceptualized into “food”, “plant”
and “animal”.
One potential solution toward this goal is selectional preference (SP), originally proposed by Resnik(1996). Classbased SP computes whether a class of terms is a preferred
argument to a verb. Together with a taxonomy of concepts,
SP can produce a ranked list of classes that are the most
appropriate subjects or objects of a verb. However, for the
purpose of representing verbs, SP has the following drawback: it doesn’t allow the granularity of the concepts to be
tuned because it computes a selectional preference score between the verb and every possible concept in the taxonomy.
The top k concepts do not necessarily cover all the aspects of
that verb because these concepts may semantically overlap
each other. Clustering-based SP and LDA-based SP (Ritter, Etzioni, and others 2010) ﬁnd tunable classes with low
overlaps, but the classes are either word clusters or probabilistic distributions of words, which are not abstracted into
concepts. Without associating the classes to concepts in taxonomies, the model loses the ability of generalization. For
example, if “eat McDonalds” does not appear in the training
data, clustering- and LDA-based SP cannot recognize “McDonalds” as a valid argument to “eat”, since “McDonalds” is

Abstract
Verbs play an important role in the understanding of natural
language text. This paper studies the problem of abstracting the subject and object arguments of a verb into a set of
noun concepts, known as the “argument concepts”. This set
of concepts, whose size is parameterized, represents the ﬁnegrained semantics of a verb. For example, the object of “enjoy” can be abstracted into time, hobby and event, etc. We
present a novel framework to automatically infer human readable and machine computable action concepts with high accuracy.

1

Introduction

Verb plays the central role in both syntax and semantics
of natural language sentences. The distributional hypothesis (Harris 1954; Miller and Charles 1991) shows that it is
possible to represent the meaning of a word by the distributional properties of its context, e.g., its surrounding words in
a window. A verb has a unique role in a sentence because it
maintains dependency relation with its syntactic arguments
such as the subject and the object. Therefore, it is possible to use the distribution of immediate arguments of a verb
to represent its meaning, such as ReVerb (Fader, Soderland,
and Etzioni 2011). Such an approach is a form of “bagof-words” (BoW) approach. The common criticisms of the
BoW approach are i) perceived orthorgonality of all words
despite some of them sharing similar or related meanings;
ii) its high dimensionality and high cost of computation; and
iii) poor readibility to humans.
To ameliorate these limitations, a natural solution is to
represent the arguments by their abstract types, rather than
the words themselves. It is reasonable to assume that a
verb represents different meanings, or different senses, if
it’s used with different types of arguments. To that end,
FrameNet (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998) and VerbNet (Kipper et al. 2000) are examples of human-annotated
lexicons that include verbs and their meanings (called
frames) and the different types of their arguments (called
thematic roles or semantic roles). Due to the excessive cost
of constructing such lexicons, as well as their intentional
shallow semantic nature, the abstraction of verb arguments
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We only consider subjects and direct objects in this paper,
though other arguments may be inferred as well.

2615

