Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

EDDIE: An Embodied AI System for
Research and Intervention for Individuals with ASD
Robert Selkowitz1, Jonathan Rodgers2, P.J. Moskal3, Jon Mrowczynski1, Christine Colson1
{1Dept of Physics, 2Institute for Autism Research, 3Department of Communication Studies} Canisius College, Buffalo, NY
{selkowir, rodgers1, moskalp, mrowczy1, colsonc} @canisius.edu

Abstract
We report on the ongoing development of EDDIE (Emotion
Demonstration, Decoding, Interpretation, and Encoding), an
interactive embodied AI to be deployed as an intervention
system for children diagnosed with High-Functioning Autism Spectrum Disorders (HFASD). EDDIE presents the
subject with interactive requests to decode facial expressions presented through an avatar, encode requested expressions, or do both in a single session. Facial tracking software interprets the subject’s response, and allows for immediate feedback. The system fills a need in research and intervention for children with HFASD by providing an engaging platform for presentation of exemplar expressions consistent with mechanical systems of facial action measurement integrated with an automatic system for interpreting
and giving feedback to the subject’s expressions. Both live
interaction with EDDIE and video recordings of humanEDDIE interaction will be demonstrated.

Figure 1. A prototype EDDIE demonstrating a happy face.
ASD subjects’ tendency to restricted interests and repetitive behaviors, further improving effectiveness.
Direct modeling of human facial expression via muscle
movements was validated by Ekman (Ekman & Friesen,
1978), through the Facial Action Coding System (FACS).
In this system, individual muscle movements are represented by a numbered list of facial action units (FAUs),
and collections of FAUs correspond to particular emotional
states. For now, we focus on three expressions: happy,
sad, and angry. The relevant FAUs are shown in table 1.
We are developing a low-cost platform which can deliver therapeutic interventions to children with HFASD.
EDDIE, depicted in figure 1, is capable of producing facial
expressions via a hardware system based on Jim (Selkowitz et.al. 2015); observing and interpreting a user’s facial
expression via Kinect interface (e.g. Alabassi et al., 2015);
and providing verbal prompts and feedback via prerecorded vocalizations. By connecting these functionalities, we will be able to deploy EDDIE to assess, train, and
reassess subjects’ abilities to decode and encode facial expressions.

Introduction and related work
Individuals with ASD exhibit two diagnostically critical
classes of symptom: social communication deficits, and restricted and repetitive behaviors. A common aspect of social communication deficits is a reduced ability to both interpret (decode) and produce (encode) facial expressions of
emotion. Existing studies on encoding of facial emotions
rely on social judgement to determine the accuracy of encoding, rather than reading of facial muscle movements
(e.g., Volker et al. 2009). Children diagnosed with HFASD
perform below typically developing (TD) children at encoding emotions, but show improvement with intervention
(Volker et al., 2009; Rodgers et al., 2014).
Additionally, it is well documented that children with
HFASD respond well to computer-assisted interventions
(Ploog et.al., 2013), and robotic agents (Scassellati et.al.,
2012). Presumably, this is partly due to both the reduced
level of social demand associated with human-robot interactions as well as the ability of robots to provide reliable,
repeatable, models of human behavior. We anticipate that
coupling a robot with a game will also take advantage of

Table 1: The three emotional states expressed by the Eddie
prototype and the related FAUs.

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4385

