Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Are Elephants Bigger than Butterﬂies?
Reasoning about Sizes of Objects
Hessam Bagherinezhad† and Hannaneh Hajishirzi† and Yejin Choi† and Ali Farhadi†‡
†

University of Washington, ‡ Allen Institute for AI
{hessam, hannaneh, yejin, ali}@washington.edu

Abstract

✓dog is 83 cm tall
✓dog is ~0.5 m tall
✓dog is 70 - 75 cm tall

Human vision greatly beneﬁts from the information about
sizes of objects. The role of size in several visual reasoning
tasks has been thoroughly explored in human perception and
cognition. However, the impact of the information about sizes
of objects is yet to be determined in AI. We postulate that this
is mainly attributed to the lack of a comprehensive repository of size information. In this paper, we introduce a method
to automatically infer object sizes, leveraging visual and textual information from web. By maximizing the joint likelihood of textual and visual observations, our method learns
reliable relative size estimates, with no explicit human supervision. We introduce the relative size dataset and show that
our method outperforms competitive textual and visual baselines in reasoning about size comparisons.

1

sofa

dog

cat

tree

window

✓tree is 20 m tall
✓tree is about 6 m tall
✓tree is 4-12 m tall

Introduction
Figure 1: In this paper we study the problem of inferring
sizes of objects using visual and textual data available on
the web. With no explicit human supervision, our method
achieves reliable (83.5% accurate) relative size estimates.
We use size graph, shown above, to represent both absolute
size information (from textual web data) and relative ones
(from visual web data). The size graph allows us to leverage
the transitive nature of size information by maximizing the
likelihood of both visual and textual observations.

Human visual system has a strong prior knowledge about
physical sizes of objects in the real world (Ittelson 1951)
and can immediately retrieve size information as it recognizes objects (Konkle and Oliva 2012). Humans are often
very sensitive to discrepancies in size estimates (size constancy (Holway and Boring 1941)) and draw or imagine objects in canonical sizes, despite signiﬁcant variations due to
a change in viewpoint or distance (Konkle and Oliva 2011).
Considering the importance of size information in human
vision, it is counter-intuitive that most of the current AI systems are agnostic to object sizes. We postulate that this is
mainly due to the lack of a comprehensive resource that can
provide information about object sizes. In this paper, we introduce a method to automatically provide such information
by representing and inferring object sizes and their relations.
To be comprehensive, our method does not rely on explicit
human supervision and only uses web data.
Identifying numerical properties of objects, such as size,
has been recently studied in Natural Language Processing
and shown to be helpful for question answering and information extraction (Tandon, de Melo, and Weikum 2014;
Chu-carroll et al. 2003; Davidov and Rappoport 2010). The
core idea of the state-of-the-art methods is to design search
queries in the form of manually deﬁned templates either
looking for absolute size of objects (e.g. “the size of a car is
* unit”) or speciﬁc relations (e.g. “wheel of a car”). The results are promising, but the quality and scale of such extrac-

tion has been somewhat limiting. For example, these methods predict a relatively small size for a ‘car’ because search
queries discover more frequent relations about the size of
a ‘toy car’ rather than a regular ‘car’ (Aramaki et al. 2007).
This is in part because most trivial commonsense knowledge
is rarely stated explicitly in natural language text, e.g., it is
unlikely to ﬁnd a sentence that says a car is bigger than an
orange. In addition, comparative statements in text, if found,
rarely provide precisely how much one object is bigger than
the other. In this paper, we argue that visual and textual observations are complementary, and a successful size estimation method will take advantage of both modalities.
In images, estimating the absolute sizes of objects requires information about the camera parameters and accurate depth estimates which are not available at scale. Visual
data, however, can provide informative cues about relative

3449

