Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Using Declarative Programming in an Introductory
Computer Science Course for High School Students
Maritza Reyes,1 Cynthia Perez,2 Rocky Upchurch,3 Timothy Yuen,4 and Yuanlin Zhang5
1

Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, USA
2
Department of Psychology, Texas Tech University, USA
3
New Deal High School, Lubbock, Texas, USA
4
Department of Interdisciplinary Learning and Teaching, University of Texas at San Antonio, USA
5
Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University, USA
1
maritza reyes@utexas.edu, 2 cynthia.perez@ttu.edu, 3 RockyU@ndisd.net, 4 Timothy.Yuen@utsa.edu, 5 y.zhang@ttu.edu
proach (Gelfond and Kahl 2014). The course described in this
paper was offered during the summer of 2015. The course
met Monday through Friday from 1:00pm to 1:50pm, and
was taught in a computer lab.
This course was offered as part of the TexPREP program
hosted at Texas Tech University. TexPREP is a math, science,
and engineering summer enrichment program for 6th - 12th
graders. Each summer, students take courses in math, science,
and engineering typically taught by local K-12 teachers and
university students, and occasionally by university faculty.
Students taking this course were in their fourth year of the
TexPREP program, and had taken two CS courses (CS2 and
CS3) prior to CS4. CS2 taught Scratch and CS3 taught Alice.
Both courses covered the foundations of programming up to
and including conditionals, recursions, and loops within their
respective programming environments. Note there is no CS1
in TexPREP.
Course Objectives. The overall objective of this course
was to make students capable of solving problems using a
declarative approach. Speciﬁcally, by the end of this course,
students should be able to: 1) identify the knowledge needed
to specify a problem at hand, 2) identify the objects (and their
categories), the relations among objects and how one relation is deﬁned by other relations in terms of the knowledge
identiﬁed in the ﬁrst objective, and 3) write ASP programs to
represent the objects, relations and deﬁnitions identiﬁed in
the second objective.
Course topics included deﬁning sorts (categories of objects), declaring relations, deﬁning a relation using other
relations (possibly in a recursive manner), solving problems
in terms of answering relationship ties among members of a
family, coloring a map, and a Sudoku problem.
Development Environment. The speciﬁc ASP language
selected for this course was SPARC (Balai, Gelfond, and
Zhang 2013) mainly due to the explicit modeling methodology underlying this language. The programming environment
we used for writing and reasoning with SPARC programs is
ASPIDE, a graphical user interface based integrated development environment.
Students. There were originally 17 students registered
for this course; however, one dropped out mid-way through
the course. Sixteen students consented to having their de-

Abstract
Though not often taught at the K-12 level, declarative programming is a viable paradigm for teaching computer science
due to its importance in artiﬁcial intelligence and in helping
student explore and understand problem spaces. This paper
discusses the authors’ design and implementation of a declarative programming course for high school students during a
4-week summer session.

Background and Rationale
Computer science education researchers have long debated
imperative versus object-oriented approaches to teaching introductory computer science courses, but the conversation
often leaves out declarative programming (DP) approaches.
The last two decades have seen signiﬁcant advances in theory
and application of declarative programming including answer
set programming (Gelfond and Kahl 2014). Answer set programming (ASP) has its roots in Logic Programming and
nonmonotonic reasoning and becomes a dominant language
in the knowledge representation community because it offers
elegant and effective solutions to classic artiﬁcial intelligence
problems, such as frame problems, ramiﬁcation problems,
and many challenging knowledge intensive application problems. Thanks to its simplicity and clarity in both informal and
formal semantics, ASP provides natural modeling of many
knowledge intensive problems.
Given its importance in artiﬁcial intelligence and general
problem solving, the authors assert the need for students to
learn and have a basic understanding of declarative programming. The purpose of this paper is to discuss the rationale for
and the design of an introductory computer science course
based on the declarative programming paradigm. This paper
describes how the authors implemented this as a four-week
summer course for high school students taking part in a summer enrichment program.

Course Description
Computer Science 4 (CS4) is a four-week course on declarative programming using the answer set programming apc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4132

