Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fast Optimal Clearing of Capped-Chain Barter Exchanges
Benjamin Plaut

John P. Dickerson

Tuomas Sandholm

Carnegie Mellon University
bplaut@andrew.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
dickerson@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

healthy kidneys gives one organ to a patient with kidney failure, is even more desirable than deceased donation; grafts
sourced in this manner generally last twice as long as cadaveric grafts in the recipient’s body (HHS/HRSA/HSB/DOT
2011). Finding a feasible living donor is difﬁcult due to medical compatibility and other logistical issues. Toward this
end, kidney exchange (Rapaport 1986; Roth, Sönmez, and
Ünver 2004) is a market where patients with willing but incompatible donors swap their paired donors, thus allowing
participants to circumvent these compatibility issues.
In this paper, we address kidney exchange from a computational point of view. Speciﬁcally, given a set of incompatible pairs of patients and donors, we are interested in computing the “best” set of feasible organ trades, which take place
in cycles or unpaired donor-initiated chains. This problem is
both theoretically and empirically hard to solve (Abraham,
Blum, and Sandholm 2007). Over the last decade, integer
programming-based methods for solving different interpretations of the kidney exchange problem have been developed
and then used in ﬁelded exchanges. As kidney exchange
matures, holes in the expressiveness and scaling capabilities of the current solvers are found, and improvements are
made. We are actively involved in this feedback loop with
the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) US nationwide kidney exchange, and draw on that experience here.
The two leading kidney exchange clearing algorithms,
due to Glorie et al. (2014) and Anderson et al. (2015b), address the optimization problem from complementary directions. We begin by identifying a bug in the correctness of
the former algorithm, and give a provably correct ﬁx that
also necessarily changes its runtime complexity. We then incorporate the (corrected) idea of Glorie et al. (2014) into an
improved version of the prior best branch-and-price-based
solver, based on work by Abraham et al. (2007). On real
data from the UNOS exchange and on demographicallyaccurate generated data, our new solver scales dramatically
better than both prior approaches when a ﬁnite cap on the
length of chains is imposed, as is the case in practice. Already on reasonably-sized instances, our method optimally
clears markets that the prior methods cannot solve at all.

Abstract
Kidney exchange is a type of barter market where patients exchange willing but incompatible donors. These
exchanges are conducted via cycles—where each incompatible patient-donor pair in the cycle both gives
and receives a kidney—and chains, which are started
by an altruist donor who does not need a kidney in return. Finding the best combination of cycles and chains
is hard. The leading algorithms for this optimization
problem use either branch and price—a combination
of branch and bound and column generation—or constraint generation. We show a correctness error in the
leading prior branch-and-price-based approach [Glorie
et al. 2014]. We develop a provably correct ﬁx to it,
which also necessarily changes the algorithm’s complexity, as well as other improvements to the search
algorithm. Next, we compare our solver to the leading
constraint-generation-based solver and to the best prior
correct branch-and-price-based solver. We focus on the
setting where chains have a length cap. A cap is desirable in practice since if even one edge in the chain fails,
the rest of the chain fails: the cap precludes very long
chains that are extremely unlikely to execute and instead
causes the solution to have more parallel chains and cycles that are more likely to succeed. We work with the
UNOS nationwide kidney exchange, which uses a chain
cap. Algorithms from our group autonomously make
the transplant plans for that exchange. On that real data
and demographically-accurate generated data, our new
solver scales signiﬁcantly better than the prior leading
approaches.

1

Introduction

Chronic kidney disease is a worldwide problem affecting, at
various levels of severity, tens of millions of people at great
societal burden (Neuen et al. 2013) and monetary cost (Saran
et al. 2015). For those with end-stage kidney failure—of
which there are over 100,000 in the US alone1 —the procurement of a new healthy kidney is a life-saving necessity.
Cadaveric kidneys fulﬁll only a fraction of the demand
for kidneys; indeed, the imbalance in supply and demand
is growing. Living donation, where a willing donor with two

2

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov

Preliminaries

Any barter exchange can be represented as a directed graph
G = (V, E), such that each participating agent is a ver-

601

