Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Uniﬁed Bayesian Model of Scripts, Frames and Language
Francis Ferraro1
1

2

Benjamin Van Durme1,2

Center for Language and Speech Processing
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence
Johns Hopkins University

connections between these theories, previous empirical efforts have focused on just one or the other: this model is
the ﬁrst to make the connection explicit. We show how
current efforts in discourse modeling, and semantic frame
induction and identiﬁcation can be combined in a single
model to capture what classic AI theory posited. Quantitatively, by using a frame-semantic parser pre-trained on
FrameNet (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998), we show that
incorporating frame information provides both a better ﬁt to
held-out data and improved coherence (Mimno et al. 2011).
Our uniﬁed probabilistic model provides a principled mathematical way of restating Minsky’s argument for the four
frame levels, and our results show that our model is a legitimate way to capture what Minsky proposed.

Abstract
We present the ﬁrst probabilistic model to capture all levels of the Minsky Frame structure, with the goal of corpusbased induction of scenario deﬁnitions. Our model uniﬁes
prior efforts in discourse-level modeling with that of Fillmore’s related notion of frame, as captured in sentence-level,
FrameNet semantic parses; as part of this, we resurrect the
coupling among Minsky’s frames, Schank’s scripts and Fillmore’s frames, as originally laid out by those authors. Empirically, our approach yields improved scenario representations, reﬂected quantitatively in lower surprisal and more coherent latent scenarios.

Introduction
Frames or scripts describe prototypically complex situations
in terms of certain events, actions, actors and other pieces of
information we expect to be involved. These theories posit
that for many situations we encounter, there is a template
with a number of slots that need to be ﬁlled in order to understand the situation. For example, we partially describe
a B OMBING situation with a Detonation action, along
with those involved, e.g., B OMBERs and V ICTIMs.
Corpus statistics can be used to induce approximate, probabilistic versions of these templates using verb cooccurrences and automatically generated syntactic dependency
parses (Cheung, Poon, and Vanderwende 2013; Bamman,
O’Connor, and Smith 2013; Chambers 2013, i.a.). These
parses can serve as a limited proxy for sentence meaning,
owing to information conveyed via the syntax/semantics interface. They do not however fully (explicitly) represent a
semantic analysis (Rudinger and Van Durme 2014).
Fillmore’s notion of frame semantics ties a notion akin to
Minsky’s frames to individual lexical items (Fillmore 1976;
1982). Word meaning is deﬁned in terms of the roles words
play in situations they typically invoke, and in how they interact with other lexical items.
In the following we present a probabilistic model which
uniﬁes discourse-level Minskian frames with Fillmore’s
frame semantics. Despite the historical and intellectual

Frames Background
Classic Theories
Minsky, along with a number of contemporaries, believed
in schematizing common situations and experiences into
“chunks”, or frames. These frames contain world knowledge that would allow artiﬁcial intelligence systems to encounter various occurrences and react appropriately. For
Minsky, frames were data structures, with slots, to “[represent] a stereotyped situation.” Some slots and conditions
could have default values; entities (references to an “object”
in the world) and pointers to other frames could ﬁll slots.
Minsky (1974) outlined four different “levels” of frames:
Surface Syntactic Frames “Mainly verb and noun structures. Prepositional and word-order indicator conventions.”
Surface Semantic Frames “Action-centered meanings of
words. Qualiﬁers and relations concerning participants,
instruments, trajectories and strategies, goals, consequences and side-effects.”
Thematic Frames “Scenarios concerned with topics, activities, portraits, setting.”
Narrative Frames “Skeleton forms for typical stories, explanations, and arguments. Conventions about foci, protagonists, plot forms, development, etc., designed to help

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2601

