Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Complexity Results and Algorithms for
Extension Enforcement in Abstract Argumentation∗
Johannes P. Wallner and Andreas Niskanen and Matti Järvisalo
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Computer Science,
University of Helsinki, Finland

et al. 2015), a speciﬁc form of AF dynamics with connections to belief revision, concerned with ﬁnding changes to a
given AF in order to support a desired point of view, represented as a set of arguments, under pre-speciﬁed semantics.
While the complexity landscape of non-dynamic problems on AFs, including the credulous and skeptical reasoning tasks for a given ﬁxed AF, is already wellestablished (Dunne and Wooldridge 2009), the complexity of extension enforcement under different semantics and
problem variants has not been thoroughly studied until now.
Furthermore, while several efﬁcient systems for the NP-hard
variants of non-dynamic problems are available (Cerutti et
al. 2014; Cerutti, Giacomin, and Vallati 2014; Dvořák et
al. 2014; Egly, Gaggl, and Woltran 2010; Nofal, Atkinson,
and Dunne 2014), to our best knowledge the single existing
system for extension enforcement was only recently proposed (Coste-Marquis et al. 2015), and currently supports
extension enforcement only w.r.t. speciﬁc AF semantics (the
stable semantics). This paper aims at bridging these gaps.
Our main contributions are the following.

Abstract
Understanding the dynamics of argumentation frameworks
(AFs) is important in the study of argumentation in AI.
In this work, we focus on the so-called extension enforcement problem in abstract argumentation. We provide a nearly
complete computational complexity map of ﬁxed-argument
extension enforcement under various major AF semantics,
with results ranging from polynomial-time algorithms to
completeness for the second-level of the polynomial hierarchy. Complementing the complexity results, we propose algorithms for NP-hard extension enforcement based
on constrained optimization. Going beyond NP, we propose
novel counterexample-guided abstraction reﬁnement procedures for the second-level complete problems and present empirical results on a prototype system constituting the ﬁrst approach to extension enforcement in its generality.

Introduction
Argumentation is a core topic in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
(Bench-Capon and Dunne 2007), with applications in e.g.
decision support (Amgoud and Prade 2009), legal reasoning (Bench-Capon, Prakken, and Sartor 2009), and multiagent systems (McBurney, Parsons, and Rahwan 2012). Argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995) provide the
fundamental formal model for many approaches to argumentation in AI. Syntactically, AFs are directed graphs,
where arguments are abstract entities represented by vertices. Conﬂicts among arguments are formalized as attacks,
and represented with directed edges between arguments. Semantics of AFs—several of which have been proposed—
specify criteria for arguments’ acceptance resulting in sets
of jointly acceptable arguments called extensions.
Argumentation is inherently a dynamic process. Recently,
several works have focused on fundamental aspects of
argumentation dynamics (Baumann 2012a; Baumann and
Brewka 2015; Bisquert et al. 2013; Coste-Marquis et al.
2014a; 2014b; Delobelle, Konieczny, and Vesic 2015; Diller
et al. 2015). In this work, we focus on extension enforcement (Baumann 2012b; Bisquert et al. 2013; Coste-Marquis

• We provide a nearly complete computational complexity
map of ﬁxed-argument extension enforcement, where the
task is to enforce a given extension by modifying the attack relation of a given AF. Our results cover nine standard AF semantics and both the so-called strict and nonstrict variants of extension enforcement. For examples,
we provide polynomial-time algorithms for strict enforcement under the admissible and stable semantics (the latter
of which was in fact proposed to be solved using the NPmachinery of integer programming (IP) by Coste-Marquis
et al. (2015)); show that most non-strict enforcement
problems are NP-complete, along with strict enforcement
under the complete and grounded semantics; and establish
second-level completeness for strict enforcement under
preferred and semi-stable semantics as well as for nonstrict semi-stable and stage semantics.
• We propose algorithms for the NP-hard variants of
the enforcement problems based on applying constraint optimization solvers. We detail maximum satisﬁability (MaxSAT) encodings for the NP-complete
problem variants, and, perhaps most interestingly, propose novel counterexample-guided abstraction reﬁnement
(CEGAR) (Clarke et al. 2003; Clarke, Gupta, and Strich-

∗
Work funded by Academy of Finland, grants 251170 COIN,
276412, and 284591.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1088

