Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Geometric Method to Construct
Minimal Peer Prediction Mechanisms
Rafael Frongillo

Jens Witkowski

CU Boulder
raf@colorado.edu

ETH Zurich
jensw@inf.ethz.ch

The classical peer prediction method (Miller, Resnick,
and Zeckhauser 2005) addresses this challenge by comparing the reported information of a participant with that of
another participant, and computing a payment rule which
ensures that truth revelation is a strategic equilibrium.
The major shortcoming of the classical peer prediction
method with regard to practical applications is that it requires too much common knowledge. Bayesian Truth Serum
mechanisms (Prelec 2004; Witkowski and Parkes 2012a;
Radanovic and Faltings 2013) relax these common knowledge assumptions but require participants to report a probability distribution in addition to the actual information that is
to be elicited. That is, they are not minimal. The 1/p mechanism (Jurca and Faltings 2008; 2011) and the Shadowing
Method (Witkowski and Parkes 2012a; Witkowski 2014) relax the common knowledge assumptions of classical peer
prediction to some degree while still being minimal.

Abstract
Minimal peer prediction mechanisms truthfully elicit private information (e.g., opinions or experiences) from rational
agents without the requirement that ground truth is eventually revealed. In this paper, we use a geometric perspective to
prove that minimal peer prediction mechanisms are equivalent to power diagrams, a type of weighted Voronoi diagram.
Using this characterization and results from computational
geometry, we show that many of the mechanisms in the literature are unique up to afﬁne transformations, and introduce
a general method to construct new truthful mechanisms.

1

Introduction

User-generated content is essential to the effective functioning of many social computing and e-commerce platforms. A
prominent example is eliciting information through crowdsourcing platforms, such as Amazon Mechanical Turk,
where workers are paid small rewards to do so-called human computation tasks, which are easy for humans to solve
but difﬁcult for computers. For example, humans easily recognize celebrities in images, whereas even state-of-the-art
computer vision algorithms perform signiﬁcantly worse.
While statistical techniques can adjust for biases or identify noisy users, they are appropriate only in settings with
repeated participation by the same user, and when user inputs are informative in the ﬁrst place. But what if providing
accurate information is costly for users, or if users have incentives to lie? Consider an image annotation task (e.g. for
search engine indexing), where workers may wish to save
effort by annotating with random words, or words that are
too generic (e.g. “animal”). Or consider a public health program that requires participants to report whether they have
ever used illegal drugs, and where participants may lie about
their drug use due to shame or eligibility concerns.
Peer prediction mechanisms address these incentive problems. They are designed to elicit truthful private information from self-interested participants, such as answers to the
question “Have you ever used illegal drugs?” Crucially, peer
prediction mechanisms cannot use ground truth. In the public health example this means the program cannot verify
whether a participant has or has not ever used illegal drugs;
it can only use the participants’ voluntary reports.

Our Results. In this paper, we provide a complete characterization of the mechanism design space of minimal
peer prediction, which includes the classical peer prediction method, output agreement, the 1/p mechanism, and the
Shadowing Method as special cases. While it was known
that every minimal mechanism requires some constraint on
the agents’ belief models (Jurca and Faltings 2011), it was
unknown which constraints allow for truthful mechanism
and how the constraints of different truthful mechanisms
relate to one another. We answer these questions in Section 3 by adapting techniques from property elicitation, allowing us to prove the equivalence of minimal peer prediction mechanisms and power diagrams, a type of weighted
Voronoi diagram. In Section 4, we then use this and results
from computational geometry to show that all aforementioned mechanisms are unique with respect to their belief
model constraints up to positive-afﬁne transformation. One
important corollary of this is that maximizing effort incentives for any of these mechanisms reduces to computing the
effort-optimal positive-afﬁne transformation. In Section 5,
we exemplify how to construct new truthful mechanisms for
new conditions. In Section 6, we revisit the classical peer
prediction method and show how to compute a mechanism
that is maximally-robust with respect to deviations between
the mechanism’s and the agents’ belief models. We conclude
with useful directions for future work in Section 7.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

502

