Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Scalable Completion of Nonnegative Matrices
with the Separable Structure
Xiyu Yu, Wei Bian, Dacheng Tao
Center for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney
xiyu.yu@student.uts.edu.au
{wei.bian, dacheng.tao}@uts.edu.au

Matrix completion seems to be an impossible task due to
the large amount of unknown variables but limited information. In order to make it tractable, more assumptions should
be made on the data matrix. A reasonable and commonly
used assumption is that the matrix has a low-rank, i.e., its
columns reside in a subspace spanned by several basis vectors. To incorporate the low-rank assumption, directly minimising the rank function is straightforward, but it is NPhard (Fazel, Hindi, and Boyd 2004). Alternatively, inspired
by 1 norm minimisation for sparse signal recovery, minimising the nuclear norm of the data matrix imposes sparsity on the singular values of the data matrix and thus fulﬁls
the low-rank assumption. Indeed, the nuclear norm is known
as the best convex lower bound of the rank function (Fazel
2002). Theoretical results have established for successful
matrix completion by using nuclear norm minimisation
(Candès and Recht 2009; Recht 2011; Candès and Tao 2010;
Bhojanapalli and Jain 2014; Chen et al. 2013; Cai, Candès,
and Shen 2010), and even in the cases where the data matrix is contaminated with noise (Candes and Plan 2010;
Keshavan, Montanari, and Oh 2009). Another way to incorporate low-rank assumption is to use the matrix production idea. Any matrix X ∈ Rm×n of a low rank r
could be factorized into two small matrices, i.e., X = UV,
where U ∈ Rm×r and V ∈ Rr×n . Based on this idea,
we can directly apply this factorization form into matrix
completion model so as to obtain a low-rank matrix (Wen,
Yin, and Zhang 2012; Aravkin et al. 2014; Recht and Ré
2013). There are many other works inherently based on lowrank assumption but using some different views, such as,
probabilistic model (Todeschini, Caron, and Chavent 2013;
Lafond et al. 2014), summation of rank-one matrices (Wang
et al. 2014), etc.

Abstract
Matrix completion is to recover missing/unobserved values of
a data matrix from very limited observations. Due to widely
potential applications, it has received growing interests in
ﬁelds from machine learning, data mining, to collaborative
ﬁltering and computer vision. To ensure the successful recovery of missing values, most existing matrix completion algorithms utilise the low-rank assumption, i.e., the fully observed
data matrix has a low rank, or equivalently the columns of the
matrix can be linearly represented by a few numbers of basis vectors. Although such low-rank assumption applies generally in practice, real-world data can process much richer
structural information. In this paper, we present a new model
for matrix completion, motivated by the separability assumption of nonnegative matrices from the recent literature of matrix factorisations: there exists a set of columns of the matrix such that the resting columns can be represented by their
convex combinations. Given the separability property, which
holds reasonably for many applications, our model provides
a more accurate matrix completion than the low-rank based
algorithms. Further, we derives a scalable algorithm to solve
our matrix completion model, which utilises a randomised
method to select the basis columns under the separability
assumption and a coordinate gradient based method to automatically deal with the structural constraints in optimisation. Compared to the state-of-the-art algorithms, the proposed matrix completion model achieves competitive results
on both synthetic and real datasets.

Introduction
In many practical problems, people would like to recover
missing/observed values of a data matrix from a small subset of observations. For example, in the famous Netﬂix challenge, one has to predict users’ preferences in a huge and
sparse matrix according to a very small fraction of ratings.
This matrix completion process is critical for many tasks,
such as, reconstruction, prediction and classiﬁcation. Therefore, it has received great interests recently, in a wide range
of ﬁelds from machine learning, data mining, to collaborative ﬁltering and computer vision (Shamir and ShalevShwartz 2011; Xiao and Guo 2014; Huang, Nie, and Huang
2013; Liu et al. 2015; Yao and Kwok 2015).

However, data from real-world applications can process
much richer structural information than the low-rank assumption. In particular, the recent literature of matrix factorizations shown that it is reasonable to assume that there
exists a set of columns of the data matrix such that the resting
columns can be represented by their convex combinations
(Recht et al. 2012; Kumar, Sindhwani, and Kambadur 2013;
Gillis, Vavasis, and others 2014; Arora et al. 2012) . Such
assumption is called separability and has been utilised in developing efﬁcient algorithms for nonnegative matrix factorization (Benson et al. 2014; Zhou, Bian, and Tao 2013). Mo-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2279

