Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Step Size Controllers for Robust Neural Network Training
Christian Daniel

Jonathan Taylor

Sebastian Nowozin

TU Darmstadt
Hochschulstrasse 10
64285 Darmstadt, Germany

Microsoft Research
21 Station Road
Cambridge, UK

Microsoft Research
21 Station Road
Cambridge, UK

• Identifying informative features for the automatic control
of the learning rate.
• Proposing a learning setup for a controller that automatically adapts the step size of NN training algorithms.
• Showing that the resulting controller generalizes across
different tasks and architectures.
Together, these contributions enable robust and efﬁcient
training of NNs without the need of manual step size tuning.

Abstract
This paper investigates algorithms to automatically adapt the
learning rate of neural networks (NNs). Starting with stochastic gradient descent, a large variety of learning methods has
been proposed for the NN setting. However, these methods
are usually sensitive to the initial learning rate which has to be
chosen by the experimenter. We investigate several features
and show how an adaptive controller can adjust the learning
rate without prior knowledge of the learning problem at hand.

Introduction

Method

Due to the recent successes of Neural Networks for tasks
such as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012) and speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012),
the underlying gradient descent methods used for training
have gained a renewed interest by the research community. Adding to the well known stochastic gradient descent
and RMSprop methods (Tieleman and Hinton 2012), several new gradient based methods such as Adagrad (Duchi,
Hazan, and Singer 2011) or Adadelta (Zeiler 2012) have
been proposed. However, most of the proposed methods rely
heavily on a good choice of an initial learning rate. Compounding this issue is the fact that the range of good learning
rates for one problem is often small compared to the range
of good learning rates across different problems, i.e., even
an experienced experimenter often has to manually search
for good problem-speciﬁc learning rates.
A tempting alternative to manually searching for a good
learning rate would be to learn a control policy that automatically adjusts the learning rate without further intervention
using, for example, reinforcement learning techniques (Sutton and Barto 1998). Unfortunately, the success of learning such a controller from data is likely to depend heavily
on the features made available to the learning algorithm. A
wide array of reinforcement learning literature has shown
the importance of good features in tasks ranging from Tetris
(Thiery and Scherrer 2009) to haptile object identiﬁcation
(Kroemer, Lampert, and Peters 2011). Thus, the ﬁrst step towards applying RL methods to control learning rates is to
ﬁnd good features. Subsequently, the main contributions of
this paper are

The goal of this paper is to develop an adaptive controller
for the learning rate used in training algorithms such as
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) or RMSprop (Tieleman
and Hinton 2012). We start with a general statement of the
problem we are aiming to solve.

Problem Statement
We are interested in ﬁnding the minimizer
ω ∗ = arg min F (X; ω),
ω

(1)

where in our case ω represents the weight vector of the NN
and X = {x1 , . . . , xN } is the set of N training examples
(e.g., images and labels). The function F (·) sums over the
function values induced by the individual inputs such that
N

F (X; ω) =

1 
f (xi ; ω).
N i=1

(2)

In order to ﬁnd ω ∗ , we have access to an optimization operator T (·) which yields a weight update vector
Δω = T (∇F, ρ, ξ).

(3)

The optimization operator itself can be any arbitrary training algorithm, such as SGD or RMSprop. The variable ξ
deﬁnes the open parameters of the training algorithm, such
as the learning rate η. The vector ρ is often used to accumulate statistics of the training process and serves as a memory.
While most training algorithms are guaranteed to ﬁnd a locally optimal value for ω given a sufﬁciently small value for
η and lower bounds for selecting η exist, these bounds are
often not practical. The goal of this paper, thus, is to learn

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1519

