Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reading the Videos: Temporal Labeling for Crowdsourced
Time-Sync Videos Based on Semantic Embedding
†

Guangyi Lv† , Tong Xu† , Enhong Chen†∗ , Qi Liu† , Yi Zheng‡
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
gylv@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tongxu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn
‡
Ant Financial Services Group
aliguagua.zhengy@alipay.com
the screen, which is similar with the barrage of bullets. Intuitively, users will send a bullet-screen comment according
to the current video shot, thus new opportunities occur for
temporal video labeling, as video contents could now be accurately located with timestamps.
Though some prior arts have been carried out on bulletscreen comments analysis, e.g., (Lin, Ito, and Hirokawa
2014) and (Wu and Ito 2014), usually they just focus on
simple statistics that could hardly solve practical problems.
Some other works like (Wu et al. 2014) attempt to semantically understand comments, which may fail due to informal
expressions. For instance, “2333” presents laughing while
“high-energy” means climax, which cannot be interpreted
by literal meanings. To that end, in this paper, we propose a
novel video understanding framework to better interpret the
bullet-screen comments, and then assign temporal label to
highlight video shots.
Specially, to deal with the informal expression of bulletscreen comments, we design a temporal deep structured semantic model (T-DSSM) to represent comments into semantic vectors, where the model is trained via EM algorithm
by harnessing the temporal correlation between comments.
Further, we build the mapping from semantic vectors to the
pre-deﬁned labels in a supervised way, while video highlights will then be recognized and labeled. To the best of our
knowledge, we are among the ﬁrst ones who utilize bulletscreen comments to recognize and label videos in a supervised way. Moreover, we design an EM based learning algorithm for training T-DSSM to achieve semantic embedding,
which is proven effective.
The extensive experiments on real-world dataset prove
that our framework could effectively label video highlights
with a signiﬁcant margin compared with baselines, which
validates the potential of our framework on video understanding, as well as bullet-screen comments interpretation.

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the boom of online sharing media contents, which raise signiﬁcant challenges in effective
management and retrieval. Though a large amount of efforts
have been made, precise retrieval on video shots with certain topics has been largely ignored. At the same time, due
to the popularity of novel time-sync comments, or so-called
“bullet-screen comments”, video semantics could be now
combined with timestamps to support further research on
temporal video labeling. In this paper, we propose a novel
video understanding framework to assign temporal labels on
highlighted video shots. To be speciﬁc, due to the informal
expression of bullet-screen comments, we ﬁrst propose a temporal deep structured semantic model (T-DSSM) to represent
comments into semantic vectors by taking advantage of their
temporal correlation. Then, video highlights are recognized
and labeled via semantic vectors in a supervised way. Extensive experiments on a real-world dataset prove that our framework could effectively label video highlights with a signiﬁcant margin compared with baselines, which clearly validates
the potential of our framework on video understanding, as
well as bullet-screen comments interpretation.

1

Introduction

Recently, the booming of online video-sharing websites
raises signiﬁcant challenges in effective management and retrieval of videos. Though a large amount of efforts have been
made on automatic labeling to enrich the metadata, usually
they focus on the whole video, while precise labeling with
timestamp on video shots has been largely ignored. Considering the situation that sometimes users tend to view only
parts of video shots on certain topics, e.g., shots about a
certain style or a certain movie star, however, they have to
browse the whole video if without assistance of temporal
labels. Thus, video labeling with both semantics and timestamps is urgently required.
At the same time, thanks to the emergence of the novel
time-sync comments, or so-called “bullet-screen comments”, real-time comments on video shots are now available, e.g., niconico in Japan or Bilibili in China. The “bulletscreen” is named after the scene of comments ﬂying across

2

Problem Deﬁnition and Framework

In this paper, we target at ﬁnding and labeling video
“highlights”, i.e., video shots focusing on certain topics (labels). Intuitively, this task could be solved in a supervised
way, which is deﬁned mathematically as follow:

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author.

Deﬁnition 1 Given the training set of videos with bulletscreen comments Ctrain = {< text, time >}, as well

3000

