Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

RAO∗ : An Algorithm for Chance-Constrained POMDP’s
Pedro Santana∗ and Sylvie Thiébaux+ and Brian Williams∗

∗

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, CSAIL
32 Vassar St., Room 32-224, Cambridge, MA 02139
{psantana,williams}@mit.edu

The Australian National University & NICTA
Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
Sylvie.Thiebaux@anu.edu.au

and How 2010). Therefore, to accommodate the aforementioned scenarios, new models and algorithms for constrained
MDPs have started to emerge, which handle chance constraints explicitly.
Research has mostly focused on fully observable constrained MDPs, for which non-trivial theoretical properties
are known (Altman 1999; Feinberg and Shwarz 1995). Existing algorithms cover an interesting spectrum of chance
constraints over secondary objectives or even execution
paths, e.g., (Dolgov and Durfee 2005; Hou, Yeoh, and
Varakantham 2014; Teichteil-Königsbuch 2012). For constrained POMDPs (C-POMDP’s), the state of the art is less
mature. It includes a few suboptimal or approximate methods based on extensions of dynamic programming (Isom,
Meyn, and Braatz 2008), point-based value iteration (Kim
et al. 2011), approximate linear programming (Poupart et
al. 2015), or on-line search (Undurti and How 2010). Moreover, as we later show, the modeling of chance constraints
through unit costs in the C-POMDP literature has a number
of shortcomings.
Our ﬁrst contribution is a systematic derivation of the execution risk in POMDP domains, and how it can be used to
enforce different types of chance constraints. A second contributions is Risk-bounded AO∗ (RAO∗ ), a new algorithm
for solving chance-constrained POMDPs (CC-POMDPs)
that harnesses the power of heuristic forward search in
belief space (Washington 1996; Bonet and Geffner 2000;
Szer, Charpillet, and Zilberstein 2005; Bonet and Geffner
2009). Similar to AO∗ (Nilsson 1982), RAO∗ guides the
search towards promising policies w.r.t. reward using an admissible heuristic. In addition, RAO∗ leverages a second admissible heuristic to propagate execution risk upper bounds
at each search node, allowing it to identify and prune overly
risky paths as the search proceeds. We demonstrate the usefulness of RAO∗ in two risk-sensitive domains of practical
interest: automated power supply restoration (PSR) and autonomous science agents (SA).
RAO∗ returns policies maximizing expected cumulative
reward among the set of deterministic, ﬁnite-horizon policies satisfying the chance constraints. Even though optimal CC-(PO)MDPs policies may, in general, require some
limited amount of randomization (Altman 1999), we follow Dolgov and Durfee (2005) in deliberately developing an approach focused on deterministic policies for sev-

Abstract
Autonomous agents operating in partially observable
stochastic environments often face the problem of optimizing expected performance while bounding the
risk of violating safety constraints. Such problems
can be modeled as chance-constrained POMDP’s (CCPOMDP’s). Our ﬁrst contribution is a systematic derivation of execution risk in POMDP domains, which improves upon how chance constraints are handled in
the constrained POMDP literature. Second, we present
RAO∗ , a heuristic forward search algorithm producing
optimal, deterministic, ﬁnite-horizon policies for CCPOMDP’s. In addition to the utility heuristic, RAO∗
leverages an admissible execution risk heuristic to
quickly detect and prune overly-risky policy branches.
Third, we demonstrate the usefulness of RAO∗ in two
challenging domains of practical interest: power supply
restoration and autonomous science agents.

1

+

Introduction

Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs)
(Smallwood and Sondik 1973) have become one of the most
popular frameworks for optimal planning under actuator
and sensor uncertainty, where POMDP solvers ﬁnd policies
that maximize some measure of expected utility (Kaelbling,
Littman, and Cassandra 1998; Silver and Veness 2010).
In many application domains, however, performance is
not enough. Critical missions in real-world scenarios require
agents to develop a keen sensitivity to risk, which needs
to be traded-off against utility. For instance, a search and
rescue drone should maximize the value of the information
gathered, subject to safety constraints such as avoiding dangerous areas and keeping sufﬁcient battery levels. In these
domains, autonomous agents should seek to optimize expected reward while remaining safe by deliberately keeping
the probability of violating one or more constraints within
acceptable levels. A bound on the probability of violating
constraints is called a chance constraint (Birge and Louveaux 1997). Unsurprisingly, attempting to model chance
constraints as negative rewards leads to models that are oversensitive to the particular penalty value chosen, and to policies that are overly risk-averse or overly risk-taking (Undurti
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3308

