Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Business Event Curation: Merging Human and Automated Approaches
Yiqi Wang1, Huiying Ma1, Nichola Lowe1, Maryann Feldman1, Charles Schmitt1
1 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC), Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
{wangyiqi, huiying, nlowe}@email.unc.edu; maryann.feldman@unc.edu; cschmitt@renci.org

web interface allows searching annotated articles based on
entities and events and (future) assists with curation and
iterative training of IE models.

Abstract
We present preliminary work to construct a knowledge curation system to advance research in the study of regional
economics. The proposed system exploits natural language
processing (NLP) techniques to automatically implement
business event extraction, provides a user-facing interface to
assist human curators, and a feedback loop to improve the
performance of the Information Extraction Model for the
automated parts of the system. Progress to date has shown
that we can improve standard NLP approaches for entity
and relationship extraction through heuristic means and
provide indexing of extracted relationships to aid curation.

Subtasks for business event detection
Two existing approaches for conducting business event
extraction are Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Coreference Resolution (CR). NER aims at identifying
phrases containing names of entities like organization and
person while CR solves the complexity of implicit context
owing to anaphora, cataphora and co-referring noun
phrases in text documents. Although several NLP systems
provide great implementation of these tasks, their performances were not ideal due to difference between their
training and our testing data. A focus of our work has been
to improve the performance of the NER and Co-reference
Resolution System provided by Stanford NLP groups on
our data.

Introduction (Background)
The economic success or stagnation of a geographic region, such as the Silicon Valley, depends on a complex
interplay of factors. Understanding this complexity requires collecting data on the spatio-temporal transactions
that occur among a changing set of firms and people. This
is a non-trivial challenge given that key data sources, i.e.,
business news journals, are unstructured. Human curation
can ensure high quality information extraction (IE), but
scales poorly. Integration with automated IE approaches
are thus attractive, but must address both general IE challenges and domain-specific challenges, e.g., use of domain
and regional specific terminology and the need to integrate
events over news articles. We design and implement an
automated IE system to help human curators extract business event information, which will be further used for local
economic analysis, from large amount of text data.

Figure 1.1 General Architecture of our business curation system

Named Entity Recognition
We developed an efficient approach to apply the Stanford
NER system, particularly for the ORGANIZATION, PERSON, LOCATION classes. Our approach firstly preprocessed online news articles to extract html metadata serving as external gazetteer. Along with pre-defined gazetteer
including common position titles and keywords indicating
company and the external gazetteer, we exploited handcraft
linguistic patterns and heuristics to correct and to improve
the Stanford NER result.

Approach
Figure 1.1 illustrates the general architecture of our system.
A NLP pipeline processes news articles to product articles
annotated with possible business entities and events. A

Co-reference Resolution
While the Stanford CR system demonstrated good performance on our data when referent is ‘PERSON’, it failed

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
The research demonstrated in this paper is supported by NSF SMA1439532 and UNC.

4272

