Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient Collaborative Crowdsourcing
1

Zhengxiang Pan1 , Han Yu1 , Chunyan Miao1 , Cyril Leung1,2

, Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly, Nanyang Tech. Univ., Singapore
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
{panz0012, han.yu, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, cleung@ece.ubc.ca

system qm (t + 1) = qm (t) − μm (t) + am (t). μm (t) =
K
k=1 nm,k T̃k (t) − ãm (t) where nm,k is the number of
workers with skill m required to complete a task of type
k, and T̃k (t) is the actual number of tasks of type k completed during time step t. The range of values for T̃k (t) is
0 ≤ T̃k (t) ≤ dk (t)Tk (t). Tk (t) is the number of tasks
of type k demanded by the crowdsourcers at time step t.
dk (t) is an indicator function reﬂecting the ability of the
crowdsourcing system to satisfy demands for tasks of type k.
dk (t) = 1 if qm (t) can support nm,k > 0 for all m required
by a task; otherwise, dk (t) = 0.
Due to the physical limitations of a crowdsourcing system, we assume that there exists an upper bound to μm (t)
K
max
which can be expressed μmax
(t).
m (t) =
k=1 nm,k Tk
ãm (t) is the number of workers with skill m who have become available at time step t (e.g., those who have completed previous tasks allocated to them or new workers joining the system). am (t) ∈ Z+ ∪{0}, is the number of workers
to be mobilized by the CrowdAsm approach at t. For a given
crowdsourcing system, the number for registered workers is
ﬁnite. Thus, we assume that there is an upper bound amax
m
for am (t) such that 0 ≤ am (t) ≤ amax
m .
Let cm (t) be the cost required to attract workers with
skill m to become available under a given worker supply
condition. The quality of the available workers, as measured by an average reliability value 0 < r̃m (t) < 1,
is also taken into account. Such a measure ri (t) for a
worker i can be computed based on his past performance
using reputation-based approaches (Yu et al. 2013b). Thus,
out
N m
(t)
1
out
r̃m (t) = N out
ri (t), where Nm
(t) is the toi=1
(t)
m
tal number of workers with characteristic m who are not
currently logged in to the crowdsourcing system and whose
ri (t) ≥ ε. ε is a reliability threshold set by the crowdsourcing system or a crowdsourcer (e.g., the minimum “approval
rate” in mTurk).
The expected proﬁt for the crowdsourcing system at time step t can be expressed as δ(t) =
K
k=1 dk (t)fk (pk (t), r̃k (t))pk (t) − c(a(t), x(t)), where
a(t) is the set of workers to be mobilized by CrowdAsm and x(t) is the set of possible supply conditions
of workers with various skills. Using the Lyapunov drift
Δ(q(t)) (Neely 2010) as a metric to the overall level

Abstract
We consider the problem of making efﬁcient quality-timecost trade-offs in collaborative crowdsourcing systems in
which different skills from multiple workers need to be combined to complete a task. We propose CrowdAsm - an approach which helps collaborative crowdsourcing systems determine how to combine the expertise of available workers
to maximize the expected quality of results while minimizing the expected delays. Analysis proves that CrowdAsm can
achieve close to optimal proﬁt for workers in a given crowdsourcing system if they follow the recommendations.

Introduction
In recent years, intelligent task allocation has been recognized as a useful approach to make efﬁcient quality-timecost trade-offs in crowdsourcing. Existing approaches assume that a task can be effectively completed by an individual worker (Yu et al. 2013c; 2013a; 2014; 2015). As
populations age, inter-generational crowdsourcing platforms
start to emerge. Workers with diverse skills need to form
teams to collaboratively complete crowdsourcing tasks requiring heterogeneous skills. An example is to proof-read
traditional Japanese scripts where elderly workers contribute
linguistic expertise while the young assist them with technical knowhow (Kobayashi et al. 2013).
To make efﬁcient quality-time-cost trade-offs in collaborative crowdsourcing systems through intelligent task allocation, we propose the crowd assemble (CrowdAsm) approachIt dynamically assembles teams of workers considering the budgets, the availability of workers with the required
skills and their track records in order to complete collaborative crowdsourcing tasks. It maximizes the expected rate
of success for the tasks, minimizes the expected time elapse,
and stays within the given budget. Through rigorous analysis, we prove that CrowdAsm can achieve near optimal proﬁt
for workers in a given collaborative crowdsourcing system if
they follow the recommendations.

The CrowdAsm Approach
For a given crowdsourcing system, the availability of workers with a given skill m can be modeled as a queueing
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4248

