Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fortune Teller: Predicting Your Career Path
Ye Liu† , Luming Zhang‡ , Liqiang Nie† , Yan Yan§ , David S. Rosenblum†
†

‡

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Department of Electric Engineering and Information System, Hefei University of Technology, China
§
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
{liuye, david}@comp.nus.edu.sg, {zglumg, nieliqiang}@gmail.com, yan@disi.unitn.it

eral distinct career stages, and each stage contains a set of
equivalent occupational titles. The objective of this work is
to predict the future career stages of a given user, the socalled career path modeling, which can provide potential
beneﬁts for employees, employers and headhunters. For employees, they can get information about their current career
stages, the time point for their next job-hopping, as well as
the whole picture of their own career paths. For employers,
they will be informed of the career progressions of their employees and decide what would be the best time to promote
their employees or increase their salaries. When it comes to
headhunters, they could be advised of the appropriate time
to talk to their target customers as well as the proper job positions for their customers. These efﬁcient and accurate job
hunting and recommendation processes will greatly facilitate headhunting and reduce their efforts considerably. As a
consequence, career path modeling is a research topic with
high potential and has many real-world applications.
Despite its signiﬁcant value, career path modeling from
multiple social networks is a non-trivial task due to the following reasons. (1) Source Fusion. The information from
multiple social networks of the same user describes his or
her characteristics from various views, but it should reﬂect
his or her career progression consistently. Thus, how to
seamlessly and effectively fuse such heterogeneous information is a tough challenge. (2) Temporal Relatedness Modeling. A user’s career path normally comprises a sequence of
occupations. Instead of mutual independence, they are correlated with each other in chronological order. Therefore,
how to temporally characterize such relatedness poses another challenge. (3) Inﬂuential Factors Identiﬁcation. Different career paths have different inﬂuential factors. For example, education background may play an important role in
the academic career path, but it might not be so crucial to
an acting career. Furthermore, even within the same career
path, the inﬂuential factors for different career stages also
vary. For instance, publications might be key factors to research fellows, while research community services may be
a more signiﬁcant consideration for full professors. Hence,
learning the stage-sharing and stage-speciﬁc features in each
career path presents another crucial challenge.
To tackle the above challenges, we present a multi-source
learning framework with a fused lasso penalty (MSLFL).
It co-regularizes the following factors: (1) Source Consis-

Abstract
People go to fortune tellers in hopes of learning things
about their future. A future career path is one of the
topics most frequently discussed. But rather than rely
on “black arts” to make predictions, in this work we
scientiﬁcally and systematically study the feasibility of
career path prediction from social network data. In particular, we seamlessly fuse information from multiple
social networks to comprehensively describe a user and
characterize progressive properties of his or her career
path. This is accomplished via a multi-source learning
framework with fused lasso penalty, which jointly regularizes the source and career-stage relatedness. Extensive experiments on real-world data conﬁrm the accuracy of our model.

Introduction
With the proliferation of social network services, an increasing number of individuals are involved in multiple social
networks at the same time. This trend has been witnessed
by a recent survey: multi-platform use is on the rise, and
52% of online adults now use multiple social media services (Cohen 2014). Following this trend, multi-platform applications have attracted many researchers’ attention due to
the fact that multiple social networks can characterize the
same user from different perspectives. For example, Twitter reﬂects users’ casual activities and personal opinions;
Facebook exposes users’ social connections and daily events
explicitly; and Linkedin uncovers users’ professional skills
and career paths. The heterogeneous information distributed
across those diverse social networks is usually complementary rather than conﬂicting. Hence, as compared to single social network, appropriate aggregation of multiple social networks could provide a better way to understand users comprehensively, and consequently facilitate many applications,
such as the inference of users’ age, gender, race, occupation,
personality and political orientation.
With the help of those multiple social networks, in this
paper, we scientiﬁcally study an ancient problem, the fortune teller, speciﬁcally in the ﬁeld of career path prediction.
A user’s career path, in this work, refers to the user’s occupational growth in his or her career life. It comprises sevc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

201

