Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Combining Bounding Boxes and JPS to Prune Grid Pathﬁnding
Steve Rabin

Nathan R. Sturtevant

Dept. of Computer Science
DigiPen Institute of Technology
Redmond, WA, USA
steve.rabin@gmail.com

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Denver
Denver, CO, USA
sturtevant@cs.du.edu

space, and states which are too far from the optimal path are
pruned.
There are many other ways of pruning the state space that
depend on the structure of the space being searched. Contraction Hierarchies (Geisberger et al. 2008), for example,
build an abstract graph that can be searched more efﬁciently
at runtime while still yielding optimal paths.
In this paper we study another technique from the road
network literature, geometric containers (Wagner, Willhalm,
and Zaroliagis 2005). This approach stores information with
edges in the graph that can be used to prune these edges at
runtime, proving that an edge will never lead to an optimal
solution.
We combine this technique with Jump Point
Search (Harabor and Grastien 2014; 2011), an algorithm designed for grid-based pathﬁnding. JPS uses a
canonical ordering on paths in the state space to reduce
the number of duplicate paths. Its extension, JPS+, precomputes the set of ‘jump points’ that allow the search to
quickly jump across the search space.
Related to JPS is Subgoal Graphs (Uras, Koenig, and
Hernández 2013) which was also designed for grid graphs.
Subgoal Graphs use similar structure in the map as JPS. Subgoal Graphs then use a form a contraction hierarchies to signiﬁcantly improve performance (Uras and Koenig 2014).
We show that the combination of JPS+ and geometric containers achieves state-of-the-art performance in gridbased pathﬁnding, with performance on par with storing
compressed all-pairs shortest path data. The performance
is achieved with only a constant amount of data per edge;
this is pre-computed and then used at runtime to prune the
search.
In this paper we describe the bounding-box version of geometric containers, showing how they can be used to improve performance. More importantly, we show the inﬂuence of JPS’s canonical ordering on the performance of this
technique, and how we can combine them during the preprocessing phase to improve performance.

Abstract
Pathﬁnding is a common task across many domains and platforms, whether in games, robotics, or road maps. Given the
breadth of domains, there are also a wide variety of representations used for pathﬁnding, and there are many techniques
which have been shown to improve performance. In the last
few years, the state-of-the-art in grid-based pathﬁnding has
been signiﬁcantly improved with domain-speciﬁc techniques
such as Jump Point Search (JPS), Subgoal Graphs, and Compressed Path Databases. In this paper we look at a speciﬁc
implementation of the general idea of Geometric Containers,
showing that, while it is effective on grid maps, when combined with JPS+ it provides state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction and Background
Pathﬁnding is a fundamental task for agents that can move
about a world, whether real or simulated. This need is common to characters in simulated worlds, such as games or
training environments, or in the real world, such as in robots
and automated vehicles. Furthermore, in real-time environments it is desirable that paths are returned as quickly as
possible, so that the agent can begin moving. In simulations,
returning paths quickly allows the simulation to run in real
time; the faster the planning, the more agents that can plan
simultaneously.
There are many common world representations used
across these domains, including grids (Sturtevant 2012), triangulations (Demyen and Buro 2006), graphs (Geisberger
et al. 2008), as well as other spatial representations such
as navigation meshes (Tozour 2002) and quad trees (Finkel
and Bentley 1974). The representation used for planning depends strongly on the problem being solved, as there are
important trade-offs between accuracy, planning time, and
other features involved in each world representation.
Given a representation, there are many possible optimizations that can be used to improve the performance
of search. One of the most generic approaches is that
of building better heuristics, such as true-distance heuristics (Sturtevant et al. 2009) (for polynomial domains) or
pattern databases (Culberson and Schaeffer 1998) (for exponential domains). Heuristics label distances in the state

Problem Deﬁnition and Related Work
The problem being solved here can be described as search on
a 4-tuple (G, s, g, h) where G = (V, E) is a ﬁnite directed
graph composed of vertices and edges. We use the terms vertex, node, and state interchangeably in this paper. Each edge

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

746

