Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Ensembles of Cutset Networks
Tahrima Rahman and Vibhav Gogate
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080, USA.
{tahrima.rahman,vibhav.gogate}@utdallas.edu

ence over them is linear in the size of the network using a straight-forward generalization of Pearl and Dechter’s
cutset conditioning algorithm (Pearl 1988; Dechter 1990).
Unlike other state-of-the-art models such as arithmetic circuits (Darwiche 2003; Lowd and Domingos 2008), sumproduct networks (Poon and Domingos 2011), and thin junction trees (Bach and Jordan 2001) in which learning is
computationally expensive, CNets admit tractable learning algorithms assuming that the number of nodes in the
OR tree is bounded by a constant. Moreover, fast, heuristic algorithms for learning CNets often yield performance
that is close in terms of test-set log-likelihood to the exact
learning algorithm (Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate 2014;
Di Mauro, Vergari, and Esposito 2015). We take advantage
of this fast learnability property of CNets to learn their ensembles, namely we develop techniques that combine multiple CNets to improve the prediction accuracy.
We make the following contributions. First, we develop several sequential boosting-based as well as parallel bagging-based algorithms for learning CNets from data
leveraging vast amount of previous work on boosting and
bagging algorithms (cf. (Zhou 2012)) as well as their generalizations for density estimation (Rosset and Segal 2002;
Ridgeway 2002; Welling, Zemel, and Hinton 2002). Second, we perform and report on a comprehensive empirical evaluation, comparing our new algorithms with several
state-of-the-art systems such as sum-product networks with
direct and indirect interactions (Rooshenas and Lowd 2014),
latent tree models (Choi et al. 2011) and mixtures of cutset networks (Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate 2014) on a
wide variety of benchmark datasets. Our empirical evaluation clearly demonstrates the power of our new approaches;
our new algorithms are better than competing systems on 13
out of 20 datasets in terms of test-set log-likelihood. This is
signiﬁcant because we compare with well-engineered, stateof-the-art systems.

Abstract
Cutset networks — OR (decision) trees that have Bayesian
networks whose treewidth is bounded by one at each leaf —
are a new class of tractable probabilistic models that admit
fast, polynomial-time inference and learning algorithms. This
is unlike other state-of-the-art tractable models such as thin
junction trees, arithmetic circuits and sum-product networks
in which inference is fast and efﬁcient but learning can be notoriously slow. In this paper, we take advantage of this unique
property to develop fast algorithms for learning ensembles of
cutset networks. Speciﬁcally, we consider generalized additive mixtures of cutset networks and develop sequential
boosting-based and parallel bagging-based approaches for
learning them from data. We demonstrate, via a thorough
experimental evaluation, that our new algorithms are superior
to competing approaches in terms of test-set log-likelihood
score and learning time.

Introduction
Learning tractable probabilistic models, namely models that
admit polynomial-time marginal and maximum-a-posteriori
inference, has been the subject of much recent research
(Poon and Domingos 2011; Gens and Domingos 2013;
Rooshenas and Lowd 2014; Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate
2014; Choi, Van den Broeck, and Darwiche 2015). Although, these models have higher bias and are a strict subclass of the general class of probabilistic models, it has been
shown in numerous empirical studies that they typically
have higher predictive accuracy than the latter (Rooshenas
and Lowd 2014). The key reason for this superior performance is the accuracy of inference; since exact inference
in real-world probabilistic models is often computationally
infeasible, one has to resort to approximate inference approaches which can be quite unreliable and inaccurate in
practice. Learning tractable models helps circumvent these
issues associated with approximate inference.
In this paper, we consider a sub-class of tractable models called cutset networks (Rahman, Kothalkar, and Gogate
2014) or CNets in short. Roughly speaking, cutset networks are rooted OR trees that have a Bayesian network
whose treewidth is bounded by one at each leaf. Infer-

Background
Let X = {X1 , . . . , Xn } be a set of n discrete random variables. We assume that each variable Xi can be assigned a
value from a ﬁnite set Δi , called its domain. Let x denote
an assignment to all variables in X.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3301

