Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Sparse Perceptron Decision Tree for Millions of Dimensions
Weiwei Liu and Ivor W. Tsang∗
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
liuweiwei863@gmail.com, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au

in which the test at a node uses the linear combinations of
features. Clearly, PDT is the general form of axis-parallel
DT.
Many real-world problems, like documents and Microarray data (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003), are represented as high
dimensional vectors. Many features in high dimensional
space are usually non-informative or noisy. Those noisy features will decrease the generalization performance of DT
and derogate from their promising results for dealing with
non-linear separable data, especially when they are many
noisy features. For some applications like Microarray data
analysis (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003), it is desired to identify a small set of features that represent the original feature
space. Thus, it is imperative to develop a sparse DT with
respect to input features and its corresponding theory.
Another drawback for DT is that its performance is sensitive to the tree structure, which is determined by the distribution of features. Thus, ensembles offer an effective technique
for obtaining increased accuracy by combining the predictions of many different trees, like random forest feature
selection (RFFS) (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2001)
and Gradient boosted feature selection (GBFS) (Xu et al.
2014). GBFS is an advanced gradient boosted DT (Friedman 2000), which employs gradient boosting to do feature selection in DT. GBFS, which belongs to axis-parallel
DT, shows its state-of-the-art feature selection performance
compared with l1 -regularized logistic regression (Lee et al.
2006), RFFS, and some other promising baselines. CostSensitive Tree of Classiﬁers (CSTC) (Xu et al. 2013) is another state-of-the-art approach for feature selection in DT,
which follows the PDT. Both are based on the l1 -regularized
SVM (Zhu et al. 2003): minimizing l1 -regularization plus
other loss functions. However, the theoretical and empirical
analysis in (Tan, Tsang, and Wang 2014) have shown that
l1 -regularized methods achieve suboptimal performance in
feature selection, compared with the sparse model with an
explicit budget constraint on the weights.
Our main contribution is ﬁrst to present a novel generalization error bound for the PDT, which takes into account the
distribution of the data, and provides the theoretical justiﬁcation to learn a sparse hyperplane classiﬁer in each decision
node and prune the tree. From the analysis of our bound, the
training error loss, the margin, the capacity of the kernel matrix deﬁned on the training data (Tsang and Kwok 2006), and

Abstract
Due to the nonlinear but highly interpretable representations,
decision tree (DT) models have signiﬁcantly attracted a lot
of attention of researchers. However, DT models usually suffer from the curse of dimensionality and achieve degenerated
performance when there are many noisy features. To address
these issues, this paper ﬁrst presents a novel data-dependent
generalization error bound for the perceptron decision tree
(PDT), which provides the theoretical justiﬁcation to learn a
sparse linear hyperplane in each decision node and to prune
the tree. Following our analysis, we introduce the notion of
sparse perceptron decision node (SPDN) with a budget constraint on the weight coefﬁcients, and propose a sparse perceptron decision tree (SPDT) algorithm to achieve nonlinear
prediction performance. To avoid generating an unstable and
complicated decision tree and improve the generalization of
the SPDT, we present a pruning strategy by learning classiﬁers to minimize cross-validation errors on each SPDN. Extensive empirical studies verify that our SPDT is more resilient to noisy features and effectively generates a small,
yet accurate decision tree. Compared with state-of-the-art DT
methods and SVM, our SPDT achieves better generalization
performance on ultrahigh dimensional problems with more
than 1 million features.

Introduction
Due to the nonlinear, but highly interpretable representations (Murthy, Kasif, and Salzberg 1994), decision tree (DT)
(Moret 1982; Safavian and Landgrebe 1991) has been a particularly powerful tool in various machine learning and data
mining applications, ranging from Agriculture (McQueen et
al. 1995), Astronomy (Salzberg et al. 1995) and Molecular Biology (Shimozono et al. 1994) to Financial analysis
(Mezrich 1994).
Many early works focus on the DT, in which each node
uses the value of a single feature (attribute) (Breiman et
al. 1984; Quinlan 1993) for decision. Since the decision of
those methods at each node is equivalent to an axis-parallel
hyperplane in the feature space, they are called axis-parallel
DT, which suffer from the curse of dimensionality. To improve the performance of axis-parallel DT, researchers developed perceptron decision tree (PDT) (Bennett et al. 2000)
∗

Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1881

