Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On Order-Constrained Transitive Distance Clustering
Zhiding Yu∗ , Weiyang Liu† , Wenbo Liu∗‡ , Yingzhen Yang§ , Ming Li‡ , B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar∗
∗

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, P.R. China
‡
SYSU-CMU Joint Institute of Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
§
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
†

Abstract
We consider the problem of approximating order-constrained
transitive distance (OCTD) and its clustering applications.
Given any pairwise data, transitive distance (TD) is deﬁned
as the smallest possible “gap” on the set of paths connecting them. While such metric deﬁnition renders signiﬁcant
capability of addressing elongated clusters, it is sometimes
also an over-simpliﬁed representation which loses necessary
regularization on cluster structure and overﬁts to short links
easily. As a result, conventional TD often suffers from degraded performance given clusters with “thick” structures.
Our key intuition is that the maximum (path) order, which
is the maximum number of nodes on a path, controls the level
of ﬂexibility. Reducing this order beneﬁts the clustering performance by ﬁnding a trade-off between ﬂexibility and regularization on cluster structure. Unlike TD, ﬁnding OCTD
becomes an intractable problem even though the number of
connecting paths is reduced. We therefore propose a fast approximation framework, using random samplings to generate multiple diversiﬁed TD matrices and a pooling to output
the ﬁnal approximated OCTD matrix. Comprehensive experiments on toy, image and speech datasets show the excellent
performance of OCTD, surpassing TD with signiﬁcant gains
and giving state-of-the-art performance on several datasets.

Figure 1: A toy example with densely aligned Gaussian distributed clusters. SVD (a) Clustering result with TD. (b)
Clustering result with OCTD (Min). Similar result is given
by OCTD (Mean) and is omitted. (c) (d) and (e) respectively
correspond to the (negative) distance matrices of pairwise
rows in TD, OCTD (Min) and OCTD (Mean) after SVD.

Introduction
rization (grouping) (Feng et al. 2014; Hu et al. 2014) can be
naturally formulated as clustering problems.
A wide variety of clustering algorithms were proposed
in the past decades. Some famous early clustering methods include the k-means algorithm (Lloyd 1982), fuzzy clustering (Bezdek 2013), hierarchical clustering (Sibson 1973;
Defays 1977), and mode seeking (Cheng 1995; Comaniciu
and Meer 2002). More recently, with the increase of computer memory and computation power, more sophisticated
methods including the families of spectral clustering (Ng
et al. 2002; Shi and Malik 2000; Zelnik-Manor and Perona
2004) and subspace clustering (Elhamifar and Vidal 2009;
Lu et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2013; 2013; Peng, Zhang, and Yi
2013; Peng, Yi, and Tang 2015; Hu et al. 2014; Li et al.
2015) were proposed. Spectral clustering often includes an
eigen-decomposition on the afﬁnity matrix and has wide applications in image segmentation. On the other hand, subspace clustering assumes a low dimensional subspace for
each cluster. it is therefore very successful in applications

Clustering has been and continues to remain one of the most
fundamental machine learning problems. Today, with the
fast growth of digital media and storage, the growing speed
of annotation capability can hardly match the explosive increase of data. In many problems and applications where supervised information is difﬁcult to obtain or even not available, clustering presents an important unsupervised learning
approach to analyze the useful latent patterns. In speech processing for example, NIST recently organized the i-vector
Machine Learning Challenge (Greenberg et al. 2014) where
one is required to design speaker veriﬁcation systems trained
on an unlabeled i-vector development dataset. Among the
participating works, clustering techniques are widely used
as indispensable learning components. In computer vision, a
number of important applications such as unsupervised image segmentation (Shi and Malik 2000) and image categoc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2293

