Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Text Classiﬁcation with Heterogeneous Information Network Kernels
Chenguang Wanga , Yangqiu Songb , Haoran Lia , Ming Zhanga , Jiawei Hanc
a

School of EECS, Peking University
Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, West Virginia University
c
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{wangchenguang, lihaoran 2012, mzhang cs}@pku.edu.cn, yangqiu.song@mail.wvu.edu, hanj@illinois.edu
b

words are also important. For example, if there are two documents talking about CEOs of Google and Microsoft respectively, and if we build a link between “Larry Page” of
sub-type Entrepreneur in one text and “Bill Gates” of subtype Entrepreneur in another, then they become in the same
category in the sense that they both talk about entrepreneur
and connect to the “United States” where Google and Microsoft locate in. Therefore, the structural information in the
unstructured text can be utilized to further improve the performance of text classiﬁcation.
There have been some existing studies on using external knowledge bases such as WordNet (Hotho, Staab, and
Stumme 2003), Wikipedia (Gabrilovich and Markovitch
2007), or Probase (Song, Wang, and Wang 2015), to automatically enrich the text representation, thus improve the
prediction capabilities of the classiﬁers. However, these
methods ignore the structural information in the knowledge
bases, and only treat the knowledge as “ﬂat” features. Others
try to build a network from the words in a document (Wang,
Do, and Lin 2005; Rousseau, Kiagias, and Vazirgiannis
2015) and compare the text using the graph similarities or
graph kernels (Vishwanathan et al. 2010). However, they do
not consider the entities and relations inside texts, as well as
the types of the entities and relations.
In this paper, we propose to represent a text as a heterogeneous information network (HIN), and classify the texts
considering the structured and typed information connecting different documents. The structured and typed information is generated by grounding text to world knowledge
bases (Wang et al. 2015a). Then we use meta-paths (Sun
and Han 2012) to link different documents. We develop both
simple link based augmentation of traditional feature representation of text and a more complicated weighted metapath based similarity to compare documents. Both methods
can be uniﬁed as HIN based kernels (HIN-kernels). Since the
complicated similarity is not positive semi-deﬁnite, to deﬁne a legitimate kernel based on the similarity, we propose
to use an indeﬁnite kernel SVM to solve the problem. Experimental results on two benchmark datasets show that the
indeﬁnite HIN-kernel with weighted meta-path based similarities outperforms the state-of-the-art representations as
well as other HIN-kernels. The main contributions of this
paper are highlighted as follows:

Abstract
Text classiﬁcation is an important problem with many applications. Traditional approaches represent text as a bagof-words and build classiﬁers based on this representation.
Rather than words, entity phrases, the relations between the
entities, as well as the types of the entities and relations
carry much more information to represent the texts. This
paper presents a novel text as network classiﬁcation framework, which introduces 1) a structured and typed heterogeneous information networks (HINs) representation of texts,
and 2) a meta-path based approach to link texts. We show
that with the new representation and links of texts, the structured and typed information of entities and relations can
be incorporated into kernels. Particularly, we develop both
simple linear kernel and indeﬁnite kernel based on metapaths in the HIN representation of texts, where we call them
HIN-kernels. Using Freebase, a well-known world knowledge base, to construct HIN for texts, our experiments on
two benchmark datasets show that the indeﬁnite HIN-kernel
based on weighted meta-paths outperforms the state-of-theart methods and other HIN-kernels.

Introduction
Text classiﬁcation has been widely used for many applications, such as news article categorization, social media analysis, and online advertisement. Most text classiﬁcation techniques represent the text as bag-of-words (BOW) features,
and build classiﬁers based on the features to learn the prediction functions between texts and labels. Although representing the text as BOW is simple and commonly used,
the structural nature of semantic relationships among words
and entities inside is less explored but informative. Entities
can be less ambiguous and have more information about the
categories compared to single words. For example, “Nobel
Son” and “Nobel Prize” represent different meanings. They
provide more useful information for the Film and Award categories respectively, compared to the words “Nobel,” “Son,”
etc.. If we can recognize the entity names and types (coarsegrained types such as person, location and organization;
ﬁne-grained types such as politician, musician, country, and
city), these will help better determine the categories of the
texts. Moreover, the link information between entities and
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We study the problem of converting text classiﬁcation to a

2130

