Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Marginalized Continuous Time Bayesian Networks
for Network Reconstruction from Incomplete Observations
Lukas Studer

Loı̈c Paulevé

Christoph Zechner

IBM Research Zurich
lukas.studer@alumni.ethz.ch

LRI UMR CNRS 8623
Université Paris-Saclay
loic.pauleve@lri.fr

ETH Zurich
czechner@ethz.ch

Matthias Reumann

Marı́a Rodrı́guez Martı́nez∗

Heinz Koeppl∗

IBM Research Zurich
mre@zurich.ibm.com

IBM Research Zurich
mrm@zurich.ibm.com

Technische Universitaet Darmstadt
heinz.koeppl@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de

Continuous-Time Bayesian Networks (CTBNs) as proposed in (Nodelman, Shelton, and Koller 2002) model structured Markovian processes evolving in continuous time on a
multivariate discrete state space. CTBNs are speciﬁed using
a directed graph – not necessarily acyclic – over the system’s variables and a set of rates for the state transitions of
each variable that depends on the state of its parents. CTBNs
are well suited as a hidden generative model for the biological processes mentioned above, because they can capture the
stochastic effects that arise due to lowly abundant molecular
species or other effects.

Abstract
Continuous Time Bayesian Networks (CTBNs) provide a
powerful means to model complex network dynamics. However, their inference is computationally demanding — especially if one considers incomplete and noisy time-series data.
The latter gives rise to a joint state- and parameter estimation
problem, which can only be solved numerically. Yet, ﬁnding the exact parameterization of the CTBN has often only
secondary importance in practical scenarios. We therefore
focus on the structure learning problem and present a way
to analytically marginalize the Markov chain underlying the
CTBN model with respect its parameters. Since the resulting stochastic process is parameter-free, its inference reduces
to an optimal ﬁltering problem. We solve the latter using an
efﬁcient parallel implementation of a sequential Monte Carlo
scheme. Our framework enables CTBN inference to be applied to incomplete noisy time-series data frequently found
in molecular biology and other disciplines.

Prior applications of CTBNs to biological data (Acerbi
et al. 2014) have assumed that the state of the system is
known at all times through interpolating between data points
in a pre-processing step. Assuming complete path observations is unrealistic for biological dataset but dramatically
simpliﬁes the inference problem: If additionally, the graph
prior satisﬁes structural modularity, it can be shown that
each node’s incoming edges can be found independent of
all other nodes’ incoming edges (Nodelman, Shelton, and
Koller 2003).

Keywords: sequential Monte Carlo; graph reconstruction;
continuous time Bayesian network

1

Introduction

Inﬂuence network reconstruction from noisy, incomplete
time series data is a challenging problem that has received
a lot of attention, especially in biological sciences (Penfold
and Wild 2011; Acerbi et al. 2014). Biological networks typically represent interactions between molecular components
within the cell such as regulatory interactions among genes
and transcription factors, or protein-protein interactions in
signalling networks. Recent single-cell techniques allow to
follow the activity of multiple molecular entities over cells
and over time. The resulting ensemble of time-series can
be modeled as noisy observations of a stochastic process,
where each dimension of the state vector corresponds to a
biological entity. Temporal changes in the molecular entities are reﬂected by transitions between different states of
this process.

In absence of such simplifying assumptions, inferring a
CTBN model from time-series data requires inferring the latent states of the system, which is a computationally challenging task as discussed in (Celikkaya and Shelton 2014;
Fan, Xu, and Shelton 2010; Nodelman, Shelton, and Koller
2005). We extend these approaches by additionally considering measurements that are corrupted by noise, which is
crucial for the biology domain. Several CTBN inference
methods jointly infer both graph structure and rates, yet for
biomedical applications knowledge about the presence of
an (dysregulated) edge is often sufﬁcient (Sonabend et al.
2014). To address this, we marginalize the CTBN’s stochastic process description with respect to rates by extending the
framework presented in (Zechner et al. 2014). This in turn
gives rise to a substantial reduction in computational effort
compared to standard techniques of joint inference and subsequent marginalization of the posterior.

∗

Co-last authors (and corresponding authors)
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2051

