Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Performance of GoogLeNet and AlexNet Applied to Sketches
Pedro Ballester and Ricardo Matsumura Araujo
Center for Technological Development, Federal University of Pelotas
Pelotas, RS, Brazil
pedballester@gmail.com, ricardo@inf.ufpel.edu.br

In this paper we aim at analyzing the ability of
GoogLeNet and AlexNet to classify sketches of well-known
subjects. All subjects are included in ImageNet, although almost exclusively by photo representations. The sketches we
use in this work are easily recognized by humans in most
cases (Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012) and our initial hypothesis was that they would be able to recognize most subjects
with performance comparable to that of humans.
This hypothesis stems from the feature extraction capabilities of CNNs, which is able to identify relevant features
from examples and could in principle learn very abstract representations from photos that could be applied to sketches
in much the same way humans do. We however show that
both networks are largely unable to recognize most tested
subjects, indicating that the learned representations are quite
different from that of humans. We argue that such approach
can be useful to assess classiﬁers’ generalization capabilities, in particular regarding to the abstraction level of learned
representations.
The main contribution of this work is to put forward an
image recognition task where current state-of-the-art models differ signiﬁcantly in performance when compared to humans. By training over less abstract examples (photos) and
testing in more abstract examples (sketches) one may be able
to better understand what is being learned by these models.
This paper is organized as follows. We begin by presenting related prior works, following with the statement of our
goal and our proposed methodology, including descriptions
of the models and data sets. We then show our analysis of
the results. Finally, we conclude the paper and discuss some
possible interpretations and future work.

Abstract
This work provides a study on how Convolutional Neural
Networks, trained to identify objects primarily in photos, perform when applied to more abstract representations of the
same objects. Our main goal is to better understand the generalization abilities of these networks and their learned inner
representations. We show that both GoogLeNet and AlexNet
networks are largely unable to recognize abstract sketches
that are easily recognizable by humans. Moreover, we show
that the measured efﬁcacy vary considerably across different
classes and we discuss possible reasons for this.

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are considered the
state-of-the-art model in image recognition tasks. Part of a
deep learning approach to machine learning, CNN have been
deployed successfully in a variety of applications, including
face recognition (Lawrence et al. 1997), object classiﬁcation (Szegedy et al. 2014) and generating scene descriptions
(Pinheiro and Collobert 2013). This success can be partly
attributed to advances in learning algorithms for deep architectures and partly to large labeled data sets made available,
such as ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015).
ImageNet is a large collection of hierarchical labeled images that is used in the ImageNet Challenge (Russakovsky
et al. 2015). Two well known trained CNN implementations
that use ImageNet are GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al. 2014) and
AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). Both attain a low error when trained over the million of images contained in ImageNet.
GoogLeNet and AlexNet are often used in photo classiﬁcation, as a large fraction of examples in ImageNet are composed of photos. In this case, they are able to generalize well
and successfully classify out-of-sample examples.
Although the general approach is good enough to be
deployed in commercial applications (e.g. Google Photos,
Flickr), an important issue is understanding what is being
learned and the limits in generalization capabilities. It is often noted that CNNs error rates are comparable to that of
humans (Zeiler and Fergus 2014) when such comparison is
made over a large data set such as ImageNet, but works on
where humans and CNNs differ are still sparse.

Related Works
Convolutional Neural Networks have been applied to a variety of tasks with state-of-the-art performance in several applications. The most used architecture follows that of (LeCun et al. 1998), where a CNN was ﬁrst applied to recognize
hand-written digits.
The network has been improving since its creation with
the development of new layers (Srivastava et al. 2014;
Girshick et al. 2014) and the addition of classic computer vision techniques. CNN are often used in the ImageNet Challenge with many different variations
In (Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012) a data set of sketches

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1124

