Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Training Watson - A Cognitive Systems Course
Michael Wollowski
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
wollowski@rose-hulman.edu

We developed a course in which students train an instance
of Watson and develop an application that interacts with the
trained instance. Additionally, students learn technical information about the Jeopardy! version of Watson and they
discuss a future infused with cognitive assistants. In this
poster, we justify this course, characterize major assessment
items and provide advice on choosing a domain.

papers and an IBM produced MOOC about Watson [IBM],
there is an opportunity to study key technologies underlying advanced Q/A systems.
There is a wild-held belief that cognitive assistants will
assume a significant role in our future. Studying Q/A systems like Watson enables us to critically examine some of
the claims made about them.

Introduction

Best Practices

IBM’s Watson captured the imagination of people during
the memorable match on Valentine’s Day of 2011. Personal assistants such as Siri, Google Now and Cortana are in
widespread use. The technologies and prospects of those
technologies are of interest to academia and industry alike.
We developed a course that enables students to develop
an application for IBM’s Watson, thereby studying Q/A
techniques from an applied perspective. The main activity
in this course is centered on training an instance of Watson.
IBM recommends a training set consisting of 300 – 400
answers and 4 - 5 questions for each answer, amounting to
1200 – 1600 question-answer pairs. Going through this
exercise is a valuable experience in determining the power
and limitations of one of the most powerful question answering system. We were told that the Jeopardy! version of
Watson was trained over a period of one year.
A second significant portion of the course is concerned
with developing students’ entrepreneurial skills. Since
Watson is relatively new, it is not uncommon for students
to develop an application that can be brought to market. In
addition to the excitement that exposure to the process of
taking a product to market brings, there is an opportunity
for students to learn about and practice the creative process
of developing new or improved products.
A third component of this course centers around studying technical details underlying Watson. Through technical

Perhaps the biggest challenge in teaching this course is to
manage expectations. To be precise, Watson is a questionanswering system. In particular, it is not a reasoning system. It cannot evaluate choices. This may change in the
future, but for now, the version of Watson to which students get access is the Q/A version.
A second, related challenge is the choice of a good domain. Watson requires a good amount of training. IBM
recommends the development of about 1200-1600 question-answer pairs. In essence, one trains Watson to learn
the way a user would ask a question. In a sense, Watson
enables the user to pose a question in 1,001 ways. Considering the relatively small number of answers, this suggests
that the domain ought to be fairly small.
The above exposition suggests another criterion for selecting a good domain: One in which people may not know
how to phrase a question in the first place. A good example
and one for which Watson is used in industry is customer
support.
The precision and recall of a Watson application is highly correlated to quality of the documents to be ingested. As
such, as good amount of time should be spent curating the
documents. In particular, the documents should have a
good amount of structure to them in the form of a title,
section and sub+-section headings. The information in the
headings should be relevant to the section body. Ideally,
the section heading is repeated in the section body. It is
perfectly fine to edit out information that is not pertinent to
the answers.

Abstract

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4136

