Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Evaluating the Robustness of Game
Theoretic Solutions When Using Abstraction
Oscar Veliz
University of Texas at El Paso
500 W. University Ave, El Paso, TX, 79968, USA
(915) 747-6373 osveliz@miners.utep.edu

Abstraction Meta-Games

Abstract

We ﬁrst introduce a formal model that can be used to study
the situation where players select strategies based on abstracted game models. Our model is based on the meta-game
framework introduced by Kiekintveld et al. (Kiekintveld and
Wellman 2008), which focused on situations where players
received noisy observations of the same underlying game
and had to select strategies based on these observations. The
situation where players use abstractions is similar in that
players make strategy choices based on imperfect game abstractions. Players may use different abstractions which may
cause problems for solutions that use coordination.

Game theory is a tool for modeling multi-agent decision problems and has been used to analyze strategies
in domains such as poker, security, and trading agents.
One method for solving very large games is to use abstraction techniques to shrink the game by removing detail, solve the reduced game, and then translate the solution back to the original game. We present a methodology for evaluating the robustness of different gametheoretic solution concepts to the errors introduced by
the abstraction process. We present an initial empirical study of the robustness of several solution methods
when using abstracted games.

Introduction
Games that model real world interactions are often complex, with huge numbers of possible strategies and information states. We are interested in better understanding the
effect of abstraction in game-theoretic analysis. In particular, we focus on the strategy selection problem: how should
an agent choose a strategy to play in a game, based on an
abstracted game model? This problem has three interacting
components: (1) the method for abstracting the game, (2) the
method for selecting a strategy based on the abstraction, and
(3) the method for mapping this strategy back to the original game. This approach has been studied extensively for
poker, which is a 2-player, zero-sum game. However, much
less is known about how abstraction interacts with strategy
selection in more general games.
The main contributions of our work are as follows. First,
we specify a model of the strategy selection problem when
players use asymmetric abstractions as a meta-game. In this
model players can use different methods for abstracting the
game, solving the game, and reverse-mapping the solution.
We introduce a collection of speciﬁc methods for abstracting
and solving games intended to be representative of popular
methods used in the literature. Finally, we present the results
of extensive tournament simulations of abstraction and solution methods which show show differences in robustness.

Figure 1: 2-players asymmetric abstractions
An example of an abstraction meta-game is shown in Figure 1. In this example, we have two players who are playing the one-shot normal form game shown at the top of the
ﬁgure; this is the base game. They each perform their own
(unspeciﬁed) abstraction to reduce the game. Then they both
solve their abstracted games using their own solution methods. If both players use Nash equilibrium their actions when
reversed mapped are A and H leading to -10,-10!

Abstraction and Solution Methods
We deﬁne an abstraction method as a function that maps
one normal-form game into a second (smaller) normal-form
game. We identify two broad categories of abstractions that
are common in the literature: strategy elimination and strategy combination. Strategy elimination abstractions remove
some strategies completely to reduce the size of the game.
Strategy combination simplify games by merging multiple
strategies into a single representative strategy. Our goal in

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4268

