Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Scalable and Extensible Framework
for Superposition-Structured Models
Shenjian Zhao and Cong Xie and Zhihua Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhao1014,xcgoner,zhihua}@sjtu.edu.cn

sparse group penalty (Zhou et al. 2012) when F is the difference matrix and Gj indicates the group.
Indeed, there are plenty of machine learning models,
which can be cast into the formulation in (1).
• Generalized lasso model: all generalized lasso models
such as the fused lasso (Tibshirani et al. 2005), the sparse
group lasso (Simon et al. 2013), the group lasso for logistic regression (Meier, Van De Geer, and Bühlmann 2008)
can be written as the following form:

Abstract
In many learning tasks, structural models usually lead
to better interpretability and higher generalization performance. In recent years, however, the simple structural models such as lasso are frequently proved to be
insufﬁcient. Accordingly, there has been a lot of work
on “superposition-structured” models where multiple
structural constraints are imposed. To efﬁciently solve
these “superposition-structured” statistical models, we
develop a framework based on a proximal Newtontype method. Employing the smoothed conic dual approach with the LBFGS updating formula, we propose a scalable and extensible proximal quasi-Newton
(SEP-QN) framework. Empirical analysis on various
datasets shows that our framework is potentially powerful, and achieves super-linear convergence rate for optimizing some popular “superposition-structured” statistical models such as the fused sparse group lasso.

1

minp f (x)  g(x) + λ1 Fx1 +

x∈R

minp f (x) 

x∈R

In this paper, we consider the “superposition-structured” statistical models (Yang and Ravikumar 2013) where multiple
structural constraints are imposed. Examples of such structural constraints include sparsity constraint, graph-structure,
group-structure, etc. We could leverage such structural constraints via speciﬁc regularization functions. Consequently,
many problems of relevance in “superposition-structured”
statistical learning can be formulated as minimizing a composite function:
min f (x)  g(x) + Ψ(x),

λj Gj x2 .

j=2

• Multi-task learning: given r tasks, each with sample matrix A(k) ∈ R(nk ×p) ( samples in the k-th task) and labels
y(k) , Jalali et al. proposed minimizing the following objective:

Introduction

x∈Rp

N


r


l(y(k) , A(k) (S(k) + B(k) ))

k=1

+ λ1 S1 + λ2 B1,∞ ,

(2)

where l(·) is the loss function and S(k) is the k-th column
of S. Besides, more multi-task learning like the model in
(Kim and Xing 2010) also could be cast into (1).
• Gaussian graphical model with latent variables: Chandrasekaran et al. showed that the precision matrix will
have a low rank + sparse structure when some random
variables are hidden, thus the “superposition-structured”
model will be much helpful.
Moreover, many real-world problems beneﬁt from these
models such as Gene expression, time-varying network and
disease progression. In this paper we mainly study the computational issue of the model in (1).
There are some generic methods that can be used to solve
these models theoretically. The CVX (Grant and Boyd 2014)
is able to solve these models, but it is not scalable. The
Primal-Dual approach proposed by Combettes and Pesquet
(2012) can deal with these models, but it converges slowly.
The smoothed conic dual (SCD) approach was studied in
(Lan, Lu, and Monteiro 2011; Nesterov 2005) and Becker,
Candès, and Grant (2012) could obtain O( 1 ) iterationcomplexity, but it needs to ﬁnd the minimizer related to

(1)

where g is a convex and continuously differentiable loss
function, and Ψ is a hybrid regularization, usually deﬁned
as sum of N convex (non-smooth) functions. More speciﬁcally,
N

ψi (Wi x + bi ),
Ψ(x) 
i=1

each ψi is convex but not necessarily differentiable, Wi ∈
Rqi ×p and bi ∈ Rqi are available. For example, Ψ(x) 
N −2
λ1 x1 + λ2 Fx1 + λ3 j=1 Gj x2 deﬁnes a fused
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2372

