Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Surprise-Triggered Reformulation of Design Goals
Kazjon Grace and Mary Lou Maher
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
{k.grace,m.maher}@uncc.edu

Pirolli 1992; Maher and Poon 1996; Maher et al. 1995;
Goel et al. 2014; Helms and Goel 2012; Wiltgen, Goel,
and Vattam 2011; Goel et al. 2012). These various models
are primarily concerned with knowledge representation and
generalized processes for design synthesis. While creating
and pursuing design goals is a critical part of the synthesis of potentially creative design solutions, there remains a
challenge of how to model the formation of new goals.
Cognitive studies of human creative design suggest
that problem decomposition, goal formulation and solution
search do not happen discretely and sequentially, but iteratively interact as designers re-interpret, re-formulate and
solve problems (Schön 1983; Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi
1976). One documented trigger of this iterative reformulation is unexpected discovery – the observation of a whole or
partial design of low prior likelihood (Suwa, Gero, and Purcell ). The discovery of unexpected elements within a design
has been shown to lead to the invention of new design requirements, which in turn lead to an increased chance of future unexpected discovery (Suwa, Gero, and Purcell 2000).
In human designers, the ability to surprise oneself with intermediate external representations (e.g. sketches) is not only
possible but highly desirable for creativity. We present a
computational model in which observing surprising designs
leads to reformulation of design goals. We do this by adopting a metacognitive perspective, in which designing occurs
at the cognitive level and surprise-triggered reformulation at
the metacognitive level.

Abstract
This paper presents a cognitive model of goal formulation in designing that is triggered by surprise. Cognitive
system approaches to design synthesis focus on generating alternative designs in response to design goals or
requirements. Few existing systems provide models for
how goals change during designing, a hallmark of creative design in humans. In this paper we present models of surprise and reformulation as metacognitive processes that transform design goals in order to explore
surprising regions of a design search space. The model
provides a system with speciﬁc goals for exploratory
behaviour, whereas previous systems have modelled exploration and novelty-seeking abstractly. We use observed designs to construct a probabilistic model that
represents expectations about the design domain, and
then reason about the unexpectedness of new designs
with that model. We implement our model in the domain of culinary creativity, and demonstrate how the
cognitive behaviors of surprise and problem reformulation can be incorporated into design reasoning.

Introduction
Designing presents unique challenges for cognitive systems:
problems are ill-deﬁned, solution spaces are very large, and
there is often an unstated goal that new designs are expected
to be creative. Creativity implies that a new design not just
be useful and/or appropriate, but novel as well (Newell,
Shaw, and Simon 1959; Boden 2003). Evaluating novelty
in creativity requires more than a distance measure in an
objective representation space. Novel designs induce surprise in observers given their past experiences with the design domain (Grace et al. 2015; 2014). Therefore evaluating
creativity is dependent on dynamic and complex contextual
factors, including the set of known past solutions to similar
problems. Recognising the creativity of a design is increasingly a problem approachable by data science – by extracting knowledge from large volumes of product data and using
it in the evaluation of novelty and value.
Cognitive models of creative designing that have inspired computational systems include: analogical reasoning,
case-based reasoning, bio-inspired design, and evolutionary design (Gero 1994; Gero and Maher 1993; Goel and

Background
AI approaches to design have been inspired by cognitive
models of human designers. Each of these models provides a
representation of design knowledge that has the potential to
generate creative designs, for example, by bringing knowledge from another domain (bio-inspired design, cross domain analogy) or by systematically combining components
in a design space (i.e. the space of all possible designs)
guided by a ﬁtness function (evolutionary design). However,
these models lack speciﬁcity in how to formulate new goals
in response to the search in the solutions space that can lead
to creative design solutions. In this section we review aspects
of cognitive systems that are the basis for our more complete
cognitive model that includes a metacognitive model of goal
reformulation for creative design.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3726

