Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A First-Order Logic of Probability and Only Knowing in Unbounded Domains
Vaishak Belle∗

Gerhard Lakemeyer†

Hector J. Levesque

Dept. of Computer Science
KU Leuven
Belgium

Dept. of Computer Science
RWTH Aachen University
Germany

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Canada

vaishak@cs.kuleuven.be

gerhard@cs.rwth-aachen.de

hector@cs.toronto.edu

Somewhat surprisingly, OL has a particularly simple semantics. A model, or an epistemic state, is simply a set of
worlds e, which satisﬁes only knowing a sentence α just
in case e is maximal, that is, adding any other world to e
would lead to not believing α any more. Here worlds are
simply truth assignments to atoms of a ﬁrst-order language
and believing is interpreted in the usual way as truth in all
worlds in e. Over the years, only knowing has been studied and extended in various ways, such as capturing defaults (Lakemeyer and Levesque 2005), modeling dynamical worlds (Lakemeyer and Levesque 2004), and reasoning about multiple agents (Halpern and Lakemeyer 2001;
Waaler and Solhaug 2005; Belle and Lakemeyer 2010).
Be that as it may, ﬁrst-order accounts of only knowing
have limited themselves to categorical knowledge, where a
formula φ is either known or not known. In many real-world
applications, it is not enough to deal with incomplete knowledge in that sense. Here, one must also know which of φ
or ¬φ is the more likely, and by how much. Similarly, in
a robotic setting (Bacchus, Halpern, and Levesque 1999),
some outcomes are more likely than others, perhaps due to
error prone actuators. Reasoning about probabilistic beliefs
is then a critical feature. To that end, it is natural to ask the
following: if all that is known is p, what is the degree of
belief in q? More generally, if a knowledge base includes
partial, incomplete or probabilistic speciﬁcations, what can
the agent be expected to believe?
In this work, we attempt a response to these questions by
proposing a ﬁrst-order account of subjective probability and
only knowing. The reasonableness of our proposal can be
evaluated in diﬀerent ways. At one extreme, belief is shown
to exhibit the usual properties of subjective probabilities
(Fagin and Halpern 1994). At the other extreme, the logic
is also shown to exhibit the properties of classical only
knowing as desired. Moreover, like OL, our account admits
a substitutional interpretation of quantiﬁers over an inﬁnite
domain, giving us a simple way to address issues such as
quantifying-in (Kaplan 1968). Perhaps most signiﬁcantly,
the properties of belief emerge as a logical consequence of
the sentences of the knowledge base at a corresponding level
of speciﬁcity. In particular, this will mean that for partial
and incomplete speciﬁcations, where a single probability
distribution would often not suﬃce, suitable beliefs are
nonetheless entailed.

Abstract
Only knowing captures the intuitive notion that the beliefs of
an agent are precisely those that follow from its knowledge
base. It has previously been shown to be useful in characterizing knowledge-based reasoners, especially in a quantiﬁed setting. While this allows us to reason about incomplete
knowledge in the sense of not knowing whether a formula is
true or not, there are many applications where one would like
to reason about the degree of belief in a formula. In this work,
we propose a new general ﬁrst-order account of probability
and only knowing that admits knowledge bases with incomplete and probabilistic speciﬁcations. Beliefs and non-beliefs
are then shown to emerge as a direct logical consequence of
the sentences of the knowledge base at a corresponding level
of speciﬁcity.

1

Introduction

When considering knowledge-based reasoners, it seems intuitive that the beliefs of the agent are those that follow from
the assumption that its knowledge base is all that is known.1
Levesque (Levesque 1990) was among the ﬁrst to capture
this idea in the logic of only knowing OL, where a modality
O is introduced in addition to the classical epistemic operator K. For example, from O p it follows that K p, but
more interestingly, it also follows that ¬Kq. This is diﬀerent from classical epistemic logic where K p does not preclude K(p ∧ q). Similarly, in a quantiﬁed setting, we get the
following valid sentence:
O(P(a) ∨ P(b)) ⊃ K(∃x[P(x) ∧ ¬KP(x)])
which says that “if all I know is P(a) or P(b) then I know
that there is an instance of P but not what.” In other words,
a precise characterization of the beliefs and the non-beliefs
of a knowledge-based reasoner can be given in a succinct
manner using only knowing. With this meta-knowledge, the
agent is then in a position to do something when its knowledge is incomplete, ask a question for example.
∗
Supported by the Research Foundation-Flanders (FWOVlaanderen).
†
Also aﬃliated with the University of Toronto.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, we do not distinguish between “knowledge” and
“belief” and freely use the terms interchangeably.

893

