Noisy Submodular Maximization via Adaptive Sampling
with Applications to Crowdsourced Image Collection Summarization
Adish Singla

Sebastian Tschiatschek

Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich
adish.singla@inf.ethz.ch

ETH Zurich
sebastian.tschiatschek@inf.ethz.ch

ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

like to select a small subset of these images that summarizes the theme Cathedrals in Venice, cf., Figure 1. We cast
this summarization task as the problem of maximizing a submodular set function f under cardinality constraints.
Submodular maximization. Usually, it is assumed that
f is known, i.e., f can be evaluated exactly by querying an
oracle. In this case, a greedy algorithm is typically used for
maximization. The greedy algorithm builds up a set of items
by picking those of highest marginal utility in every iteration, given the items selected that far. Despite its greedy nature, this algorithm provides the best constant factor approximation to the optimal solution computable in polynomial
time (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978).
Maximization under noise. However, in many realistic
applications, the function f is not known and can only be
evaluated up to (additive) noise. For instance, for the image summarization task, (repeatedly) querying users’ feedback in form of clicks or ratings on the individual images
or image-sets can provide such noisy evaluations. There are
other settings for which marginal gains are hard to compute exactly, e.g., computing marginal gains of nodes in viral marketing applications (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos
2003) or conditional information gains in feature selection
tasks (Krause and Guestrin 2005). In such cases, one can
apply a naive uniform sampling approach to estimate all
marginal gains up to some error  and apply the standard
greedy algorithm. While simple, this uniform sampling approach could have high sample complexity, rendering it impractical for real-world applications. In this work, we propose to use adaptive sampling strategies to reduce sample
complexity while maintaining high quality of the solutions.
Our approach for adaptive sampling. The ﬁrst key insight for efﬁcient adaptive sampling is that we need to estimate the marginal gains only up to the necessary conﬁdence
to decide for the best item to select next. However, if the difference in the marginal gains of the best item and the second
best item is small, this approach also suffers from high sample complexity. To overcome this, we exploit our second key
insight that instead of focusing on selecting the single best
item, it is sufﬁcient to select an item from a small subset of
any size l ∈ {1, . . . , k} of high quality items, where k is the
cardinality constraint. Based on these insights, we propose
a novel exploration module – T OP X – that proposes good
elements by adaptively sampling noisy function evaluations.

Abstract
We address the problem of maximizing an unknown
submodular function that can only be accessed via noisy
evaluations. Our work is motivated by the task of summarizing content, e.g., image collections, by leveraging
users’ feedback in form of clicks or ratings. For summarization tasks with the goal of maximizing coverage and diversity, submodular set functions are a natural choice. When the underlying submodular function
is unknown, users’ feedback can provide noisy evaluations of the function that we seek to maximize. We provide a generic algorithm – E XP G REEDY – for maximizing an unknown submodular function under cardinality
constraints. This algorithm makes use of a novel exploration module – T OP X – that proposes good elements
based on adaptively sampling noisy function evaluations. T OP X is able to accommodate different kinds of
observation models such as value queries and pairwise
comparisons. We provide PAC-style guarantees on the
quality and sampling cost of the solution obtained by
E XP G REEDY. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in an interactive, crowdsourced image collection summarization application.

Introduction
Many applications involve the selection of a subset of items,
e.g., summarization of content on the web. Typically, the
task is to select a subset of items of limited cardinality with
the goal of maximizing their utility. This utility is often measured via properties like diversity, information, relevance or
coverage. Submodular set functions naturally capture the
fore-mentioned notions of utility. Intuitively, submodular
functions are set functions that satisfy a natural diminishing returns property. They have been widely used in diverse
applications, including content summarization and recommendations, sensor placement, viral marketing, and numerous machine learning and computer vision tasks (Krause and
Guestrin 2008; Bilmes 2015).
Summarization of image collections. One of the motivating applications, which is the subject of our experimental
evaluation, is summarization of image collections. Given a
collection of images, say, from Venice on Flickr, we would
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2037

