Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Efﬁcient Macroscopic Urban Trafﬁc Models
for Reducing Congestion: A PDDL+ Planning Approach
Mauro Vallati

Daniele Magazzeni

Bart De Schutter

School of Computing and Engineering
University of Huddersﬁeld, UK

Department of Informatics
King’s College London, UK

Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands

Lukáš Chrpa and Thomas L. McCluskey
School of Computing and Engineering
University of Huddersﬁeld, UK
approaches –such as SCOOT (Bretherton 1989) or SCATS
(Lowrie 1982)– are based on simple models of trafﬁc within
a small cluster of trafﬁc lights, and thus are faster and can
adapt to changes of trafﬁc ﬂows in their local area. Both approaches are not designed to work adequately in the face
of unplanned exceptional events, such as when roads have
been blocked due to car accidents or weather-related events.
Model-based predictive approaches are computationally expensive and usually slow to converge, thus requiring up to
several hours for providing a strategy to be applied. Conversely, reactive models are extremely quick, but they rely
on pre-computed knowledge and very simpliﬁed trafﬁc models; therefore, the generated strategies are not so effective.

Abstract
The global growth in urbanisation increases the demand for services including road transport infrastructure, presenting challenges in terms of mobility. In
this scenario, optimising the exploitation of urban road
networks is a pivotal challenge. Existing urban trafﬁc control approaches, based on complex mathematical models, can effectively deal with planned-ahead
events, but are not able to cope with unexpected situations –such as roads blocked due to car accidents or
weather-related events– because of their huge computational requirements. Therefore, such unexpected situations are mainly dealt with manually, or by exploiting
pre-computed policies.
Our goal is to show the feasibility of using mixed
discrete-continuous planning to deal with unexpected
circumstances in urban trafﬁc control. We present a
PDDL+ formulation of urban trafﬁc control, where continuous processes are used to model ﬂows of cars, and
show how planning can be used to efﬁciently reduce
congestion of speciﬁed roads by controlling trafﬁc light
green phases. We present simulation results on two networks (one of them considers Manchester city centre)
that demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach, compared with ﬁxed-time and reactive techniques.

Whereas there has been a long record of the use of AI
techniques in road transportation (Various 2007; Miles and
Walker 2006), there has been little application of AI Planning and Scheduling techniques to UTC. With an adequate
description of the world and in particular of valid control actions, however, we conjecture that centralised automated planning techniques can deal with exceptional events
and multi-objective optimisation by generating an effective plan for trafﬁc light changes. Recently, the beneﬁts of
such planning-based approaches for supporting trafﬁc control have been argued. For instance, Jimoh et al. (2013)
introduced the idea of using automated planning in UTC
as a planning aid to be used in exceptional circumstances,
e.g. in situations where roads within a network of roads
become blocked due to some unanticipated incident. However, they assume that each vehicle can be directed by the
planner –thus limiting scalability–, and will follow instructions given. Shah et al. (2013) provided a model for dealing with road trafﬁc accident management. A scheduling
approach (called SURTRAC) has been proposed by Xie,
Smith, and Barlow (2012). They focused on the exploitation of decentralised scheduling techniques to synchronise a
group of trafﬁc light clusters. Each intersection is controlled
by a scheduling agent that communicates with neighbours
to predict the future trafﬁc demand, and to minimise predicted vehicles waiting time at the trafﬁc signal. The interested reader is referred to a recent survey of planning and
scheduling approaches applied to trafﬁc management (Cenamor et al. 2014).

Introduction
In the 21st Century the world’s population is expected to
increase –from 5.9bn in 2013 to 9.6bn by 2100– and to become more urbanised. This huge growth increases the demand for housing, as well as associated utilities and services
including transport infrastructure, vehicle parking and public transport.
Current urban trafﬁc control (UTC) techniques help to
minimise delay within day to day trafﬁc ﬂows, by providing strategies for trafﬁc light phases, and are very effective
in planned or typical conditions. UTC methods follow two
main directions: model-based predictive approaches (Papageorgiou et al. 2007) and reactive approaches. The former
are based on complex mathematical models, amounting to
the solution of thousands of equations. Conversely, reactive
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3188

