Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Selectively Reactive Coordination for a Team of Robot Soccer Champions
Juan Pablo Mendoza, Joydeep Biswas, Philip Cooksey, Richard Wang,
Steven Klee, Danny Zhu and Manuela Veloso
School of Computer Science. Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue. Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

game conditions and rules change to increase the difﬁculty
of the problem and challenge the autonomous planning algorithms (Weitzenfeld et al. 2015). This year, the CMDragons
(see Figure 1), composed of the same robot hardware for
the last 10 years, won the competition, scoring 48 goals and
suffering 0 goals in 6 games. This level of performance had
never been reached before in the league. While various defense and offense algorithms contributed to our result (Mendoza et al. 2015), we strongly credit our new coordinated,
aggressive, and continuous attack, which we present here.

Abstract
CMDragons 2015 is the champion of the RoboCup
Small Size League of autonomous robot soccer. The
team won all of its six games, scoring a total of 48
goals and conceding 0. This unprecedented dominant
performance is the result of various features, but we
particularly credit our novel offense multi-robot coordination. This paper thus presents our Selectively Reactive Coordination (SRC) algorithm, consisting of two
layers: A coordinated opponent-agnostic layer enables
the team to create its own plans, setting the pace of the
game in offense. An individual opponent-reactive action selection layer enables the robots to maintain reactivity to different opponents. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our coordination through results from
RoboCup 2015, and through controlled experiments using a physics-based simulator and an automated referee.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: All the CMDragons 2015 robots (6 play at a time),
champions of the RoboCup Small Size League of robot soccer. (Hardware designed and built by Mike Licitra, and
carefully maintained by Joydeep Biswas and Richard Wang.)

The RoboCup 2015 robot soccer Small-Size League (SSL)
consists of teams of six autonomous robots playing on a ﬁeld
of 9m×6m, with overhead cameras that observe the pose
of the twelve players and of the orange golf ball used to
play. These observations (gathered at 60Hz) are passed to
each team’s computer (Zickler et al. 2010), which runs the
planning algorithms to choose actions for each individual
team robot. Such actions are sent by radio (at 60Hz) to the
robots for execution. The RoboCup SSL is a very complex
multi-robot planning problem with clear goals to achieve, in
a fast-paced adversarial environment, with inevitably nondeterministic real physical sensing and execution.
Many researchers, present authors included, have worked
on this research problem (Veloso, Stone, and Han 2000;
Veloso, Bowling, and Stone 2000; D’Andrea 2005; Bruce
et al. 2008; Sukvichai, Ariyachartphadungkit, and Chaiso
2012; Li et al. 2015), making contributions in real-time
sensing (Bruce and Veloso 2003) and control (Behnke et
al. 2004), planning (Zickler and Veloso 2009), and teamwork (Stone and Veloso 1999), which have enabled the current RoboCup SSL games to be a fascinating demonstration of effective AI multi-robot planning algorithms under
signiﬁcant uncertainty. Every year, teams improve and the

In this paper, we contribute our Selectively Reactive Coordination (SRC) approach to tractably and effectively solve
the coordinated soccer offense problem. Our SRC algorithm is composed of two layers: The coordinated opponentagnostic layer enables the team to conduct potentially expensive optimizations ofﬂine to ﬁnd multi-robot team plans
that generally perform well. The individual opponentreactive action selection layer is highly reactive to opponents within the constraints imposed by the coordination
layer plans, and thus enables the team to adapt appropriately
to opponent behavior.
While robot soccer is a speciﬁc planning problem, we believe many of the ideas we present generalize to other dynamic multi-robot domains –e.g., capture-the-ﬂag (Atkin,
Westbrook, and Cohen 1999), keepaway (Stone et al. 2006),
rescue planning (Jennings, Whelan, and Evans 1997), and
team patrolling (Agmon et al. 2008)– in which robots balance executing an agreed-upon team plan with reacting to
changes in the environment. We hope that this paper inspires
others to pursue the robot soccer problem, or to apply or extend our algorithms to other dynamic multi-robot domains.

c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3354

