Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Mapping Action Language BC to Logic
Programs: A Characterization by Postulates
Haodi Zhang and Fangzhen Lin
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clearwater Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong

Abstract

The use of the default negation operator in (2) makes it
stronger than (1) in the sense that (2) can be applied even
when (1) cannot. For instance, the singleton program {p ←
q} has the empty set as its only answer set, but the singleton
program {p ← not ¬q} has {p} as its only answer set.
While these rules can be interpreted by either B’s semantics or C’s semantics, they cannot be mixed. This is reﬂected
in incompatible sets of postulates that we used for capturing
B and C in (Zhang and Lin 2015). However, this presents a
problem if one tries to capture the language BC (Lee, Lifschitz, and Yang 2013). In BC, a static causal rule has the
form:

We have earlier shown that the standard mappings from action languages B and C to logic programs under answer set
semantics can be captured by sets of properties on transition
systems. In this paper, we consider action language BC and
show that a standard mapping from BC action descriptions
to logic programs can be similarly captured when the action
rules in the descriptions do not have consistency conditions.

Introduction
Logical formalization of the effects of actions has been a
main concern in knowledge representation (e.g. (McCarthy
and Hayes 1969; Fikes and Nilsson 1971; McCarthy 1977;
Finger 1987; McCarthy 1980; Reiter 1980)). There been
many approaches proposed (e.g. (McCarthy and Hayes
1969; McCarthy 1980; Lifschitz 1987; Reiter 1991; Shanahan 1995; Lin 1995; McCain and Turner 1995; Thielscher
1998; Giunchiglia et al. 2004)). In this paper we consider
various action languages (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1993; 1998;
Giunchiglia and Lifschitz 1998; Lee, Lifschitz, and Yang
2013).
Recently Zhang and Lin (2015) proposed a set of properties for characterizing action languages B (Gelfond and
Lifschitz 1998) and C (Giunchiglia and Lifschitz 1998).
They considered static causal rules of the form (l, G), where
l is a ﬂuent literal and G a set of ﬂuent literals. What
these rules mean depends on the underlying semantics, and
is best understood by a mapping to logic programs under the answer set semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988;
1991). When these rules are interpreted under the B semantics, a rule like (l, G) corresponds to the logic program rule
l ← G ,

l if G ifcons H,

and means that in every state, if G and it is consistent to
assume H, then l. This is like a default rule (Reiter 1980)
with G as premises and H justiﬁcations. In terms of logic
programs, such a rule is translated as
l ← G, not not H
or
l ← G, not H
using strong negation. Thus the semantics of BC is a combination of B and C: G is translated according to B while H
according to C. However, given that a static causal rule in
(Zhang and Lin 2015) is a pair (l, G), the semantics of BC
cannot be captured in their framework.
To address this problem, we propose to extend static
causal rules in (Zhang and Lin 2015) to triples (l, G, H),
with G as premises and H justiﬁcations. We’ll show with
this extension, the mixed semantics of BC on static causal
rules can be similarly characterized.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First we
introduce the syntax of our causal action theories. We then
relate these theories to BC action descriptions, and this provides the BC semantics to these theories. We then formulate four properties on transition systems and show that they
are all satisﬁed by the BC semantics. We then show that
these four properties provide a unique characterization of
the BC semantics under the so-called permissible mappings.
We then relate our result to those in (Zhang and Lin 2015)
for action languages B and C, and conclude the paper.

(1)

where the primed propositions represent the truth values of
the corresponding ﬂuents in the successor states. If they are
interpreted under the C semantics, a rule like (l, G) corresponds to the logic program rule
l ← not G ,

(3)

(2)

where G denotes the set of complements of the literals in


G . The differences between these two types of logic program rules under the answer set semantics are well-known.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1116

