Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Incentives for Strategic Behavior in Fisher Market Games
Ning Chen

Xiaotie Deng

Bo Tang

Division of Mathematical Sciences
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Department of Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK

Hongyang Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University, USA
However, there is a major issue on the application of market equilibrium in that it has not taken strategic behavior of
the participants into consideration: In a Fisher market, market equilibrium prices and associated allocations, computed
in terms of utility functions and money endowments, may
change even if one participant has a change in its utility function or endowment. Hence, one may misreport his private
information if it results in a favorable solution.
Example 1. Consider a market with two items and two
buyers with endowments (, 1 − ) and utility functions
u1 (x, y) = x+(1−)y, u2 (x, y) = 2 x+(1−2 )y, respectively. When both buyers report truthfully, the equilibrium
price is p = (, 1 − ) and the ﬁrst player gets all fraction of
the ﬁrst item with utility . If the ﬁrst buyer strategically reports u1 = u2 , then the equilibrium price is p = (2 , 1−2 )
and he gets the bundle with x = 1, y = /(1 + ) for which
his utility is (1 + (1 − )/(1 + )). When  = 1/2, the ﬁrst
player improves his utility from 1/2 to 5/6. When  goes to
0, he doubles his utility from  to a value close to 2.
Based on this observation, Adsul et al. (2010) formulated
the Fisher market game and studied the strategic behaviors
by examining the induced Nash equilibrium. Nonetheless,
the investigation on Nash equilibrium suffers from two major drawbacks. Nash equilibrium is shown to be computationally intractable (Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009), even for two-player games (Chen, Deng, and
Teng 2009) or within a small constant approximation factor (Rubinstein 2015). Even if equilibria can be computed
efﬁciently, a recent work by Brânzei et al. (2014) shows that
their social welfare might be far from the one in market under truthfully reporting.
In this paper, we quantitatively measure a buyer’s utility
gain by strategic plays by adopting the notion of incentive
ratio (Chen, Deng, and Zhang 2011). Incentive ratio is deﬁned as the factor of the largest possible utility gain that a
participant can achieve by behaving strategically, given that
all other participants have their strategies unchanged. Incentive ratio characterizes the extent to which utilities can be increased by strategic manipulations. A smaller incentive ratio
implies that a buyer has less incentive to inﬂuence the market price formation through (complicated) strategic considerations by a signiﬁcant effort to collect all utility functions
of other market participants.
First of all, we consider a widely studied class of weak

Abstract
In a Fisher market game, a market equilibrium is computed
in terms of the utility functions and money endowments that
agents reported. As a consequence, an individual buyer may
misreport his private information to obtain a utility gain. We
investigate the extent to which an agent’s utility can be increased by unilateral strategic plays and prove that the percentage of this improvement is at most 2 for markets with
weak gross substitute utilities. Equivalently, we show that
truthfully reporting is a 0.5-approximate Nash equilibrium in
this game. To identify sufﬁcient conditions for truthfully reporting being close to Nash equilibrium, we conduct a parameterized study on strategic behaviors and further show
that the ratio of utility gain decreases linearly as buyer’s
initial endowment increases or his maximum share of an
item decreases. Finally, we consider collusive behavior of
a coalition and prove that the utility gain is bounded by
1/(1 − maximum share of the collusion). Our ﬁndings justify the truthful reporting assumption in Fisher markets by a
quantitative study on participants incentive, and imply that
under large market assumption, the utility gain of a buyer
from manipulations diminishes to 0.

Introduction
The Internet and World Wide Web have created a possibility for buyers and sellers to meet at a marketplace in which
pricing and allocations can be determined more efﬁciently
and effectively than ever before. Market equilibrium, a vital notion in classic economic theory, ensures optimum fairness and efﬁciency and has become a paradigm for practical
applications in computer science. Understanding its properties and computation has been one of the central questions
in economics and computer science. In this paper, we consider the Fisher market model (Brainard and Scarf 2000),
in which a market maker sells divisible items of unit supply each to potential buyers, each endowed with an initially
amount of cash and a utility function. At a market equilibrium, all products are sold out, all cash is spent, and, most
importantly, the set of items purchased by each buyer maximizes his utility for the given equilibrium prices constrained
by his initial endowment. It has been shown that a market
equilibrium always exists given mild assumptions (Arrow
and Debreu 1954).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

453

