Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Understanding Emerging Spatial Entities
Jinyoung Yeo, Jin-woo Park

Seung-won Hwang

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{jinyeo, jwpark85}@postech.ac.kr

Yonsei University
seungwonh@yonsei.ac.kr

• [C2] Vocabulary mismatch: People tend to use various
“synonymous” tags, which refer to the same SE but cannot be matched with its queried ofﬁcial SE name.

Abstract
In Foursquare or Google+ Local, emerging spatial entities,
such as new business or venue, are reported to grow by 1%
every day. As information on such spatial entities is initially
limited (e.g., only name), we need to quickly harvest related
information from social media such as Flickr photos. Especially, achieving high-recall in photo population is essential
for emerging spatial entities, which suffer from data sparseness (e.g., 71% restaurants of TripAdvisor in Seattle do not
have any photo, as of Sep 03, 2015). Our goal is thus to
address this limitation by identifying effective linking techniques for emerging spatial entities and photos. Compared
with state-of-the-art baselines, our proposed approach improves recall and F1 score by up to 24% and 18%, respectively. To show the effectiveness and robustness of our approach, we have conducted extensive experiments in three
different cities, Seattle, Washington D.C., and Taipei, of varying characteristics such as geographical density and language.

An existing solution for improving recall is clustering duplicate or near-duplicate photos to collect missing or synonymous tags (which we use as a baseline in this work).
We propose a more systematic way to tackle the aforementioned two challenges and achieve signiﬁcantly higher recall
over baselines (up to 24.3% in Table 2). This recall gain is
critical in many applications– F1 score of SE type categorization (Srihari, Niu, and Li 2000; Wang et al. 2012) using
photos is improved by 7.7% (Table 7).
In particular, we address C1 and C2 in the following three
novel ways:
First, we infer missing tags by propagating tags among
duplicate/near-duplicate “photo clusters” referring to the
same SE. To infer such relations, existing related methods
adopt geo-spatial (Crandall et al. 2009), visual (Zheng et al.
2009), and/or textual (Belém et al. 2011) signals among single photos. We later emprically show that our systematic aggregation of these three signals is signiﬁcantly superior to a
naive combination baseline (Figure 1).

Introduction
New business and venue open daily, as reported to be 1%
of knowledge bases (KBs) on spatial entities (SEs) such as
Foursquare and Google+ Local. However, KB pages of a
new place are often non-existent or near-empty (only name
and location are known). Thus, users cannot obtain information about new places, until expert or non-expert volunteers
visit the places and annotate their KB pages, which may
take from a few days to a few years. Meanwhile, such new
arrivals create attention rather immediately in social media
that users post image and text to share their experiences and
interests, which can be considered as a passive annotation.
Our research question is thus to automatically populate
empty KB pages by such photos uploaded on social media
sites. A naive idea is querying SE names (e.g., ‘McCaw Hall
Prelude’) to Flickr (Wang et al. 2012), using location as an
additional feature to disambiguate (Packer et al. 2012). This
method is highly precise but suffers from low recall. In contrast, we propose high-recall approaches, tackling the following two causes of low recall.

Second, we mine a large Flickr corpus to obtain highquality synonyms. Existing related methods (Cheng, Lauw,
and Paparizos 2012; Jiang et al. 2013) leverage term cooccurrence patterns in text documents, as an evidence of
synonymous term pairs. In contrast, we use image and location signals, which can be mined from photos shooting
the same SE, to extract higher-quality synonyms in usergenerated tags. We show that aggregating these signals is
effective to expand SE names for photo population (Table 3
and Figure 2).
Lastly, we observe the mutually reinforcing nature of the
above two approaches to combine them into an iterative
framework for photo population. The key contributions of
this framework is to improve trade-off between precision
and recall (Figure 3) and show consistent performance in
cities of varying geographic density of SEs, language, and
popularity of SEs (Table 4-6 and Figure 4).

• [C1] Tag sparsity: Web photos may be poorly tagged or
often have no “identifying” tag such as SE name.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

301

