Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bagging Ensembles for the Diagnosis and Prognostication of Alzheimer’s Disease
Peng Dai, Femida Gwadry-Sridhar, Michael Bauer Michael Borrie, for the ADNI∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
and Robarts Research
London, ON, Canada
{pdai5, fgwadrys, bauer}@uwo.ca

Division of Geriatric Medicine
University of Western Ontario
London, ON, Canada
michael.borrie@sjhc.london.on.ca

the presence of dementia, amnesia and a deﬁcit in one or
more cognitive functions. AD is typically present with subtle recent memory loss and subsequent progressive memory
impairment, followed by global cognitive decline and death.
Increasingly, more evidence points to the fact that AD can be
active several years prior to appearance of any signs of cognitive defects (WHO 2012). Consequently, there is a pressing need to identify AD at an earlier stage in order to ensure
that treatment can be initiated early, where it may have a
greater chance of success in delaying disease progression.
The diagnosis of AD is complex which involves a variety of medical tests including physical exam, neurological
exam, mental status tests and brain imaging. Clinicians usually assess these factors based on personal experience and
subjective assessment. The development of machine learning algorithms offers the potential for diagnostically relevant
analysis techniques, which can assist the clinicians to better understand the information underlying the medical variables. Automatic diagnosis of AD can be formulated as a
multiclass classiﬁcation problem. It is particularly challenging due to the inherent difﬁculty in distinguishing between
normal aging, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and early
signs of AD. Besides, with the advancement of medical technology, a large amount of medical test data are available for
the analysis of AD, including Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), Positron emission tomography (PET) scan, gene sequence, etc. The medical test data are multivariate heterogeneous, which makes comparison and analysis highly challenging.
In this paper, we propose a general framework for the diagnosis and (progression) prediction of Alzheimer’s disease
based on Bagging trees ensemble. A hybrid manifold learning algorithm is proposed for feature embedding, which is
based on an optimal neighborhood similarity graph generated by the Probabilistic Global Distance Metric Learning
(PGDM) (Xing et al. 2003). Thus, the multivariate arbitrary
length data sequences are embedded into a manifold that has
all the local properties of Euclidean space. Then, the bagging trees algorithm is used for classiﬁcation, i.e. automatic
diagnosis and AD progression prediction. Another important contribution of our work is the analysis of how various
regions of the brain changes while the patient develops AD.
Alzheimer’s disease is closely related to the atrophy of various brain regions. Our analysis is based on both intra- and

Abstract
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease, which involves the degeneration of various brain functions, resulting in memory loss, cognitive disorder and death.
Large amounts of multivariate heterogeneous medical test
data are available for the analysis of brain deterioration. How
to measure the deterioration remains a challenging problem.
In this study, we ﬁrst investigate how different regions of the
human brain change as the patient develops AD. Correlation
analysis and feature ranking are performed based on the feature vectors from different stages of the pathologic process
in Alzheimer disease. Then, an automatic diagnosis system
is presented, which is based on a hybrid manifold learning
for feature embedding and the bootstrap aggregating (Bagging) algorithm for classiﬁcation. We investigate two different tasks, i.e. diagnosis and progression prediction. Extensive comparison is made against Support Vector Machines
(SVM), Random Forest (RF), Decision Tree (DT) and Random Subspace (RS) methods. Experimental results show that
our proposed algorithm yields superior results when compared to the other methods, suggesting promising robustness
for possible clinical applications.

Introduction
Alzheimers disease (AD) is a genetically complex, progressive and fatal neurodegenerative disease. According to the
2014 World Alzheimer report, there are an estimated 44 million people worldwide living with dementia with about 60%
of the cases having Alzheimers disease at a total cost of over
US$605 billion (WHO 2012). The disease presents tremendous challenges to public health, health care delivery, social
services, and to the family. It is well known that the initial
AD pathology develops in situ while the patient is cognitively normal. At some point in time, sufﬁcient brain damage accumulates to result in cognitive symptoms and impairment. Clinical diagnosis of AD often includes establishing
∗
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from
the Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database
(adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI
contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3944

