Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

‘Knowing Whether’ in Proper Epistemic Knowledge Bases
Tim Miller, Paolo Felli, Christian Muise, Adrian R. Pearce, Liz Sonenberg
Department of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne
{tmiller,paolo.felli,christian.muise,adrianrp,l.sonenberg}@unimelb.edu.au

can be done in polynomial time without the expensive precompilation step. In both cases, entailment queries are complete for a reasonably large set of arbitrary modal logic formula, and sound for any query. Muise et al. (2015a) used this
to compile a multi-agent epistemic planning problem into a
classical planning problem, allowing plan and policy generation over multi-agent epistemic states.
The lack of disjunction is a restriction that is acceptable
for some scenarios, but clearly not all; however extending PEKBs to include disjunction would eliminate the desirable computational properties. We believe the next best
opportunity is to include a restricted form of disjunction:
‘knowing whether’. An agent knows whether ϕ is true —
or in the case of belief logics, is opinionated as to whether
ϕ is true — if they know ϕ or they know ¬ϕ. Formally,
i ϕ ∨ i ¬ϕ. The ability to model ‘knowing whether’ is
useful in many domains, such as for action preconditions in
planning (Scherl and Levesque 1993), diagnostic planning
applications (Baier, Mombourquette, and McIlraith 2014),
and in scenarios such as gossip (van Ditmarsch and Kooi
2015), muddy children (Fagin et al. 1995), and questioning
(Aloni, Egré, and De Jager 2013). In particular, ‘knowing
whether’ is useful in multi-agent domains in which agents
know (or observe) that events occur without observing the
outcome of the event itself. Consider the following scenario
involving multi-vehicle search and rescue. If one unmanned
vehicle (vehicle 1) has surveyed a sequence of points looking for survivors, we know that the vehicle knows whether
there are survivors at surveyed points. If another vehicle (vehicle 2) observes a survivor at point A in the sequence, it
can then infer that the ﬁrst vehicle knows that there is a
survivor ((1 survivor ∨ 1 ¬survivor) ∧ 2 survivor ⊃
1 survivor) and may assume that vehicle 1 has returned to
base to report without ﬁnishing its survey, as pre-scripted.
Vehicle 2 can now re-plan that: (a) it should survey the remaining points; and (b) it need not enact a rescue plan. Without being able to represent that vehicle 1 knows whether
there is a survivor at point A, vehicle 2 cannot infer this
without regressing “into the past”, because it does not have
1 survivor ∨ 1 ¬survivor in its knowledge base, so cannot infer that 1 survivor. In our experience modelling real
applications, the lack of disjunction in knowledge bases has
only been problematic for these ‘knowing whether’ cases.
In this paper, we extend PEKBs to include knowing

Abstract
Proper epistemic knowledge bases (PEKBs) are syntactic
knowledge bases that use multi-agent epistemic logic to represent nested multi-agent knowledge and belief. PEKBs have
certain syntactic restrictions that lead to desirable computational properties; primarily, a PEKB is a conjunction of modal
literals, and therefore contains no disjunction. Sound entailment can be checked in polynomial time, and is complete for
a large set of arbitrary formulae in logics Kn and KDn . In
this paper, we extend PEKBs to deal with a restricted form of
disjunction: ‘knowing whether’. An agent i knows whether ϕ
iff agent i knows ϕ or knows ¬ϕ; that is, i ϕ ∨ i ¬ϕ. In
our experience, the ability to represent that an agent knows
whether something holds is useful in many multi-agent domains. We represent knowing whether with a modal operator, Δi , and present sound polynomial-time entailment algorithms on PEKBs with Δi in Kn and KDn , but which are
complete for a smaller class of queries than standard PEKBs.

Introduction
Reasoning about the nested beliefs or knowledge of other
agents is essential for many collaborative and competitive
tasks. While highly expressive doxastic and epistemic logics
exist for this (Fagin et al. 1995), such logics are computationally expensive. To implement agents that can efﬁciently
reason about other agents in complex scenarios, approximations of these logics are necessary in many cases.
Proper epistemic knowledge bases (PEKBs), proposed by
Lakemeyer and Lespérance (2012), are one such approximation. PEKBs are syntactic knowledge bases that contain sets
of restricted modal literals (RMLs), which are modal literals that contain no conjunction or disjunction. Lakemeyer
and Lespérance (2012) show that, for the epistemic logic
Kn , a PEKB can be compiled in exponential time into a
special normal form, called prime implicate normal form
(PINF), which is logically equivalent to the original PEKB,
and database-like entailment queries can be made on these
compiled form formulae in polynomial time. Muise et al.
(2015b) extended this work to show that, if the knowledge
base is known to be consistent, for example due to the use
of a sound belief update operator, then entailment queries
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1044

