Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Optimizing Resilience in Large Scale Networks
Xiaojian Wu,1 Daniel Sheldon,1,2 Shlomo Zilberstein,1
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA 01075, USA
{xiaojian,sheldon,shlomo}@cs.umass.edu

a subset of edges to invest in so that the total expected travel
time between a set of origin/destination (o/d) pairs is minimized. Optimization algorithms for PTNP have been developed and applied to practical problems.
Previous works, however, suffer from two signiﬁcant limitations. First, the assumption that an edge has only two
states—passable or impassable—is limiting. For example,
a malfunctioning culvert may not disconnect the road completely, but can cause trafﬁc to experience a certain amount
of delay. Hence, edge lengths can take on multiple different values. Second, although existing algorithms can produce optimal solutions, they can only scale up to networks of
1000 edges and 5 o/d pairs (Schichl and Sellmann 2015). In
our application, the network contains 55687 edges and 5504
pairs. Existing algorithms do not scale to networks of this
size and cannot handle edges with multiple possible lengths.
To address the above limitations, we ﬁrst formulate a more general problem called Generalized Predisaster Transportation Network Preparation (GPTNP). Unlike PTNP, the problem is deﬁned on directed graphs, which
are a better model for road networks. The length of an edge
is a random variable with domain [0, ∞] where ∞ means
that the edge is impassable. The investment on an edge
makes its length stochastically shorter. This general deﬁnition allows us to model richer and more practical situations.
We then create a very fast algorithm, based on the sample average approximation (SAA) (Sheldon et al. 2010;
Wu, Sheldon, and Zilberstein 2015) and network design algorithms, to compute a high quality solution for the GPTNP
problem in large-scale networks. In our algorithm, we recast
the GPTNP problem as a deterministic optimization problem using the SAA method and a novel sampling procedure.
With enough samples, the optimal solution to the deterministic problem approaches the optimal solution of the GPTNP
problem (Kleywegt, Shapiro, and Homem-de Mello 2002).
Then, the deterministic problem is formulated as a novel network design problem called Budget Set Weighted Shortest
Path Steiner Graph (BSW-SPSG), composed of a directed
graph and a budget limit. The goal is to purchase sets of
edges to minimize the total shortest path length between a
number of o/d pairs, subject to a budget constraint.
The BSW-SPSG problem is NP-hard and, more importantly, the size of the constructed problem is usually very
large. Consequently, even a greedy heuristic is too slow

Abstract
We propose a decision making framework to optimize the resilience of road networks to natural disasters such as ﬂoods.
Our model generalizes an existing one for this problem by allowing roads with a broad class of stochastic delay models.
We then present a fast algorithm based on the sample average
approximation (SAA) method and network design techniques
to solve this problem approximately. On a small existing
benchmark, our algorithm produces near-optimal solutions
and the SAA method converges quickly with a small number
of samples. We then apply our algorithm to a large real-world
problem to optimize the resilience of a road network to failures of stream crossing structures to minimize travel times of
emergency medical service vehicles. On medium-sized networks, our algorithm obtains solutions of comparable quality
to a greedy baseline method but is 30–60 times faster. Our
algorithm is the only existing algorithm that can scale to the
full network, which has many thousands of edges.

Introduction
We study the problem of optimizing the resilience of networks to various types of failures. Our approach applies to
both digital networks (e.g., communication networks) and
physical networks (e.g., road networks). In this paper, we
focus on the latter, and describe a method to help decision
makers use a limited budget to reinforce roads and make
them more resistant to damage from ﬂoods. According to
a recent report (Hallegatte et al. 2013), ﬂood damages for
the 136 largest coastal cities around the globe could cost $1
trillion per year by 2050 without taking protective measures.
Developing computational tools to help combat this problem
is therefore an important task.
This challenge has been tackled in the past, most notably as the Pre-disaster Transportation Network Preparation (PTNP) problem (Peeta et al. 2010; Schichl and Sellmann 2015). In this problem, an undirected graph is given
where edges represent road segments and vertices represent
intersections of multiple roads. Each edge has a ﬁxed travel
time (or length) and can survive the disaster with a certain
probability. If a road segment fails, it becomes impassable.
Pre-disaster investment can increase the survival probability
of a road segment. Given a budget limit, the goal is to select
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3922

