Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Discourse Relations Detection via a
Mixed Generative-Discriminative Framework
Jifan Chen, Qi Zhang, Pengfei Liu, Xuanjing Huang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, P.R.China
jfchen14, qz, pﬂiu14, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
and capture than sentence-level parsing. Most of the works
mentioned above treated the task as a supervised classiﬁcation problem and used linguistic features relating to words
and other syntax-related cues to perform the task.
Recently, methods for learning continuous word representations have succeeded in capturing semantic and syntactic
regularities using vector arithmetic (Pennington, Socher, and
Manning 2014). Mikolov et al. (2013) introduced an interesting observation about word analogies. For example:

Abstract
Word embeddings, which can better capture the ﬁne-grained
semantics of words, have proven to be useful for a variety of natural language processing tasks. However, because
discourse structures describe the relationships between segments of discourse, word embeddings cannot be directly integrated to perform the task. In this paper, we introduce a
mixed generative-discriminative framework, in which we use
vector offsets between embeddings of words to represent the
semantic relations between text segments and Fisher kernel
framework to convert a variable number of vector offsets into
a ﬁxed length vector. In order to incorporate the weights of
these offsets into the vector, we also propose the Weighted
Fisher Vector. Experimental results on two different datasets
show that the proposed method without using manually designed features can achieve better performance on recognizing the discourse level relations in most cases.

v(king) − v(queen) ≈ v(man) − v(woman)
v(·) denotes the embedding of a word. This indicates that
vector offsets in embedding space can represent the shared
semantic relations between word pairs. Many existing works
also show that hidden relation between words can be represented by the vector arithmetic (Pennington, Socher, and
Manning 2014; Fu et al. 2014). Thus, it motivates us to assume that offsets between embeddings of words in a pair of
text segments can represent their relevant semantic relations.
In this paper, we introduce a method based on the idea
of using vector offsets between word embeddings for discourse relation extraction. Each word in a discourse segment is ﬁrst embedded into a d-dimensional vector space
by a looking-up word embeddings table. Word embeddings
can be learned in advance by a feed-forward neural network
language model (Bengio et al. 2006), continuous skip-gram
model (Mikolov et al. 2013), or other methods. Then vector offsets between word embeddings in segment pairs are
calculated. As the number of words is variable in different segments, we propose to use the Fisher kernel framework (Jaakkola, Haussler, and others 1999) to aggregate
these vector offsets into a ﬁxed length vector. Finally, supervised methods are used to model the task based on the
ﬁxed length vectors.
The main contributions of this work can be summarized
as follows:
• We proposed to use vector offsets between word embeddings to represent semantic relations between sentences
or segments.
• The Fisher kernel framework is incorporated to convert a
variable number of vector offsets into a ﬁxed length vector, and in order to incorporate the weights of these offsets
into the vector, we also propose the Weighted Fisher Vector.

Introduction
Discourse relations describe how two segments (e.g. clauses,
sentences, and larger multi-clause groupings) of discourse
are logically connected. These relations can be used to
describe the high-level organization of text. Hence, various NLP applications, such as opinion mining (Somasundaran and Wiebe 2009; Heerschop et al. 2011; Taboada
et al. 2011), summarization (Thione et al. 2004; Cristea,
Postolache, and Pistol 2005), essay quality analysis (Attali
and Burstein 2006), and event detection (Huang and Riloff
2012), can beneﬁt from it.
Along with the increasing requirements, the discourse
relation classiﬁcation and discourse parsing tasks have
received considerable attention in recent years. Existing researches have been conducted from different perspectives, including rich linguistic features (Soricut and
Marcu 2003; Subba and Di Eugenio 2009; Feng and Hirst
2012), rule based methods (Polanyi et al. 2004), statistical methods (Baldridge and Lascarides 2005; Duverle and
Prendinger 2009; Lin, Kan, and Ng 2009; Muller et al. 2012;
Li et al. 2014; Ji and Eisenstein 2015), and deep learning
based methods (Li, Li, and Hovy 2014). Because there is no
discourse-level grammar analogous to sentence-level grammar, discourse relations are less straightforward to deﬁne
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2921

