Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Preferences Single-Peaked on Nice Trees
Dominik Peters and Edith Elkind
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
{dominik.peters, edith.elkind}@cs.ox.ac.uk

j

Abstract
Preference proﬁles that are single-peaked on trees enjoy
desirable properties: they admit a Condorcet winner (Demange 1982), and there are hard voting problems that become
tractable on this domain (Yu, Chan, and Elkind 2013). Trick
(1989) proposed a polynomial-time algorithm that ﬁnds some
tree with respect to which a given preference proﬁle is singlepeaked. However, some voting problems are only known to
be easy for proﬁles that are single-peaked on “nice” trees, and
Trick’s algorithm provides no guarantees on the properties of
the tree that it outputs. To overcome this issue, we build on the
work of Trick and Yu et al. to develop a structural approach
that enables us to compactly represent all trees with respect to
which a given proﬁle is single-peaked. We show how to use
this representation to efﬁciently ﬁnd the “best” tree for a given
proﬁle, according to a number of criteria; for other criteria, we
obtain NP-hardness results. In particular, we show that it is
NP-hard to decide whether an input proﬁle is single-peaked
with respect to a given tree. To demonstrate the applicability
of our framework, we use it to identify a new class of proﬁles
that admit an efﬁcient algorithm for a popular variant of the
Chamberlin–Courant (1983) rule.

1

i

a

h

b
c

d

e

f

g
k

Figure 1: The ‘attachment digraph’ computed for the proﬁle {kfedghcijba, dcbeafghijk, gfhiedcbajk} which is singlepeaked on 336 different trees. All of them appear as subtrees
of the above digraph, which can be computed in O(|V | · |C|2 )
time. The black edges must appear in any tree; for each free
vertex with gray outgoing arcs, we choose exactly one of
them. The transitivity among the gray edges will be crucial
to our approach.

single-peaked on a tree if candidates can be mapped to the
vertices of some tree so that the restriction of this proﬁle to
every path in this tree is single-peaked. This is a considerably broader domain than that of the single-peaked elections,
which, nevertheless, retains some of the desirable properties
of the latter: proﬁles that are single-peaked on a tree always
have a Condorcet winner (Demange 1982), and there are
committee selection problems that become easier when preferences are single-peaked on a tree (Yu, Chan, and Elkind
2013). However, some of the algorithms for this domain
require the input proﬁle to be single-peaked on a “nice” tree,
such as a tree with a small number of leaves or a star (Yu,
Chan, and Elkind 2013); indeed, positive results for singlepeaked preferences can also be viewed in this light, as they
require the preferences to be single-peaked on a speciﬁc tree,
namely, a line (path).
Now, forcing Trick’s algorithm to output a “nice” tree is
not a trivial task: indeed, this algorithm may output a complex
tree even when the input proﬁle is single-peaked on a line.
Fortunately, there are efﬁcient algorithms for recognizing
when a given proﬁle is single-peaked on a line (Bartholdi and
Trick 1986; Doignon and Falmagne 1994; Escofﬁer, Lang,
and Öztürk 2008), and Yu, Chan, and Elkind (2013) explain
how to modify Trick’s algorithm so that it outputs a tree
with the minimum number of leaves and how to recognise
when a proﬁle is single-peaked on a star. However, prior to

Introduction

Preference aggregation is a difﬁcult task when voters’ preferences may be arbitrary: one has to deal with voting paradoxes
(Arrow 1951) and computationally hard problems (Brandt,
Conitzer, and Endriss 2013). This observation motivates the
study of domain restrictions, i.e., special classes of voters’
preferences that rule out paradoxical outcomes and/or allow
one to circumvent computational hardness results. Perhaps
the most-studied restricted domain is that of single-peaked
preferences (Black 1948). This domain captures proﬁles
where voters’ preferences are determined by candidates’ positions on a single issue, and has many desirable properties:
for instance, single-peaked elections always have a Condorcet
winner (a candidate that is preferred to every other candidate
by a majority of voters), admit a non-manipulable voting
rule (Moulin 1991), and allow for an efﬁcient winner determination algorithm for a popular committee selection rule
(Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann 2013).
Demange (1982) introduced a weaker domain restriction,
namely, single-peakedness on a tree. Brieﬂy, a proﬁle is
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

594

