Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Using Multiple Representations to Simultaneously Learn
Computational Thinking and Middle School Science
Satabdi Basu, Gautam Biswas, and John S. Kinnebrew
Institute for Software Integrated Systems
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN, USA.
{Satabdi.basu@vanderbilt.edu, gautam.biswas@vanderbilt.edu, john.kinnebrew@gmail.com}

against matched expert simulations to refine their models. In
this paper, we present our latest version of CTSiM, where
we have extended the computational/simulation modeling
representation to include a linked conceptual modeling representation to better support students’ modeling and learning tasks. Conceptual modeling helps students identify the
primary agents, their properties and behaviors, and relevant
environment elements in the domain of study. Further, students conceptualize agent behaviors as sense-and-act processes. In concert, students build their computational models to describe agent behaviors using a visual block-structured language. The set of programming constructs or
blocks include domain-general CT (e.g., assignments, conditionals, loops) and domain-specific (e.g., ‘energy’ in ecological models, ‘speed up’ in kinematics models) constructs
(Sengupta, et al., 2013). In previous work, we have demonstrated that the domain-specific computational modeling
language helps leverage students’ intuitions and science
knowledge while synergistically supporting learning science and CT concepts across different domains (Basu et. al.,
2014).
In this paper, we formally describe the linked modeling
representations as different levels of abstraction in CTSiM
modeling activities. Using results from a 6th-grade classroom study, we show how students combine the use of these
representations while building, analyzing, and verifying
their models to learn science and CT concepts. Analysis of
students’ modeling behavior shows that when appropriately
scaffolded, their use of the linked representations improves
over time. Also, they develop the ability to decompose complex models into parts and use a judicious combination of
the conceptual and computational representations to construct correct domain models. In addition, their modeling

Abstract
Computational Thinking (CT) is considered a core competency in problem formulation and problem solving. We have
developed the Computational Thinking using Simulation and
Modeling (CTSiM) learning environment to help middle
school students learn science and CT concepts simultaneously. In this paper, we present an approach that leverages
multiple linked representations to help students learn by constructing and analyzing computational models of science topics. Results from a recent study show that students successfully use the linked representations to become better modelers and learners.

Introduction
Research in science education has emphasized the importance of engaging learners in the practices of developing
and using models to help them understand how scientific
knowledge is constructed, evaluated, and communicated
(Duschl, Schweingruber, & Shouse, 2007). Computational
Thinking (CT) is being recognized as a vital ingredient to
support such learning (Barr & Stephenson, 2011; Grover &
Pea, 2013). Several of the epistemic and representational
practices central to the development of expertise in science
disciplines (e.g., defining problems, developing and using
models, and designing and verifying solutions) are primary
components of CT (Wing, 2006). In order to support middle
school students’ synergistic learning of science and CT concepts, we have developed the Computational Thinking using
Simulation and Modeling (CTSiM) learning environment
(Basu et. al., 2014; Sengupta et. al, 2013).
CTSiM provides an agent-based, visual programming
platform where students build simulation models of science
phenomena using an agent-based framework (Wilensky,
1999), and analyze and compare their model behaviors
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3705

