Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

An Efﬁcient Time Series Subsequence Pattern Mining and Prediction
Framework with an Application to Respiratory Motion Prediction
Shouyi Wang, Kin Ming Kam

Cao Xiao,∗ Stephen Bowen,+ W. Chaovalitwongse∗

Department of Industrial, Manufacturing
& Systems Engineering, University of Texas
at Arlington, TX 76019

∗

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Department of Radiation Oncology,University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195

+

methods are sensitive to the number of nearest neighbors
K, the ensemble functions that combine nearest neighbor,
and the sliding window length. Currently, no effective approaches exist to guide the selection of these model parameters. If too many neighbors are selected, the predicted values
of a query time series tend to be biased by including intrinsically different patterns; while if too few neighbors are used,
the predictions tend to be inﬂuenced by noises and outliers
with large variance. Such bias-variance dilemma is a wellknown issue in KNN applications (T. Hastie and Friedman
2009), and no systematic approach has been developed to
improve the efﬁciency of time series subsequence pattern
mining and the robustness of nearest-neighbor approaches
in time series prediction. In addition to pattern searching approaches, an efﬁcient representation of time series itself is
also critical in time series pattern recognition and prediction.
There has been a huge interest in approximating time series with reduced dimensionality. Methods include discrete
Fourier transformation (DFT), single value decomposition
(SVD), discrete wavelet transformation (DWT), piecewise
approximation, and etc. (Fu 2011). Take the popular DFTbased representation for example, although it can achieve
accurate time series approximation using a few signature
DFT coefﬁcients, the representation cannot be applied to
weighted/penalized pattern matching problems. In summary,
four fundamental problems exist in time series pattern mining and are in urgent need to be solved, including 1) data
representation: how to represent the essential shape characteristics of a time series pattern in a largely reduced dimensional space, while allows convenient penalization and subsequence pattern mining; 2) similarity measure and pattern
matching: how to search perceptually similar patterns from
massive time series data effectively and efﬁciently ; 3) parameter selection: how to develop a data-driven method to
select parameters and avoid the bias-variance dilemma; 4)
ensemble function: how can we ensemble in order to achieve
reliable and robust predictions.

Abstract
Traditional time series analysis methods are limited on
some complex real-world time series data. Respiratory
motion prediction is one of such challenging problems.
The memory-based nearest neighbor approaches have
shown potentials in predicting complex nonlinear time
series compared to many traditional parametric prediction models. However, the massive time series subsequences representation, the similarity distance measures, the number of nearest neighbors, and the ensemble functions create challenges as well as limit the
performance of nearest neighbor approaches in complex time series prediction. To address these problems,
we propose a ﬂexible time series pattern representation and selection framework, called the orthogonalpolynomial-based variant-nearest-neighbor (OPVNN)
approach. For the respiratory motion prediction problem, the proposed approach achieved the highest and
most robust prediction performance compared to the
state-of-the-art time series prediction methods. With a
solid mathematical and theoretical foundation in orthogonal polynomials, the proposed time series representation, subsequence pattern mining and prediction
framework has a great potential to beneﬁt those industry and medical applications that need to handle highly
nonlinear and complex time series data streams, such as
quasi-periodic ones.

Introduction
Although various time series modeling methods have been
proposed, it is still a challenge to make accurate and robust predictions for highly nonlinear and complex time series, such as respiratory motion trajectories. A few studies
showed that the memory-based nearest neighbor approach
can be useful to predict highly nonlinear and complex
time series patterns (Keogh, Lin, and Fu 2005; Sasu 2012;
Yankov, Decoste, and Keogh 2006). In general, a K-nearest
neighbor (KNN) method can be used to identify K most
similar time series patterns ﬁrst and then predict the future
pattern of a query time series. Though promising for predicting complex nonstationary time series, a signiﬁcant limit of
these methods is on efﬁcient subsequence pattern searching
in a low-dimensional space. Also the performance of these

This study is motivated to address the aforementioned
time series data mining challenges, and provide a solution
to make accurate and robust predictions for complex time
series data. In particular, we developed a novel time series
pattern representation using orthogonal polynomial approximation. A set of theories and similarity distance measures
were developed to achieve fast and efﬁcient time series pat-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2159

