Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Adaptable Regression Method for Ensemble Consensus Forecasting
John K. Williams, Peter P. Neilley, Joseph P. Koval and Jeff McDonald
The Weather Company, Andover, MA
john.williams@weather.com

weather forecasts, exploiting the increasing number of
physics-driven numerical weather prediction (NWP) models now operationally available to provide a single authoritative forecast. Accurate weather forecasts are important
for daily planning by individuals and families as well as for
decision support across a broad range of endeavors including public safety, transportation, energy generation and
management, retail logistics, emergency preparedness, and
many others. Indeed, Lazo et al. (2011) estimated that
weather variability is responsible for a $485 billion annual
impact on U.S. economic activity, some portion of which
could be mitigated by improved weather forecasts.
Individual physics-based predictive models are limited
by the accuracy of observations used for initialization and
by their imperfect representations of physical processes,
and are subject to both systematic and chaotic excursions.
Human forecasters commonly combine multiple sources of
forecast guidance, drawing on training and deep experience
to account for nonstationarity due to seasons, variable
weather patterns, and daily heating and cooling cycles;
spatial inhomogeneity in NWP models’ predictive performance, which vary as a function of latitude, altitude, land
cover, terrain, proximity to water and other factors; ensemble changes, as NWP models are frequently updated; and
errors in verifying observations.
Given their promise for reducing forecaster workload
and generating more accurate predictions, automated consensus methods that attempt to intelligently combine multiple weather or climate predictions have received considerable attention in recent years. Thompson (1977) argued
that a weighted linear combination of two imperfectly correlated scalar weather forecasts could reduce the error variance by 20%. Krishnamurti et al. (1999) fit linear regressions to model ensemble forecast anomalies and showed
improved mean-squared error (MSE) for seasonal climate,
global weather, and hurricane forecasts during subsequent
testing periods. An operational Australian consensus system used a recent lookback period to estimate biases for
several forecast models or derived model output statistics
(MOS) products, and combined them using weights in-

Abstract
Accurate weather forecasts enhance sustainability by facilitating decision making across a broad range of endeavors
including public safety, transportation, energy generation
and management, retail logistics, emergency preparedness,
and many others. This paper presents a method for combining multiple scalar forecasts to obtain deterministic predictions that are generally more accurate than any of the constituents. Exponentially-weighted forecast bias estimates
and error covariance matrices are formed at observation
sites, aggregated spatially and temporally, and used to formulate a constrained, regularized least squares regression
problem that may be solved using quadratic programming.
The model is re-trained when new observations arrive, updating the forecast bias estimates and consensus combination weights to adapt to weather regime and input forecast
model changes. The algorithm is illustrated for 0-72 hour
temperature forecasts at over 1200 sites in the contiguous
U.S. based on a 22-member forecast ensemble, and its performance over multiple seasons is compared to a state-ofthe-art ensemble-based forecasting system. In addition to
weather forecasts, this approach to consensus may be useful
for ensemble predictions of climate, wind energy, solar
power, energy demand, and numerous other quantities.

Introduction
Combining information from multiple forecasts—for instance, via bias correction followed by weighted averaging—has long been known to produce deterministic consensus predictions that are generally more accurate than
any of the constituent inputs. Consensus methods have
been successfully used in a wide range of disciplines including finance, economics and biomedicine (Clemen
1989). Within computer science, “blending” or “stacking”
multiple machine-learned models (Wolpert 1992, Breiman
1996, Kuncheva 2004) has proven to be highly effective,
with famous successes such as winning the Netflix prize.
The focus of this paper is on developing a skillful, practical
method for producing an automated ensemble consensus of
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3915

