Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Computing Contingent Plans Using Online Replanning
Radimir Komarnitsky and Guy Shani
Information Systems Engineering
Ben Gurion University, Israel
{radimir,shanigu}@bgu.ac.il

The size of the plan tree can be exponential in the number of unknown variables, where each different sequence of
observations leads to a different sequence of actions. Thus,
ofﬂine planners that compute the complete tree often met
scaling up difﬁculties (Albore, Palacios, and Geffner 2009;
Bryce, Kambhampati, and Smith 2006). Recently, Muise,
Belle, and McIlraith (2014) translated a partially observable problem into a fully observable non-deterministic planning (Bonet and Geffner 2011), and then ran the nondeterministic planner PRP. A disadvantage of this approach
is that the translation either becomes large as the problem
size increases, or is restricted to certain classes of problems,
such as simple contingent problems, or bounded width.
In this paper we take a different approach. Instead of
translating the entire problem into a non-deterministic one,
we compute a solution directly over the contingent problem, leveraging an online contingent planner. Online planners avoid computing a complete plan tree ofﬂine, by taking
into account a concrete state of the system, making decisions
throughout the plan execution (Shani and Brafman 2011;
Brafman and Shani 2012; Albore, Palacios, and Geffner
2009; Bonet and Geffner 2011). These planners often plan
for the next action (or until the next sensing action) observe
its output, and then plan again (replan) given the newly obtained information(Maliah et al. 2014). As such, these planners traverse a single branch of a complete plan tree.
Our method uses repeated calls to such an online replanner, capable of receiving the current partially observable
state, i.e., the system description and a sequence of actions
and observations that were already obtained, and computing
a sequence of actions that will lead to the goal, if possible,
or to a sensing action, producing more information, otherwise. We begin at the initial state, asking the planner to produce a plan to a sensing action, then call the planner again
for each of the possible observations that the sensing action
has produced. This process continues until all branches end
at goal leaves. Given a sound and complete online replanner, and limiting ourselves to deterministic domains with no
deadends, this approach provides a sound and complete contingent planner for computing contingent plan trees.
Plan trees may be exponential, requiring a different sequence of actions for every possible initial state. In many
cases, however, the environment allows for a structured solution, allowing us to represent the plan tree more compactly

Abstract
In contingent planning under partial observability with
sensing actions, agents actively use sensing to discover meaningful facts about the world. For this class
of problems the solution can be represented as a plan
tree, branching on various possible observations. Recent successful approaches translate the partially observable contingent problem into a non-deterministic
fully observable problem, and then use a planner for
non-deterministic planning. While this approach has
been successful in many domains, the translation may
become very large, encumbering the task of the nondeterministic planner.
In this paper we suggest a different approach — using an online contingent solver repeatedly to construct
a plan tree. We execute the plan returned by the online
solver until the next observation action, and then branch
on the possible observed values, and replan for every
branch independently. In many cases a plan tree can be
exponential in the number of state variables, but still, the
tree has a structure that allows us to compactly represent it using a directed graph. We suggest a mechanism
for tailoring such a graph that reduces both the computational effort and the storage space. Furthermore, unlike recent state of the art ofﬂine planners, our approach
is not bounded to a speciﬁc class of contingent problems, such as limited problem width, or simple contingent problems. We present a set of experiments, showing our approach to scale better than state of the art ofﬂine planners.

Introduction
Agents operating in a partially observable environment gain
important information using sensing actions. For example,
a robot navigating in a hallway may use its proximity sensors to alert it about the nearby walls. When the agent must
achieve some goal, it often takes different actions given different observations it senses. In this case, the agent’s decision problem can be modeled as contingent planning under
partial observability with sensing actions, and the solution to
the problem can be represented as a plan tree, where nodes
are labeled by actions, and outgoing edges are labeled by
possible observations resulting from the action.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3159

