Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Nonlinear Feature Extraction with Max-Margin Data Shifting
‡

Jianqiao Wangni† , Ning Chen‡∗
MOE Key lab of Bioinformatics, Bioinformatics Division and Center for Synthetic & Systems Biology,
TNList, † Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
zjnqha@gmail.com, ningchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

et al. 2008) to learn semantic features; and improving the
generalization ability of deep networks (Hinton et al. 2012).
The explicit corruption method transforms each data instance xn ∈ RD (n = 1, · · · , N ) to S versions x̃ns through
some pre-deﬁned corrupting
p(x̃|xn ), and mini models

mizes the average loss N1S n s L(x̃ns , yn ) over the corrupted dataset. Though being simple, the disadvantage of the
explicit corruption is also obvious—corrupting every observation to multiple copies will dramatically increase the training size and thereby training time. Recent work on marginalized corrupted features (MCF) (Maaten et al. 2013) provides
an implicit corruption scheme, which avoids enumerating
multiple copies and instead minimizes the expected loss
1
N Ep [L(x̃n , yn )] under the corrupting model. MCF showed
promise in learning autoencoders (Chen et al. 2014) and link
predictors (Chen et al. 2015).
In this paper, we present max-margin data shifting
(MMDS), a simple and efﬁcient method that processes the
input data before extracting features. MMDS relies on a
large-margin classiﬁer on the original data. By building a
subsequent feature extractor (e.g., PCA), we are able to learn
features that are suitable for classiﬁcation tasks. MMDS can
be approximately derived as the mean of a supervised corrupting model, which considers both the standard noising
model (e.g., Gaussian noise) on input data and the discriminative ability of a potential corruption according to a prelearned large-margin classiﬁer. The latter factor encodes our
intuition that some corrupted data points may cross the decision boundary (if given) and lead to a difﬁcult case for
classiﬁcation; and such corrupted data points should be discouraged.
Our empirical results on various datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of MMDS in the context of various feature extractors.

Abstract
Feature extraction is an important task in machine learning. In this paper, we present a simple and efﬁcient
method, named max-margin data shifting (MMDS), to
process the data before feature extraction. By relying on
a large-margin classiﬁer, MMDS is helpful to enhance
the discriminative ability of subsequent feature extractors. The kernel trick can be applied to extract nonlinear
features from input data. We further analyze in detail the
example of principal component analysis (PCA). The
empirical results on multiple linear and nonlinear models demonstrate that MMDS can efﬁciently improve the
performance of unsupervised extractors.

Introduction
Feature extractors are important in machine learning and
can heavily affect ﬁnal performance. They transform lowlevel input data, like raw pixels in images and bag-of-words
in documents, to high-level features like typical visual patterns (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013) and topics (Blei,
Ng, and Jordan 2003). Supervised feature extraction methods have attracted much attention because they are able to
learn suitable features for speciﬁc tasks. For example, supervised LDA (Mcauliffe and Blei 2008; Zhu, Ahmed, and
Xing 2012) jointly models words in documents and their responses (e.g., movie ratings); supervised dictionary learning
(Mairal et al. 2009) seeks the overcomplete basis for signals
that belong to different classes.
In general, the training data are valuable and limited,
therefore cannot cover the rich variations. For example, each
node of a sensor network may have a probability to mechanically fail, and visual objects have various types of translations and rotations. Therefore, training a good extractor requires a large scale of observations; and how to accomplish
such a task by using only a relatively small dataset is an
important and challenging goal to pursue. One useful technique to improve the robustness of extractors is corruption,
which artiﬁcially generates more data by adding noise (e.g.,
Guassian noise or blankout noise) to the original data. This
noising scheme has proven effective on introducing adaptive
regularization (Bishop 1995); helping auto-encoder (Vincent

Supervised Data Corruption
Considering a fully labeled dataset that includes N data
points xn ∈ RD and labels yn ∈ Y = {1, . . . , H}, where
H is the number of categories, we aim to extract the highlevel representation, or latent features, zn ∈ RK from data
xn . Instead of dealing with the original data, we consider
the augmented data x̃ns , which are sampled from a supervised corrupting distribution pn (x̃|xn , yn , η), parameterized by η. Assuming each data is corrupted for S times,

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2208

