Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Distance Minimization for Reward
Learning from Scored Trajectories
Benjamin Burchﬁel, Carlo Tomasi, and Ronald Parr
Duke University, Department of Computer Science
308 Research Drive
Durham, NC USA

imal reward. One option is to learn the expert’s policy directly, allowing the learner to imitate the expert under similar circumstances. An alternative option, termed Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL), learns the expert’s reward function and then computes a policy that maximizes accrued reward. This approach often offers advantages in portability
in that the reward function can transfer to parts of the state
space with different dynamics and different optimal actions.
We examine a learning method, Distance Minimization
(DM-IRL) (El Asri, Laroche, and Pietquin 2013), that estimates the expert’s reward function from single scores an
expert assigns demonstrated trajectories upon their completion. Demonstration scoring has a strong precedent in human learning and performance evaluation. It is common for
experiences to be judged on a 1-10 scale, for athletic performances to be scored, and for scores to be assigned to demonstrations based on empirical outcomes. In all these cases, the
judge need not be good at the desired task or familiar with its
intricacies at each step; The judge must simply be able to assign a reliable numerical score to demonstration trajectories
performed by herself, the learner, or others. This also avoids
estimating the transition function of a (human) expert, requiring only the robot’s transition function be known. DMIRL models the expert’s hidden reward function as a linear
combination of state features, and estimates its coefﬁcients
by (regularized) linear regression.
We provide a theoretical analysis of DM-IRL’s performance when scoring noise is introduced, a proof of the
strong NP-hardness of generating policies with a speciﬁc
target feature expectation, an empirical examination of DMIRL’s behavior in a terrain navigation setting under a variety
of conditions, and an analysis of the relation of DM-IRL to
previous IRL approaches. We show that DM-IRL is robust to
suboptimal demonstration and noisy scoring, even with few
demonstrations, and that the rewards DM-IRL learns from
MDPs with unknown dynamics can be transferred to other
MDPs.

Abstract
Many planning methods rely on the use of an immediate reward function as a portable and succinct representation of desired behavior. Rewards are often inferred from demonstrated behavior that is assumed to be
near-optimal. We examine a framework, Distance Minimization IRL (DM-IRL), for learning reward functions
from scores an expert assigns to possibly suboptimal
demonstrations. By changing the expert’s role from a
demonstrator to a judge, DM-IRL relaxes some of the
assumptions present in IRL, enabling learning from the
scoring of arbitrary demonstration trajectories with unknown transition functions. DM-IRL complements existing IRL approaches by addressing different assumptions about the expert. We show that DM-IRL is robust to expert scoring error and prove that ﬁnding a
policy that produces maximally informative trajectories
for an expert to score is strongly NP-hard. Experimentally, we demonstrate that the reward function DM-IRL
learns from an MDP with an unknown transition model
can transfer to an agent with known characteristics in a
novel environment, and we achieve successful learning
with limited available training data.

Introduction
Real-world planning tasks in unstructured domains require
agents that are adaptable to their settings. Hand-designing
reward functions to induce desired behavior is often extremely difﬁcult; improperly speciﬁed reward functions can
lead to unexpectedly poor results. Furthermore, in situations where there is no naturally occurring immediate reward
feedback, applying traditional Reinforcement Learning (RL)
algorithms is not feasible. In Learning from Demonstration (LfD), the agent learns from an expert who repeatedly
demonstrates how to perform a task well. This is a natural way to transfer knowledge to the learning agent without
programming task behavior explicitly. Furthermore, in these
situations, LfD provides a compelling approach to specifying the agent’s behavior.
LfD is commonly implemented using Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs), in which an agent follows a behavior
policy resulting in state-space trajectories that accrue max-

Related Work
Many inﬂuential approaches to IRL (Ng and Russell 2000;
Abbeel and Ng 2004; Ramachandran and Amir 2007;
Kolter, Abbeel, and Ng 2007; Syed and Schapire 2007;
Syed, Bowling, and Schapire 2008; Ziebart et al. 2008;
Boularias et al. 2011) assume that the reward function is lin-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3330

