Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Business-Aware Visual Concept Discovery from
Social Media for Multimodal Business Venue Recognition
Bor-Chun Chen

Yan-Ying Chen and Francine Chen and Dhiraj Joshi

University of Maryland, USA
sirius@umd.edu

FX Palo Alto Laboratory, Palo Alto, CA, USA
{yanying, chen, dhiraj}@fxpal.com

Abstract

Query Image
Social Media

Image localization is important for marketing and recommendation of local business; however, the level of granularity is still a critical issue. Given a consumer photo and
its rough GPS information, we are interested in extracting
the ﬁne-grained location information, i.e. business venues,
of the image. To this end, we propose a novel framework
for business venue recognition. The framework mainly contains three parts. First, business-aware visual concept discovery: we mine a set of concepts that are useful for business venue recognition based on three guidelines including
business awareness, visually detectable, and discriminative
power. We deﬁne concepts that satisfy all of these three
criteria as business-aware visual concept. Second, businessaware concept detection by convolutional neural networks
(BA-CNN): we propose a new network conﬁguration that can
incorporate semantic signals mined from business reviews
for extracting semantic concept features from a query image.
Third, multimodal business venue recognition: we extend visually detected concepts to multimodal feature representations that allow a test image to be associated with business
reviews and images from social media for business venue
recognition. The experiments results show the visual concepts
detected by BA-CNN can achieve up to 22.5% relative improvement for business venue recognition compared to the
state-of-the-art convolutional neural network features. Experiments also show that by leveraging multimodal information
from social media we can further boost the performance, especially when the database images belonging to each business
venue are scarce.

Business Venue

Business-Aware
Concept
Discovery (a)
Concepts:
espresso,
cupcake, table,
…

Concept
Detection (b)

Multimodal
Business Venue
Recognition (c)

Business-Aware
Concepts

Figure 1: Given an image uploaded to social media and its
rough GPS information, we want to automatically ﬁnd out
the business venue where it was taken. (a) We ﬁrst mine a
list of business-aware visual concepts from social media, (b)
use the proposed BA-CNN to detect these business-aware visual concepts from the query image and (c) associate visual
concepts with images and business reviews in a geo-tagged
database to recognize the business venue.

and its GPS information, we aim to infer which venue the
image was taken at.
Recognition of the business venue (e.g. cafe shop, local
restaurant) in an image can help many applications for personalization and location-based services/marketing. For instance, it allows personalized promotion based on the business venue a user had visited, or accurate check-in suggestion in social media applications. One might think this is an
easy task: since we already have the GPS information, we
can just map it to the GPS information of business venue.
However, GPS information is not accurate enough to achieve
such ﬁne-grained geo-localization tasks. According to experiments conducted in Maier and Kleiner (2010), modern
GPS sensors can have up to 40 meter error, especially in the
urban area. Hence, GPS can only help us narrow down the
candidates within a nearby area, and we need a more reliable
way to recognize the venue.
There are many previous works focusing on geolocalization based on matching visual content. However,
most of the works only target on a coarser granularity of
location (e.g., city), and they are only applicable for outdoor
images while a huge portion of the images on social media

Introduction
Nowadays, there are a sheer amount of images being uploaded to social media sites on the web everyday. Although
some of the images contain check-in information that discloses at which business venues they were taken, many of
the images do not have such information available. For example, the images uploaded to Flickr or Google Photos only
contain GPS information but no check-in information. Even
for images which have check-in information, most checkins are famous travel landmarks while very few of them are
local business venues. There arises an interesting research
problem: given image content taken in some business venue
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

101

