Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Social Emotion Classiﬁcation via Reader Perspective Weighted Model
Xin Li, Yanghui Rao∗ , Yanjia Chen, Xuebo Liu, Huan Huang
School of Mobile Information Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
Zhuhai Campus, Tang Jia Bay, Zhu Hai, Guang Dong, China
+86-18675606178, lixin77@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
raoyangh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {chenyj79, liuxb5, huangh338}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
∗
The Corresponding Author

Related Work

Abstract

Preliminary works on social emotion classiﬁcation have
focused mainly on exploiting the emotions of individual
words. The SWAT system (Strapparava and Mihalcea 2007)
employed the unigram model to annotate the emotional responses of news headlines, which scored the emotions of
each word w as the average of emotions for every headline
that contained w. An emotion-term (ET) model (Bao et al.
2012) was also proposed to associate words with emotions.
The limitation of such models is that the same word may
evoke positive attitude in one topic but negative in another.
Recently, the ETM and three reader perspective topic models, named multi-labeled supervised topic model (MSTM)
and sentiment latent topic model (SLTM) (Rao et al. 2014b),
and affective topic model (ATM) (Rao et al. 2014c) were
developed to social emotion classiﬁcation by introducing
an additional topic layer between emotions and documents.
However, due to the existence of noisy training documents,
the performance of existing models that weight training documents equally is quite unstable (Rao et al. 2014a).

With the development of Web 2.0, many users express
their opinions online. This paper is concerned with the
classiﬁcation of social emotions on varied-scale data
sets. Different from traditional models which weight
training documents equally, the concept of emotional
entropy is proposed to estimate the weight and tackle
the issue of noisy documents. The topic assignment is
also used to distinguish different emotional senses of
the same word. Experimental evaluations using different data sets validate the effectiveness of the proposed
social emotion classiﬁcation model.

Introduction
Many news websites have provided a new service that allows
users to express their emotions after browsing articles, with
each article incorporates the emotional responses shared by
its readers, which they express by voting for a set of emotion labels. The aggregation of such emotional responses is
known as social emotions (Bao et al. 2012).
Research into social emotion classiﬁcation began with
the SemEval-2007 tasks (Strapparava and Mihalcea 2007)
by associating words with social emotions. However, the
same word in different topics may convey different attitudes.
Thus, an emotion-topic model (ETM) was proposed to explore the emotions of topics (Bao et al. 2012). The limitation
of ETM is that it treats each training document equally, so
the documents that evoke prominent emotions in readers are
usually mixed with noisy documents which do not convey
much affective meaning. Experimental results have shown
that the performance of models without weighting for training documents is unstable, especially on the data set with
limited training instances or features (Rao et al. 2014a). In
this paper, we develop a reader perspective weighted model
(RPWM) for social emotion classiﬁcation over varied-scale
training documents, in which the concept of emotional entropy is proposed to estimate the weight of different training documents. Experimental evaluations using varied-scale
data sets validate the effectiveness of the proposed model for
social emotion classiﬁcation.

Reader Perspective Weighted Model
In this section, we present the details of our reader perspective weighted model for social emotion classiﬁcation.
Given a document da written by an author a, the conditional probability of readers’ emotion er can be estimated
by p(er |da ) ∝ P (er ) ∗ P (da |er ). We denote the collection
of training documents as D, the collection of documents that
evoked the reader’s emotion of er as Der . Then,
P (er ) =

|Der | + γ
,
|D| + E ∗ γ

(1)

where γ is a smoothing parameter used to avoid zero probability, and E is the number of emotion labels.
The estimation of P (da |er ) is based on the conditional
independence assumption that given readers’ emotion of er ,
each word w in da is generated independently. It is consistent to social emotion classiﬁcation, in which the words of
da are determined prior to the emotional
responses triggered
in readers. Thus, we have P (da |er ) = w∈da P (w|er ). According to the Bayesian inference, P (w|er ) is proportional
to the product of the probability of document da in Der , and
the joint probability of da and w.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4230

