Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Randomised Procedures for Initialising and Switching Actions in Policy Iteration
Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan

Neeldhara Misra

Aditya Gopalan

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Mumbai 400076 India
shivaram@cse.iitb.ac.in

Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar
Gandhinagar 382355 India
neeldhara.misra@gmail.com

Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru 560012 India
aditya@ece.iisc.ernet.in

to act. This problem, referred to as MDP planning, is the
focus of this paper.
Formally, an MDP M “ pS, A, R, T, γq has a set of states
S in which an agent can be, and a set of actions A that the
agent can execute. Upon taking action a from state s, the
agent receives a reward r, assumed to be a real-valued random variable with mean Rps, aq. The action a also transports the agent to a state s1 , selected from S at random with
probability T ps, a, s1 q. In this paper, we assume that S and
A are both ﬁnite, with |S| “ n ě 2, and |A| “ k ě 2.
To fully specify M , we need to deﬁne an objective for
the agent. A policy (assumed stationary, deterministic, and
Markovian) is a mapping from S to A: when following
a policy π, the agent takes action πpsq when in state s.
A natural objective is to ﬁnd a policy that maximises the
agent’s expected long-term reward. Consider an agent that
starts in some state s0 at time 0 and continually follows
π. The agent thereby encounters a trajectory over time:
xs0 , πps0 q, r0 , s1 , πps1 q, r1 , s2 , . . . y. The value of state s
under policy π is given by
ﬀ
«
8
ÿ
def
γ t rt |s0 “ s ,
(1)
V π psq “ Eπ

Abstract
Policy Iteration (PI) (Howard 1960) is a classical method for
computing an optimal policy for a ﬁnite Markov Decision
Problem (MDP). The method is conceptually simple: starting from some initial policy, “policy improvement” is repeatedly performed to obtain progressively dominating policies,
until eventually, an optimal policy is reached. Being remarkably efﬁcient in practice, PI is often favoured over alternative
approaches such as Value Iteration and Linear Programming.
Unfortunately, even after several decades of study, theoretical bounds on the complexity of PI remain unsatisfactory.
For an MDP with n states and k actions, Mansour and Singh
(1999) bound the number of iterations taken by Howard’s
PI, the canonical variant of the method, by Opkn {nq. This
bound merely improves upon the trivial bound of kn by a linear factor. However, a randomised variant of PI introduced
by Mansour and Singh (1999) does yield an exponential improvement, with its expected number of iterations bounded
by O ppp1 ` 2{ log2 pkqq k{2qn q.
With the objective of furnishing improved upper bounds for
PI, we introduce two randomised procedures in this paper.
Our ﬁrst contribution is a routine to ﬁnd a good initial policy
for PI. After evaluating a number of randomly generated policies, this procedure applies a novel criterion to pick one to initialise PI. When PI is subsequently applied, we show that the
expected number of policy evaluations—including both the
initialisation and the improvement stages—remains bounded
in expectation by Opkn{2 q. The key construction employed
in this routine is a total order on the set of policies. Our second contribution is a randomised action-switching rule for PI,
which admits a bound of p2 ` lnpk ´ 1qqn on the expected
number of iterations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
tightest complexity bound known for PI when k ě 3.

t“0

The Markov Decision Problem (MDP) (Bellman 1957; Puterman 1994) has been in use for several decades as a formal
framework for decision-making under uncertainty. An MDP
models an agent whose actions result in stochastic state transitions, while yielding associated rewards. The agent’s natural aim is to consistently take actions that lead to high longterm reward. Thus, given an MDP, the central computational
question is that of determining an optimal way for the agent

where γ P r0, 1s is a discount factor. Setting γ ă 1, as done
under the discounted reward setting (Sutton and Barto 1998,
see Section 3.3), ensures that values are well-deﬁned. In certain MDPs, such as those with a “sink state”, values continue
to be well-deﬁned for all states and policies under the total
reward setting (Fearnley 2010), wherein γ is set to 1. In this
paper, we make no strict assumption on the reward setting
used in deﬁning the MDP—as we will see shortly, we only
require that the Policy Iteration algorithm (Howard 1960) be
applicable. This algorithm can also be used under the average reward setting (Mahadevan 1996), which calls for a
more nuanced deﬁnition of values. To keep our exposition
simple, we stick to (1) throughout this paper, and assume
γ ă 1 when we refer to 1{p1 ´ γq.
Let Π be the set of k n distinct policies corresponding to
M . It is a key property (Bellman 1957) that this set contains
a policy π ˚ such that for @s P S, @π P Π,

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

V π psq ě V π psq.

1

Introduction

‹

3145

(2)

