Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Online Cross-Modal Hashing for Web Image Retrieval
Liang Xie

Jialie Shen ∗ and Lei Zhu

Department of Mathematics
Wuhan University of Technology, China
whutxl@hotmail.com

School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University, Singapore
jlshen@smu.edu.sg, leizhu0608@gmail.com

As a result, existing CMH methods might not be able to
achieve good performance under environment of online realworld web image retrieval, where they generally ignore that
data usually arrive in streaming fashion. The online images
(e.g., those on Flickr and Google), are rapidly increased as
time goes on. For example, millions of new images are uploaded to Flickr by users each day. If new images are added
to the web database, existing CMH methods have to accumulate all the database data to retrain new hash functions,
and recomputed the hash codes of whole database. They are
obviously inefﬁcient in the learning process of hash functions and codes, especially when the database is frequently
updated. As an emerging technology, online hashing technique (Huang, Yang, and Zheng 2013), can be applied to
cope with the online retrieval of streaming database. However, existing online hashing methods cannot be directly applied to cross-modal retrieval of web images, in that they
have ignored two essential problems:

Abstract
Cross-modal hashing (CMH) is an efﬁcient technique for the
fast retrieval of web image data, and it has gained a lot of attentions recently. However, traditional CMH methods usually
apply batch learning for generating hash functions and codes.
They are inefﬁcient for the retrieval of web images which usually have streaming fashion. Online learning can be exploited
for CMH. But existing online hashing methods still cannot
solve two essential problems: efﬁcient updating of hash codes
and analysis of cross-modal correlation. In this paper, we propose Online Cross-modal Hashing (OCMH) which can effectively address the above two problems by learning the shared
latent codes (SLC). In OCMH, hash codes can be represented
by the permanent SLC and dynamic transfer matrix. Therefore, inefﬁcient updating of hash codes is transformed to the
efﬁcient updating of SLC and transfer matrix, and the time
complexity is irrelevant to the database size. Moreover, SLC
is shared by all the modalities, and thus it can encode the
latent cross-modal correlation, which further improves the
overall cross-modal correlation between heterogeneous data.
Experimental results on two real-world multi-modal web image datasets: MIR Flickr and NUS-WIDE, demonstrate the
effectiveness and efﬁciency of OCMH for online cross-modal
web image retrieval.

• Existing online hashing methods are inefﬁcient when updating hash codes. They only focus on the online learning
of hash functions, but ignore efﬁcient updating of hash
codes. In general online hashing process, the hash function can be efﬁciently retrained when new data arrive.
However, the change of hash functions will result in the
change of hamming space. In order to make the new data
and old data to be effectively matched, the whole database
should be accumulated to compute their new hash codes
by the updated hash functions. As a result, the time complexity of updating hash codes depends on the size of
whole database, and it is obviously very inefﬁcient in the
online scenario. For an efﬁcient online hashing method,
the updating time of hash codes must be irrelevant to
database size.

Introduction
Web image is typical multi-modal data, which consists
of multiple information type, such as visual contents and
text tags. Cross-modal hashing (CMH) (Song et al. 2013;
Zhang and Li 2014; Xie et al. 2015) has gained a lot of attentions for the fast retrieval of web image data. CMH combines
the advantages of cross-modal analysis (Costa Pereira et al.
2014; Zhai, Peng, and Xiao 2013; Xie, Pan, and Lu 2015)
and hashing technology (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2009;
Zhang et al. 2010; Zhu, Shen, and Xie 2015), it can efﬁciently solve the retrieval of heterogenous modalities.
The basic idea of CMH methods is to project the information from different modalities into a uniﬁed hash space,
where hamming distance can be applied as the metric to
measure distance. They often learn hash functions in ofﬂine process by batch learning. Then the hash codes of all
database data are computed by the learned hash functions.

• The cross-modal correlation is not analyzed by online
hashing. Cross-modal correlation describes the relationship between different modalities, thus it plays an important role in cross-modal retrieval. Due to the well-known
semantic gap between different modalities, cross-modal
correlation is difﬁcult to be analyzed. Moreover, with
the change of database, the correlation between heterogeneous data is also varied. The analysis of ever-changing
cross-modal correlation poses great challenge to online
hashing method.

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

294

