Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Locally Adaptive Translation for Knowledge Graph Embedding
Yantao Jia1 , Yuanzhuo Wang1 , Hailun Lin2 , Xiaolong Jin1 , Xueqi Cheng1
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China

entities as points and relations as translation from head entities to tail entities in the vector space. TransH (Wang et al.
2014) models relations as translation on a hyperplane and
represents a relation as two vectors, i.e., the norm vector
of the hyperplane and the translation vector on the hyperplane. These methods ﬁnally learn the representations of entities and relations by minimizing a global margin-based loss
function.
On one hand, existing embedding methods over one
knowledge graph determine the optimal form of loss function during experiments. A critical problem is that the determination is made over a limited number of candidates.
For example, the optimal loss function used in TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) on Freebase is determined with its margin among the 3-element set {1, 2, 10}. It is unclear that
why the loss function is examined by only testing a closed
set of values of its parameters in the literature. Obviously,
the margin is nonnegative and the full grid search of ﬁnding its optimum is almost impossible. On the other hand,
existing embedding methods over two different knowledge
graphs ﬁnd their individual optimal loss functions over the
same set of candidates. For instance, in TransH (Wang et
al. 2014), the loss functions on Freebase and WordNet share
the same candidate margins, i.e., {0.25, 0.5, 1, 2}. Since different knowledge graphs contain different entities and relations, this compatible setting ignores the individual locality
of knowledge graphs and seems not convincing in theory.
In this paper, we propose a translation based embedding
method, called TransA, to address the above two issues. For
different knowledge graphs, TransA adaptively ﬁnds the optimal loss function according to the structure of knowledge
graphs, and no closed set of candidates is needed in advance. It not only makes the translation based embedding
more tractable in practice, but promotes the performance of
embedding related applications, such as link prediction and
triple classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, the contributions of the paper are two-fold.

Abstract
Knowledge graph embedding aims to represent entities and
relations in a large-scale knowledge graph as elements in a
continuous vector space. Existing methods, e.g., TransE and
TransH, learn embedding representation by deﬁning a global
margin-based loss function over the data. However, the optimal loss function is determined during experiments whose
parameters are examined among a closed set of candidates.
Moreover, embeddings over two knowledge graphs with different entities and relations share the same set of candidate
loss functions, ignoring the locality of both graphs. This leads
to the limited performance of embedding related applications. In this paper, we propose a locally adaptive translation
method for knowledge graph embedding, called TransA, to
ﬁnd the optimal loss function by adaptively determining its
margin over different knowledge graphs. Experiments on two
benchmark data sets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method, as compared to the-state-of-the-art ones.

Keywords:locally adaptive translation, knowledge graph
embedding, optimal margin

Introduction
A knowledge graph is actually a graph with entities of different types as nodes and various relations among them as
edges. Typical examples include Freebase (Bollacker et al.
2008), WordNet (Miller 1995), OpenKN (Jia et al. 2014),
to name a few. In the past decade, the great success of constructing these large-scale knowledge graphs have advanced
many realistic applications, such as, link prediction (Liu et
al. 2014) and document understanding (Wu et al. 2012).
However, since knowledge graphs usually contain millions
of vertices and edges, any inference and computation over
them may not be easy. For example, when using Freebase
for link prediction, we need to deal with 68 million of vertices and one billion of edges. In addition, knowledge graphs
usually adopt symbolic and logical representation only. This
is not enough when handling applications with intensive numerical computation.
Recently, many research work have been conducted to
embed a knowledge graph into a continuous vector space,
called knowledge graph embedding, to tackle these problems. For example, TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) represents

• We experimentally prove that knowledge graphs with different localities may correspond to different optimal loss
functions, which differ in the setting of margins. Then we
study how margin affects the performance of embedding
by deducing a relation between them.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We further propose the locally adaptive translation

992

