Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Scalable Algorithms for Tractable Schatten Quasi-Norm Minimization
Fanhua Shang, Yuanyuan Liu, James Cheng
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{fhshang, yyliu, jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Schatten-p quasi-norm minimization has attracted a great
deal of attention in images recovery (Lu and Zhang 2014;
Lu et al. 2014), collaborative ﬁltering (Nie et al. 2012; Lu
et al. 2015; Mohan and Fazel 2012) and MRI analysis (Majumdar and Ward 2011). In addition, many non-convex surrogate functions of the 0 -norm listed in (Lu et al. 2014;
2015) have been extended to approximate the rank function,
such as SCAD (Fan and Li 2001) and MCP (Zhang 2010).
All non-convex surrogate functions mentioned above
for low-rank minimization lead to some non-convex, nonsmooth, even non-Lipschitz optimization problems. Therefore, it is crucial to develop fast and scalable algorithms
which are specialized to solve some alternative formulations. So far, Lai, Xu, and Yin (2013) proposed an iterative reweighted lease squares (IRucLq) algorithm to approximate the Schatten-p quasi-norm minimization problem, and
proved that the limit point of any convergent subsequence
generated by their algorithm is a critical point. Moreover,
Lu et al. (2014) proposed an iteratively reweighted nuclear
norm (IRNN) algorithm to solve many non-convex surrogate minimization problems. For matrix completion problems, the Schatten-p quasi-norm has been shown to be empirically superior to the nuclear norm (Marjanovic and Solo
2012). In addition, Zhang, Huang, and Zhang (2013) theoretically proved that the Schatten-p quasi-norm minimization with small p requires signiﬁcantly fewer measurements
than the convex nuclear norm minimization. However, all
existing algorithms have to be solved iteratively and involve
SVD or EVD in each iteration, which incurs high computational cost and is too expensive for solving large-scale problems (Cai and Osher 2013; Liu et al. 2014).
In contrast, as an alternative non-convex formulation of
the nuclear norm, the bilinear spectral regularization as
in (Srebro, Rennie, and Jaakkola 2004; Recht, Fazel, and
Parrilo 2010) has been successfully applied in many largescale applications, e.g., collaborative ﬁltering (Mitra, Sheorey, and Chellappa 2010). As the Schatten-p quasi-norm is
equivalent to the p quasi-norm on singular values of a matrix, it is natural to ask the following question: can we design equivalent matrix factorization forms for the cases of
the Schatten quasi-norm, e.g., p = 2/3 or 1/2?
In order to answer the above question, in this paper we
ﬁrst deﬁne two tractable Schatten quasi-norms, i.e., the
Frobenius/nuclear hybrid and bi-nuclear quasi-norms. We

Abstract
The Schatten-p quasi-norm (0<p<1) is usually used to replace the standard nuclear norm in order to approximate the
rank function more accurately. However, existing Schattenp quasi-norm minimization algorithms involve singular value
decomposition (SVD) or eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) in
each iteration, and thus may become very slow and impractical for large-scale problems. In this paper, we ﬁrst deﬁne two
tractable Schatten quasi-norms, i.e., the Frobenius/nuclear
hybrid and bi-nuclear quasi-norms, and then prove that they
are in essence the Schatten-2/3 and 1/2 quasi-norms, respectively, which lead to the design of very efﬁcient algorithms that only need to update two much smaller factor matrices. We also design two efﬁcient proximal alternating linearized minimization algorithms for solving representative
matrix completion problems. Finally, we provide the global
convergence and performance guarantees for our algorithms,
which have better convergence properties than existing algorithms. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world data
show that our algorithms are more accurate than the state-ofthe-art methods, and are orders of magnitude faster.

Introduction
In recent years, the matrix rank minimization problem arises
in a wide range of applications such as matrix completion, robust principal component analysis, low-rank representation, multivariate regression and multi-task learning.
To solve such problems, Fazel, Hindi, and Boyd; Candès
and Tao; Recht, Fazel, and Parrilo (2001; 2010; 2010) have
suggested to relax the rank function by its convex envelope,
i.e., the nuclear norm. In fact, the nuclear norm is equivalent to the 1 -norm on singular values of a matrix, and
thus it promotes a low-rank solution. However, it has been
shown in (Fan and Li 2001) that the 1 -norm regularization over-penalizes large entries of vectors, and results in
a biased solution. By realizing the intimate relationship between them, the nuclear norm penalty also over-penalizes
large singular values, that is, it may make the solution deviate from the original solution as the 1 -norm does (Nie,
Huang, and Ding 2012; Lu et al. 2015). Compared with the
nuclear norm, the Schatten-p quasi-norm for 0<p<1 makes a
closer approximation to the rank function. Consequently, the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2016

