Solving Risk-Sensitive POMDPs with and without Cost Observations
Ping Hou

William Yeoh

Pradeep Varakantham

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA
phou@cs.nmsu.edu

Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA
wyeoh@cs.nmsu.edu

School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
Singapore 188065
pradeepv@smu.edu.sg

In this paper, we investigate goal-directed Risk-Sensitive
POMDPs (RS-POMDPs), a generalization of RS-MDPs to
the partially observable case. In the motivating domains earlier, partial observability may correspond to taxi drivers not
completely observing other taxis in the same zone, electric
car drivers not knowing about trafﬁc conditions, and lack
of accurate knowledge of snow conditions on the ground.
Additionally, it is often not explicitly stated in the POMDP
literature if agents can or cannot observe actual costs incurred
during execution (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998).
When costs can be observed, one can use them to update and
get more accurate belief states, which can result in improved
policies. Unfortunately, most algorithms do not explicitly use
them to do so even when costs can be observed.
Towards solving goal-directed RS-POMDPs, we make
the following key contributions: (i) We generalize Functional Value Iteration (FVI) (Marecki and Varakantham 2010),
which was developed to solve ﬁnite-horizon RS-POMDPs, to
now solve goal-directed RS-POMDPs with our RS-criterion;
(ii) We propose a new exact search-based algorithm that is
tailored speciﬁcally to RS-POMDPs with our RS-criterion;
(iii) In domains where agents can observe actual costs of
actions and they can provide more information than the observations, we provide a mechanism to exploit the extra information provided by observed costs; and (iv) Finally, we
experimentally show that the new algorithm performs better than FVI in two synthetic domains and a taxi domain
(Ziebart et al. 2008; Varakantham et al. 2012) generated with
real-world data.

Abstract
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs)
are often used to model planning problems under uncertainty.
The goal in Risk-Sensitive POMDPs (RS-POMDPs) is to ﬁnd
a policy that maximizes the probability that the cumulative
cost is within some user-deﬁned cost threshold. In this paper,
unlike existing POMDP literature, we distinguish between the
two cases of whether costs can or cannot be observed and show
the empirical impact of cost observations. We also introduce a
new search-based algorithm to solve RS-POMDPs and show
that it is faster and more scalable than existing approaches
in two synthetic domains and a taxi domain generated with
real-world data.

Introduction
In planning their daily movement strategies to get customers,
most taxi drivers (Ziebart et al. 2008; Varakantham et al.
2012) are focused on reducing the risk associated with achieving a certain goal in terms of revenue. Similarly, electric car
drivers (Eisner, Funke, and Storandt 2011) are more focused
on reducing the risk of being stranded on a highway than trying to reach a destination several minutes earlier. Trucks deployed to clear snow in cities (Salazar-Aguilar, Langevin, and
Laporte 2013) are motivated by the need to reduce the risk of
not clearing snow on “important” highways and roads. Motivated by such problems, this paper focuses on risk-sensitive
planning under uncertainty.
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs) have been shown to be effective models for planning under uncertainty. There is a large
body of work by researchers who incorporated notions
of risk in MDPs and POMDPs (Liu and Koenig 2005;
2006; Osogami 2011; 2012; Bäuerle and Rieder 2014;
Marecki and Varakantham 2010). Among them, Yu, Lin,
and Yan (1998) introduced Risk-Sensitive MDPs (RS-MDPs),
which seek a policy that maximizes the probability that the
cumulative cost is within some user-deﬁned cost threshold.
In this model, the Risk-Sensitive criterion (RS-criterion) is
equivalent to having a utility function that is a step function,
where an execution trajectory has no utility if its cost exceeds
the threshold and a non-zero constant utility otherwise.

Background
A Goal-Directed POMDP (GD-POMDP) (Geffner
and Bonet 2013) is represented as a tuple P =
S, b0 , G, A, T, C, Ω, O. It consists of a set of states S;
an initial belief state b0 ; a subset G ⊆ S of observable
goal states; a set of actions A; a transition function
T : S × A × S → [0, 1] that gives the probability T (s, a, s )
of transitioning from state s to state s when action a is
executed; a cost function C : S×A → R+ that gives the cost
C(s, a) of executing action a in state s; a set of observations
Ω; and an observation function O : A × S × Ω → [0, 1]
that gives the probability O(a, s, o) of receiving observation
o when the action a is executed and state s is reached. In
this paper, we will focus on GD-POMDPs and will thus use

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3138

