Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Nested Monte Carlo Search for Two-Player Games
Tristan Cazenave

Abdallah Safﬁdine
Michael Schoﬁeld
Michael Thielscher

L AMSADE — Université Paris-Dauphine
cazenave@lamsade.dauphine.fr

School of Computer Science and Engineering
The University of New South Wales
{abdallahs, mschoﬁeld, mit}@cse.unsw.edu.au
(MCTS) (Cazenave 2009). It lends itself to many optimisations and improvements and has been successful in many
such problems (Cazenave 2010; Akiyama, Komiya, and
Kotani 2012). In particular, NMCS lead to a new record solution to the Morpion Solitaire mathematical puzzle.
While the NMCS algorithm has been used successfully in
a variety of single-agent domains, it has not been adapted to
a more general setting. The purpose of our paper is to generalise the NMCS algorithm to two-player turn-taking games
with win/lose outcomes.

Abstract
The use of the Monte Carlo playouts as an evaluation function has proved to be a viable, general technique for searching intractable game spaces. This facilitate the use of statistical techniques like Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), but is
also known to require signiﬁcant processing overhead. We
seek to improve the quality of information extracted from the
Monte Carlo playout in three ways. Firstly, by nesting the
evaluation function inside another evaluation function; secondly, by measuring and utilising the depth of the playout;
and thirdly, by incorporating pruning strategies that eliminate
unnecessary searches and avoid traps. Our experimental data,
obtained on a variety of two-player games from past General
Game Playing (GGP) competitions and others, demonstrate
the usefulness of these techniques in a Nested Player when
pitted against a standard, optimised UCT player.

Contributions
A naive extension of NMCS from single- to two-player
games faces three hurdles: (a) no game theoretic guarantees,
(b) lack of informativity of the Monte Carlo playouts, and
(c) high complexity of nested searches. Our contributions in
this paper address each of these issues as follows: Based on
a formal framework for NMCS in two-player win/lose games,
1. we show how the quality of information propagated during the search can be increased via a discounting heuristic, leading to a better move selection for the overall algorithm;
2. we present a technique for improving the cost-effectiveness of the algorithm without changing the resulting policy by using safe pruning criteria;
3. we show how long-term convergence to an optimal strategy can be guaranteed by wrapping NMCS inside a Upper
Conﬁdence bounds for Trees (UCT)-like algorithm;
Moreover, we present the results of evaluating experimentally the performance of the algorithm on 9 different twoplayer win/lose games. The player resulting from combining these ideas is superior to a standard MCTS player in 5 of
the tested domains, and weaker in a single one. This NMCS
player also performs favourably compared to the recently
developed MCTS-MR algorithm (Baier and Winands 2013) in
4 domains and is outperformed in 2. We identify misère variants as being particularly favourable to two-player NMCS.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. We
introduce two-player, two-outcome games and a generalisation of single-player NMCS to these games, then present the
two heuristic improvements of discounting and pruning, respectively, including game-theoretic guarantees, and ﬁnally
state and discuss our experimental results.

Introduction
Monte Carlo techniques have proved a viable approach for
searching intractable game spaces (Browne et al. 2012).
These techniques are domain independent, that is, the programmer does not need to construct a different evaluation
function for each game. As such, they have been successfully applied to a variety of games, especially in General
Game Playing (GGP), where the goal is to build AI systems
that are capable of taking the rules of any game described
in a formal language and to play that game efﬁciently and
effectively (Genesereth, Love, and Pell 2005). This area of
research is growing with much emphasis on improving the
ability of AI systems to play games with intractable search
spaces.
A policy is a function or algorithm mapping states to actions for a speciﬁed player. The simplest domain independent policy is to always choose a random move, but this does
not lead to quality play. This raises a fundamental question:
how do we take a simple random technique and improve the
quality of the information it produces while mitigating the
increase in complexity, for example in the context of GGP?
For the special case of single-agent games, the Nested
Monte Carlo Search (NMCS) algorithm was proposed as
an alternative to single-player Monte Carlo Tree Search
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

687

