Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Compressed Conditional Mean Embeddings
for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Guy Lever

John Shawe-Taylor

Ronnie Stafford

Csaba Szepesvári

University College London
London, UK
g.lever@cs.ucl.ac.uk

University College London
London, UK
j.shawe-taylor@cs.ucl.ac.uk

University College London
London, UK
r.stafford.12@ucl.ac.uk

University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
szepesva@cs.ualberta.ca

learned policy exist: e.g. consistency in the large data limit
for the algorithm of Ormoneit and Sen (2002) under mild
smoothness assumptions or bounds on the value of the policy learned in terms of the error of the CME (Grünewälder et
al. 2012b; Yao et al. 2014). c) By reducing model learning to
a supervised learning problem, to some extent the problem
of a-priori deﬁning a good low-dimensional representation
architecture for value functions is avoided. d) The approach
can be data-efﬁcient since state-of-the-art non-parametric
approaches can be used to approximate the CME from few
data points.
One drawback is the fact that the size of the induced ﬁnite (pseudo-)MDP scales quadratically with the amount of
data used to learn the model, signiﬁcantly slowing down the
planning step and straining the algorithm’s memory requirements as more data is collected. Further, Grünewälder et al.
(2012b) employ non-parametric methods to learn the CME
which are data efﬁcient but computationally expensive. It
is therefore of interest to investigate methods for learning
CMEs in RL which retain these beneﬁts but enable efﬁcient planning and which can be learned efﬁciently even
for problems that require huge amounts of data to learn a
good model. We present a method of learning a compressed
CME which induces a compressed ﬁnite pseudo-MDP for
efﬁcient planning, decoupling the amount of data collected
and the size of the induced pseudo-MDP. The compression
guarantees the existence of compressed CMEs maintaining good performance bounds. We optimize the CME nonparametrically but efﬁciently, using kernel matching pursuit.

Abstract
We present a model-based approach to solving Markov decision processes (MDPs) in which the system dynamics are
learned using conditional mean embeddings (CMEs). This
class of methods comes with strong performance guarantees, and enables planning to be performed in an induced ﬁnite (pseudo-)MDP, which approximates the MDP, but can be
solved exactly using dynamic programming. Two drawbacks
of existing methods exist: ﬁrstly, the size of the induced ﬁnite (pseudo-)MDP scales quadratically with the amount of
data used to learn the model, costing much memory and time
when planning with the learned model; secondly, learning
the CME itself using powerful kernel least-squares is costly
– a second computational bottleneck. We present an algorithm which maintains a rich kernelized CME model class,
but solves both problems: ﬁrstly we demonstrate that the loss
function for the CME model suggests a principled approach
to compressing the induced (pseudo-)MDP, leading to faster
planning, while maintaining guarantees; secondly we propose
to learn the CME model itself using fast sparse-greedy kernel
regression well-suited to the RL context. We demonstrate superior performance to existing methods in this class of modelbased approaches on a range of MDPs.

1

Introduction

Several methods have been proposed for model-based reinforcement learning (RL) which, due to the form of the
model, induce a ﬁnite (pseudo-)MDP1 which approximates
the MDP, such that solving the induced (pseudo-)MDP delivers a good policy for the true MDP (Ormoneit and Sen
2002; Grünewälder et al. 2012b; Yao et al. 2014). In these
methods the learned ‘model’ can be viewed as a “conditional
mean embedding” (CME) of the MDP transition dynamics.
We review this family of methods in Section 3.
In general the approach has the following potentially useful properties: a) The induced ﬁnite approximate Bellman
optimality equation can be solved exactly in ﬁnite time,
avoiding instability associated with approximate dynamic
programming (e.g. Bertsekas (2011)). As a result, planning
is guaranteed to succeed. b) Guarantees on the value of the

2
2.1

Preliminaries

Reinforcement Learning Background

We recall basic concepts associated with reinforcement
learning (RL). In RL an agent acts in an environment by
sequentially choosing actions over a sequence of time steps,
in order to maximize a cumulative reward. We model this
as a Markov decision process (MDP) which is deﬁned using a state space S, an action space A, an initial state distribution P1 over S, an (immediate) reward function r :
S × A → [0, 1], and a stationary Markov transition kernel (P (s |s, a))(s,a,s )∈S×A×S These, together with a (stationary, stochastic, Markov) policy π : S → P(A), a
map from the state space to the set of distributions over

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Pseudo-MDPs relax the potential transition functions from the
set of probability measures to signed measures. See Section 3.1.

1779

