Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Resistance to Corruption of Strategic Argumentation
Michael J. Maher
School of Engineering and Information Technology
UNSW, Canberra
E-mail: michael.maher@unsw.edu.au

arguments are available to a player is kept conﬁdential, as
a strategic advantage. However, in practice, a player may
behave corruptly to violate this conﬁdentiality. In particular,
a player might learn of her opponent’s arguments through
espionage, or collude with her nominal opponent to achieve
a pre-determined outcome. Such behaviour is against legal
ethics, and in this paper we investigate whether strategic argumentation is resistant to this form of corruption, that is,
whether it is computationally difﬁcult to exploit the corrupt
behaviour.
The games we consider in this paper are two-player adversarial games. In each move a player adds entire arguments, rather than single rules, to the dispute. These
games also require a player to commit to the arguments
she plays, in the sense that there is no ability to retract
an argument. The only way an argument loses force is
as a result of it being attacked by other arguments. We
call playing such games strategic argumentation, following (Governatori et al. 2014b). These games are quite different – in purpose and in technical detail, as discussed
above – from dialogue games that are used to provide an
operational interpretation of defeasible rules and argumentation (for example, (Prakken and Sartor 1998; Prakken 2005;
Thang, Dung, and Hung 2012), among many).
It might appear more natural to formulate strategic argumentation games in concrete terms, with precedents represented by defeasible rules, as argued by (Prakken and Sartor
1998). Indeed (Maher 2014) does exactly this, using the
defeasible logic DL (Antoniou et al. 2001). However, we
choose to ﬁrst formulate them in terms of Dung’s model of
abstract argumentation (Dung 1995). Although this has the
danger that important features are abstracted away, we will
show that results obtained in the abstract setting can be extended to a wide range of concrete formalisms supporting
defeasible rules.
We address two semantics for abstract argumentation: the
grounded and stable semantics (Dung 1995). These semantics seem the most natural for adjudicating disputes. The
grounded semantics accepts arguments that (iteratively) are
only attacked by defeated arguments and hence are relatively
uncontroversial. The stable semantics consists of those adjudications where each argument is accepted or rejected.
Furthermore, most concrete languages expressing defeasible
rules reﬂect one of these semantics.

Abstract
Strategic argumentation provides a simple model of disputation. We investigate it in the context of Dung’s abstract argumentation. We show that strategic argumentation under the
grounded semantics is resistant to corruption – speciﬁcally,
collusion and espionage – in a sense similar to Bartholdi et
al’s notion of a voting scheme resistant to manipulation. Under the stable semantics, strategic argumentation is resistant
to espionage, but its resistance to collusion varies according
to the aims of the disputants. These results are extended to a
variety of concrete languages for argumentation.

Introduction
Organizations have many mechanisms to discourage the
risk of corruption of their processes by the individuals performing these processes: managerial oversight, transparency
through audit trails, the presence of co-workers, random inspections, etc. (Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick 1989) introduced a further way in which corruption is discouraged: the
computational difﬁculty of determining what an individual
must do to achieve a speciﬁc aim (in their problem, to alter
the result of an election). In this paper, we adapt this approach for strategic argumentation, which provides a simple
model of disputation and negotiation among agents.
A key source of intuition for this work is legal disputation.
(Prakken and Sartor 1998) have argued persuasively that legal precedents can be represented by defeasible rules, and
reasoned with using arguments constructed from the rules.
Lawyers act as agents for their clients and, in particular, may
present oral arguments to a judge in support of their client’s
position and to refute arguments by opposing lawyers. Such
a process can be represented as a game where each player,
in turn, asserts additional arguments that overcome their opponent’s arguments and leave the game in a desired state.
((Prakken 2005) calls such dialogues relevant.) Eventually
a winner emerges when one player is unable to refute the
opponent’s argument.
To model legal disputation requires a game of incomplete
knowledge, since lawyers generally are not aware of all the
arguments their opponent will employ. In theory, and implicit in the rules of such games, the knowledge of which
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1030

