Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Causal Explanation Under Indeterminism: A Sampling Approach
Christopher A Merck and Samantha Kleinberg
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken NJ

However if we want to tell an individual why their blood
sugar is low at 4 PM, we need to be able to automatically
determine that it is due to the race they ran the day before
plus their current insulin dosing. Runs from a week ago are
not important here, but neither is a brief jog that morning.
To accurately and automatically explain events, we need
to handle both continuous time and state (e.g. glucose level),
and go beyond only looking at whether an event happens and
instead identify causes that change when and how the event
happens. Perhaps an individual had a genetic disposition toward lung cancer, but smoking led to diagnosis at a much
earlier age than otherwise would have happened. It may
be that two arsonists individually didn’t change whether a
ﬁre happened (since either would have brought it about), but
they increased the intensity of the ﬁre and prevented it from
being extinguished.
In this work, we show how to compute answers to counterfactual queries in continuous-time systems using probability trajectories. We then show how to test whether one
event changes the probability, time, or intensity of another
event and compute quantitative strengths for these relationships. We ﬁrst evaluate our method in a continuous-time
simulation of billiard ball collisions, showing that it rejects
spurious correlations when there is a common cause, ﬁnds
hastening despite probability lowering in cases of backup
causation, and identiﬁes the most direct relationships in
causal chains. Finally, we use it to explain a hypoglycemic
episode in a simulation of Type 1 Diabetes, demonstrating
the technique’s readiness for real-world use.

Abstract
One of the key uses of causes is to explain why things happen.
Explanations of speciﬁc events, like an individual’s heart attack on Monday afternoon or a particular car accident, help
assign responsibility and inform our future decisions. Computational methods for causal inference make use of the vast
amounts of data collected by individuals to better understand
their behavior and improve their health. However, most methods for explanation of speciﬁc events have provided theoretical approaches with limited applicability. In contrast we
make two main contributions: an algorithm for explanation
that calculates the strength of token causes, and an evaluation
based on simulated data that enables objective comparison
against prior methods and ground truth. We show that the
approach ﬁnds the correct relationships in classic test cases
(causal chains, common cause, and backup causation) and in
a realistic scenario (explaining hyperglycemic episodes in a
simulation of type 1 diabetes).

Introduction
The past two decades have seen signiﬁcant progress in computational discovery of causal relationships at the population level. Given a database of medical records, we can
ﬁnd causal relationships between variables like medications,
lifestyle, and disease. Yet while causal inference can tell us
what causes heart failure in general, it cannot tell us that
a speciﬁc patient’s heart failure is caused by their thyroid
disfunction rather than their uncontrolled diabetes — that is
the role of causal explanation. One of the core approaches
to explanation is based on counterfactuals, which capture
that without the cause the effect would not have happened.
However, this approach and other solutions have been primarily theoretical and since we only see what actually happened, it is difﬁcult to determine what would have happened
had things been different. Since the solutions to explanation have been mainly theoretical, computational methods
for explanation have lagged behind those for inference.
The primary shortcoming of existing explanation methods is their handling of time. Methods either ignore event
timing entirely (e.g. Bayesian networks) or add time ad-hoc
(e.g. dynamic Bayesian networks) at the expense of computational complexity and large amounts of required input.

Related Work
Causal explanation has been studied in philosophy, computer science, and other ﬁelds including law (determining
fault and culpability), medicine (diagnosing individuals to
identify the cause of their symptoms), and software engineering (ﬁnding causes of program bugs). We focus on reviewing the work in the ﬁrst two areas since they provide
insight into what constitutes a causal explanation and how
we can realistically ﬁnd these.

Philosophy
We draw inspiration from two approaches to causal explanation, or token causality, that aim to evaluate or quantify how
much of a difference a cause made to its effect.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1037

