Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

The Constrained Laplacian Rank Algorithm for Graph-Based Clustering
Feiping Nie1 , Xiaoqian Wang1 , Michael I. Jordan2 , Heng Huang1∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas, Arlington
2
Departments of EECS and Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
feipingnie@gmail.com, xqwang1991@gmail.com, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu, heng@uta.edu

results to get the clustering indicators); also, the clustering
results are dependent on the quality of the input data graph
(i.e., they are sensitive to the particular graph construction
methods). It seems plausible that a strategy in which the optimization phase is allowed to change the data graph could
have advantages relative to the two-phase strategy.
In this paper we propose a novel graph-based clustering
model that learns a graph with exactly k connected components (where k is the number of clusters). In our new
model, instead of ﬁxing the input data graph associated to
the afﬁnity matrix, we learn a new data similarity matrix
that is a block diagonal matrix and has exactly k connected
components—the k clusters. Thus, our new data similarity
matrix is directly useful for the clustering task; the clustering results can be immediately obtained without requiring
any post-processing to extract the clustering indicators. To
achieve such ideal clustering structures, we impose a rank
constraint on the Laplacian graph of the new data similarity matrix, thereby guaranteeing the existence of exactly k
connected components. Considering both L2-norm and L1norm objectives, we propose two new clustering objectives
and derive optimization algorithms to solve them. We also
introduce a novel graph-construction method to initialize the
graph associated with the afﬁnity matrix.
We conduct empirical studies on simulated datasets and
seven real-world benchmark datasets to validate our proposed methods. The experimental results are promising—
we ﬁnd that our new graph-based clustering method consistently outperforms other related methods in most cases.
Notation: Throughout the paper, all the matrices are written as uppercase. For a matrix M , the i-th row and the ij-th
element of M are denoted by mi and mij , respectively. The
trace of matrix M is denoted by T r(M ). The L2-norm of
vector v is denoted by v2 , the Frobenius and the L1 norm
of matrix M are denoted by M F and M 1 , respectively.

Abstract
Graph-based clustering methods perform clustering on
a ﬁxed input data graph. If this initial construction is
of low quality then the resulting clustering may also be
of low quality. Moreover, existing graph-based clustering methods require post-processing on the data graph
to extract the clustering indicators. We address both of
these drawbacks by allowing the data graph itself to be
adjusted as part of the clustering procedure. In particular, our Constrained Laplacian Rank (CLR) method
learns a graph with exactly k connected components
(where k is the number of clusters). We develop two
versions of this method, based upon the L1-norm and
the L2-norm, which yield two new graph-based clustering objectives. We derive optimization algorithms
to solve these objectives. Experimental results on synthetic datasets and real-world benchmark datasets exhibit the effectiveness of this new graph-based clustering method.

Introduction
State-of-the art clustering methods are often based on graphical representations of the relationships among data points.
For example, spectral clustering (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss
2001), normalized cut (Shi and Malik 2000) and ratio
cut (Hagen and Kahng 1992) all transform the data into
a weighted, undirected graph based on pairwise similarities. Clustering is then accomplished by spectral or graphtheoretic optimization procedures. See (Ding and He 2005;
Li and Ding 2006) for a discussion of the relations among
these graph-based methods, and also the connections to nonnegative matrix factorization. All of these methods involve
a two-stage process in which an data graph is formed from
the data, and then various optimization procedures are invoked on this ﬁxed input data graph. A disadvantage of this
two-stage process is that the ﬁnal clustering structures are
not represented explicitly in the data graph (e.g., graph-cut
methods often use K-means algorithm to post-process the

New Clustering Formulations
Graph-based clustering approaches typically optimize their
objectives based on a given data graph associated with an
afﬁnity matrix A ∈ Rn×n (which can be symmetric or nonsymmetric), where n is the number of nodes (data points) in
the graph. There are two drawbacks with these approaches:
(1) the clustering performance is sensitive to the quality of
the data graph construction; (2) the cluster structures are not

∗

To whom all correspondence should be addressed. This
work was partially supported by US NSF-IIS 1117965, NSFIIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NIH R01
AG049371.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1969

