Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

From Exact to Anytime Solutions for Marginal MAP
Junkyu Lee

Radu Marinescu

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
junkyul@ics.uci.edu

IBM Research – Ireland
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com

Rina Dechter

Alexander Ihler

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
dechter@ics.uci.edu

University Irvine, CA 92697, USA
ihler@ics.uci.edu

2003; Yuan and Hansen 2009). The depth-ﬁrst branch and
bound search improves its performance when it traverses an
AND/OR search graph, and when it is guided by heuristics
based on weighted mini-bucket elimination with cost shifting schemes, as shown in (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler
2014). More recently, several best-ﬁrst AND/OR search algorithms for MMAP were also proposed, and were shown
to outperform considerably depth-ﬁrst search if memory is
available (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2015). They include the best-ﬁrst AND/OR search algorithm which belongs to the AO* family, as well as a recursive bestﬁrst AND/OR search algorithm that operates within limited
memory. In addition, variational algorithms for MMAP (Liu
and Ihler 2013), and an anytime MMAP algorithm based
on factor-set-elimination (Maua and De Campos 2012) have
also been developed.
Best-ﬁrst search, which typically expands fewer nodes
than depth-ﬁrst search, is a particularly favorable choice for
MMAP because it can save on the number of evaluations of
the marginal probability conditioned on the MAP variables.
However, best-ﬁrst search faces two drawbacks: (1) it may
require enormous amounts of memory, (2) it only returns the
optimal solution at the end of processing. Recursive bestﬁrst search (Korf 1993) remedies the memory issue, but still
lacks anytime behavior.
Contributions: Here, we focus on providing good anytime solutions, and develop the anytime version of the exact AND/OR search algorithms. We use the principle of
weighted search that was shown to provide a useful tool for
converting best ﬁrst algorithms into anytime scheme (Pohl
1970). Unlike local search based methods (Park and Darwiche 2004), our proposed algorithms come with solution
quality guarantees; unlike variational schemes (Liu and Ihler
2013) our algorithms will prove optimality if given enough
time.
We discuss the effectiveness of the newly introduced anytime algorithms against state-of-the-art exact search algorithms over varying strength of heuristics and time bounds.
Through extensive empirical evaluations, we show that the
proposed anytime algorithms dominate exact search algorithms and provide anytime solutions to the problems that
were beyond the reach of exact algorithms.

Abstract
This paper explores the anytime performance of search-based
algorithms for solving the Marginal MAP task over graphical
models. The current state-of-the-art for solving this challenging task is based on best-ﬁrst search exploring the AND/OR
graph with the guidance of heuristics based on mini-bucket
and variational cost-shifting principles. Yet, those schemes
are uncompromising in that they solve the problem exactly,
or not at all, and often suffer from memory problems. In
this work, we explore the well known principle of weighted
search for converting best-ﬁrst search solvers into anytime
schemes. The weighted best-ﬁrst search schemes report a
solution early in the process by using inadmissible heuristics, and subsequently improve the solution. While it was
demonstrated recently that weighted schemes can yield effective anytime behavior for pure MAP tasks, Marginal MAP
is far more challenging (e.g., a conditional sum must be evaluated for every solution). Yet, in an extensive empirical analysis we show that weighted schemes are indeed highly effective anytime solvers for Marginal MAP yielding the most
competitive schemes to date for this task.

Introduction
Graphical models provide a powerful framework for reasoning about conditional dependency structures over many
variables. The Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) task asks
for the mode of the joint probability distribution, while the
Marginal MAP (MMAP) task generalizes MAP by allowing
a subset of the variables to be marginalized.
MMAP is known to be a very challenging task. The difﬁculty rises from not only the exponential size of the search
space but also the hardness of evaluating a full instantiation
of MAP variables, i.e., computing the marginal probability
given evidence. Furthermore, variable elimination orders of
MMAP are constrained and often more costly because the
maximization and the summation do not commute, i.e., sum
variables are eliminated before any MAP variable.
Early work for solving MMAP exactly was based on the
depth-ﬁrst branch and bound search guided by a heuristic
based on evaluating (incrementally) a join-tree built along
an unconstrained variable ordering (Park and Darwiche
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3255

