Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Comparative Study of Ranking-Based Semantics for Abstract Argumentation
Elise Bonzon

Jérôme Delobelle

Sébastien Konieczny

Nicolas Maudet

LIPADE
Université Paris Descartes
France
bonzon@parisdescartes.fr

CRIL, CNRS
Université d’Artois
France
delobelle@cril.fr

CRIL, CNRS
Université d’Artois
France
konieczny@cril.fr

Sorbonne Universités
UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS
LIP6, UMR 7606
75005 Paris
nicolas.maudet@lip6.fr

This is what we propose in this work. We study the existing ranking-based semantics in the literature (focusing on
the semantics that return a unique ranking between arguments) in the light of the proposed properties. That allows
us to underline the differences of behavior between those
semantics, and to propose a better reading of the different
choices one has on this matter.
The paper is organized as follows. The following section
gives the relevant background regarding abstract argumentation and ranking-based semantics. The next section presents
the different properties that have been introduced in the literature, whereas the next one formally introduces the existing
ranking-based semantics. Note that due to space constraints,
we can not recall all the details and justiﬁcations of semantics and properties of the literature, but the reader can ﬁnd
them in the corresponding papers. In the next section we
discuss the different properties and compare the semantics,
and the ﬁnal section concludes.

Abstract
Argumentation is a process of evaluating and comparing a set of arguments. A way to compare them consists
in using a ranking-based semantics which rank-order
arguments from the most to the least acceptable ones.
Recently, a number of such semantics have been proposed independently, often associated with some desirable properties. However, there is no comparative study
which takes a broader perspective. This is what we propose in this work. We provide a general comparison of
all these semantics with respect to the proposed properties. That allows to underline the differences of behavior
between the existing semantics.

Introduction
Argumentation consists in reasoning with conﬂicting information based on the exchange and evaluation of interacting arguments. The most popular way to represent argumentation process was proposed by Dung (1995) with argumentation frameworks modelized by binary graphs, where
the nodes represent the arguments, and the edges represent the attacks between them. From these argumentation
frameworks, several semantics indicating which sets of arguments, called extensions, are mutually compatible were
proposed (see (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011) for
an overview). However, for applications with a big number
of arguments, it can be problematic to have only two levels
of evaluations (arguments are either accepted or rejected).
For instance, such a limitation can be questionable when
using argumentation for debate platforms on the web (see
(Leite and Martins 2011) for such a discussion).
In order to ﬁx these problems, a solution consists in using semantics that distinguish arguments not with the classical accepted/rejected evaluations, but with a large number of levels of acceptability. A lot of these semantics,
called ranking-based semantics, were proposed in recent
years (Amgoud and Ben-Naim 2013; Cayrol and LagasquieSchiex 2005; Leite and Martins 2011; Matt and Toni 2008;
Gabbay 2012) with, for each semantics, different behaviour
and logical properties. However, all these semantics have
never been compared between them.

Preliminaries
In this section, we start by brieﬂy recalling what is a Dung’s
abstract argumentation framework (Dung 1995).
Deﬁnition 1. An argumentation framework (AF) is a pair
F = A, R with A a set of arguments and R a binary relation on A, i.e. R ⊆ A × A, called the attack relation. A
set of arguments S ⊆ A attacks an argument b ∈ A, if there
exists a ∈ S, such that (a, b) ∈ R. We note Arg(F ) = A.
Let AF be the set of all argumentation frameworks. For
two AFs F = A, R and G = A , R , we deﬁne the union
F ∪ G = A ∪ A , R ∪ R .
We can now introduce some useful notions in order to
formalize properties of argumentation frameworks.
Deﬁnition 2. Let F = A, R be an AF and a, b ∈ A.
A path P from b to a, noted P (b, a), is a sequence s =
a0 , . . . , an  of arguments such that a0 = a, an = b
and ∀i < n, (ai+1 , ai ) ∈ R. We denote by lP = n the
length of P. A defender (resp. attacker) of a is an argument situated at the beginning of an even-length (resp. oddlength) path. We denote the multiset of defenders and attackers of a by Rn+ (a) = {b | ∃P (b, a) with lP ∈ 2N} and
Rn− (a) = {b | ∃P (b, a) with lP ∈ 2N+1} respectively. The
direct attackers of a are arguments in R1− (a). An argument
a is defended if R2+ (a) = ∅.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

914

