Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Privacy-CNH: A Framework to Detect Photo Privacy with
Convolutional Neural Network Using Hierarchical Features
Lam Tran

Deguang Kong, Hongxia Jin

Ji Liu

University of Rochester
Samsung Research America
University of Rochester
Department of Computer Science
665 Clyde Ave
Department of Computer Science
Rochester, New York 14627
Mountain View, California 94043
Rochester, New York 14627
lam.tran@rochester.edu
doogkong@gmail.com
hongxia@acm.org
jliu@cs.rochester.edu
Abstract
Photo privacy is a very important problem in the digital age
where photos are commonly shared on social networking
sites and mobile devices. The main challenge in photo privacy detection is how to generate discriminant features to accurately detect privacy at risk photos. Existing photo privacy
detection works, which rely on low-level vision features, are
non-informative to the users regarding what privacy information is leaked from their photos.
In this paper, we propose a new framework called PrivacyCNH that utilizes hierarchical features which include both
object and convolutional features in a deep learning model
to detect privacy at risk photos. The generation of object
features enables our model to better inform the users about
the reason why a photo has privacy risk. The combination
of convolutional and object features provide a richer model
to understand photo privacy from different aspects, thus improving photo privacy detection accuracy. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms the
state-of-the-art work and the standard convolutional neural
network (CNN) with convolutional features on photo privacy
detection tasks.

Figure 1: The photo of an identiﬁcation card on Flickr that
leaks the private information of the individual in the photo.

that reveals the private information such as name, age, address, date of birth and other information. This photo may be
used by cybercriminals for fraudulent activities. The photo
is privacy at risk because it may lead to identity theft.
Recently, photo privacy leakage is a major concern, and
some of these incidents occurred without the awareness of
the victim. The most recent event was the iCloud celebrity
photo leaks (Villapaz 2004) where almost 500 private photos of several celebrities were leaked on the Internet. There
are many other incidents that were not covered by the major
media such as a man posted his ex-girlfriend’s nude photos
on Facebook as an act of revenge, and he was later convicted
and sentenced to jail for 3 years in a California penitentiary
(Rocha 2004).
Furthermore, a study by (Zerr et al. 2012) showed that
more than 80% of photos shared by teenagers on Facebook
were not approved by their parents and teachers. A recent research by (Besmer and Lipford 2008) had shown that Facebook proﬁles were used by employers and law enforcement
for employment and crime investigation respectively. Even
worse, a recent survey by (Wang et al. 2011) found that 23%
of Facebook users regret posting on Facebook. Therefore,
photo privacy detection is an important problem to solve in
order to educate and protect users from the aforementioned

Introduction
Mobile devices have revolutionized how people share photos with each other on social networks with a single click
of a button. Many social networking websites allow the user
to specify speciﬁc viewing privileges for speciﬁc groups of
people. While social networking websites such as Facebook
make an effort to protect their users’ privacy, such websites
mostly rely on the users themselves to report privacy violation before any action is taken. Moreover, the content of the
photos is rarely analyzed by the websites before the photos
are made available to view. After the photos are posted on
the social network to the public to view, it is close to impossible to permanently delete the uploaded photos. As a result,
the photos posted on these social networking websites may
release users’ home location, contact, bank account, family
members, and other sensitive information to the world before the users notice them.
For example, the photo shown in Figure 1 was downloaded from Flickr. The photo contains an identiﬁcation card
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1317

