Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Visual Semantic Framework for Innovation Analytics
Walid Shalaby

Computer Science Department
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
wshalaby@uncc.edu

Kripa Rajshekhar

Metonymy Labs
Chicago Metropolitan Area
kripa@metolabs.com

Wlodek Zadrozny

Computer Science Department
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
wzadrozn@uncc.edu

Wikipedia). In this knowledge graph nodes represent concepts and edges represent associations between them. For
any input keyword(s)/text, our framework maps that input to
a conceptual domain using the knowledge graph. In this conceptual domain semantically similar terms/documents will
have similar conceptual representations.
The basic pipeline for building the concept graph of input keyword(s)/text is presented in Figure 1. MSA utilizes
Wikipedia as a conceptual knowledge source. First, we build
a search index of all Wikipedia articles. Second, we utilize
association rule mining to uncover implicit associations between concepts by mining the ”See Also” link graph of indexed articles. Third, we use the inferred association rules
to construct a knowledge graph of concepts and their associations. Fourth, given a seed text, we map that text to the
concept space by ﬁrst generating a candidate set of concepts from the search index (explicit concepts), and then
augmenting that set with strongly associated concepts from
the knowledge graph (implicit concepts). Steps 1-3 are done
ofﬂine making conceptual mapping very efﬁcient at runtime.

Abstract
In this demo we present a semantic framework for innovation
and patent analytics powered by Mined Semantic Analysis
(MSA). Our framework provides cognitive assistance to its
users through a Web-based visual and interactive interface.
First, we describe building a conceptual knowledge graph
by mining user-generated encyclopedic textual corpus for semantic associations. Then, we demonstrate applying the acquired knowledge to support many cognition and knowledge
based use cases for innovation analysis including technology
exploration and landscaping, competitive analysis, literature
and prior art search and others.

Introduction
Innovations are often expressed as patent applications which
tend to be lengthy documents with highly complex and domain speciﬁc terminology. To establish their work novelty,
patent authors tend to use different vocabulary to refer to
the same concepts making the problem of patent analysis
linguistically challenging. Moreover, innovations analysis,
management, and planning are cognition intensive tasks that
require huge amount of domain and real-world expertise.
With the emergence of Big Data, massive amounts of innovation and patent data have become readily available promoting the need for more intelligent, interactive, and insightful cognitive analytics.
Current tools for innovation analysis can be roughly subdivided into three categories. First, statistical analysis tools
which utilize innovations metadata to provide high-level
statistics and visual plots of innovation trends. Second, content analysis tools which analyze patent texts to support
tasks like prior art search, litigation, technology exploration
and others. Third, hybrid tools which serve both purposes.
In this demo we present a Web-based semantic, visual,
and interactive framework for innovation analytics. To address the linguistic challenges of patent texts, our framework utilizes Minded Semantic Analysis (MSA), a novel distributional semantics approach (under review). MSA builds
a conceptual knowledge graph using association rule mining on concept rich user-generated textual corpora (e.g.,

Applications
We have a Web application of our framework to demonstrate
typical use cases which map to real-world cognitive tasks
that practitioners deal with today. These include a user initiated and interactive related-technology exploration tool, a
prior art search application, and a company patent portfolio
summarization functionality.
Due to limited space, we demonstrate in detail only one
application of our framework to assist practitioners in technology exploration and landscape analysis.
Consider ”Cognitive Analytics” (CA) as an example technology. Figure 2 (top) shows the concept space of CA by retrieving the top 10 most semantically related concepts using
MSA (node size reﬂects association strength). We can clearly
notice that: a) those concepts are very associated with CA as
well as with one another, and b) they cover a wide spectrum
of technological/conceptual landscape.
All patent data are indexed into our framework, consequently, we could facilitate landscape analysis of CA-related
technologies by showing patenting and innovation progression as the ThemeRiver shown in Figure 2 (bottom). Each
stream represents a patent class where stream width is proportional to the number of granted patents per class over 20

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4389

