Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Veto-Consensus Multiple Kernel Learning
Yuxun Zhou

Ninghang Hu

Costas J. Spanos

Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
yxzhou@berkeley.edu

Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
huninghang@gmail.com

Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
spanos@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose Veto-Consensus Multiple Kernel Learning
(VCMKL), a novel way of combining multiple kernels such
that one class of samples is described by the logical intersection (consensus) of base kernelized decision rules, whereas
the other classes by the union (veto) of their complements.
The proposed conﬁguration is a natural ﬁt for domain description and learning with hidden subgroups. We ﬁrst provide generalization risk bound in terms of the Rademacher
complexity of the classiﬁer, then a large margin multi-ν learning objective with tunable training error bound is formulated.
Seeing that the corresponding optimization is non-convex and
existing methods severely suffer from local minima, we establish a new algorithm, namely Parametric Dual Descent
Procedure(PDDP), that can approach global optimum with
guarantees. The bases of PDDP are two theorems that reveal
the global convexity and local explicitness of the parameterized dual optimum, for which a series of new techniques
for parametric program have been developed. The proposed
method is evaluated on extensive set of experiments, and the
results show signiﬁcant improvement over the state-of-the-art
approaches.

1

Figure 1: 2D VCMK with non-linear/all linear base kernels

method (Kloft et al. 2011), and mirror descent (Jagarlapudi et al. 2009). Also data related issues such as sample adaptability and missing channels (Liu et al. 2014;
2015) have been addressed. Despite the substantial theoretical advancement and algorithmic progress made in linear
MKL, few of the results could be directly applied to MKL
that incorporates nonlinear combinations. Indeed non-linear
MKL is usually studied on a case-by-case basis, such as
polynomial combination (Cortes, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh
2009), hierarchical kernel (Bach 2009), hyperkernels (Ong,
Williamson, and Smola 2005), etc.
In this work we propose a novel non-linear combination
of multiple kernels. To motivate the conﬁguration, Figure 1
illustrates a practical problem where part of the classes contains hidden structures. In this example, the positive class is
labeled. In contrast, the negative class contains several subgroups but only a“single” label is provided. To compensate
for this implicit information, we propose to describe the positive class by the intersection of the acceptance region of
multiple base kernel decision rules, and the negative class
by the union of their complements. Hence a sample is classiﬁed as negative as long as one or more rules “votes” negative (Veto), and a positive assignment is made for a sample
if and only if all of the rules agree (Consensus). With this
intuition, VCMKL is a natural solution for applications involving hidden structures. Moreover because the construction inherently emphasizes the sensitivity to negative class
and the speciﬁcity to positive class, it is also a promising
tool for domain description problems.
We discuss the proposed VCMKL from both theoretical and algorithmic perspectives. Firstly, we formalize the

Introduction

In recent years, multiple kernel learning (MKL) has shown
promising results in a variety of applications and has attracted much attention in machine learning community.
Given a set of base kernels, MKL ﬁnds an optimal combination of them with which an appropriate hypothesis
is determined on the training data. A large body of literature has been addressing the arising issues of MKL,
mainly from three perspectives and their intersections, i.e.
theoretical learning bound, related optimization algorithm,
and alternative MKL settings. To list a few, the generalization bounds for learning linear combination of multiple kernels have been extensively studied in (Ying and
Campbell 2009; Cortes, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2010;
Hussain and Shawe-Taylor 2011) by analyzing various complexity metrics. Following the pioneer work (Lanckriet et al.
2004) that formulates linear MKL as a semi-deﬁnite program (SDP), a series of work is devoted to improve the efﬁciency with various optimization techniques, such as reduced gradient (Rakotomamonjy et al. 2008), Newtown’s
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2407

