Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Complexity of mCP-nets
Thomas Lukasiewicz and Enrico Malizia
Department of Computer Science,
University of Oxford, UK
ﬁrstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

CP-net, there is an edge from vertex A to vertex B if the
value of the feature A inﬂuences the choice of the value of
feature B. Intuitively, this model captures preferences of the
type “given that all the other characteristics are equal, I prefer this value for feature A to that value of feature A”.
CP-nets were used to model preferences of groups, obtaining mCP-nets (Rossi, Venable, and Walsh 2004). This
multi-agent model is essentially a set of CP-nets, one for
each user. Preferences for groups of agents in mCP-nets
are deﬁned through voting schemes. In fact, through their
own individual CP-nets, each agent votes whether an outcome is preferred to another, and different ways of collecting votes (i.e., different voting schemes) give rise to different dominance semantics for mCP-nets. Various voting
schemes were proposed for mCP-nets (Rossi, Venable, and
Walsh 2004; Li, Vo, and Kowalczyk 2015). Unlike CP-nets,
which received an extensive complexity analysis, a precise
complexity analysis of voting tasks on mCP-nets is still
missing, as explicitly mentioned multiple times in the literature (Lang 2007; Li, Vo, and Kowalczyk 2010a; 2010b;
2011; 2015). In the original paper (Rossi, Venable, and
Walsh 2004), an initial investigation of these complexities
was carried out by studying the complexity of brute-force
algorithms to solve these problems. Our aim in this paper
is to settle these problems in their exact complexity classes,
showing, if possible, completeness results.

Abstract
mCP-nets are an expressive and intuitive formalism based on
CP-nets to reason about preferences of groups of agents. The
dominance semantics of mCP-nets is based on the concept
of voting, and different voting schemes give rise to different
dominance semantics for the group. Unlike CP-nets, which
received an extensive complexity analysis, mCP-nets, as reported multiple times in the literature, lack a precise study
of the voting tasks’ complexity. Prior to this work, only a
complexity analysis of brute-force algorithms for these tasks
was available, and this analysis only gave EXPTIME upper bounds for most of those problems. In this paper, we
start to ﬁll this gap by carrying out a precise computational
complexity analysis of voting tasks on acyclic binary polynomially connected mCP-nets whose constituents are standard
CP-nets. Interestingly, all these problems actually belong to
various levels of the polynomial hierarchy, and some of them
even belong to PTIME or LOGSPACE. Furthermore, for most
of these problems, we provide completeness results, which
show tight lower bounds for problems that (up to date) did
not have any explicit non-obvious lower bound.

Introduction
Modeling and reasoning about user preferences is a vast
area in AI with an extensive variety of applications. Among
them, there is the one of query answering under (group) preferences. For example, in a Web that is moving forward from
a document-centric paradigm to a user-centric one, it will
be more and more important to present Web search results
ranked according user preferences. In fact, in this example,
the problem is twofold: How to present a query answer to
a user who is known to belong to a group, and hence how
to rank results according to group preferences, and, on the
other hand, how to rank the answer when the speciﬁc user is
known along with her own preferences.
In the literature, various models for representing user
preferences were proposed, and among them one of the most
studied is that of CP-nets (Boutilier et al. 2004), as a vast literature on them demonstrates. This model has proven itself
to be useful and intuitive. In CP-nets, user preferences are
encoded via a directed graph whose vertices represent the
various features of the domain at hand. In the graph of a

Contributions. In this paper, we focus on acyclic binary
polynomially connected mCP-nets with standard CP-nets,
i.e., the constituent CP-nets of an mCP-net rank all the features, and they are not partial CP-nets (see preliminaries).
Our contributions are brieﬂy as follows:
 We carry out a thorough complexity analysis, for the
(a) Pareto, (b) Majority, (c) Max, and (d) Ranking voting schemes, of deciding (1) dominance, (2) optimal and
(3) optimum outcomes, (4) the existence of optimal and
(5) optimum outcomes (see Fig. 1). In most cases, we
show completeness, i.e., we provide tight lower bounds
for problems that (up to date) did not have any explicit
lower bound transcending the obvious hardness due to the
dominance test over the underlying CP-nets.
 In the complexity analysis, we distinguish between optimal and optimum outcomes for each voting scheme
(based on the idea of distinguishing weak and strong Con-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

558

