Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Unsupervised Co-Activity Detection from
Multiple Videos Using Absorbing Markov Chain
Donghun Yeo, Bohyung Han, Joon Hee Han
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea

video summarization, video annotation, visual surveillance,
etc.
Co-activity detection has not been studied intensively yet,
and there are only a few closely related works, which typically have critical limitations in scalability. (Chu, Zhou, and
De la Torre 2012) formulates co-activity detection problem
as an identiﬁcation of the most similar subsequences given
a pair of videos using branch-and-bound. Guo et al. (Guo et
al. 2013) ﬁnds common activity through binary labeling on
Markov random ﬁeld, which is constructed based on dense
trajectories. However, these algorithms are limited to processing only a pair of videos at a time and difﬁcult to be
extended for more videos. (Chu, Song, and Jaimes 2015)
proposes a video co-summarization technique, which can be
applied to co-activity detection by ﬁnding a complete bipartite subgraphs deﬁned on a video pair. This algorithm is extended to multiple videos by aggregating pairwise results,
but it does not consider multiple videos directly. A weakly
supervised algorithm for co-activity detection is proposed in
(Duchenne et al. 2009), but it assumes that co-activity has
the same length and occurs once in each video. More importantly, it requires negative examples to detect co-activities.
Another weakly supervised method is based on simple biclustering (Xiong and Corso 2012), which can also be applied to more than two videos, but this is not fully automatic
since human agent should determine which cluster corresponds to co-activity in the ﬁnal stage. There are several related problems in computer vision and pattern recognition,
i.e., image co-segmentation (Joulin, Bach, and Ponce 2010;
Kim and Xing 2012), video co-segmentation (Chiu and Fritz
2013), motif discovery (Minnen et al. 2007). However, these
approaches are not ﬂexible enough to be extended or converted to solve co-activity detection problem.
We propose an unsupervised algorithm to extract a subset of frames containing co-activity from each video using absorbing Markov chain. In our algorithm, we divide
each video into multiple overlapping subsequences with a
ﬁxed length and construct a vertex corresponding to each
subsequence. Edges are created for every pair of vertices
that do not belong to the same video and also for temporally overlapped subsequences in each video. Note that the
intra-sequence edges facilitate transitions between temporally adjacent vertices, which may be parts of co-activities
due to temporal locality. This property is also useful to iden-

Abstract
We propose a simple but effective unsupervised learning algorithm to detect a common activity (co-activity)
from a set of videos, which is formulated using absorbing Markov chain in a principled way. In our algorithm, a complete multipartite graph is ﬁrst constructed,
where vertices correspond to subsequences extracted
from videos using a temporal sliding window and edges
connect between the vertices originated from different
videos; the weight of an edge is proportional to the similarity between the features of two end vertices. Then,
we extend the graph structure by adding edges between
temporally overlapped subsequences in a video to handle variable-length co-activities using temporal locality, and create an absorbing vertex connected from all
other nodes. The proposed algorithm identiﬁes a subset
of subsequences as co-activity by estimating absorption
time in the constructed graph efﬁciently. The great advantage of our algorithm lies in the properties that it can
handle more than two videos naturally and identify multiple instances of a co-activity with variable lengths in a
video. Our algorithm is evaluated intensively in a challenging dataset and illustrates outstanding performance
quantitatively and qualitatively.

Introduction
Activity detection refers to a technique to identify and localize one or more predeﬁned classes of activities from input
videos in temporal (sometimes, spatio-temporal) domain.
Various algorithms have been proposed so far (Chen and
Grauman 2012; Yuan, Liu, and Wu 2011; Duchenne et al.
2009; Tian, Sukthankar, and Shah 2013), but they are typically based on supervised learning techniques that utilize
clean training data. On the other hand, co-activity detection, which is the problem of our interest, is a task to extract
one or more streaks of frames containing a common activity
from each video out of multiple ones without separate training procedure. Co-activity detection is a notoriously challenging problem; this is partly because co-activity is not a
well-deﬁned term and feature descriptors are not sufﬁciently
discriminative, especially in an unsupervised setting. However, this problem has potential to be used in various computer vision applications such as automatic video cropping,
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3662

