Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Holographic Embeddings of Knowledge Graphs
Maximilian Nickel1,2 and Lorenzo Rosasco1,2,3 and Tomaso Poggio1
1

Laboratory for Computational and Statistical Learning and Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
2
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy
3
DIBRIS, Universita Degli Studi Di Genova, Italy

relation instance (edge) in the graph. Such models can be
used to derive new knowledge from known facts (link prediction), to disambiguate entities (entity resolution), to extract
taxonomies, and for probabilistic question answering (see
e.g., (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011; Bordes et al. 2013;
Krompaß, Nickel, and Tresp 2014)). Furthermore, embeddings of KGs have been used to support machine reading and
to assess the trustworthiness of web sites (Dong et al. 2014;
2015). However, existing embedding models that can capture rich interactions in relational data are often limited in
their scalability. Vice versa, models that can be computed
efﬁciently are often considerably less expressive. In this
work, we approach learning from KGs within the framework
of compositional vector space models. We introduce holographic embeddings (H OL E) which use the circular correlation of entity embeddings (vector representations) to create
compositional representations of binary relational data. By
using correlation as the compositional operator H OL E can
capture rich interactions but simultaneously remains efﬁcient
to compute, easy to train, and scalable to very large datasets.
As we will show experimentally, H OL E is able to outperform
state-of-the-art embedding models on various benchmark
datasets for learning from KGs. Compositional vector space
models have also been considered in cognitive science and
natural language processing, e.g., to model symbolic structures, to represent the semantic meaning of phrases, and as
models for associative memory (see e.g., (Smolensky 1990;
Plate 1995; Mitchell and Lapata 2008; Socher et al. 2012)).
In this work, we do not only draw inspiration from these
models, but we will also highlight the connections of H OL E
to holographic models of associative memory.

Abstract
Learning embeddings of entities and relations is an efﬁcient
and versatile method to perform machine learning on relational data such as knowledge graphs. In this work, we propose holographic embeddings (H OL E) to learn compositional
vector space representations of entire knowledge graphs. The
proposed method is related to holographic models of associative memory in that it employs circular correlation to create
compositional representations. By using correlation as the
compositional operator, H OL E can capture rich interactions
but simultaneously remains efﬁcient to compute, easy to train,
and scalable to very large datasets. Experimentally, we show
that holographic embeddings are able to outperform state-ofthe-art methods for link prediction on knowledge graphs and
relational learning benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Relations are a key concept in artiﬁcial intelligence and cognitive science. Many of the structures that humans impose
on the world, such as logical reasoning, analogies, or taxonomies, are based on entities, concepts and their relationships. Hence, learning from and with relational knowledge
representations has long been considered an important task
in artiﬁcial intelligence (see e.g., (Getoor and Taskar 2007;
Muggleton 1991; Gentner 1983; Kemp et al. 2006; Xu et al.
2006; Richardson and Domingos 2006)). In this work we
are concerned with learning from knowledge graphs (KGs),
i.e., knowledge bases which model facts as instances of binary relations (e.g., bornIn(BarackObama, Hawaii)). This
form of knowledge representation can be interpreted as a
multigraph, where entities correspond to nodes, facts correspond to typed edges, and the type of an edge indicates
the kind of the relation. Modern knowledge graphs such
as YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), and Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008)
contain billions of facts about millions of entities and have
found important applications in question answering, structured search, and digital assistants. Recently, vector space
embeddings of knowledge graphs have received considerable
attention, as they can be used to create statistical models of
entire KGs, i.e., to predict the probability of any possible

Compositional Representations
In this section we introduce compositional vector space models for KGs, the general learning setting, and related work.
Let E denote the set of all entities and P the set of all relation types (predicates) in a domain. A binary relation is a subset Rp ⊆ E × E of all pairs of entities (i.e., those pairs which
are in a relation of type p). Higher-arity relations are deﬁned
analogously. The characteristic function φp : E × E → {±1}
of a relation Rp indicates for each possible pair of entities
whether they are part of Rp . We will denote (possible) relation instances as Rp (s, o), where s, o ∈ E denote the ﬁrst
and second argument of the asymmetric relation Rp . We will

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1955

