Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Design of an Online Course on Knowledge-Based AI
Ashok K. Goel and David A. Joyner
Design & Intelligence Laboratory, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30338, USA
ashok.goel@cc.gatech.edu; david.joyner@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract

er. In recent years, the class projects in the KBAI course
have focused on visual analogy problems inspired by the
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) test of intelligence
(Raven, Raven & Court 1998). The RPM test has attracted
much interest in cognitive systems research (Bringsjord &
Schimanski 2003; Carpenter, Just & Shell 1990; Lovett et
al. 2009) including in our research laboratory (Kunda,
McGreggor & Goel 2013; McGreggor, Kunda & Goel
2014). In the KBAI class, students design, program, and
test AI agents on visual analogy problems inspired by the
Raven’s test. We found that the class projects stimulated
student engagement while providing an authentic opportunity to explore cutting-edge research (Goel, Kunda,
Joyner & Vattam 2013).

In Fall 2014 we offered an online course on KnowledgeBased Artificial Intelligence (KBAI) to about 200 students
as part of the Georgia Tech Online MS in CS program. By
now we have offered the course to more than 1000 students.
We describe the design, development and delivery of the
online KBAI class in Fall 2014.

Georgia Tech OMSCS Program
In January 2014, Georgia Tech launched its Online MS in
CS (OMSCS) program (www.omscs.gatech.edu/). The
video lessons for the OMSCS courses are delivered by
Udacity (www.udacity.com/georgia-tech). The goal is to
offer the same educational programs and courses online
that we offer to residential MS students, and with the same
depth, substance and rigor. The OMSCS program currently
has ~3000 students, which is an order of magnitude more
than the number of students in the residential program.
However, while the residential degree costs several tens of
thousands of dollars, the OMSCS program costs only several thousand dollars, an order of magnitude less costly
than the residential program.

Design of an Experiment in Online Learning
We made several strategic decisions when we first conceived the online KBAI course. (1) We decided to view the
design, development and delivery of the online KBAI
course as an experiment in design-based research on online
learning. (2) We decided not to directly transfer the course
materials from the legacy residential KBAI class to the
new online KBAI course. Instead, we viewed the task of
designing the online course as an opportunity to reflect on
the learning goals, strategies, outcomes, and assessments of
the course. (3) We decided not to follow the most common
method for making online courses: replay of videotapes of
residential classes. We thought that this method is both
limited by the constraints of the old classroom medium and
takes minimal advantage of the affordances of the new
online medium. (4) We decided to incorporate as many
lessons from the learning sciences into the design of the
online KBAI course as possible. Thus, we adopted learning
strategies such as learning by example, learning by doing,
project-based learning, collaborative learning, and more.
(5) We decided to use as much interactive educational
technology in the online course as possible. Thus, we de-

Georgia Tech KBAI Class
Goel has been teaching a residential semester-long course
on Knowledge-Based AI at Georgia Tech each year for
more than a decade. Joyner took the KBAI course in Fall
2010 and was a teaching assistant (TA) for the course in
2012. The KBAI class focuses on the cognitive systems
school of AI that we characterize as human-level, humanlike and human-centered AI (Goel & Davies 2011). The
KBAI class adopts a design stance towards learning about
AI (Goel 1994). Thus, the class work includes intensive
design and programming projects that build on one anothCopyright © 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4089

