Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Representation Learning Framework for Multi-Source Transfer Parsing
1

Jiang Guo1 * , Wanxiang Che1† , David Yarowsky2 , Haifeng Wang3 , Ting Liu1
Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Center for Language and Speech Processing Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
3
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{jguo, car, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn
yarowsky@jhu.edu, wanghaifeng@baidu.com

2004). However, in terms of accuracy, the annotation projection approach and the model transfer approach are far more
promising than the unsupervised ones. In this study, we investigate the cross-lingual model transfer approach.
The pioneering work on model transfer of dependency
parsing is the delexicalized models of McDonald, Petrov,
and Hall (2011), which ignore all lexical features that are
not directly transferable across languages. To address the
deﬁciency regarding the lexical features, Täckström, McDonald, and Uszkoreit (2012) proposed cross-lingual word
clusters, which can be viewed as partial lexical feature representations. More recently, Guo et al. (2015) proposed to
ﬁll the lexical feature gap by learning bilingual word embeddings. They combined bilingual word embeddings and
word clusters, showing signiﬁcant improvement against the
delexicalized systems.
However, the major problem of the aforementioned representation learning approaches is that they only support transfer between two languages. Therefore, the resulting models
lack the ability of recovering some speciﬁc syntactic structures of the target language which rarely (or never) appear
in the source language. Take the word ordering as an example, in Spanish and French, adjectives often appear after
nouns, yielding right-directed amod (adjective modiﬁer) dependency arcs, whereas in English (source language) most
of the amod arcs are left-directed. Another typical example is German, in which verbs appear mostly in V2 position, yielding left-directed dobj (direct object) arcs, which
can hardly be recovered using models trained in English.
So what if we include a language which is more syntactically similar to the target language as one of our source languages? This intuition results in multi-source transfer parsing, which can signiﬁcantly improve the overall quality of
the resulting parsers (McDonald, Petrov, and Hall 2011). To
this end, we propose a novel representation learning framework for multi-source transfer parsing that integrates both
ideas to improve cross-lingual model transfer.
The main challenge that arises is to learn uniﬁed word
representations over multiple languages. We present two
algorithms for learning uniﬁed word embeddings, namely
multilingual skip-gram (M ULTI -SG) and multilingual robust projection (M ULTI -P ROJ), which are respectively extensions of the monolingual skip-gram model (Mikolov et al.
2013) and the robust projection approach proposed by Guo

Abstract
Cross-lingual model transfer has been a promising
approach for inducing dependency parsers for lowresource languages where annotated treebanks are not
available. The major obstacles for the model transfer
approach are two-fold: 1. Lexical features are not directly transferable across languages; 2. Target languagespeciﬁc syntactic structures are difﬁcult to be recovered.
To address these two challenges, we present a novel representation learning framework for multi-source transfer parsing. Our framework allows multi-source transfer parsing using full lexical features straightforwardly.
By evaluating on the Google universal dependency treebanks (v2.0), our best models yield an absolute improvement of 6.53% in averaged labeled attachment
score, as compared with delexicalized multi-source
transfer models. We also signiﬁcantly outperform the
state-of-the-art transfer system proposed most recently.

Introduction
The goal of dependency parsing is to induce tree structures for natural language sentences following the dependency grammar. Dependency parsing can be highly beneﬁcial for various natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
such as question answering, machine translation, knowledge
mining/representation. Most of the previous work on dependency parsing focused on supervised learning with humanannotated treebanks, which are limited to very few resourcerich languages such as English and Chinese. Since it is labor
intensive and time-consuming to manually build treebanks
for all languages, recent years have seen a great deal of interest in cross-lingual learning methods which aim at inducing
dependency parsers for low-resource languages while using
only annotated training data from resource-rich languages.
Several approaches have been proposed for cross-lingual
dependency parsing, mainly including annotation projection
methods (Hwa et al. 2005; Tiedemann 2014) and model
transfer methods (McDonald, Petrov, and Hall 2011). Another line of research on multilingual dependency parsing
is unsupervised grammar induction (Klein and Manning
*

This work was done while the author was visiting JHU.
Email corresponding.
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2734

