Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multivariate Conditional Outlier Detection
and Its Clinical Application
Charmgil Hong and Milos Hauskrecht
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
{charmgil, milos}@cs.pitt.edu
from the model. Accordingly, our research interests are twofold: (1) how to build a multivariate conditional model from
data, and (2) how to apply the model to estimate the outlier scores of individual data instances. In the following, we
highlight the objectives and outcomes of each fold.

Abstract
This paper overviews and discusses our recent work on
a multivariate conditional outlier detection framework
for clinical applications.

Our Approach

Background

Modeling of Multivariate Responses

Over the past decades, the quality of healthcare and its
improvement have been the center pieces of many public
programs and initiatives. Recent studies on patient safety,
however, revealed that preventable medical errors are more
widespread than initially thought, which are now estimated
to be one of the leading causes of death (James 2013). While
computer-based tools aimed to prevent the occurrence of errors exist, they require substantial human expert input; hence
they are expensive to build and their coverage is small.
One way to alleviate the issue is to use the data mining and
machine learning techniques, and identify unusual patient
care patterns based on the clinical data stored in electronic
medical record (EMR) systems. The motivation is that the
cases requiring medical attention for reconsideration could
be identiﬁed by detecting statistical outliers in patient care
patterns (Hauskrecht et al. 2007; 2013). Existing data-driven
outlier detection methods, however, are not suitable for clinical applications, because they merely attempt to identify unusual data instances that deviate much from the majority in
the dataset. On the other hand, clinical data often show the
conditional relations that the responses (i.e. diagnoses, orders, administrations, etc.) are strongly based on the observation (context) of the patient. In addition, those responses
are usually correlated to each other (e.g. a set of medications that are usually ordered together). However, such correlations have not been fully explored yet for the purpose of
outlier detection.
Our research aims at developing automated methods of
multivariate conditional outlier detection, which consider
both context and correlations in identifying outliers, and
applying the methods to support clinical decision making.
More speciﬁcally, we study model-based outlier detection
techniques that we represent a data distribution using a statistical model and identify outliers based on the deviation

In the ﬁrst fold, our key objective is to accurately and efﬁciently learn a compact representation of complex clinical records. For clinical data, this is particularly challenging because each record may contain hundreds to thousands
of observations and responses. The conventional approach
is to build an oversimpliﬁed model, for the sake of computational efﬁciency, by disregarding any correlations among
the responses. However, studies have suggested that those
correlations often contain important modeling information,
which could improve the accuracy of the model to a great extent (Read et al. 2009; Batal, Hong, and Hauskrecht 2013).
We formulate the modeling of EMRs in the multidimensional learning framework (van der Gaag and de Waal
2006; Batal, Hong, and Hauskrecht 2013), which allows us
to efﬁciently ﬁnd and exploit the correlation structure of
data. Namely, we assume that each patient is associated with
d discrete-valued variables representing clinical responses.
The objective is to learn a function that assigns to each patient, represented by its feature vector x = {x1 , ..., xm }, the
most probable response assignment y = {y1 , ..., yd }. One
approach to this task is to model the conditional joint distribution P (Y|X). Assuming the 0-1 loss function, the optimal
function h∗ assigns to an instance the maximum a posteriori
(MAP) assignment of the responses.
h∗ (x) = arg max P (Y1 = y1 , ..., Yd = yd |X = x)

(1)

y1 ,...,yd

A challenge in modeling P (Y|X) is that the number
of all possible responses is exponential in d. We develop
ways to improve the modeling accuracy without a heavy
burden of computational complexity. In (Batal, Hong, and
Hauskrecht 2013), we present efﬁcient structure learning
and exact inference algorithms by assuming the correlations among response variables form a tree. In (Hong,
Batal, and Hauskrecht 2014; 2015), we extend this treestructured model and develop theoretically sound multi-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4216

