Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Global Distant Supervision for Relation Extraction
Xianpei Han

Le Sun

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xianpei, sunle}@nfs.iscas.ac.cn

knowledge base (KB) with the sentences in a given corpus,
then these instances can be used to build relation extractors
using classifiers such as SVM and logistic classiﬁer.

Abstract
Machine learning approaches to relation extraction are typically supervised and require expensive labeled data. To break
the bottleneck of labeled data, a promising approach is to exploit easily obtained indirect supervision knowledge – which
we usually refer to as distant supervision (DS). However, traditional DS methods mostly only exploit one specific kind of
indirect supervision knowledge – the relations/facts in a
given knowledge base, thus often suffer from the problem of
lack of supervision. In this paper, we propose a global distant
supervision model for relation extraction, which can: 1) compensate the lack of supervision with a wide variety of indirect
supervision knowledge; and 2) reduce the uncertainty in DS
by performing joint inference across relation instances. Experimental results show that, by exploiting the consistency
between relation labels, the consistency between relations
and arguments, and the consistency between neighbor instances using Markov logic, our method significantly outperforms traditional DS approaches.

Knowledge Base
CEO-of(Steve Jobs, Apple)
Founder-of(Steve Jobs, Apple)
CEO-of(Marissa Mayer, Yahoo!)
Founder-of(Steve Wozniak, Apple)

Heuristically
labeling

S1: Jobs, the CEO of Apple
S2: Jobs left Apple
S3: Jobs is the cofounder of Apple

CEO-of, Founder-of, NR
CEO-of, Founder-of, NR
CEO-of, Founder-of, NR

CEO-of
NR
Founder-of

S4: Mayer is the new CEO of Yahoo!

CEO-of, NR

CEO-of

S5: Woz is the cofounder of Apple

Founder-of, NR

Founder-of

Possible labels by DS

Golden labels

Relation instances

Figure 1.Training instance labeling using KB relations
However, traditional DS methods mostly only exploit one
specific kind of indirect supervision knowledge – the relations/facts in a given knowledge base such as Freebase and
Yago. Ignoring many other kinds of indirect supervision
knowledge, traditional methods often suffer from the problem of lack of supervision. Specifically, the lack of supervision will introduce a lot of uncertainty and will result in
wrongly labeled training instances. For example, in Figure
1 if only using the relations in KB as supervision knowledge,
we will not be able to accurately label the three training instances S1-S3 because they can be labeled as either CEO-of,
Founder-of or NR (Not a Relation), and there will be totally
3×3×3×2×2=108 possible states for the labels of the five
example instances. Since most machine learning techniques
require accurately labelled training instances, the label uncertainty will result in big challenges.
To resolve the above problem, this paper proposes a
global distant supervision model for relation extraction,
which can: 1) compensate the lack of supervision with a
wide variety of indirect supervision knowledge; and 2) reduce the uncertainty in DS by performing joint inference
across relation instances. The idea of our method is that we

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) aims to identify and categorize relations between pairs of entities in text. For example, a RE
system will extract CEO-of(Jobs, Apple) from the sentence
“Jobs is the CEO of Apple”. In recent years, with the expectation to build large scale, machine-readable knowledge bases which can support natural language understanding and
human-like reasoning (e.g., Yago 1 , DBPedia 2 and Freebase 3 ), there is an increasing need for extracting relations/facts from large scale corpus (e.g., the Web). Unfortunately, machine learning approaches to relation extraction
are typically supervised and require expensive labeled data,
therefore are unlikely to be scaled to the web situation.
To break the bottleneck of labeled data, a promising approach is to exploit easily obtained indirect supervision
knowledge – which we usually refer to as distant supervision (DS). For example, as shown in Figure 1, we can collect
training instances by heuristically aligning relations in a

1 http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/yago-naga/yago

Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2 http://www.dbpedia.org/
3 http://www.freebase.com/

2950

