Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Relational Knowledge Transfer for Zero-Shot Learning
Donghui Wang, Yanan Li, Yuetan Lin, Yueting Zhuang
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{dhwang, ynli, linyuetan, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
General zero-shot learning (ZSL) approaches exploit
transfer learning via semantic knowledge space. In this
paper, we reveal a novel relational knowledge transfer
(RKT) mechanism for ZSL, which is simple, generic
and effective. RKT resolves the inherent semantic shift
problem existing in ZSL through restoring the missing manifold structure of unseen categories via optimizing semantic mapping. It extracts the relational knowledge from data manifold structure in semantic knowledge space based on sparse coding theory. The extracted
knowledge is then transferred backwards to generate
virtual data for unseen categories in the feature space.
On the one hand, the generalizing ability of the semantic mapping function can be enhanced with the added
data. On the other hand, the mapping function for unseen categories can be learned directly from only these
generated data, achieving inspiring performance. Incorporated with RKT, even simple baseline methods can
achieve good results. Extensive experiments on three
challenging datasets show prominent performance obtained by RKT, and we obtain 82.43% accuracy on the
Animals with Attributes dataset.

Figure 1: The overall framework of the proposed method
for ZSL. First, it transfers the semantic correlation from S
to X ; then it uses this correlation to restore the manifold
structure of unseen categories by producing virtual labelled
data; ﬁnally, it learns semantic mapping g(x) for ZSL.
training dataset {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 , where yi ∈ Y is the training class label and Z denotes the testing label space (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009). Obviously, because
of the lack of testing data, fu can not be directly learned.
Though fs : X → Y can be obtained from the training
dataset, due to the symmetry of hypersimplex, fs has no
ability to transfer knowledge for fu to predict unseen categories in ZSL. To tackle this problem, the common practice is to introduce a sharable semantic knowledge space S,
as is shown in Figure 1. Learning fu becomes a two stage
process fu = l(gu (x), z), i.e. ﬁrst learn a semantic mapping
gu (x) : x → φ, φ ∈ S by ML methods when φ is binary or
regression models if φ is continuous. Then it learns a class
predictor l(φ) : φ → z. Likewise, we can not get gu (x) for
unseen categories. Since the semantic space S is shared between Y and Z, it is hoped that by resorting to gs (x), ZSL
could be addressed. Thereby, fu is learned as l(gs (x), z) in
existing ZSL approaches.
Nevertheless, approximating the real mapping gu (x) for
unseen categories using gs (x) suffers an inherent problem.
On one hand, gs (x) just optimize the training dataset where
labelled information of unseen classes is missing. On the
other hand, in real world situations the semantic relationship between different classes in X may be different from
that in S. Therefore, gs (x) has a shift from gu (x). Direct
use of gs (x) in fu (x) instead of gu (x) will cause signiﬁcant performance degradation in ZSL. Our main goal of this

Introduction
Traditional machine learning approaches for classiﬁcation
presuppose the existence of a large labelled dataset to optimize the parameters of object classiﬁers. Formally, the
task of traditional supervised learning is to ﬁnd a function
f : X → Y from the training dataset {(xi , yi )|1 ⩽ i ⩽ N },
where X denotes the d-dimensional input space and Y contains all K labels in the training dataset. When each input
xi belongs to one class, learning f is a traditional multiclass classiﬁcation problem. From the perspective of space
geometry, it maps xi to one of the K vertices of a (K, 1)hypersimplex in the K-dimensional space, when yi is encoded as a one-hot vector. However, if xi comes from multiple classes, f becomes a multi-label (ML) classiﬁcation
function (Huang, Gao, and Zhou 2014), which maps xi
to one of the 2K vertices of a unit hypercube in the Kdimensional space.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to learn a classiﬁer fu :
X → Z, Y ∩ Z = ∅ for unseen categories from the given
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2145

