Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Heuristic Planning for Hybrid Systems∗
Wiktor Piotrowski,† Maria Fox,
Derek Long, Daniele Magazzeni

Fabio Mercorio
Department of Statistics
and Quantitative Methods
C.R.I.S.P. Research Centre
University of Milan-Bicocca
Milan, Italy

Department of Informatics
King’s College London
Strand Building, Strand
London, WC2R 2LS UK
wiktor.piotrowski@kcl.ac.uk
+44 (0)75 0627 0730

model with uniform time steps and step functions. Discretised model and a ﬁnite-time horizon ensures a ﬁnite number
of states in the search for a solution. Solutions to the discretised problem are validated against the original continuous
model using VAL ((Howey, Long, and Fox 2004)). If the
plan at a certain discretisation is not valid, the discretisation
can be reﬁned and the process iterates.
DiNo, based on UPMurphi, extends its capabilities by using a novel relaxation-based domain-independent heuristic,
Staged Relaxed Planning Graph+ (SRPG+). The heuristic guides the Enforced Hill-Climbing algorithm ((Nebel
2001)). In DiNo we also exploit the deferred heuristic evaluation ((Richter and Westphal 2010)) for completeness (in a
discretised search space with a ﬁnite horizon). The SPRG+
heuristic improves on the Temporal Relaxed Planning Graph
and extends its functionality to include information gained
from PDDL+ features, namely the processes and events.
DiNo is currently the only heuristic planner capable of
handling non-linear system dynamics combined with the full
PDDL+ feature set.

Abstract
Planning in hybrid systems has been gaining research interest in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence community in recent years.
Hybrid systems allow for a more accurate representation of
real world problems, though solving them is very challenging
due to complex system dynamics and a large model feature
set. We developed DiNo, a new planner designed to tackle
problems set in hybrid domains. DiNo is based on the discretise and validate approach and uses the novel Staged Relaxed
Planning Graph+ (SRPG+) heuristic.

Introduction
Over the years, Automated Planning research has been continuously attempting to solve the most advanced and complex planning problems. The standard modelling language,
PDDL ((McDermott et al. 1998)), has been evolving to accommodate new concepts and operations, enabling research
to tackle problems more accurately representing real-world
scenarios. A recent version of the language, PDDL+ ((Fox
and Long 2006)), enabled the most accurate standardised
way yet, of deﬁning hybrid problems as planning domains.
Planning in hybrid domains (also known as hybrid systems) is currently one of the fastest growing and most interesting subﬁelds of Automated Planning. Hybrid domains
are models of systems which exhibit both continuous and
discrete behaviour. They are amongst the most advanced
models of systems and the resulting problems are notoriously difﬁcult for planners to cope with due to non-linear
behaviours and immense search spaces. Indeed, planning in
hybrid domains is challenging because apart from the state
explosion caused by discrete state variables, the continuous
variables cause the reachability problem to become undecidable.
We introduce DiNo, a new planner designed to solve
problems set in hybrid domains. DiNo uses the planningas-model-checking paradigm ((Bogomolov et al. 2014)) and
relies on the Discretise & Validate approach ((Della Penna,
Magazzeni, and Mercorio 2012)). The Discretise & Validate approach works by approximating the continuous dynamics of the system and handling the resulting discretised

Related Work
Various techniques and tools have been developed to deal
with hybrid domains. More recent approaches in this direction have been proposed by ((Bogomolov et al. 2014)),
where the close relationship between hybrid planning domains and hybrid automata is explored, and ((Bryce et al.
2015)) where PDDL+ models are handled using SMT.
Nevertheless, none of these approaches are able to handle
the full set of PDDL+ features, namely non-linear domains
with processes and events. To date, the only viable approach
in this direction is PDDL+ planning via discretisation. UPMurphi ((Della Penna, Magazzeni, and Mercorio 2012)),
which implements the discretise and validate approach, is
able to deal with the full range of PDDL+ features. The
main drawback of UPMurphi is the lack of heuristics, and
this strongly limits its scalability. However, UPMurphi was
successfully used in the multiple-battery management domain ((Fox, Long, and Magazzeni 2012)), where a domainspeciﬁc heuristic was used.

∗

Additional Resources www.wiktor.co.uk
Primary Author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Staged Relaxed Planning Graph+

†

The Staged Relaxed Planning Graph+ is designed for hybrid
domains with continuous change and PDDL+ features. The

4254

