Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

CAPReS: Context Aware Persona Based Recommendation for Shoppers
Joydeep Banerjee

Gurulingesh Raravi

Manoj Gupta

Sindhu K. Ernala

Arizona State University
jbanerje@asu.edu

Xerox Research Center India
gurulinges.raravi@xerox.com

Xerox Research Center India
manoj.gupta@xerox.com

IIIT Hyderabad
eskiranmai94@gmail.com

Shruti Kunde and Koustuv Dasgupta
Xerox Research Center India
{ﬁrstname.lastname}@xerox.com
different categories of shopping personas, e.g., luxuriant,
infrequent, etc. Informally, a luxuriant shopper is one who
generally looks for products of high-end brands and that too
may be in exclusive stores. Whereas an infrequent shopper
is one who generally is a needy shopper and buys only those
products that s/he is speciﬁcally looking for and may prefer
to wait for one of the sale seasons to begin to get a good
deal. Thus, a luxuriant and an infrequent shopper looking to
buy a same product might have to be given different recommendations. This makes the designing of a persona based
recommendation engine a challenging task.
Apart from shopping persona, the recommendation engine needs to take care of additional constraints that shopper might have. These additional constraints may be upper
bounds on the money and the time that the shopper is willing
to spend on products and on commuting, respectively.
Further, we believe that such recommendation systems
can become effective only when they can make multiple recommendations where each recommendation is a set of stores
along with the products to buy in each of those stores and the
route to traverse to reach those stores. This is mainly because
of the following reasons. First, having multiple options enables the user to evaluate pros and cons of the options and
gives ﬂexibility to choose one from the list. Second, the
recommendation engine itself can continuously learn more
about the persona of the shopper by observing the options
selected by the user from the list of recommendations (the
functionality for the latter is not in the scope of this work).
Therefore, it is desirable to have a recommendation engine
that gives shoppers multiple options to select from and hence
we focus on developing such a recommendation solution.
Problem deﬁnition. In this work, we study the problem of persona based shopping recommendation in a physical retail setting where a recommendation system needs to
make top-k recommendations to the shopper for maximizing her value for money considering the above mentioned
challenges related to persona and shopper constraints.
Contributions of this work. This work makes the following contributions:
C1. It proposes a dynamic programming based optimal
recommendation algorithm that makes top-k recommendations; the algorithm has a pseudo-polynomial timecomplexity w.r.t the time and the budget constraints
speciﬁed by the shopper and has an exponential timecomplexity w.r.t. the number of products to be purchased.

Abstract
Nowadays, brick-and-mortar stores are ﬁnding it extremely
difﬁcult to retain their customers due to the ever increasing
competition from the online stores. One of the key reasons
for this is the lack of personalized shopping experience offered by the brick-and-mortar stores. This work considers the
problem of persona based shopping recommendation for such
stores to maximize the value for money of the shoppers. For
this problem, it proposes a non-polynomial time-complexity
optimal dynamic program and a polynomial time-complexity
non-optimal heuristic, for making top-k recommendations by
taking into account shopper persona and her time and budget
constraints. In our empirical evaluations with a mix of realworld data and simulated data, the performance of the heuristic in terms of the persona based recommendations (quantiﬁed by similarity scores and items recommended) closely
matched (differed by only 8% each with) that of the dynamic
program and at the same time heuristic ran at least twice faster
compared to the dynamic program.

1

Introduction

Lack of solutions to provide a personalized shopping experience to shoppers is hurting the business of brick-and-mortar
stores (aka physical retail stores) and they are losing their
customer base to online stores who have successfully implemented such sophisticated solutions. A half baked effort in
this direction by these physical retail stores via text messaging has hardly helped them as most of these messages that
shoppers receive on their mobiles regarding products, offers
and deals are mostly spam and does not cater to the needs of
the shoppers, nor their context and not even remotely related
to their shopping personas. Moreover, the combination of
hectic lifestyles and the explosion of available products and
stores has tremendously increased the struggle of shoppers
in deciding what to buy and in which stores to buy and what
route (say to minimize the commute time) to take to even
reach those stores. Currently, no comprehensive recommendation system is available that tries to match the needs of the
shoppers by taking into account their personas, needs and
constraints to the products and deals offered by the physical
retailers to maximize the value for money of shoppers.
Value for money (VFM) may have different implications
for different shoppers depending on their persona; there are
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

680

