Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

What’s Hot in the Answer Set Programming Competition
Martin Gebser

Marco Maratea

Francesco Ricca

University of Potsdam, Germany
gebser@cs.uni-potsdam.de

Università di Genova, Italy
marco@dibris.unige.it

Università della Calabria, Italy
ricca@mat.unical.it

benchmarks from six new domains were submitted in addition, thus doubling the number of domains stemming from
applications. Overall, this amounts to 32 benchmark domains, comprising 5058 instances in total, modeling challenging problems from various areas including: artiﬁcial intelligence, databases, games, graph theory, industrial conﬁguration, planning and scheduling, system synthesis, etc.
While instances had been drawn purely at random in the
past (in 2013 also taking hardness estimates by benchmark
authors into account), the sixth edition of the ASP competition aimed at balancing the hardness of instances selected per benchmark domain. To this end, an instance selection process inspired by the 2014 SAT Competition3 has
been incorporated. First, the empirical hardness of all available instances has been evaluated by running the three topperforming systems from the previous edition, and then a
balanced selection was made among instances of varying
difﬁculty. Running the three reference systems exhaustively
took about 212 CPU days on the competition platform and
led to a classiﬁcation of the available instances. Instances
solved in less than 20 seconds by each of the three systems as
well as those where all of them failed in the grounding phase
were classiﬁed as too easy or non-groundable. While such
instances remain uninformative regarding a system comparison and were thus dropped, the other instances are partitioned into four hardness categories. The instance selection
was then balanced by aiming at 20% of instances from each
category plus another 20% picked freely, where concrete instances are drawn at random among the respective candidates. Although a perfect balancing was often impossible
due to underpopulated hardness categories, an approximate
compensation was feasible for all but four domains (with
easy instances only). These domains were discarded, so that
benchmarks from 28 domains, 12 of which are inspired by
applications, were eventually included in the competition.
Notably, the instance selection process has itself been implemented in ASP, based on a factual representation of runtime data. As a result, the material collected on the website4
of the sixth edition of the ASP competition contributes a
broad range of benchmark domains, empirical hardness data
for all instances provided by benchmark authors, as well as

Abstract
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a declarative programming paradigm with roots in logic programming, knowledge
representation, and non-monotonic reasoning. The ASP competition series aims at assessing and promoting the evolution
of ASP systems and applications. Its growing range of challenging application-oriented benchmarks inspires and showcases continuous advancements of the state of the art in ASP.

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and
Truszczyński 2011) is a declarative programming approach
to knowledge representation and reasoning, having close relationships to neighboring areas like Boolean Satisﬁability
and Constraint Programming. Since the ﬁrst edition in 2007,
the ASP competition series assesses ASP systems on challenging benchmarks in order to promote the state of the
art (Calimeri et al. 2012).
The sixth edition (Gebser, Maratea, and Ricca 2015)
of the ASP competition took place in afﬁliation with the
13th International Conference on Logic Programming and
Non-Monotonic Reasoning (LPNMR 2015).1 Similar to past
events (Calimeri et al. 2015), it featured several tracks based
on language features of benchmark encodings in ASP-Core2 format2 as well as on the number of processors allocated
to participant systems.
In the following, we spotlight hot aspects of the sixth edition of the ASP competition, including its benchmark selection process, the advancements of participant systems, a
newly introduced Marathon track, and an on-site modeling
event complementing the “in silico” system competition.

Benchmark Suite and Selection
The competition benchmarks included 26 domains for which
encodings and instances were already available from earlier editions (Calimeri, Ianni, and Ricca 2014). For four
of these domains, the benchmark authors kindly provided
fresh and more challenging instance sets, suitable for making meaningful system comparisons. Application-oriented
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://lpnmr2015.mat.unical.it/
2
https://www.mat.unical.it/aspcomp2013/ASPStandardization/

3
4

4327

http://www.satcompetition.org/2014/
http://aspcomp2015.dibris.unige.it/

