Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Consensus Guided Unsupervised Feature Selection
1

Hongfu Liu1 , Ming Shao1 , Yun Fu1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston
liu.hongf@husky.neu.edu, mingshao@ece.neu.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

computing resource but only provide limited performance
improvement.
Feature selection manages to tackle the problem above
by selecting the pivot portion of feature, which has been
widely discussed in machine learning and data mining community (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003; Li and Fu 2015). Clearly,
features after selection are easily interpreted, need shorter
training time, and most importantly overcome the over ﬁtting problem. A straightforward way is to enumerate all different feature subsets and evaluate each by certain metric
or scores. Such exhaust search is usually computational intractable but for small feature sets. When it comes to unsupervised tasks, feature selection becomes more challenging.
Many algorithms have been proposed to effectively solve
the feature selection problem, which can be brieﬂy categorized into three groups according to the accessibility to labels: supervised feature selection, semi-supervised feature
selection and unsupervised feature selection.
The ﬁrst category utilizes label information to ﬁnd the feature relevance or mutual information, and ensures that the
discriminative knowledge is correctly encoded by the selected features (Wolf and Shashua 2005; Theodoridis and
Koutroumbas 2008; Nie et al. 2010). Such strategy is usually very effective, but needs costly label information, which
is not always available in mining task. Therefore, unsupervised feature selection is demanded for the scenario without any label information but the underlying distribution of
the data (Wolf and Shashua 2005; Dy and Brodley 2004;
Zhao and Liu 2007; Alelyani, Tang, and Liu 2013). However, due to the absence of labels, it is usually hard to determine the quality of features directly. To this end, unsupervised feature selection approaches usually proceed with
certain evaluation criteria such as: Laplacian Score (He,
Cai, and Niyogi 2005), mutual information (Peng, Long,
and Ding 2005), and maximum likelihood (Dy and Brodley
2004), or generate pseudo labels to apply supervised feature
selection (Cai, Zhang, and He 2010; Li et al. 2013).
Recently, some achievements have been witnessed in Unsupervised Feature Selection scenario, which use sparse projection with pseudo labels to guide the process of feature selection. However, they generate pseudo labels with all features so that noisy and ineffective features degrade pseudo
labels and further harm the performance of feature selection (Liu and Tao 2015); besides, these methods suffer from

Abstract
Feature selection has been widely recognized as one of the
key problems in data mining and machine learning community, especially for high-dimensional data with redundant information, partial noises and outliers. Recently, unsupervised
feature selection attracts substantial research attentions since
data acquisition is rather cheap today but labeling work is
still expensive and time consuming. This is speciﬁcally useful for effective feature selection of clustering tasks. Recent
works using sparse projection with pre-learned pseudo labels
achieve appealing results; however, they generate pseudo labels with all features so that noisy and ineffective features degrade the cluster structure and further harm the performance
of feature selection; besides, these methods suffer from complex composition of multiple constraints and computational
inefﬁciency, e.g., eigen-decomposition. Differently, in this
work we introduce consensus clustering for pseudo labeling, which gets rid of expensive eigen-decomposition and
provides better clustering accuracy with high robustness. In
addition, complex constraints such as non-negative are removed due to the crisp indicators of consensus clustering.
Speciﬁcally, we propose one efﬁcient formulation for our
unsupervised feature selection by using the utility function
and provide theoretical analysis on optimization rules and
model convergence. Extensive experiments on several realworld data sets demonstrate that our methods are superior to
the most recent state-of-the-art works in terms of NMI.

Introduction
Nowadays cutting edge technologies for data mining manage to tackle two major problems with the exponential
growth in harvest data: high dimensionality (Agrawal et
al. 1998), huge data size (Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and
Smyth 1996). High dimensional data have never been common than today in many areas since the entity itself includes rich contents that can not be easily abstracted by
machines via algorithms: text, images, videos, etc. On one
hand, researchers attempt to extract as many features as possible to assist learning algorithms for better performance;
on the other hand, rich features lead to redundant information, noisy portion, and outlier samples. In the worst case,
an expansion of feature size will take exponentially more
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1874

