Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Instructable Intelligent Personal Agent
1

Amos Azaria1 , Jayant Krishnamurthy2 , Tom M. Mitchell1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
2
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, WA 98103
{azariaa, jayantk, tom.mitchell}@cs.cmu.edu

However, unlike the instructable human assistant above, interactions with these agents are limited to commands preprogrammed by the developers. A teachable agent has two
signiﬁcant beneﬁts over such preprogrammed agents. First,
teaching enables a user to deﬁne a new command and a sequence of actions to perform it, including commands that
were not considered by the software developer. Second,
teaching can also be used to expand the range of natural language phrasings understood by the system (e.g., by teaching
the system that ”drop a note to Bill” has the same meaning
as ”send an email to Bill”.). Together, these two capabilities
might enable a community of users to jointly instruct a system to achieve a signiﬁcant number of new commands, and
ways to express them in natural language.
This paper presents a Learning by Instruction Agent
(LIA), an intelligent agent that allows users to teach it new
commands using solely natural language interactions. LIA
operates in an email environment, where it learns to interpret natural language commands in terms of given primitive actions such as sending emails. Users teach LIA to
perform a new command by providing step-by-step instructions. LIA is then able to generalize and later execute this
command with different parameters; for example, having
been taught “forward an email to Alice,” LIA can correctly
interpret “forward this email to Bob.” Users can also teach
LIA declarative knowledge by deﬁning new concepts and relations between them, e.g., deﬁning the notion of a contact,
and that each contact has an associated email address. The
contributions of this work are:

Abstract
Unlike traditional machine learning methods, humans often
learn from natural language instruction. As users become
increasingly accustomed to interacting with mobile devices
using speech, their interest in instructing these devices in natural language is likely to grow.
We introduce our Learning by Instruction Agent (LIA), an intelligent personal agent that users can teach to perform new
action sequences to achieve new commands, using solely natural language interaction. LIA uses a CCG semantic parser
to ground the semantics of each command in terms of primitive executable procedures deﬁning sensors and effectors of
the agent. Given a natural language command that LIA does
not understand, it prompts the user to explain how to achieve
the command through a sequence of steps, also speciﬁed in
natural language. A novel lexicon induction algorithm enables LIA to generalize across taught commands, e.g., having been taught how to “forward an email to Alice,” LIA can
correctly interpret the command “forward this email to Bob.”
A user study involving email tasks demonstrates that users
voluntarily teach LIA new commands, and that these taught
commands signiﬁcantly reduce task completion time. These
results demonstrate the potential of natural language instruction as a signiﬁcant, under-explored paradigm for machine
learning.

Introduction
Natural language instructions are commonly used to teach
humans but are rarely used to teach machine learning systems. For example, a user may tell his human assistant “I’m
stuck in trafﬁc and will be late.” The assistant may not know
what to do, so the user may then explain “ﬁrst, use GPS to
estimate my time of arrival, then see who I am meeting and
send them an email indicating that I’ll be late.” Having been
instructed thus, the assistant now understands how to handle
similar situations in the future. We would like users to be
able to teach machine learning systems through this kind of
natural language interaction.
As a starting point, we focus on building an instructable
intelligent personal agent. Intelligent personal agents – such
as Siri, Google Now, Cortana and Echo – have demonstrated
great potential for assisting users with basic daily tasks.

1. A working implementation of an agent that can be taught
in natural language to perform new commands.
2. A novel lexicon induction algorithm that enables the agent
to generalize from a taught command to unseen commands.
3. A user study demonstrating that users voluntarily teach
the agent new commands, and that these taught commands result in a signiﬁcant time savings on future tasks.

Related work
Three ﬁelds with vast work are closely related to ours showing that researchers are reaching out to the vision of an
instructable agent. The ﬁrst is grounded language acquisition (Harnad 1990; Chen and Mooney 2008). In this

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2681

