Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Path Following with Adaptive Path Estimation for Graph Matching
1

Tao Wang1

Haibin Ling2,3

School of Computer &Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
2
Computer & Information Sciences Department, Temple University, Philadelphia 19122, USA
3
Meitu HiScene Lab, HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai, China
twang@bjtu.edu.cn, hbling@temple.edu

large amount of algorithms (Gold and Rangarajan 1996;
Leordeanu and Hebert 2005; Cour, Srinivasan, and Shi 2007;
Cho, Lee, and Lee 2010; Leordeanu and Hebert 2009;
Zaslavskiy, Bach, and Vert 2009; Zhou and Torre 2012;
Liu and Qiao 2014; Liu et al. 2014; Zass and Shashua 2008;
Egozi, Keller, and Guterman 2013) utilizing constraints relaxation to harness the solution searching. Among these algorithms, the ones utilizing the path-following strategy exhibited state-of-art performances (Zaslavskiy, Bach, and
Vert 2009; Zhou and Torre 2012; Liu and Qiao 2014). These
approaches reformulate graph matching as a convex-concave
relaxation procedure (CCRP) problem, which is solved by
interpolating between two approximate simpler formulations, and they use the path following strategy to recast iteratively the bistochastic matrix 1 solution in the discrete domain. However, all these algorithms suffer from high computational burden and thus are hard to be applied in large
graphs. It therefore demands research attention on how to
reduce the computational burden of this category of algorithms.
Addressing the above mentioned issues, we propose a
novel path following strategy to improve the computational
efﬁciency of the path following algorithms, which achieving similar or even better matching accuracy. In particular,
our strategy extends the traditional path following strategy
in two aspects: (1) We propose a path estimation method
that uses the temporal solutions in previous iterations to estimate the solution in current iteration, and then adopt this estimation as the start point to search the local minima. Since
such estimation is usually closer to the local minima than
the previous solution, we spend less time on searching for
local minima in each iteration. (2) We derive an adaptive
step length on the path estimation to dynamically adjust the
step length to further accelerate the convergence.
As a general strategy, our approach can be fused into all
the algorithms that utilize the origin path following strategy. In this work, we integrate the proposed approach into
two state-of-the-art graph matching algorithms, FGM (Zhou
and Torre 2012) and GNCCP (Liu and Qiao 2014), denote
the enhanced algorithms as FGM+EST and GNCCP+EST
respectively. For a thorough evaluation, we compare the

Abstract
Graph matching plays an important role in many ﬁelds
in computer vision. It is a well-known general NP-hard
problem and has been investigated for decades. Among
the large amount of algorithms for graph matching, the
algorithms utilizing the path following strategy exhibited state-of-art performances. However, the main drawback of this category of algorithms lies in their high
computational burden. In this paper, we propose a novel
path following strategy for graph matching aiming to
improve its computation efﬁciency. We ﬁrst propose
a path estimation method to reduce the computational
cost at each iteration, and subsequently a method of
adaptive step length to accelerate the convergence. The
proposed approach is able to be integrated into all the
algorithms that utilize the path following strategy. To
validate our approach, we compare our approach with
several recently proposed graph matching algorithms on
three benchmark image datasets. Experimental results
show that, our approach improves signiﬁcantly the computation efﬁciency of the original algorithms, and offers
similar or better matching results.

Introduction
Graph matching involves establishing correspondences between the vertices of two graphs. It is a fundamental problem
in computer science and closely relates to a lot of research
problems in computer vision, including for instance feature registration (Torresani, Kolmogorov, and Rother 2008;
Jiang, Yu, and Martin 2011), image classiﬁcation (Lazebnik,
Schmid, and Ponce 2006; Wu et al. 2013), object recognition (Duchenne, Joulin, and Ponce 2011) and shape matching (Berg, Berg, and Malik 2005). Graph matching is a wellknown general NP-hard problem of which global optimum
is hardly guaranteed for graphs of reasonable sizes. Consequently, approximate algorithms seeking acceptable suboptimal solutions are popular, and the research interest of this
problem mainly focuses on investigating more accurate and
faster algorithms.
Although the graph matching problem has been investigated for decades, it is still a challenging problem due
to the objective function being non-convex and the constraints on the solution being combinatorial. There are a
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A bistochastic matrix is a square matrix of nonnegative real
number, of which each row (and column) sums to one.

3625

