Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Spectral Bisection Tree Guided Deep Adaptive Exemplar
Autoencoder for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
1

Ming Shao1 Zhengming Ding1 Handong Zhao1 Yun Fu1,2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
{mingshao, allanding, hdzhao, yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

transitions to mitigate domain discrepancy, classiﬁer adaptation builds transferable classiﬁers for the target data. Different from them, deep feature adaptation is more ﬂexible
due to the adaptable building block. In addition, deep structure is able to abstract domain invariant descriptors through
layers related semantics. Nonetheless, few works in this line
have been done so far for unsupervised domain adaptation,
where target labels are totally missing.
In this paper, following the line of “deep feature adaptation”, we propose a novel framework called “Deep Adaptive
Exemplar AutoEncoder” (DAE2 ), as illustrated in Figure 1.
Our model can exploit the semantics, and explicitly couple
source and target data in the deep strucutre, which, however,
are ignored by the exisiting methods (Glorot, Bordes, and
Bengio 2011; Chen et al. 2012). First, we partition source
and target data by a spectral bisection tree, and use sourcetarget pairs within the same partition to train linear/nonlinear autoencoders (AE). On bottom layers, source-target
pairs within larger partitions reﬂect the underlying data distribution, while on top layers, such pairs within smaller partitions represent the class information. Second, as we only
have limited source-target pairs for training, we propose to
marginalize over the perturbed terms by minimizing the empirical expectation of loss function in addition to a low-rank
coding regularizer which ensures the source and target data
are tightly coupled. Then a supervised layer is added on top
to generate the cross-domain discriminative features. Extensive experiments on vision, and text datasets demonstrate
that the proposed Deep Adaptive Exemplar Autoencoder is
able to extract domain invariant features that reduce the divergence between two relevant yet different domains.

Abstract
Learning with limited labeled data is always a challenge in
AI problems, and one of promising ways is transferring wellestablished source domain knowledge to the target domain,
i.e., domain adaptation. In this paper, we extend the deep
representation learning to domain adaptation scenario, and
propose a novel deep model called “Deep Adaptive Exemplar AutoEncoder (DAE2 )”. Different from conventional denoising autoencoders using corrupted inputs, we assign semantics to the input-output pairs of the autoencoders, which
allow us to gradually extract discriminant features layer by
layer. To this end, ﬁrst, we build a spectral bisection tree to
generate source-target data compositions as the training pairs
fed to autoencoders. Second, a low-rank coding regularizer
is imposed to ensure the transferability of the learned hidden layer. Finally, a supervised layer is added on top to transform learned representations into discriminant features. The
problem above can be solved iteratively in an EM fashion of
learning. Extensive experiments on domain adaptation tasks
including object, handwritten digits, and text data classiﬁcations demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Learning with limited labels has drawn considerable attention in particular with the availability of large amount of
training data from different sources. There are a group methods proposed recently that reuse relevant datasets (source)
as the auxiliary for effective model learning on the current
dataset (target), i.e., transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2010).
Most existing transfer learning methods manage to deal with
different domains but identical task, i.e., domain adaptation,
where the domain shift between the current data (target) and
auxiliary data (source) is mitigated.
As to domain adaptation, there are three lines that attract substantial research attention recently: (1) feature space
adaptation (Pan et al. 2011; Gong et al. 2012; Long et al.
2014c), (2) classiﬁer adaptation (Bruzzone and Marconcini
2010; Bahadori, Liu, and Zhang 2011; Duan, Xu, and Tsang
2012; Ni, Qiu, and Chellappa 2013), (3) deep feature adaptation (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Mesnil et al. 2012;
Chen et al. 2012; Donahue et al. 2014). While feature space
adaptation attempts to ﬁnd common subspace or smooth

Related Work
Adapting feature space methods usually align two domains
by seeking for a shared subspace. In (Gong et al. 2012),
a geodesic ﬂow kernel is implemented to learn the transitions from source to target domains. Therefore, features
projected to the intermediate subspaces are able to represent both source and target data well. Recently, regularizers such as low-rank constraint (Shao, Kit, and Fu 2014)
and Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Pan et al. 2011;
Baktashmotlagh et al. 2013; Long et al. 2014c) have been
applied on transfer learning to guide the subspace or kernel
learning. However, the shallow structure adopted by above

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2023

