Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Using Correlated Strategies for Computing
Stackelberg Equilibria in Extensive-Form Games
Jiřı́ Čermák1 , Branislav Bošanský1,2 , Karel Durkota1 , Viliam Lisý1,3 , Christopher Kiekintveld4
1

Agent Technology Center, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University
3
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at El Paso
jiri.cermak@agents.fel.cvut.cz, branislav.bosansky@agents.fel.cvut.cz, karel.durkota@agents.fel.cvut.cz,
lisy@ualberta.ca, cdkiekintveld@utep.edu

(EFGs) was only introduced recently (Bosansky and Cermak
2015) and formulates the problem as a mixed-integer variant of sequence-form linear program (referred to as BC15).
However, the scalability of BC15 is limited as it contains a
binary variable for each sequence of actions of the follower.

Abstract
Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium (SSE) is a fundamental solution concept in game theory in which one player commits to
a strategy, while the other player observes this commitment
and plays a best response. We present a new algorithm for
computing SSE for two-player extensive-form general-sum
games with imperfect information (EFGs) where computing
SSE is an NP-hard problem. Our algorithm is based on a
correlated version of SSE, known as Stackelberg ExtensiveForm Correlated Equilibrium (SEFCE). Our contribution is
therefore twofold: (1) we give the ﬁrst linear program for
computing SEFCE in EFGs without chance, (2) we repeatedly solve and modify this linear program in a systematic
search until we arrive to SSE. Our new algorithm outperforms
the best previous algorithms by several orders of magnitude.

Our main contribution is a novel algorithm computing
SSE in EFGs that offers a dramatic speed-up in computation
time compared to BC15. The key idea behind our algorithm
is in computing a variant of SSE, where the leader commits
to correlated strategies – i.e., the leader can send signals to
the follower, and the best response of the follower is to follow these signals. We use this variant to ﬁnd the original SSE
by systematically restricting which signals the leader can
send to the follower. This variant of SSE has previously been
studied in single step games (Conitzer and Korzhyk 2011),
ﬁnite turn-based and concurrent-move games (Bosansky et
al. 2015), inﬁnite concurrent-move stochastic games (Letchford et al. 2012), and security games (Xu et al. 2015;
Rabinovich et al. 2015; Durkota et al. 2015). Formally, it
has been deﬁned as Stackelberg Extensive-Form Correlated
Equilibrium (SEFCE) in (Bosansky et al. 2015). While it
was shown that the utility value for the leader in SSE cannot
be closely approximated by SEFCE (Letchford et al. 2012),
we show that one can use SEFCE to compute SSE. Since
there was no previously known algorithm for computing SEFCE in EFGs, we also show that SEFCE can be found in
polynomial time in EFGs without chance.

Introduction
The roles of players in many games are often asymmetric.
One example is the ability of one player (the leader) to commit to a strategy, to which the other players (the followers)
react by playing their best response. In real-world scenarios, the leader can model a market leader with the power
to set the price for items or services, or a defense agency
committing to a security protocol to protect critical facilities.
Optimal strategies for the players in such situations are described by the Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium (SSE) (Leitmann 1978; von Stengel and Zamir 2004). There are many
examples of successful applications of SSE in infrastructure
protection (Tambe 2011) as well as protecting the environment and wildlife (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015).
In most of the existing works, the game models are simpliﬁed and do not consider the sequential interaction among
players (Pita et al. 2008; Tsai et al. 2009; Shieh et al. 2012;
Jiang et al. 2013). One reason is computational complexity,
since computing SSE is often NP-hard when sequential interaction is allowed (Letchford and Conitzer 2010). Another
reason is the lack of practical algorithms. The only algorithm designed speciﬁcally for computing SSE in two-player
imperfect-information general-sum extensive-form games

The paper is structured as follows. After introducing the
formalism of EFGs, we formally deﬁne both SSE and SEFCE, and give an example of a game where these concepts
differ. Next, we present the linear program (LP) for computing SEFCE in EFGs without chance (we describe a modiﬁed LP for EFGs with chance in the full version of the paper). Afterwards, we present our algorithm for computing
SSE in EFGs that iteratively solves the LP for SEFCE with
additional constraints until SSE is reached. Finally, we provide three variants of our algorithm and show that each variant signiﬁcantly improves the computation time compared
to BC15 on randomly generated games and an example of a
search game.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

439

