Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Abstraction Using Analysis of Subgames
Anjon Basak
University of Texas at El Paso
500 W University Ave, El Paso, TX 79968
915-731-3083, abasak@miners.utep.edu

. Even for this setting abstraction is not completely understood, and there has been less work in this area (with some
exceptions, such as the decision-theoretic clustering methods proposed by (Bard et al. 2015)). Here I focus on the simpler setting of normal form games and particularly games
with a structure called AIOS (Approximately Identical Outside Subgames). This is a similar structure to ALAGIU (All
Lower Actions Give Identical Utility) (Conitzer and Sandholm 2006). The key idea is to create clusters of strategies
for both players that form subgames. Within a subgame, the
strategies and payoffs can vary arbitrarily. However, outside
of the subgame, the strategies for each player should be a
similar as possible in the payoffs for playing against any opponent strategy not in the cluster.
We are motivated by the recursive game reduction technique introduced by Conitzer et al. (Conitzer and Sandholm
2006). This idea leads to a different type of clustering abstraction where clusters form subgames that are solved separately to create the abstracted game. We also introduce a
variation of this technique that can improve solution quality by iteratively modifying the subgames to account for
abstraction error. In cases where there are differences outside of the subgames, simply composing the solutions of the
subgames may not be an equilibrium of the original game.
This is because the solution may occasionally result in play
in quadrants of the game that are not one of the subgames
solved explicitly, which results in error because the payoffs
are not exactly the same for all strategies. The iterative solution technique attempts to account for this error. First, we
calculate for each strategy in a cluster the expected payoff
for this strategy outside of the subgame against the current
opponent solution. Then, we modify the subgames using the
error offset, and resolve the subgames. This results in a sequence of modiﬁed solutions that account for the differences
in payoffs outside of the subgames from the previous iteration. We call this method ISASC for Iterative Subgame Abstraction and Solution Concept.
When solving an abstracted game, it is not clear that the
best analysis is simply to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium of the abstracted game, since this may not be an equilibrium of the
original game. This is the idea for our next contribution,
Minimum Epsilon Bounded equilibrium (MEB) which represents and improved version of pure strategy Nash Equilibrium (PSNE) that considers additional information about the

Abstract
Normal form games are one of the most familiar representations for modeling interactions among multiple agent. However, modeling many realistic interactions between agents results in games that are extremely large. In these cases computing standard solutions like Nash equilibrium may be intractable. To overcome this issue the idea of abstraction has
been investigated, most prominently in research on computer
Poker. Solving a game using abstraction requires using some
method to simplify the game before it is analyzed. We study
a new variation for solving normal form games using abstraction that is based on ﬁnding and solving suitable sub games.
We compare this method with several variations of a common
type of abstraction based on clustering similar strategies.

Introduction
Game theory models interactions among self-interested rational agents, where each agent tries to maximize its utility. The most basic representation of a game is the wellknown normal form (NFG). One of the key challenges in
computational game theory is ﬁnding effective ways of analyzing extremely large games. Many real-world situations
where we would like to apply game theory naturally have
very large strategy spaces or other complexities. However,
ﬁnding Nash equilibria is known to be a computationally
hard problem.
To analyze games that are beyond the limits of standard
solution algorithms, an increasingly common approach is to
apply some form of automated abstraction to simplify the
game. The simpliﬁed game is then analyzed using an available solver, and the solution is somehow mapped back into
the original game. If the simpliﬁed game is able to retain
the key strategic features of the original game, then in principle the solution of the simpler game may be a reasonable
approximation of the solution to the original game. This general approach has been very successful in developing computer poker agents, and most of the successful players in the
annual competition in computer poker over the past years
have used some variation of this idea (e.g. (Gilpin and Sandholm 2006)).
I study a new variation for solving normal form games1
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.cs.utep.edu/kiekintveld/students/basak/paper.pdf

4196

