Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Adaptive Normalized Risk-Averting Training for Deep Neural Networks
Zhiguang Wang, Tim Oates

James Lo

Department of Computer Science and Electric Engineering
University of Maryland Baltimore County
zgwang813@gmail.com, oates@umbc.edu

Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Maryland Baltimore County
jameslo@umbc.edu

better interpret hidden features Various regularization techniques such as dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) with Maxout (Goodfellow et al. 2013b) are proposed to regulate the
DNNs to be less prone to overﬁtting.
Neural network models always lead to a non-convex optimization problem. The optimization algorithm impacts the
quality of the local minimum because it is hard to ﬁnd a
global minimum or estimate how far a particular local minimum is from the best possible solution. The most standard approach to optimize DNNs is Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD). There are many variants of SGD and researchers and practitioners typically choose a particular variant empirically. While nearly all DNNs optimization algorithms in popular use are gradient-based, recent work has
shown that more advanced second-order methods such as
L-BFGS and Saddle-Free Newton (SFN) approaches can
yield better results for DNN tasks (Ngiam et al. 2011;
Dauphin et al. 2014). Second order derivatives can be addressed by hardware extensions (GPUs or clusters) or batch
methods when dealing with massive data, SGD still provides
a robust default choice for optimizing DNNs.
Instead of modifying the network structure or optimization techniques for DNNs, we focused on designing a new
error function to convexify the error space. The convexiﬁcation approach has been studied in the optimization community for decades, but has never been seriously applied within
deep learning. Two well-known methods are the graduated
nonconvexity method (Blake and Zisserman 1987) and the
LiuFloudas convexiﬁcation method (Liu and Floudas 1993).
LiuFloudas convexiﬁcation can be applied to optimization
problems where the error criterion is twice continuously differentiable, although determining the weight α of the added
quadratic function for convexifying the error criterion involves signiﬁcant computation when dealing with massive
data and parameters.
Following the same name employed for deriving robust
controllers and ﬁlters (Speyer, Deyst, and Jacobson 1974),
a new type of Risk-Averting Error (RAE) is proposed theoretically for solving non-convex optimization problems (Lo
2010). Empirically, with the proposal of Normalized RiskAverting Error (NRAE) and the Gradual Deconvexiﬁcation
method (GDC), this error criterion is proved to be competitive with the standard mean square error (MSE) in single
layer and two-layer neural networks for solving data ﬁt-

Abstract
This paper proposes a set of new error criteria and a
learning approach, called Adaptive Normalized RiskAverting Training (ANRAT) to attack the non-convex
optimization problem in training deep neural networks
without pretraining. Theoretically, we demonstrate its
effectiveness based on the expansion of the convexity region. By analyzing the gradient on the convexity index λ, we explain the reason why our learning
method using gradient descent works. In practice, we
show how this training method is successfully applied
for improved training of deep neural networks to solve
visual recognition tasks on the MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. Using simple experimental settings without pretraining and other tricks, we obtain results comparable or superior to those reported in recent literature on the same tasks using standard ConvNets +
MSE/cross entropy. Performance on deep/shallow multilayer perceptron and Denoised Auto-encoder is also
explored. ANRAT can be combined with other quasiNewton training methods, innovative network variants,
regularization techniques and other common tricks in
DNNs. Other than unsupervised pretraining, it provides
a new perspective to address the non-convex optimization strategy in training DNNs.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are attracting attention
largely due to their impressive empirical performance in image and speech recognition tasks. While Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) are the de facto state-of-the-art for visual
recognition, Deep Belief Networks (DBN), Deep Boltzmann
Machines (DBM) and Stacked Auto-encoders (SA) provide
insights as generative models to learn the full generating distribution of input data. Recently, researchers have investigated various techniques to improve the learning capacity of
DNNs. Unsupervised pretraining using Restrict Boltzmann
Machines (RBM), Denoised Autoencoders (DA) or Topographic ICA (TICA) has proved to be helpful for training
DNNs with better weight initialization (Ngiam et al. 2010;
Coates and Ng 2011). Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) and
variants are proposed as the optimal activation functions to
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2201

