Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Robust Execution of BDI Agent Programs
by Exploiting Synergies Between Intentions
Yuan Yao

Brian Logan

John Thangarajah

School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
yvy@cs.nott.ac.uk

School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
bsl@cs.nott.ac.uk

School of Computer Science and IT
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia
john.thangarajah@rmit.edu.au

Deferring the selection of plans until the corresponding
goal must be achieved allows BDI agents to respond ﬂexibly to the current state of the environment, by adapting the
means used to achieve a goal to the current circumstances.
However, as with any software system, BDI agent programs
may fail. Several different types of execution failure can be
distinguished.1 Coverage failures occur when there is no applicable plan for the current (sub)goal in the current environment. Precondition failures occur when an action cannot be
executed because a precondition for the action does not hold
(e.g., in order to pick up an object, a robot agent must be
within gripping distance of the object). Postcondition failures occur when the intended effect of the action does not
hold after executing the action (e.g., if the gripper is faulty, a
pickup action may not result in the agent holding the object).
In popular BDI agent programming languages such as
JACK (Winikoff 2005) or Jadex (Pokahr, Braubach, and
Lamersdorf 2005), when an execution failure occurs another
applicable plan is tried to achieve the current (sub)goal.
(This form of failure handling is also implemented in
the Jason ‘backtracking declarative goal’ pattern (Bordini,
Hübner, and Wooldridge 2007).) If no alternative means is
available, then the goal is deemed failed, and the failure is
propagated to higher-level motivating goals. This approach
to failure handling gives rise to a very large behaviour space
for BDI agent programs (Winikoff and Craneﬁeld 2014), and
can result in robust execution. However, this robustness can
come at a considerable cost in terms of backtracking (i.e.,
partial execution of a plan to the point of failure, followed
by selection of an alternative plan for the current subgoal).
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach to recovering from execution failures that relies on exploiting positive interactions between an agent’s intentions. A positive
interaction occurs when the execution of an action in one
intention assists the execution of plans or actions in other
intentions (e.g., by (re)establishing their context or preconditions). We have implemented our approach in a scheduling algorithm for BDI agents which we call SP . We present
the results of a preliminary empirical evaluation of SP in
a range of scenarios of increasing difﬁculty. The results
suggest our approach out-performs existing failure handling

Abstract
A key advantage the reactive planning approach
adopted by BDI-based agents is the ability to recover
from plan execution failures, and almost all BDI agent
programming languages and platforms provide some
form of failure handling mechanism. In general, these
consist of simply choosing an alternative plan for the
failed subgoal (e.g., JACK, Jadex). In this paper, we
propose an alternative approach to recovering from execution failures that relies on exploiting positive interactions between an agent’s intentions. A positive interaction occurs when the execution of an action in one
intention assists the execution of actions in other intentions (e.g., by (re)establishing their preconditions). We
have implemented our approach in a scheduling algorithm for BDI agents which we call SP . The results of
a preliminary empirical evaluation of SP suggest our
approach out-performs existing failure handling mechanisms used by state-of-the-art BDI languages. Moreover, the computational overhead of SP is modest.

1

Introduction

Arguably the dominant paradigm in agent development
is the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) model (Rao and
Georgeff 1991). In BDI-based agent programming languages, e.g., JACK (Winikoff 2005) Jason (Bordini, Hübner,
and Wooldridge 2007), 2APL (Dastani 2008), the behaviour
of an agent is speciﬁed in terms of beliefs, goals, and plans.
Beliefs represent the agent’s information about the environment (and itself). Goals represent desired states of the environment the agent is trying to bring about. Plans are the
means by which the agent can modify the environment in order to achieve its goals. Plans are composed of steps which
are either basic actions that directly change the agent’s environment, or subgoals which are in turn achieved by other
plans. For each top-level goal, the agent selects a plan which
forms the root of an intention, and commences executing the
steps in the plan. If the next step in an intention is a subgoal,
a (sub)plan is selected to achieve the subgoal and pushed
onto the intention, and the steps in the (sub)plan are then executed and so on. This process of repeatedly choosing and
executing plans is referred to the agent’s deliberation cycle.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We ignore failures arising from programmer error, and assume
that programs are correctly written.

2558

