Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Fixed-Rank Supervised Metric
Learning on Riemannian Manifold
Yadong Mu
AT&T Labs Research
Middletown, NJ 07748, U.S.A.
Email: myd@research.att.com

learning (Hoi, Liu, and Chang 2008; Liu et al. 2010), fully
supervised learning (Xing et al. 2003; Ying and Li 2012;
Hu, Lu, and Tan 2014), transfer learning (Luo et al. 2014)
or structural learning (Lim, Lanckriet, and McFee 2013).
Prominent real-world applications of metric learning techniques include face veriﬁcation (Hu, Lu, and Tan 2014),
image retrieval (Hoi, Liu, and Chang 2010), image annotation (Verma and Jawahar 2012), and bioinformatics (Kato
and Nagano 2010), etc.
Instead of using nonlinear distance functions (Weinberger
and Saul 2006; Kedem et al. 2012), the main scope of
this paper is to optimize the (squared) Mahalanobis distance (Xing et al. 2003) between two data points, which is
mathematically expressed as below

Abstract
Metric learning has become a critical tool in many machine
learning tasks. This paper focuses on learning an optimal Mahalanobis distance matrix (parameterized by a positive semideﬁnite matrix W) in the setting of supervised learning. Recently, particular research attention has been attracted by lowrank metric learning, which requires that matrix W is dominated by a few large singular values. In the era of high feature dimensions, low-rank metric learning effectively reduces
the storage and computation overheads. However, existing
low-rank metric learning algorithms usually adopt sophisticated regularization (such as LogDet divergence) for encouraging matrix low-rankness, which unfortunately incurs iterative computations of matrix SVD. In this paper, we tackle
low-rank metric learning by enforcing ﬁxed-rank constraint
on the matrix W. We harness the Riemannian manifold geometry of the collection of ﬁxed-rank matrices and devise a
novel second-order Riemannian retraction operator. The proposed operator is efﬁcient and ensures that W always resides
on the manifold. Comprehensive numerical experiments conducted on benchmarks clearly suggest that the proposed algorithm is substantially superior or on par with the state-of-theart in terms of k-NN classiﬁcation accuracy. Moreover, the
proposed manifold retraction operator can be also naturally
applied in generic rank-constrained machine learning algorithms.

D(xi , xj ) = (xi − xj ) W(xi − xj ),

(1)

where the parametric matrix W is often assumed to be positive semi-deﬁnite in order to ensure a well-deﬁned metric.
In supervised metric learning, the matrix W is critically
optimized based on pre-speciﬁed similar/dissimilar constraints. Proﬁting from advances in numerical optimization
techniques (particularly sophisticated schemes on PSD matrices (Shen et al. 2009)), supervised metric learning is making big strides towards elevating the accuracies of machine
learning systems. Importantly, the number of free parameters in W is quadratic with regard to the feature dimension,
which indicates a huge feasible region in many real-world
scenarios. Avoiding the over-ﬁtting is therefore crucial for
attaining good accuracy on unseen data points. To this end,
a large body of metric learning literature has actively explored the regularization imposed on W (Jin, Wang, and
Zhou 2009; Liu and Vemuri 2012; Chen et al. 2012). For
example, the information-theoretic approaches, exempliﬁed
by sparse distance metric learning (SDML) (Qi et al. 2009)
and sparse semi-supervised metric Learning (S3ML) (Liu et
al. 2010), propose to use LogDet divergence and L1 regularization on W. The LogDet divergence effectively aligns the
learned W with our empirical belief of W. The justiﬁcation
for the sparse regularization primarily is a theoretical result
in covariance matrix estimation (Ravikumar et al. 2011).
Matrix low-rankness is another widespreadly adopted
regularization in machine learning, such as in robust
PCA (Candès et al. 2011) and subspace segmentation (Liu,
Lin, and Yu 2010). A number of low-rank metric learning

Introduction
Metric learning methods (Yang 2006; Kulis 2013; Bellet,
Habrard, and Sebban 2013) strive to effectively gauge the
pairwise distance between two data objects. In the past few
years, metric learning has become ubiquitous and stimulated by a large spectrum of applications in the research
ﬁelds such as machine learning and information retrieval.
For a number of fundamental machine learning algorithms
(such as k-means clustering and k-NN classiﬁcation) and
applications (such as image search), the naive Euclidean
distance is often insufﬁcient for describing domain-speciﬁc
data afﬁnities. Learning a well-deﬁned metric (typically in
the form of Mahalanobis distance metric) plays a crucial
role in obtaining state-of-the-art performance and a vast literature of metric learning algorithms under various problem settings has been created, including semi-supervised
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1941

