Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Teaching-to-Learn and Learning-to-Teach for Multi-Label Propagation
Chen Gong†, and Dacheng Tao and Jie Yang† and Wei Liu 



†
Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney

Didi Research, Beijing, China
{goodgongchen, jieyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au
weiliu@didichuxing.com

and Zhou 2007) adapt the traditional KNN classiﬁer to
multi-label KNN, (Clare and King 2001; Bi and Kwok
2011) deploy the tree model to analyze the MLL problem,
and (Elisseeff and Weston 2001; Xu, Li, and Zhou 2013;
Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015) develop various multi-label SVMs
by introducing the ranking loss, PRO loss, and the causality
between labels, respectively.
Although the above methods differ from one another, they
all focus on how to exploit the label correlations to optimize
learning performance. Since graph is a simple yet powerful
tool to model the relationship between labels or examples,
several researchers have recently introduced graph to MLL
problem. Representative works include (Kong, Ng, and
Zhou 2013; Chen et al. 2013; Wang, Huang, and Ding 2009;
Chen et al. 2008; Jiang 2012; Kang, Jin, and Sukthankar
2006; Zha et al. 2008; Wang, Tu, and Tsotsos 2013). However, above graph-based propagation methods often suffer from unsatisfactory performance due to the unexpected
noise (e,g, outliers) in the sample space and the huge label
search space (the size is 2q where q is the number of possible labels). To make matters worse, they propagate the labels
to unlabeled examples in an unfavorable sequence without
considering their individual propagation difﬁculty or reliability. For example, (Wang, Huang, and Ding 2009; Chen et
al. 2008; Kong, Ng, and Zhou 2013) treat all the unlabeled
examples equally and conduct a one-shot label propagation
by minimizing the designed energy function. (Jiang 2012;
Wang, Tu, and Tsotsos 2013) iteratively transfer the label
information to unlabeled examples as long as these examples are directly linked to the labeled examples on a graph.
Inspired by (Gong et al. 2015), we address the above
problem by proposing a novel iterative multi-label propagation scheme called “Multi-Label Teaching-to-Learn and
Learning-to-Teach” (ML-TLLT), to explicitly manipulate
the propagation sequence, so that the unlabeled examples are
logically propagated from simple to difﬁcult. This is beneﬁcial to improving propagation quality because the previously
attained simple knowledge eases the learning burden for the
subsequent difﬁcult examples. Generally, an example is simple if its labels can be conﬁdently decided. Suppose we have
n = l+u examples X = {x1 ,· · ·, xl ,xl+1 ,· · · ,xl+u }, where
the ﬁrst l elements constitute the labeled set L and the remaining u examples form the unlabeled set U . Each element
xi ∈ X ⊂ Rd is associated with a set of q possible labels

Abstract
Multi-label propagation aims to transmit the multi-label information from labeled examples to unlabeled examples
based on a weighted graph. Existing methods ignore the speciﬁc propagation difﬁculty of different unlabeled examples
and conduct the propagation in an imperfect sequence, leading to the error-prone classiﬁcation of some difﬁcult examples with uncertain labels. To address this problem, this paper associates each possible label with a “teacher”, and proposes a “Multi-Label Teaching-to-Learn and Learning-toTeach” (ML-TLLT) algorithm, so that the entire propagation
process is guided by the teachers and manipulated from simple examples to more difﬁcult ones. In the teaching-to-learn
step, the teachers select the simplest examples for the current
propagation by investigating both the deﬁnitiveness of each
possible label of the unlabeled examples, and the dependencies between labels revealed by the labeled examples. In the
learning-to-teach step, the teachers reversely learn from the
learner’s feedback to properly select the simplest examples
for the next propagation. Thorough empirical studies show
that due to the optimized propagation sequence designed by
the teachers, ML-TLLT yields generally better performance
than seven state-of-the-art methods on the typical multi-label
benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Multi-Label Learning (MLL) refers to the problem in which
an example can be assigned a set of different labels. So
far, MLL has been intensively adopted in image annotation (Wang, Huang, and Ding 2009), text categorization
(Schapire and Singer 2000), social behavior learning (Tang
and Liu 2009), and others.
By following the taxonomy presented in (Zhang and Zhou
2014), we classify the existing MLL algorithms into problem
transformation methods and algorithm adaptation methods.
Problem transformation methods cast MML into other wellstudied scenarios. Representative approaches include Calibrated Label Ranking (Fürnkranz et al. 2008) which transforms MLL into a label ranking problem, and Binary Relevance (Boutell et al. 2004) which regards MLL as a series of
binary classiﬁcation tasks.
Algorithm adaptation methods extend the existing learning algorithms to multi-label cases. For example, (Zhang
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1610

