Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Toward a Better Understanding of Deep Neural Network
Based Acoustic Modelling: An Empirical Investigation
Xingfu Wang, Lin Wang∗ , Jing Chen and Litao Wu
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, P.R. China.
wangxfu@ustc.edu.cn, ustcwanglin@hotmail.com, {ccjj, litao3rd}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

aims to address this concern by systematically exploring the
major strategies to improve DNN acoustic models.
This paper offers an empirical investigation of DNN performance on two LVCSR tasks to understand best practices
and important design decisions when building DNN acoustic models.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the previous work involved in building neural network acoustic models for LVCSR, and contextualizes the questions addressed by our investigations. Section
3 describes the neural network architectures and optimization algorithms evaluated in this paper. Section 4 presents
our experiments on the Switchboard corpus, which focus on
regularization choices. We then present experiments on the
larger Fisher corpora in Section 5 which explore the performance of larger and deeper DNN architectures. We conclude
in Section 6.

Abstract
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have outperformed traditional acoustic models on a variety of
speech recognition benchmarks. However, due to system differences across research groups, although a
tremendous breadth and depth of related work has been
established, it is still not easy to assess the performance
improvements of a particular architectural variant from
examining the literature when building DNN acoustic
models.
Our work aims to uncover which variations among
baseline systems are most relevant for automatic speech
recognition (ASR) performance via a series of systematic tests on the limits of the major architectural choices.
By holding all the other components ﬁxed, we are able
to explore the design and training decisions without being confounded by the other inﬂuencing factors.
Our experiment results suggest that a relatively simple DNN architecture and optimization technique produces strong results. These ﬁndings, along with previous work, not only help build a better understanding towards why DNN acoustic models perform well or how
they might be improved, but also help establish a set
of best practices for new speech corpora and language
understanding task variants.

1

2

Related Work

To better contextualize previous work, and further convey
what parts of the process are not yet fully understood, we
break the discussion into the following 4 aspects of modeling and algorithmic choices:

2.1

Introduction

Network Size and Depth

The total number of parameters used in modern DNNs is
typically 10 to 100 times greater than neural networks used
in the original hybrid HMM experiments. This increased
model size, which translates to increased representational
capacity, is critical to the success of modern DNN-HMM
system. Using DNNs with many hidden layers and many total parameters has generally found to be beneﬁcial(Seide,
Li, and Yu 2011; Morgan 2012; Yu et al. 2013), but the
role of hidden layers and total network size is not generally
understood. In the work of Rich Caruana(Ba and Caruana
2013), it is stated that trained deep nets can be duplicated
with shallow nets, but perhaps the deep structure is beneﬁcial to learning. Whether deeper is always better, or how
deep a network must be to obtain good performance, is not
well understood both for speech recognition and DNN classiﬁcation tasks more generally. We build DNNs with 5 to 10
times the total number of free parameters of DNNs used in
most previous work to investigate the question of how far

DEEP neural network (DNN) acoustic models have driven
tremendous improvements in large vocabulary continuous
speech recognition (LVCSR) in recent years (Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006; Vincent et al. 2010; Dahl et al. 2011;
Jaitly et al. 2012). However,the underlying principles for
understanding why DNNs work so much better remain not
well understood. Recent research on DNN acoustic models
for LVCSR have explored a great many variations different
in network architecture, optimization techniques, loss functions and regulation methods to reduce overﬁtting.
Due to system differences across research groups it can
be difﬁcult, for example, to determine whether a performance improvement is due to a better neural network architecture or a different optimization technique. Our work
∗

Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2173

