Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Lift-Based Bidding in Ad Selection
Jian Xu∗ , Xuhui Shao, Jianjie Ma, Kuang-chih Lee, Hang Qi, Quan Lu
∗

TouchPal Inc., 1172 Castro St, Mountain View, CA 94040
Yahoo Inc., 701 First Ave, Sunnyvale, CA 94089
jian.xu@cootek.cn, {xshao,jianma,kclee,hangqi,qlu}@yahoo-inc.com

pricing model as it is the most challenging problem. Stateof-the-art DSPs that support such CPA pricing model typically convert an advertiser’s CPA bid to an expected cost per
impression (eCPM) bid in order to participate in the RTB
auctions where the winning ad is chosen based on the highest bid (McAfee 2011). In pure second price auctions, theoretically the optimal bidding strategy is truth-telling. Therefore, the prevalent practice to derive such eCPM bid is estimating the Action Rate (AR) which is the probability that
the impression will lead to a desired action and multiplying
it by the CPA bid (i.e., eCPM=AR×CPA).
However, such bidding strategy neglects the probability
that a user will take the desired action even if the impression
is not shown. For example, a loyal Pampers customer will
make further purchases even if not exposed to any Pampers
ad. An analogy can be found in the political marketing. As
early as in 2012, Obama’s presidential campaign already focused on the swing voters by quantifying how easily they
can be shifted to vote for the Democrat (Rutenberg 2013). It
is surprising that the online advertising market has lagged
behind at this point. We argue that the prevalent bidding
strategy is categorically suboptimal by design.

Abstract
Real-time bidding has become one of the largest online advertising markets in the world. Today the bid
price per ad impression is typically decided by the expected value of how it can lead to a desired action event
to the advertiser. However, this industry standard approach to decide the bid price does not consider the actual effect of the ad shown to the user, which should
be measured based on the performance lift among users
who have been or have not been exposed to a certain
treatment of ads. In this paper, we propose a new bidding strategy and prove that if the bid price is decided
based on the performance lift rather than absolute performance value, advertisers can actually gain more action events. We describe the modeling methodology to
predict the performance lift and demonstrate the actual
performance gain through blind A/B test with real ad
campaigns. We also show that to move the demand-side
platforms to bid based on performance lift, they should
be rewarded based on the relative performance lift they
contribute.

Introduction
Online advertising is one of the fastest growing industries
with $58 billion total spend projected in 2015 in US alone.
One of the most signiﬁcant trends in online advertising in
recent years is real-time bidding (RTB), or sometimes more
broadly referred to as programmatic buying. In RTB, advertisers have the ability of making decisions whether and how
much to bid for every impression that would lead to the best
expected outcome. It is analogous to stock exchanges in that
data-driven algorithms are used to automatically buy and sell
ads in real-time. The bidding algorithm can use the contextual and user behavioral data to select the best ads in order
to optimize the effectiveness of online advertising.
Demand-Side Platforms (DSPs) are thus created to help
advertisers manage their campaigns and optimize their realtime bidding activities. DSPs offer different pricing models,
such as cost per impression (CPM1 ), cost per click (CPC),
and cost per action (CPA). This paper focuses on the CPA

Motivating Examples
The above bidding strategy calculates the bid price based
on the AR (proxy for value to the advertiser) of a user. The
problem is that campaign budget would be spent on users
who already have high ARs instead of those who could have
been greatly inﬂuenced by the ads (i.e., those with high AR
lift because of the ads). The difference is best illustrated by
the examples below.
E XAMPLE 1 (VALUE - BASED B IDDING). Suppose a DSP
is bidding on behalf of an advertiser to acquire impressions
and the advertiser’s CPA=$100. Suppose there are two ad
requests from user a and b respectively. The AR of user a is
0.04 if she is shown the advertiser’s ad, otherwise the AR is
0.03. User b has an AR of 0.02 if she is shown the ad, otherwise the AR is 0.001.
Based on the common practice in the industry, the bid
prices should be the absolute ARs assuming ads are shown
times CPA. So the the bid prices for a and b are 0.04 ×
$100 = $4 and 0.02 × $100 = $2 respectively. Suppose the
highest bid prices from other competitors are equally $3.5

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Sometimes refers to cost per thousand impressions to make the
numbers easier to manage.

651

