Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Progressive EM for Latent Tree Models and Hierarchical Topic Detection
Peixian Chen,† Nevin L. Zhang,† Leonard K. M. Poon,‡ Zhourong Chen†
†

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology {pchenac,lzhang,zchenbb@cse.ust.hk}
‡
The Hong Kong Institute of Education{kmpoon@ied.edu.hk}

Abstract
Hierarchical latent tree analysis (HLTA) is recently proposed
as a new method for topic detection. It differs fundamentally from the LDA-based methods in terms of topic deﬁnition, topic-document relationship, and learning method. It
has been shown to discover signiﬁcantly more coherent topics and better topic hierarchies. However, HLTA relies on the
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm for parameter estimation and hence is not efﬁcient enough to deal with large
datasets. In this paper, we propose a method to drastically
speed up HLTA using a technique inspired by the advances
in the method of moments. Empirical experiments show that
our method greatly improves the efﬁciency of HLTA. It is as
efﬁcient as the state-of-the-art LDA-based method for hierarchical topic detection and ﬁnds substantially better topics and
topic hierarchies.

Figure 1: Latent tree model obtained from a toy text dataset.

Empirical results from Liu, Zhang, and Chen (2014)
indicate that HLTA ﬁnds signiﬁcantly better topics and
topic hierarchies than hierarchical latent Dirichlet allocation (hLDA), the ﬁrst LDA-based method for hierarchical
topic detection. However HLTA is not efﬁcient. It took, for
instance, 17 hours to process a NIPS dataset that consists of
fewer than 2,000 documents over 1,000 distinct words.
The computational bottleneck of HLTA lies in the use of
the EM algorithm (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin, 1977) for
parameter estimation. In this paper, we propose progressive
EM (PEM) as a replacement of EM so as to scale up HLTA.
PEM is motivated by a spectral technique applied in the
method of moments, which relates each equation of population moments to at most 3 observed variables (Chang, 1996;
Anandkumar et al., 2012). Similarly, PEM works in steps
and, at each step, it focuses on a small part of the model parameters and involves only three or four observed variables.
Our new algorithm is hence named PEM-HLTA. It is drastically faster than HLTA. PEM-HLTA ﬁnished processing
the aforementioned NIPS dataset within 4 minutes and is capable of analysing much larger corpus. PEM-HLTA is also
as efﬁcient as nHDP (Paisley et al., 2012), a state-of-the-art
LDA-based method for hierarchical topic detection, and it
signiﬁcantly outperforms nHDP, as well as hLDA, in terms
of the quality of topics and topic hierarchies.

Introduction
Detecting topics and topic hierarchies from document collections, along with its many potential applications, is a major research area in Machine Learning. Currently the predominant approach to topic detection is latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan, 2003). LDA has been
developed to detect topics and to model relationships among
them, including topic correlations (Blei and Lafferty, 2007),
topic hierarchies (Blei, Grifﬁths, and Jordan, 2010; Paisley
et al., 2012), and topic evolution (Blei and Lafferty, 2006).
We collectively name these methods LDA-based methods.
In those methods, a topic is a probability distribution over a
vocabulary and a document is a mixture of topics. Therefore
LDA is a type of mixed membership model.
A totally different approach to hierarchical topic detection is recently proposed by Liu, Zhang, and Chen (2014).
It is called hierarchical latent tree analysis (HLTA), where
topics are organized hierarchically as a latent tree model
(LTM) (Zhang, 2004; Zhang, Wang, and Chen, 2008a) such
as the one in Fig 1. Each internal node of an LTM gives several states, with each state being a topic and corresponding
to a collection of documents. A document can thus belong to
multiple topics from different internal nodes. HLTA is therefore a type of multiple membership model.

Preliminaries
A latent tree model (LTM) is a Markov random ﬁeld over
an undirected tree, where the leaf nodes represent observed variables and the internal nodes represent latent variables (Zhang, 2004; Chen et al., 2012). Here we assume all
variables are discrete with ﬁnite cardinality, i.e., ﬁnite number of possible states.
Parameters of an LTM consist of potentials associated
with edges and nodes such that the product of all potentials

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1498

