Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Tweet Timeline Generation with Determinantal Point Processes
Jin-ge Yao1,2 , Feifan Fan1 , Wayne Xin Zhao3 , Xiaojun Wan1,2 , Edward Chang4 , Jianguo Xiao1,2
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871,China
2
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistic (Peking University), MOE, China
3
School of Information, Renmin University of China
4
HTC Research, Beijing, China
{yaojinge,fanff,wanxiaojun,xiaojianguo}@pku.edu.cn, batmanﬂy@gmail.com, edward chang@htc.com
topical relevance and overall diversity with a recently proposed probabilistic model called determinantal point processes (DPPs)(Kulesza and Taskar 2012). A determinantal
point process is a probabilistic measure deﬁned on item sets.
A typical DPP model can independently characterize quality scores of each item and select items as diverse as possible. This property makes it suitable for the timeline generation task to select both representative and diverse tweets.
However, tweets are short, noisy and even contain slangs
or spelling errors, which makes the TTG task challenging.
For example, many less relevant tweets are likely to obtain
considerable relevance scores due to the fact that the query
terms are unconsciously included in the tweets. Thus, a simple application of DPP model will not lead to good performance for TTG task.
There is an inevitable need to better balance relevance
of tweets and selectional diversity in the context of TTG
task. To tackle this issue, we proposed two novel strategies. Firstly, utilizing spectral properties of the parameter
matrix of a DPP model, the magnitudes of relevance scores
can be adaptively rescaled via an automatic tuning process,
which is called spectral rescaling in this paper. Such a rescaling method is able to tune the effect of different relevance
scores, according to the scale and distribution of the similarity values. Secondly, as the DPP model essentially deﬁnes
a probability distribution, we further propose to impose a
topical relevance prior to enhance the selection of relevant
and topically coherent tweets, which improves the relevance
measurement based on simple surface lexical similarity. Extensive experiments on the TREC 2014 dataset demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed DPP model along with the
two strategies.

Abstract
The task of tweet timeline generation (TTG) aims at selecting
a small set of representative tweets to generate a meaningful
timeline and providing enough coverage for a given topical
query. This paper presents an approach based on determinantal point processes (DPPs) by jointly modeling the topical relevance of each selected tweet and overall selectional diversity. Aiming at better treatment for balancing relevance and
diversity, we introduce two novel strategies, namely spectral
rescaling and topical prior. Extensive experiments on the public TREC 2014 dataset demonstrate that our proposed DPP
model along with the two strategies can achieve fairly competitive results against the state-of-the-art TTG systems.

Introduction
The microblogging service has become one of the most popular social networking platforms in recent years. When users
search a query in a microblogging website such as Twitter, an archive of tweets would be retrieved related to the
query topic. In many cases, users may also want to collect
the recent progress of one particular event and turn to Twitter search for more information from social users. However,
search results on tweets are not very informative and lack of
meaningful organization. Results typically include a large
amount of duplicates or near-duplicates tweets. It would be
helpful if the search system produced a summary timeline
about the topic.
In TREC 2014 Microblog track, the organizer introduced
a novel pilot task named Tweet Timeline Generation (TTG)
(Lin and Efron 2014). The main requirement of the TTG
task is to produce a summary that captures relevant information for a given query Q. Highly related to topic detection
and tracking (TDT) and traditional multi-document summarization, the essence of TTG task requires that a system
should be able to jointly consider topical relevance (obtaining relevant information) and diversity (reducing the redundant tweets) in tweet selection.
Jointly modeling relevance and diversity has been an important and general issue in multiple ﬁelds, which has attracted much research interest. In this work we introduce a
novel approach for the TTG task to jointly model individual

The Task: Tweet Timeline Generation
The task of tweet timeline generation aims at selecting a
small amount of representative tweets to generate a timeline
and providing enough coverage for a given topical query.
Formally, we give a deﬁnition for the TTG task as follows:
Input: Given a topic query Q from users, we obtain a
collection of tweets C = {T1 , T2 , · · · , TN } related to the
query by traditional retrieval model, where Ti is a tweet and
N is the number of retrieved tweets.
Output: A summarized tweet timeline which consists of
relevant and non-redundant, chronologically ordered tweets,

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3080

