Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Teaching Automated Strategic Reasoning Using Capstone Tournaments
Oscar Veliz, Marcus Gutierrez, and Christopher Kiekintveld
University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, TX 79968
osveliz@miners.utep.edu mgutierrez22@miners.utep.edu cdkiekintveld@utep.edu

and techniques they have learned throughout the course. At
a high level, the tournaments have a round-robin structure 1
that matches up every agent against every other agent in
many different game instances.

Abstract
Courses in artiﬁcial intelligence and related topics often
cover methods for reasoning under uncertainty, decision
theory, and game theory. However, these methods can
seem very abstract when students ﬁrst encounter them,
and they are often taught using simple toy problems.
Our goal is to help students to operationalize this knowledge by designing sophisticated autonomous agents that
must make complex decisions in games that capture
their interest. We describe a tournament-based pedagogy that we have used in two different courses with
two different games based on current research topics
in artiﬁcial intelligence to engage students in designing
agents that use strategic reasoning. Many students ﬁnd
this structure very engaging, and we ﬁnd that students
develop a deeper understanding of the abstract strategic
reasoning concepts introduced in the courses.

Network Security Game

Introduction
One of the central goals of artiﬁcial intelligence is to be
able to design and implement autonomous agents that make
effective decisions in complex domains. We describe a
tournament-based pedagogy that we have used in two different courses with two different games to engage students in
strategic reasoning. One course is a general introduction to
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the other focuses on applications
of automated strategic reasoning in computer network security. There are many examples of successful uses of games
in teaching AI including Pac-Man (DeNero and Klein 2010)
and Mario (Taylor 2011). Our pedagogy is to use capstone
projects in these AI courses where students must analyze a
game, determine the strategic issues, and integrate multiple
course methods to design an agent that will perform well
against their peers’ agents. Our approach is similar to previous work, but we emphasize using multiple AI topics, open
ended agent design, and games based on current research.

Figure 1: Example network security game where each node
represents a computer on a network. Each node has a Security Value (SV) and Point Value (PV).
The ﬁrst time we implemented a capstone assignment
based on this structure was for a course called “Computational Decision Making and Risk Analysis” which focuses
on applications of game theory, decision theory, and machine learning to computer network security. The game scenario we developed for this course shown in Figure 1 is inspired by current research in applications of game theory
for security, including problems in computer network security (Kiekintveld, Lisý, and Pı́bil 2015). The game models
an attacker/defender interaction, where computer networks
are represented as graphs. Attacker agents probe the network looking for weaknesses and ways to attack the network. Defender agents try to harden the network, create
ﬁrewall rules, and deploy honeypots.

Tournaments
We use tournaments to challenge students to develop automated agents that use strategic reasoning to make decisions in multi-player games, incorporating the knowledge
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In practice round robin tournaments cannot be used with large
numbers of agents requiring adoption of alternative structures.

4134

