Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Affective Computing and Applications
of Image Emotion Perceptions
Sicheng Zhao, Hongxun Yao
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.
zsc@hit.edu.cn, h.yao@hit.edu.cn

Introduction

Title: Light in Darkness
Tags: london, stormy, dramatic weather, …
Description: …there was a break in the clouds such
that a strip of the far bank and bridge were lit up
while the sky behind remained somewhat foreboding.
I thought it made for a pretty intense scene….

Images can convey rich semantics and evoke strong emotions in viewers. The research of my PhD thesis focuses on
image emotion computing (IEC), which aims to predict the
emotion perceptions of given images. The development of
IEC is greatly constrained by two main challenges: affective
gap and subjective evaluation (Zhao et al. 2014a). Previous
works mainly focused on ﬁnding features that can express
emotions better to bridge the affective gap, such as elementsof-art based features (Machajdik and Hanbury 2010) and
shape features (Lu et al. 2012).
According to the emotion representation models, including categorical emotion states (CES) and dimensional emotion space (DES) (Zhao et al. 2014a), three different tasks
are traditionally performed on IEC: affective image classiﬁcation, regression and retrieval. The state-of-the-art methods
on the three above tasks are image-centric, focusing on the
dominant emotions for the majority of viewers.
For my PhD thesis, I plan to answer the following questions: (1) Compared to the low-level elements-of-art based
features, can we ﬁnd some higher level features that are more
interpretable and have stronger link to emotions? (2) Are the
emotions that are evoked in viewers by an image subjective
and different? If they are, how can we tackle the user-centric
emotion prediction? (3) For image-centric emotion computing, can we predict the emotion distribution instead of the
dominant emotion category?

(a) Original image
Comments from different viewers
Wow, that is fantastic...it looks so
incredible, ….. That sky is amazing.
Yup a fave for me as well. Exciting
drama at its best.
Hey, it really frightened me! My
little daughter just looked scared.

(b) Image metadata

Expected emotion:
Emotion category: fear
Sentiment: negative
Valence: 4.1956
Arousal: 4.4989
Dominance: 4.8378

(c) Expected emotion

Personalized emotions
Emotion: awe, Sentiment: positive
V: 7.121 A: 4.479 D: 6.635
Emotion: excitement, Sentiment: positive
V: 7.950 A: 6.950 D: 7.210
Emotion: fear, Sentiment: negative
V: 2.625 A: 5.805 D: 3.625

(d) Personalized emotion labels

(e) Emotion distribution

Figure 1: Illustration of personalized image emotion perceptions in social networks. The emotions are obtained using
the keywords in red. The contour lines of (e) are the assigned
emotion distributions by expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm based on Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM).

into mathematical formulae for quantization measurement.
Take emphasis for example. Emphasis, also known as
contrast, is used to stress the difference of certain elements.
It can be accomplished by using sudden and abrupt changes
in elements, which is usually used to direct and focus viewers’ attention to the most important area or centers of interests of a design. We adopt Itten’s color contrasts and the rate
of focused attention (RFA) to measure emphasis. This part
has been ﬁnished in (Zhao et al. 2014a). We demonstrate
that the principles-of-art based emotion features (PAEF) can
model emotions better and are more interpretable to humans.

Principles-of-Art Based Emotion Features
The artistic elements must be carefully arranged and orchestrated into meaningful regions and images to describe
speciﬁc semantics and emotions. The rules, tools or guidelines of arranging and orchestrating the elements-of-art in an
artwork are known as the principles-of-art, which consider
various artistic aspects, including balance, emphasis, harmony, variety, gradation, movement, rhythm, and proportion (Collingwood 1958; Hobbs, Salome, and Vieth 1995).
We systematically study and formulize the former 6 artistic principles, without considering rhythm and proportion,
as they are ambiguously deﬁned. For each principle, we explain the concepts and meanings and translate these concepts

Personalized Emotion Perception Prediction
The images in Abstract dataset (Machajdik and Hanbury
2010) were labeled by 14 people on average. 81% images
are assigned with 5 to 8 emotions. So the perceived emotions of different viewers may vary.
To further demonstrate this observation, we set up a largescale dataset, named Image-Emotion-Social-Net dataset,
with over 1 million images downloaded from Flickr. To get
the personalized emotion labels, ﬁrstly we use traditional
lexicon-based methods as in (Jia et al. 2012; Yang et al.
2014) to obtain the text segmentation results of the title,
tags and descriptions from uploaders for expected emotions
and the comments from viewers for actual emotions. Then
we compute the average value of valence, arousal and dom-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4321

