Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Trust and Distrust Across Coalitions:
Shapley Value Based Centrality Measures for Signed Networks
(Student Abstract Version)
Varun Gangal1 , Abhishek Narwekar1 , Balaraman Ravindran1 , Ramasuri Narayanam2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600036, India, +91-44-22574350
vgtomahawk@gmail.com,abhisheknkar@gmail.com,ravi@cse.iitm.ac.in
2
IBM Research India, Bangalore, India
ramasurn@in.ibm.com
subset of nodes C ⊆ V given by the characteristic function ν(C) of the game. The value assigned to a node is a
weighted sum of the marginal contributions it makes to the
values of all possible subsets, also known as the Shapley
Value (SV). SV based centrality provides an intuitive way of
capturing a node’s centrality in combination with different
groups of other nodes in the network.
Earlier works on SV based centrality measures, such as
Suri and Narahari (2008) used MC sampling to compute
centrality. Aadithya et al. (2010) introduced the possibility
of deriving a closed form expression by deﬁning ν(C) appropriately. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst
work to deﬁne cooperative game theoretic centrality measures for SSNs. Moreover, we are also the ﬁrst to evaluate
such measures for a centrality-based ranking task, in traditional or signed networks. Earlier works have evaluated
these measures for other tasks such as inﬂuence maximization (Suri and Narahari 2008). Here we consider the task of
ranking users to detect trolls in a SSN. Trolls or malicious
users, are users with a highly negative reputation amongst
the users of the network. In the availability of ground truth,
one can evaluate a centrality measure by considering how
low these “trolls” rank in a ranklist of users according to the
measure.

Abstract
We propose Shapley Value based centrality measures for
signed social networks. We also demonstrate that they lead
to improved precision for the troll detection task.

Introduction
Signed social networks (SSNs) are social networks comprising of trust/distrust or friend-foe relationships betweeen
users. These relationships may be explicit, such as in the
Slashdot network (2009) , or inferred from interactions such
as elections and conversations, such as on Wikipedia . Mathematically, a SSN can be speciﬁed as (V, E + , E − ), where V
is the set of vertices, with E + and E − being sets of directed
edges of the form (a, b), denoting a trusts b or a distrusts b,
for E + and E − respectively.
In a social network, a centrality measure assigns each
node a value, which denotes its importance within the network. The notion of importance may vary based on the application, leading to a wide variety of such measures, based
on position, betweenness and local importance. A centrality measure for a SSN needs to incorporate two sources of
information and the interplay between them - trust and distrust edges as compared to just one type of edge in unsigned
networks. This, in addition to the imbalance in real-world
SSNs between positive and negative edges, makes deﬁning
SSN centrality measures a non-trivial task. A simple centrality measure for SSNs, ﬁrst proposed in (2009), is the simple net positive in- degree, also called Fans Minus Freaks
(FMF) centrality measure . Other measures include generalizations of eigenvector centrality and PageRank. A disadvantage of some of these centrality measures is that they
consider every node in isolation when computing the centrality. This ignores the synergy between nodes, where a
node is important by virtue of its combination with other
groups of nodes. Moreover, ignoring the synergy can also
make some of these centrality measures vulnerable to attacks wherein groups of nodes work together, as noted in
(Kumar, Spezzano, and Subrahmanian 2014), to boost their
individual centralities or reduce other nodes’s centralities.
One approach to incorporate this synergy has been to deﬁne
a cooperative game, which assigns a value to every possible

Deﬁnitions
We deﬁne four different games, deriving the closed form expression for the SV for each of them. We only present one
of the expressions here, including the remaining expressions
& proofs in the appendix 1 . We denote the positive and negative in-degrees, out-degrees and neighbor sets by d+
in (V ),
+
+
−
+
−
(V
),
d
(V
),
d
(V
),
N
(V
),
N
(V
),
N
(V
) and
d−
out
out
out
in
in
in
−
(V ).
Nout

Net Positive Fringe (NPF)
Aadithya et al. (2010) deﬁned the fringe (a generalization
of degree) of a coalition, as the set of all nodes either in
the coalition or having a positive neighbor in the coalition.
In a similar spirit, we deﬁne the positive fringe ν + (C) as
the set of all nodes which are in the coalition 2 or have a
positive out-neighbor in the coalition. The negative fringe
1

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

4210

http://tinyurl.com/o2g9a53
We assume a node always trusts itself.

