Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

An Alternating Proximal Splitting Method with Global
Convergence for Nonconvex Structured Sparsity Optimization
Shubao Zhang1 and Hui Qian1∗ and Xiaojin Gong2
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology
Department of Information Science and Electronic Engineering
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
{bravemind, qianhui, gongxj}@zju.edu.cn

Lin 2006; Zhao, Rocha, and Yu 2009), the generalized lasso
(Tibshirani and Taylor 2011), etc. However, it is usually not
easy to solve the structured sparsity optimization problem
(1) directly, since the structured sparsity-inducing regularizers g̃ are often composite. For example, when solving the
overlapping group lasso by using the proximal gradient algorithm (Yuan, Liu, and Ye 2013), the underlying proximal
operator for g̃ is not easily computed, see Eq. (3).
Observe that in many cases, the composite regularization function can be decomposed into a simple regularization function g and a linear transformation D, i.e., g̃(x) =
g(Dx) where D ∈ Rp×d . In this paper, we consider the following general optimization problem:

Abstract
In many learning tasks with structural properties,
structured sparse modeling usually leads to better interpretability and higher generalization performance.
While great efforts have focused on the convex regularization, recent studies show that nonconvex regularizers can outperform their convex counterparts in
many situations. However, the resulting nonconvex optimization problems are still challenging, especially for
the structured sparsity-inducing regularizers. In this paper, we propose a splitting method for solving nonconvex structured sparsity optimization problems. The proposed method alternates between a gradient step and
an easily solvable proximal step, and thus enjoys low
per-iteration computational complexity. We prove that
the whole sequence generated by the proposed method
converges to a critical point with at least sublinear convergence rate, relying on the Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz inequality. Experiments on both simulated and real-world
data sets demonstrate the efﬁciency and efﬁcacy of the
proposed method.

min f (x) + g(Dx),

x∈Rd

where the linear operator D encodes the structural information of the parameter. The problem (2) can be convex or nonconvex.
Developing efﬁcient algorithm for (2) is a hot area of research focus. Most of existing algorithms are mainly designed for the convex optimization problems with global
optimal solution. Among the most successful ones are Nesterov’s optimal ﬁrst-order method (Nesterov 2007; Argyriou
et al. 2011) and the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) (Boyd et al. 2011). However, these methods can not be directly extended to the nonconvex case due
to lack of convergence guarantee. Existing nonconvex approaches for (1) usually take the idea of concave-convex procedure (CCCP) (Yuille and Rangarajan 2001), majorizationminimization (MM) (Hunter and Li 2005), and concave duality (Zhang 2010b; Zhang et al. 2013), etc. For example,
the iterative reweighted 1 and 2 methods (Candès, Wakin,
and Boyd 2008; Daubechies et al. 2010) employ the idea
of majorization-minimization; the DC programming method
(Gasso, Rakotomamonjy, and Canu 2009) shares the same
spirit with the concave-convex procedure. All these methods
have a point in common that they solve the nonconvex optimization problem by solving a sequence of solvable convex
problems. As a result, these methods are often computationally expensive for large scale problems. It is thus desirable to
develop efﬁcient algorithms that are scalable for large scale
problems. In the spirit of the proximal algorithm, a general
iterative shrinkage and thresholding (GIST) framework was
recently proposed for a class of nonconvex sparisty opti-

Introduction
Learning or mining from high dimensional data is an important issue (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2009). In this
paper we are especially concerned with variable selection
problems. Generally, the colinearity among the variables implies that the underlying model lies on an intrinsic low dimensional subspace. Thus, it is interesting and challenging
to ﬁnd a sparse representation for high dimensional data.
To achieve sparsity, regularization methods have been
widely used in the literature. It admits a tradeoff between
the empirical loss and regularization as:
min f (x) + g̃(x),

x∈Rd

(2)

(1)

where f is the loss, and g̃ is a regularizer on the parameter x.
A principled approach is learning with the 1 norm such as
lasso (Tibshirani 1996), which encourages sparse estimate
of x. When the parameter has some intrinsic structures, it
needs to use more sophisticated structured sparsity-inducing
regularizers such as the (overlapping) group lasso (Yuan and
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2330

