Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

On the Depth of Deep Neural Networks: A Theoretical View
Shizhao Sun,1,∗ Wei Chen,2 Liwei Wang,3 Xiaoguang Liu,1 and Tie-Yan Liu2
1

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, P. R. China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, 100080, P. R. China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, P. R. China
sunshizhao@mail.nankai.edu.cn, wche@microsoft.com, wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn
liuxg@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn, tyliu@microsoft.com

generalization bounds for multi-layer neural networks were
derived based on Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension.
In (Bartlett 1998; Koltchinskii and Panchenko 2002), a margin bound was given to fully connected neural networks in
the setting of binary classiﬁcation. In (Neyshabur, Tomioka,
and Srebro 2015), the capacity of different norm-constrained
feed-forward networks was investigated. While these works
shed some lights on the theoretical properties of DNN, they
have limitations in helping us understand the role of depth,
due to the following reasons. First, the number of parameters
in many practical DNN models could be very large, sometimes even larger than the size of training data. This makes
the VC dimension based generalization bound too loose to
use. Second, practical DNN are usually used to perform
multi-class classiﬁcations and often contains many convolutional layers, such as the model used in the tasks of ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009). However, most existing bounds
are only regarding binary classiﬁcation and fully connected
networks. Therefore, the bounds cannot be used to explain
the advantage of using deep neural networks.
On the other hand, in recent years, researchers have tried
to explain the role of depth from other angles, e.g., deeper
neural networks are able to represent more complex functions. In (Hastad 1986; Delalleau and Bengio 2011), authors
showed that there exist families of functions that can be
represented much more efﬁciently with a deep logic circuit
or sum-product network than with a shallow one, i.e., with
substantially fewer hidden units. In (Bianchini and Scarselli
2014; Montufar et al. 2014), it was demonstrated that deeper
nets could represent more complex functions than shallower
nets in terms of maximal number of linear regions and Betti
numbers. However, these works are apart from the generalization of the learning process, and thus they cannot be used
to explain the test performance improvement for DNN.
To reveal the role of depth in DNN, in this paper, we
propose to investigate the margin bound of DNN. According to the margin bound, the expected 0-1 error of a DNN
model is upper bounded by the empirical margin error plus
a Rademacher Average (RA) based capacity term. Then we
ﬁrst derive an upper bound for the RA-based capacity term,
for both fully-connected and convolutional neural networks
in the multi-class setting. We ﬁnd that with the increasing
depth, this upper bound of RA will increase, which indicates that depth has its negative impact on the test perfor-

Abstract
People believe that depth plays an important role in success
of deep neural networks (DNN). However, this belief lacks
solid theoretical justiﬁcations as far as we know. We investigate role of depth from perspective of margin bound. In
margin bound, expected error is upper bounded by empirical margin error plus Rademacher Average (RA) based capacity term. First, we derive an upper bound for RA of DNN,
and show that it increases with increasing depth. This indicates negative impact of depth on test performance. Second,
we show that deeper networks tend to have larger representation power (measured by Betti numbers based complexity)
than shallower networks in multi-class setting, and thus can
lead to smaller empirical margin error. This implies positive
impact of depth. The combination of these two results shows
that for DNN with restricted number of hidden units, increasing depth is not always good since there is a tradeoff between
positive and negative impacts. These results inspire us to seek
alternative ways to achieve positive impact of depth, e.g., imposing margin-based penalty terms to cross entropy loss so
as to reduce empirical margin error without increasing depth.
Our experiments show that in this way, we achieve signiﬁcantly better test performance.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNN) have achieved great practical success in many machine learning tasks, such as speech
recognition, image classiﬁcation, and natural language
processing (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Hinton et al. 2012; Ciresan,
Meier, and Schmidhuber 2012; Weston et al. 2012). Many
people believe that the depth plays an important role in the
success of DNN (Srivastava, Greff, and Schmidhuber 2015;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Lee et al. 2014; Romero et
al. 2014; He et al. 2015; Szegedy et al. 2014). However, as
far as we know, such belief is still lacking solid theoretical
justiﬁcation.
On one hand, some researchers have tried to understand
the role of depth in DNN by investigating its generalization
bound. For example, in (Bartlett, Maiorov, and Meir 1998;
Karpinski and Macintyre 1995; Goldberg and Jerrum 1995),
∗
This work was done when the author was visiting Microsoft
Research Asia.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2066

