Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Non-Linear Similarity Learning for Compositionality
Masashi Tsubaki, Kevin Duh*, Masashi Shimbo, Yuji Matsumoto
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, *Johns Hopkins University
{masashi-t,shimbo,matsu}@is.naist.jp, *kevinduh@cs.jhu.edu

y

Abstract

y

w3
w4

Many NLP applications rely on the existence of similarity measures over text data. Although word vector space models provide good similarity measures between words, phrasal and sentential similarities derived
from composition of individual words remain as a difﬁcult problem. In this paper, we propose a new method
of of non-linear similarity learning for semantic compositionality. In this method, word representations are
learned through the similarity learning of sentences in
a high-dimensional space with kernel functions. On the
task of predicting the semantic relatedness of two sentences (SemEval 2014, Task 1), our method outperforms linear baselines, feature engineering approaches,
recursive neural networks, and achieve competitive results with long short-term memory models.

1

Encoding meanings
and structures of sentences

w6

x = f (w1,w2,w5, w7)

w1
w9
w5

Transformation f
in a low-dimensional space

w8
w2

w7

Word vector space

x

z’

x’ = f (w1,w3,w8)
Sentence vector space

x

Φ(x)
Φ(x’)
Update word
vector representations
y’

Semantic similarity learning in a
high-dimensional space Φ via kernels
x’
Space Φ has a higher representational
power than that of word

Figure 1: Overview of our method. Our aim is to design a
word representation learning architecture which combines
the simplicity of encoding sentence structures in a lowdimensional space with the power derived from a non-linear
similarity learning for the sentence semantics in a highdimensional space via kernel functions.

Introduction

The notion of semantic similarity between text data (e.g.,
words, phrases, sentences, and documents) plays an important role in natural language processing (NLP) applications such as information retrieval, classiﬁcation, and extraction. The simplest similarity measurement is based on word
matchings rather than word meanings, and suffers from lack
of generalization.
Recently, word semantic vector spaces based on distributional and distributed models have become popular (Turney
2012; Collobert et al. 2011; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). While such word representations are sufﬁcient
to compute the similarity between words, it is not trivial to
capture meaning of phrases and sentences composed of individual words. To overcome the weakness, modeling and
learning compositionality have received a lot of attention
(Mitchell and Lapata 2010). The goal of this research is
to formulate how word vectors and operations are learned
and modeled to properly represent phrasal and sentential semantics. However, there are still some problems in compositional vector semantics. In particular, we are concerned with
the following question:

How can we represent the meaning of sentences, which
cover richer meaning variations than that of words, in a
vector space?
To answer this question, we propose a new method of nonlinear similarity learning for semantic compositionality. Our
approach is to capture semantics of sentences in a space different from that of words. Presumably, this space must be
of higher dimension than the word space, since a sentence
contains far more information than words. For example, a
sentence “Newton was inspired to formulate gravitation by
watching the fall of an apple from a tree.” should have a
more complex (therefore, higher-dimensional) representation than words “apple”, “gravitation”, “formulate”, and
“by”.
The proposed method is inspired by the previous work
on distance metric and similarity learning (Bellet, Habrard,
and Sebban 2013), and in particular leverages the non-linear
capacity of kernels (Kedem et al. 2012). Our goal is to obtain new word representations that account for compositionality, through the similarity learning of sentential meaning in

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2828

