Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Risk Minimization in the Presence of Label Noise∗
Wei Gao and Lu Wang and Yu-Feng Li and Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 210023, China
{gaow, wangl, liyf, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

systems, etc. Generally speaking, an empirical risk minimization procedure may be misled by noisy labels. For example, the random noise (Long and Servedio 2010) defeats
all convex potential boosters, and support vector machines
(SVMs) tend to overﬁt for noisy labels. It is important to
develop effective approaches to make sure that the learning
procedure is not misled by noisy data.
In this paper, we ﬁrst present new matrix Bernstein concentration inequalities depending only on the ﬁrst moments
of random matrices, while previous Bernstein inequalities
are heavily relevant to the ﬁrst and second moments. We
further present dimension-free concentration inequalities,
which can be used for inﬁnite-dimension matrices. Our new
concentration inequalities show tighter bounds for small
spectral norm on the ﬁrst moments of random matrices.
As an application, we utilize new matrix Bernstein concentration inequalities to study the risk minimization of binary classiﬁcation in the presence of random label noise
(also called random classiﬁcation noise). Speciﬁcally, the
training labels have been ﬂipped with some certain probability instead of seeing true labels. We consider the empirical risk minimization of decomposable losses such as least
square loss, logistic loss, etc. The advantage of using such
losses is that we can divide empirical risks into two parts,
where the ﬁrst part won’t be affected and only the second
part will be affected by noisy labels. Further, the risk minimization in the presence of label noise can be converted
to the estimation of the statistics labeled instance centroid.
We prove that label noise can increase the covariance of labeled instance centroid, or even cause heavy-tailed distribution, which makes noisy tasks difﬁcult to learn. We propose
the Labeled Instance Centroid Smoothing (LICS) approach
to reduce the inﬂuence of noisy labels through incorporating
labeled instance centroid and its covariance. The effectiveness of LICS is justiﬁed both theoretically and empirically.

Abstract
Matrix concentration inequalities have attracted much
attention in diverse applications such as linear algebra,
statistical estimation, combinatorial optimization, etc.
In this paper, we present new Bernstein concentration
inequalities depending only on the ﬁrst moments of random matrices, whereas previous Bernstein inequalities
are heavily relevant to the ﬁrst and second moments.
Based on those results, we analyze the empirical risk
minimization in the presence of label noise. We ﬁnd that
many popular losses used in risk minimization can be
decomposed into two parts, where the ﬁrst part won’t
be affected and only the second part will be affected by
noisy labels. We show that the inﬂuence of noisy labels
on the second part can be reduced by our proposed LICS
(Labeled Instance Centroid Smoothing) approach. The
effectiveness of the LICS algorithm is justiﬁed both theoretically and empirically.

Introduction
Matrix concentration inequalities measure the spectral-norm
deviation of a random matrix to its expected mean, and relevant researches have attracted much attention in diverse applications such as statistical estimation (Koltchinskii 2011),
linear algebra (Tropp 2011), combinatorial optimization (So
2011), matrix completion (Recht 2011) etc. Various techniques have been developed to study the sum of independent random matrices and matrix martingales (Tropp 2011;
2012; Hsu, Kakade, and Zhang 2012; Mackey et al. 2014).
Tropp (2015) made a comprehensive introduction on matrix
concentration inequalities.
Empirical risk minimization (Vapnik 1998) has been a
popular methodology in diverse learning tasks such as regression, classiﬁcation, density estimation, etc. In many real
applications, the training data often contain noisy labels,
e.g., a document may be mis-classiﬁed manually due to human error or bias, a doctor may make incorrect diagnoses for
patients because of his knowledge and experience, a spanner
can manipulate the data to mislead the outcome of span-ﬁlter

Related Work
Ahlswede and Winter (2002) possibly proved the ﬁrst Chernoff concentration inequalities for matrix trace, and similar techniques has been adapted for Bernstein concentration inequalities (Oliveira 2010; Gross 2011). Tropp (2011;
2012; 2015) made fundamental concentration inequalities
for random matrices due to (Lieb 1973, Theorem 6). Hsu,
Kakade, and Zhang (2012) presented dimension-free con-

∗
Supported by the 973 Programm (2014CB340501), NSFC
(61333014, 61503179) and JiangsuSF (BK20150586).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1575

