Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Rational Veriﬁcation: From Model Checking to Equilibrium Checking
Michael Wooldridge, Julian Gutierrez, Paul Harrenstein,
Enrico Marchioni, Giuseppe Perelli, Alexis Toumi
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford

provides a natural and widely-adopted framework through
which to understand systems with these properties, where
participants pursue their preferences rationally and strategically (Maschler, Solan, and Zamir 2013), and this observation
has prompted a huge body of research over the past decade,
attempting to apply and adapt game theoretic techniques
to the analysis of multi-agent systems (Nisan et al. 2007;
Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008).

Abstract
Rational veriﬁcation is concerned with establishing whether
a given temporal logic formula ϕ is satisﬁed in some or all
equilibrium computations of a multi-agent system – that is,
whether the system will exhibit the behaviour ϕ under the
assumption that agents within the system act rationally in pursuit of their preferences. After motivating and introducing the
framework of rational veriﬁcation, we present formal models
through which rational veriﬁcation can be studied, and survey
the complexity of key decision problems. We give an overview
of a prototype software tool for rational veriﬁcation, and conclude with a discussion and related work.

We are concerned with the question of how we should
think about the issues of correctness and veriﬁcation in multiagent systems. We argue that the classical view of correctness, outlined above, is not appropriate for multi-agent systems. In a multi-agent setting, it is more appropriate to ask
what behaviours the system will exhibit under the assumption that agents act rationally in pursuit of their preferences.
We advance the paradigm of rational veriﬁcation for multiagent systems, as a counterpart to classical veriﬁcation. Rational veriﬁcation is concerned with establishing whether a
given temporal logic formula ϕ is satisﬁed in some or all
game theoretic equilibria of a multi-agent system – that is,
whether the system will exhibit the behaviour ϕ under the
assumption that agents within the system act rationally in
pursuit of their preferences/goals.

Introduction
Veriﬁcation is one of the most important and widelystudied problems in computer science (Boyer and Moore
1981). Veriﬁcation is the problem of checking program correctness: the key decision problem relating to veriﬁcation is
that of establishing whether or not a given system P satisﬁes
a given speciﬁcation ϕ. The most successful contemporary
approach to formal veriﬁcation is model checking, in which
an abstract, ﬁnite state model of the system of interest is
represented as a Kripke structure (a labelled transition system), and the speciﬁcation is represented as a temporal logic
formula, the models of which are intended to correspond to
“correct” behaviours of the system (Emerson 1990). The veriﬁcation process then reduces to establishing whether the
speciﬁcation formula is satisﬁed in the given Kripke structure, a process that can be efﬁciently automated in many settings of interest (Clarke, Grumberg, and Peled 2000).
In the present paper, we will be concerned with multi-agent
systems (Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008; Wooldridge
2009). Multi-agent systems are generally understood as systems composed of multiple interacting (semi-)autonomous
software components known as agents, which act in pursuit
of goals or preferences that are delegated to them by external principals. Since agents are “owned” by different principals, there is no requirement or assumption that the preferences delegated to different agents are aligned in any way.
It may be that their preferences are compatible, but it may
equally be that preferences are in opposition. Game theory

We begin by motivating our approach, describing in detail
the issue of correctness and veriﬁcation, and the hugely successful model checking paradigm for veriﬁcation. We then
discuss the question of what correctness means in the setting of multi-agent systems, and this leads us to introduce
the paradigm of rational veriﬁcation and equilibrium checking. We then introduce a formal framework, and survey the
complexity of key decision problems associated with equilibrium checking – we see that the complexity of decision
problems in equilibrium checking can be substantially worse
than for conventional model checking problems. We then
give an overview of a prototype software tool for rational veriﬁcation: the E A G L E system takes as input a R E A C T I V E
M O D U L E S speciﬁcation of a set of agents (Alur and Henzinger 1999), a goal for each agent, speciﬁed as a formula of
the temporal logic CTL (Emerson 1990), and a collection of
strategies, one for each agent in the system; the system then
checks whether the strategies form a Nash equilibrium. We
conclude with a discussion and related work.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4184

