Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Computing Rational Decisions
in Extensive Games With Limited Foresight
Paolo Turrini
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
180 Queen’s Gate, SW7 2RH London
United Kingdom
the tools to analyse what will happen in complex extensive games of perfect information where players are not able
to resort to backwards induction reasoning but to possibly
faulty and incomplete heuristic. What is more, the enormous
effort to construct players with ”opponent modelling” in the
AI community (e.g., (Schadd et al. 2007) (Donkers et al.
2001)) still lacks solid game-theoretic foundations.
Our contribution. We introduce games in which players might not be able to foresee the consequence of their
strategic decisions all the way up to the terminal nodes and
evaluate intermediate nodes according to a concrete heuristic search method. On top of that they can reason about other
players’ limited foresight and evaluation criteria: they are
endowed with higher-order beliefs about what their opponents can perceive of the game and how they evaluate it,
beliefs about what their opponents believe the others can
see and how the evaluate it, and so forth. To analyse these
games, we propose a new solution concept which combines
higher-order reasoning about players’ limited foresight and
evaluation criteria. The guiding principle for players’ behaviour is that each of them chooses a strategy in the game
she sees that is a best response to the belief about what the
other players can see and how they evaluate it. We show
constructively (Algorithms 1-4) that this solution concept
always exists (Theorem 8) and is a strict generalization of
other known ones, e.g., backwards induction. As we will
observe, the unbounded chain of beliefs underlying our rationality constraints can be ﬁnitely represented and - rather
surprisingly - effectively resolved (Proposition 12).
Related literature. In recent years an innovative tradition has emerged in game theory, aiming at capturing situations in which players are unaware of parts of the game
they are playing and might even think to be playing a different game from the real one. Halpern and Rêgo (Halpern
and Rêgo 2006), for instance, study models of unawareness
of elements of the game played (e.g., other players). Feinberg (Feinberg 2012) approaches similar problems from a
syntactic perspective. Simultaneously, the interplay between
belief and awareness in interactive situations is analysed in
a series of papers by Heifetz, Meier and Schipper (Heifetz
et al. 2006), (Heifetz et al. 2013a), (Heifetz et al. 2013b).
It should be noted that even though all these frameworks
abstractly allow to talk about unawareness of some terminal
histories in a game, none of them comes equipped with a

Abstract
We introduce a class of extensive form games where
players might not be able to foresee the possible consequences of their decisions and form a model of their
opponents which they exploit to achieve a more profitable outcome. We improve upon existing models of
games with limited foresight, endowing players with the
ability of higher order reasoning and proposing a novel
solution concept to address intuitions coming from real
game play. We analyse the resulting equilibria, devising
an effective procedure to compute them.

Introduction
While game theory is a predominant paradigm in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, the tools it provides to analyse real game play
still abstract away from many essential features. One of them
is the fact that in a wide range of extensive games of perfect information (e.g., Chess), humans (and supercomputers) are generally not able to fully assess the consequence
of their own decisions and need to resort to a judgment call
before making a move. As acclaimed game theorist Ariel
Rubinstein puts it, ”modeling games with limited foresight
remains a great challenge” and the game-theoretic frameworks developed thus far ”fall short of capturing the spirit
of limited-foresight reasoning” (Rubinstein 2004, p.134).
On the contrary, the AI approach to game-playing builds
upon the assumption that complex extensive games like
Chess or Go are theoretically games of perfect information,
but this is only marginally relevant for practical purposes,
and the backwards induction solution is of little help in predicting how such games are actually played in practice - a
point also raised in Joseph Halpern’s AAMAS 2011 invited
talk ”Beyond Nash Equilibrium: Solution Concepts for the
21st Century” (Halpern 2008). Decisions are instead taken
using heuristic search (e.g., monte-carlo tree search) under
various constraints, such as time or memory (Russell and
Wefald 1991) (Russel and Norvig 2012).
The problem. Search methods are a framework to handle
limited foresight and are widely used for decision-making
in real game-play, but a game-theoretic analysis of their
equilibrium behaviour is still missing. In particular, we lack
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

630

