Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Decoding Hidden Markov Models Faster than Viterbi
Via Online Matrix-Vector (max, +)-Multiplication
Massimo Cairo

Gabriele Farina

Department of Mathematics
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
massimo.cairo@unitn.it

Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria
Politecnico di Milano
I-20133, Milan, Italy
gabriele2.farina@mail.polimi.it

Romeo Rizzi
Department of Computer Science
University of Verona
Verona, Italy
romeo.rizzi@univr.it
rently they hold a recognized place in that ﬁeld (Yoon 2009;
Mäkinen et al. 2015).
A HMM describes a stochastic process generating a sequence of observations y1 , y2 , . . . , yn . Internally, a sequence of hidden states x1 , x2 , . . . , xn is generated according to a Markov chain. At each time instant t = 1, 2, . . . , n,
a symbol yt is observed according to a probability distribution depending on xt . We consider only time-homogeneous
HMMs, i.e. models whose parameters do not depend on
the time t. While this assumption covers the majority
of applications, some notable exceptions involving timeinhomogeneous models are known (Lafferty, McCallum,
and Pereira 2001).
Maximum a posteriori decoding (MAPD). Since the states
of the model are hidden, i.e. only the generated symbols can
be observed, a natural problem associated with HMMs is
the MAPD problem: given a HMM M and an observed sequence of symbols Y of length m, ﬁnd any state path X
through M maximizing the joint probability of X and Y .
We call any such X a most probable state path explaining the
observation Y . Traditionally, the MAPD problem is solved
by the Viterbi algorithm (Viterbi 1967), in O(mn2 ) time and
O(mn) memory for any model of size n and observation sequence of length m.
Over the years, much effort has been put into lowering the
cost of the Viterbi algorithm, both in terms of memory and of
running time. (Grice, Hughey, and Speck 1997) showed that
a checkpointing technique√can be employed to reduce the
memory complexity to O( m · n); reﬁnements of this idea
(embedded checkpointing) deliver a family of time-memory
tradeoffs, culminating into an O(n log m) memory solution
with a slightly increased running time O(mn2 log m).
At the same time, several works reducing the time complexity of the algorithm in the average-case were developed (Šrámek 2007; Churbanov and Winters-Hilt 2008;
Felzenszwalb, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2004; Esposito
and Radicioni 2009; Kaji et al. 2010). Many of these works
make assumptions on the structure of T , and may lose the
optimality or degenerate to the worst case Θ(mn2 ) opera-

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel algorithm for the
maximum a posteriori decoding (MAPD) of timehomogeneous Hidden Markov Models (HMM), improving the worst-case running time of the classical Viterbi algorithm by a logarithmic factor. In
our approach, we interpret the Viterbi algorithm as
a repeated computation of matrix-vector (max, +)multiplications. On time-homogeneous HMMs, this
computation is online: a matrix, known in advance, has
to be multiplied with several vectors revealed one at a
time. Our main contribution is an algorithm solving
this version of matrix-vector (max, +)-multiplication
in subquadratic time, by performing a polynomial preprocessing of the matrix. Employing this fast multiplication algorithm, we solve the MAPD problem in
O(mn2 / log n) time for any time-homogeneous HMM
of size n and observation sequence of length m, with
an extra polynomial preprocessing cost negligible for
m > n. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
algorithm for the MAPD problem requiring subquadratic
time per observation, under the assumption – usually
veriﬁed in practice – that the transition probability matrix does not change with time.

Introduction
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are simple probabilistic
models originally introduced (Viterbi 1967) to decode convolutional codes. Due to their universal and fundamental nature, these models have successfully been applied in
several ﬁelds, with many important applications, such as
gene prediction (Haussler and Eeckman 1996), speech, gesture and optical character recognition (Gales 1998; Huang,
Ariki, and Jack 1990; Starner, Weaver, and Pentland 1998;
Agazzi and Kuo 1993), and part-of-speech tagging (Kupiec 1992). Their applications to bioinformatics began in
the early 1990 and soon exploded to the point that curc 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1484

