Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Reﬁning Subgames in Large Imperfect Information Games
Matej Moravcik, Martin Schmid,
Karel Ha, Milan Hladik

Stephen J. Gaukrodger
Koypetition
stephen@koypetition.com

Charles University In Prague
{moravcim, schmidm, karelha, hladik}
@kam.mff.cuni.cz,

1017 nodes (Johanson 2013). Unfortunately, many games
remain that are much too large to be solved with current
techniques. For example, the more popular “No-Limit” variant of two-player Texas Hold’em poker has approximately
10165 nodes (Johanson 2013).
The leading approach to solving imperfect information
games of this magnitude is to create a simpliﬁed abstraction of the game, compute an -equilibrium in the abstract
game, and ﬁnally use the strategy from the abstracted game
to play the original, unabstracted game (Billings et al. 2003)
(Sandholm 2010) (Johanson et al. 2013) (Gibson 2014). The
amount of simpliﬁcation needed to produce the abstracted
game is determined by the maximum size of the game tree
that we are able to learn with the computing resources available. While abstraction pathologies mean that larger abstractions are not guaranteed to produce better strategies (Waugh
et al. 2009), empirical results have shown that ﬁner-grained
abstractions are generally better (Johanson et al. 2013)
An appealing compromise is to pre-calculate the largest
possible abstraction we can handle for the entire game and
then improve this in real-time with reﬁnements. The original strategy is used to play the early parts of the game (the
trunk) and once the remaining portion of the game tree (the
subgame) becomes tractable, we can reﬁne the strategy for
the subgame in real-time using even ﬁner-grained abstraction. Figure 1 illustrates the approach.

Abstract
The leading approach to solving large imperfect information
games is to pre-calculate an approximate solution using a
simpliﬁed abstraction of the full game; that solution is then
used to play the original, full-scale game. The abstraction
step is necessitated by the size of the game tree. However,
as the original game progresses, the remaining portion of the
tree (the subgame) becomes smaller. An appealing idea is to
use the simpliﬁed abstraction to play the early parts of the
game and then, once the subgame becomes tractable, to calculate a solution using a ﬁner-grained abstraction in real time,
creating a combined ﬁnal strategy. While this approach is
straightforward for perfect information games, it is a much
more complex problem for imperfect information games. If
the subgame is solved locally, the opponent can alter his play
in prior to this subgame to exploit our combined strategy. To
prevent this, we introduce the notion of subgame margin, a
simple value with appealing properties. If any best response
reaches the subgame, the improvement of exploitability of
the combined strategy is (at least) proportional to the subgame margin. This motivates subgame reﬁnements resulting
in large positive margins. Unfortunately, current techniques
either neglect subgame margin (potentially leading to a large
negative subgame margin and drastically more exploitable
strategies), or guarantee only non-negative subgame margin
(possibly producing the original, unreﬁned strategy, even if
much stronger strategies are possible). Our technique remedies this problem by maximizing the subgame margin and is
guaranteed to ﬁnd the optimal solution. We evaluate our technique using one of the top participants of the AAAI-14 Computer Poker Competition, the leading playground for agents
in imperfect information settings.

Introduction
Extensive form games are a powerful model capturing a
wide class of real-world problems. The games can be either perfect information (Chess) or imperfect information
(poker). Applications of imperfect information games range
from security problems (Pita et al. 2009) to card games
(Bowling et al. 2015)
The largest imperfect information game to be (essentially) solved today is the limit version of two-player Texas
Hold’em poker (Bowling et al. 2015), with approximately

Figure 1: Subgame reﬁnement framework. (i) the strategy
for the game is pre-computed using coarse-grained abstraction (ii) during the play, once we reach a node deﬁning a
sufﬁciently small subgame, we reﬁne the strategy for that
subgame (iii) this together with the original strategy for the
trunk creates a combined strategy. The point is to produce
improved combined strategy
Note that not only can we enlarge the size of the abstraction in the subgame, we can also reduce the “off the
tree problem”. When an opponent takes an action that is not

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

572

