Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Deep Tracking: Seeing Beyond Seeing
Using Recurrent Neural Networks
Peter Ondrúška and Ingmar Posner
Mobile Robotics Group, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
{ondruska, ingmar}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

Robot sensor

This paper presents to the best of our knowledge the
ﬁrst end-to-end object tracking approach which directly
maps from raw sensor input to object tracks in sensor
space without requiring any feature engineering or system identiﬁcation in the form of plant or sensor models.
Speciﬁcally, our system accepts a stream of raw sensor
data at one end and, in real-time, produces an estimate
of the entire environment state at the output including
even occluded objects. We achieve this by framing the
problem as a deep learning task and exploit sequence
models in the form of recurrent neural networks to learn
a mapping from sensor measurements to object tracks.
In particular, we propose a learning method based on a
form of input dropout which allows learning in an unsupervised manner, only based on raw, occluded sensor data without access to ground-truth annotations. We
demonstrate our approach using a synthetic dataset designed to mimic the task of tracking objects in 2D laser
data – as commonly encountered in robotics applications – and show that it learns to track many dynamic
objects despite occlusions and the presence of sensor
noise.

True world state y t

What the robot sees x t

Recurrent neural network

Figure 1: Often a robot’s sensors provide only partial observations of the surrounding environment. In this work we
leverage a recurrent neural network to effectively reveal occluded parts of a scene by learning to track objects from raw
sensor data – thereby effectively reversing the sensing process.

Introduction
As we demand more from our robots the need arises for them
to operate in increasingly complex, dynamic environments
where scenes – and objects of interest – are often only partially observable. However, successful decision making typically requires complete situational awareness. Commonly
this problem is tackled by a processing pipeline which uses
separate stages of object detection and tracking, both of
which require considerable hand-engineering. Classical approaches to object tracking in highly dynamic environments
require the speciﬁcation of plant and observation models as
well as robust data association.
In recent years neural networks and deep learning approaches have revolutionised how we think about classiﬁcation and detection in a number of domains (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Szegedy, Toshev, and Erhan
2013). The often unreasonable effectiveness of such approaches is commonly attributed to both an ability to learn

relevant representations directly from raw data as well as
a vastly increased capacity for function approximation afforded by the depth of the networks (Bengio 2009).
In this work we propose a framework for deep tracking, which effectively provides an off-the-shelf solution for
learning the dynamics of complex environments directly
from raw sensor data and mapping it to an intuitive representation of a complete and unoccluded scene around the
robot as illustrated in Figure 1.
To achieve this we leverage Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), which were recently demonstrated to be able to
effectively handle sequence data (Graves 2013; Sutskever,
Hinton, and Taylor 2009). In particular we consider a complete yet uninterpretable hidden state of the world and then
train the network end-to-end to update its belief of this state
using sequence of partial observations and map it back into
an interpretable unoccluded scene. This gives the network a
freedom to optimally deﬁne the content of the hidden state

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3361

