Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Consensus Style Centralizing Auto-Encoder
for Weak Style Classiﬁcation
†

Shuhui Jiang† , Ming Shao† , Chengcheng Jia† and Yun Fu†‡
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
‡
College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{shjiang, mingshao, cjia, yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Style classiﬁcation (e.g., architectural, music, fashion) attracts an increasing attention in both research and industrial
ﬁelds. Most existing works focused on low-level visual features composition for style representation. However, little effort has been devoted to automatic mid-level or high-level
style features learning by reorganizing low-level descriptors.
Moreover, styles are usually spread out and not easy to differentiate from one to another. In this paper, we call these
less representative images as weak style images. To address
these issues, we propose a consensus style centralizing autoencoder (CSCAE) to extract robust style features to facilitate weak style classiﬁcation. CSCAE is the ensemble of several style centralizing auto-encoders (SCAEs) with consensus constraint. Each SCAE centralizes each feature of certain category in a progressive way. We apply our method
in fashion style classiﬁcation and manga style classiﬁcation
as two example applications. In addition, we collect a new
dataset, Online Shopping, for fashion style classiﬁcation evaluation, which will be publicly available for vision based fashion style research. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of SCAE and CSCAE on both public and newly collected
datasets when compared with the most recent state-of-the-art
works.

Figure 1: Illustration of “weak style” phenomenon. Style images are usually “spread out”. Images in the center are representatives style images and deﬁned as “strong style”. They
are easy to distinguished from other styles. We rate them at
higher style level 3 (e.g., l3 ). Images far from the center are
less similar to strong style images. Images in red frames on
the boundary are from two different classes, but they seem
visually similar, and easily get misclassiﬁed. For example, in
manga style illustration, it is hard for human to distinguish
two upper mangas in the red frames into the Shojo (girl)
style and Shonen (boy) style. Therefore, they are deﬁned as
“weak style” and rated at lower style level 1 (e.g., l1 ).

Introduction
Recently, researchers have shown great interest in style
classiﬁcation, such as architectural style (Goel, Juneja, and
Jawahar 2012; Xu et al. 2014), music style (Herlands et al.
2014), photographic style (Van Gemert 2011), manga style
(Chu and Chao 2014) and fashion style (Kiapour et al. 2014;
Bossard et al. 2013; Yamaguchi, Kiapour, and Berg 2013;
Chao et al. 2009). For example, in vision community, fashion style, which serves as the expressions of individual’s
characters and aesthetics, is related to clothing parsing (Yamaguchi et al. 2012), recommendation (Wang et al. 2015;
Czapiewski et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2012a) and classiﬁcation (Liu et al. 2012b; Song et al. 2011; Shao, Li, and Fu
2013; Di et al. 2013), but essentially different. A particular
clothing type is generally made up of a diverse set of fashion
styles. For example, “suit” can be considered as both elegant
and renascent fashion styles. In addition, in online shopping

systems, customers could choose a special category of clothing according to personal preference or occasion, namely,
fashion style. Understanding fashion styles and clothing categories are equally important. Therefore, learning robust
style representation for style classiﬁcation becomes an interesting research topic.
Most existing style classiﬁcation methods focused on extracting discriminative local patches or patterns. Goel et al.
mined characteristic features with semantic utility from lowlevel features for different architectural styles (Goel, Juneja,

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1223

