Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Bayesian Learning of Other Agents’
Finite Controllers for Interactive POMDPs
Alessandro Panella and Piotr Gmytrasiewicz
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607

in which the transitions between nodes are deterministic and
actions are generated stochastically in each node.
In the remainder of this paper we assume that there are
two agents: the protagonist agent i and the modeled agent
j. We assume that agent i does not initially know the model
of agent j. Instead, the agent maintains a probability distribution over all possible PDFCs of j. Upon receiving observations from the environment, this belief is updated via
Bayesian inference to yield a posterior distribution that concentrates around likely models, to enable accurate prediction of j’s actions. We note that agent i’s observations do
not, in general, expose j’s behavior perfectly, but are instead
only statistically correlated to j’s actions, based on the effect that these have on the environment and how agent i perceives it. In this paper, we describe a two-phase approach:
in the ﬁrst, agent i gathers observations and infers a posterior distribution over j’s models, using a batch algorithm; in
the second, these models are embedded in i’s own decision
making process. This allows us to examine the properties of
learning and planning in isolation. While we view an online
approach that interleaves learning and planning as more realistic in many situations, we leave the exploration of this
scenario for future work.
Of primary importance to our work is selecting a suitable prior distribution over PDFCs. Since the true size of
agent j’s controller is not known, we place a stick-breaking
prior over the PDFC’s nodes, that allows the posterior distribution to concentrate around PDFCs whose size scales
with the complexity of the observed data. This eliminates
the problem of having to choose a ﬁxed model size. Since
the Bayesian inference problem at hand is too complex to
be amenable to conjugate analysis, we employ an ad-hoc
MCMC algorithm to approximate the posterior distribution
over the set of j’s PDFCs. This generates a ﬁnite ensemble
of possible models of j that are embedded in agent i’s own
decision making process by extending the state space as in
I-POMDPs.
The choice to explicitly model the other agent is motivated by the assumption that agent i is aware of the other
agent’s presence, and that agent j implements an agent function that maps its own observation history onto actions.
Moreover, agent i knows the environment’s dynamics in response to the two agents’ combined actions, and its own reward model. Without these assumptions, modeling the other

Abstract
We consider an autonomous agent operating in a stochastic,
partially-observable, multiagent environment, that explicitly
models the other agents as probabilistic deterministic ﬁnitestate controllers (PDFCs) in order to predict their actions. We
assume that such models are not given to the agent, but instead must be learned from (possibly imperfect) observations
of the other agents’ behavior. The agent maintains a belief
over the other agents’ models, that is updated via Bayesian
inference. To represent this belief we place a ﬂexible stickbreaking distribution over PDFCs, that allows the posterior
to concentrate around controllers whose size is not bounded
and scales with the complexity of the observed data. Since
this Bayesian inference task is not analytically tractable, we
devise a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm to approximate
the posterior distribution. The agent then embeds the result of
this inference into its own decision making process using the
interactive POMDP framework. We show that our learning
algorithm can learn agent models that are behaviorally accurate for problems of varying complexity, and that the agent’s
performance increases as a result.

1

Introduction

An autonomous, rational agent operating in a stochastic, partially observable environment selects actions that maximize
some objective function, usually the expected sum of future
rewards, as in the case of partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998). In multiagent settings, an additional source of
uncertainty is represented by the actions of other agents, that
affect the state of the environment. In this paper, we consider an agent that maintains explicit models of other agents
in order to predict their actions. The interactive POMDP (IPOMDP) framework (Gmytrasiewicz and Doshi 2005) proposes that the agent maintains a belief over intentional models of other agents, that recursively describe their I-POMDP
structure, including nested beliefs and preferences. An alternative we pursue in this paper is to use subintentional
models, intended as statistical predictive models of the other
agents’ behavior, that do not explicitly consider their preferences and beliefs. Speciﬁcally, we consider the class of
probabilistic deterministic ﬁnite-state controllers (PDFCs),
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2530

