Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning by Transferring from Unsupervised Universal Sources
Yu-Xiong Wang and Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{yuxiongw, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Kuzborskij, Caputo, and Orabona 2015; Kuzborskij and
Orabona 2015) has been recently considered an alternative,
which transfers directly on a model level by reusing source
hypotheses — classiﬁers or models trained from source data.
This framework is practically appealing, since it requires
neither the availability of the source data nor any knowledge on how the source models relate to each other. HTL is
also efﬁcient especially with small target samples, in which
source hypotheses are generated in advance and treated as
black boxes without any consideration of their inner workings at transfer stages.
Much attention in HTL (and also TL) has been focused
on integrating the source information into the target task
in different ways. Unfortunately, very little work has addressed the generation of useful source models. In most
cases, sources are simply category classiﬁers well-trained
from large amounts of labeled samples. This however might
be infeasible for real-world applications: we focus on learning from few samples for target categories, whereas we have
to train good classiﬁers of related categories as sources from
enough labeled data in advance. For instance, if we are interested in recognizing Père David’s deer∗ from few samples,
following the conventional HTL practice, we might need to
ﬁrst obtain well-trained source classiﬁers of camels, cows,
donkeys, and deer for transfer. Furthermore, sources generated in this way are tied to a speciﬁc set of categories due to
its supervised nature, making it difﬁcult to apply them across
a wide spectrum of target categories.
It is thus unsurprising that the current HTL (and TL) algorithms are usually evaluated under well-controlled experimental setups: (1) use small-scale well-trained classiﬁers
as sources, at most several hundred (Yang, Yan, and Hauptmann 2007b; Aytar and Zisserman 2011; 2012); (2) split a
dataset with a portion of categories as sources and the rest as
targets, which implicitly reduces the impact of dataset bias,
e.g., leave-one-class-out (Tommasi, Orabona, and Caputo
2014; Kuzborskij, Caputo, and Orabona 2015); (3) transfer
between visually similar categories with ideal sources (Hoffman et al. 2014).
To address this largely-overlooked yet fundamental problem, we introduce a systematic scheme for generating uni-

Abstract
Category classiﬁers trained from a large corpus of annotated data are widely accepted as the sources for (hypothesis) transfer learning. Sources generated in this
way are tied to a particular set of categories, limiting their transferability across a wide spectrum of target categories. In this paper, we address this largelyoverlooked yet fundamental source problem by both introducing a systematic scheme for generating universal
source hypotheses and proposing a principled, scalable
approach to automatically tuning the transfer process.
Our approach is based on the insights that expressive
source hypotheses could be generated without any supervision and that a sparse combination of such hypotheses facilitates recognition of novel categories from
few samples. We demonstrate improvements over the
state-of-the-art on object and scene classiﬁcation in the
small sample size regime.

Introduction
Learning from few samples has now attracted wide interest in large-scale object recognition, given the intrinsic longtailed distribution of real-world objects (Zhu, Anguelov, and
Ramanan 2014) and customized categories in personal image collections (Kienzle and Chellapilla 2006; Wang and
Hebert 2015). Such scenarios are typically addressed in
transfer learning (TL), which beneﬁts from transfer of prior
knowledge from related tasks to new ones, in the majority of
cases either on a data or instance level, or on a feature or parameter level (Pan and Yang 2010). Despite featuring well
established theoretical guarantees, these approaches often
suffer from great practical constraints and limitations (Pan
and Yang 2010; Kuzborskij, Caputo, and Orabona 2015):
they require reusing data originating from the source domains and extensive supervised retraining on the target task,
which is prohibitively expensive for large source data.
Hypothesis transfer learning (HTL) (Kienzle and Chellapilla 2006; Yang, Yan, and Hauptmann 2007a; 2007b;
Yang and Hauptmann 2008; Duan et al. 2009; Chattopadhyay et al. 2011; Aytar and Zisserman 2011; 2012;
Kuzborskij and Orabona 2013; Kuzborskij, Orabona, and
Caputo 2013; Tommasi, Orabona, and Caputo 2014;

∗

A Père David’s deer is a species of deer that has the neck of a
camel, the hoofs of a cow, the tail of a donkey, and the antlers of a
deer.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2187

