Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

A Generative Model of Words and Relationships from Multiple Sources
Stephanie L. Hylanda,b and Theofanis Karaletsosa and Gunnar Rätscha
a

Computational Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065
b
Tri-Institutional Training Program in Computational Biology and Medicine
Weill Cornell Medical College, 1305 York Ave, New York, NY 10021
{stephanie, theo, gunnar}@ratschlab.org
In the age of web-scale data, there is abundant training
data available for such models in the case of generic language. For specialised language domains this may not be
true. For example, medical text data (Liu et al. 2015) often contains protected health information, necessitating access restrictions and potentially limiting corpus size to that
obtainable from a single institution, resulting in a corpus
with less than tens of millions of sentences, not billions as
in (for example) Google n-grams. In addition to this, specialised domains expect certain prior knowledge from the
reader. A doctor may never mention that anastrazole is a
aromatase inhibitor (a type of cancer drug), for example,
because they communicate sparsely, assuming the reader
shares their training in this terminology. In such cases, it is
likely that even larger quantities of data are required, but the
sensitive nature of such data makes this difﬁcult to attain.
Fortunately, such specialised disciplines often create expressive ontologies, in the form of annotated relationships between terms (denoted by underlines). These may
be semantic, such as dog is a type of animal, or derived
from domain-speciﬁc knowledge, such as anemia is an
associated disease of leukemia. (This is a relationship found
in the medical ontology system UMLS; see Bodenreider,
2004). We observe that these relationships can be thought
of as additional contexts from which co-occurrence statistics
can be drawn; the set of diseases associated with leukemia
arguably share a common context, even if they may not cooccur in a sentence (see Figure 1).
We would like to use this structured information to improve the quality of learned embeddings, to use their information content to regularize the embedding space in cases
of low data abundance while obtaining an explicit representation of these relationships in a vector space. We tackle
this by assuming that each relationship is an operator which
transforms words in a relationship-speciﬁc way. Intuitively,
the action of these operators is to distort the shape of the
space, effectively allowing words to have multiple representations without requiring a full set of parameters for each
possible sense.
The intended effect on the underlying (untransformed)
embedding is twofold: to encourage a solution which is more
sensitive to the domain than would be achieved using only
unstructured information and to use heterogeneous sources
of information to compensate for sparsity of data. In addition

Abstract
Neural language models are a powerful tool to embed words
into semantic vector spaces. However, learning such models generally relies on the availability of abundant and diverse training examples. In highly specialised domains this
requirement may not be met due to difﬁculties in obtaining
a large corpus, or the limited range of expression in average
use. Such domains may encode prior knowledge about entities in a knowledge base or ontology. We propose a generative
model which integrates evidence from diverse data sources,
enabling the sharing of semantic information. We achieve
this by generalising the concept of co-occurrence from distributional semantics to include other relationships between
entities or words, which we model as afﬁne transformations
on the embedding space. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of this approach by outperforming recent models on a link
prediction task and demonstrating its ability to proﬁt from
partially or fully unobserved data training labels. We further
demonstrate the usefulness of learning from different data
sources with overlapping vocabularies.

Introduction1
A deep problem in natural language processing is to model
the semantic relatedness of words, drawing on evidence
from text and spoken language, as well as knowledge graphs
such as ontologies. A successful modelling approach is to
obtain an embedding of words into a metric space such that
semantic relatedness is reﬂected by closeness in this space.
One paradigm for obtaining this embedding is the neural
language model (Bengio et al. 2003), which traditionally
draws on local co-occurence statistics from sequences of
words (sentences) to obtain an encoding of words as vectors
in a space whose geometry respects linguistic and semantic features. The core concept behind this procedure is the
distributional hypothesis of language; see Sahlgren (2008),
that semantics can be inferred by examining the context of
a word. This relies on the availability of a large corpus of
diverse sentences, such that a word’s typical context can be
accurately estimated.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A preliminary version of this work appeared at the International Workshop on Embeddings and Semantics at SEPLN 2015
(Hyland, Karaletsos, and Rätsch 2015).

2622

