Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Writing Stories with Help from Recurrent Neural Networks
Melissa Roemmele
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
12015 Waterfront Dr., Los Angeles, CA 90094
roemmele@ict.usc.edu

Data-driven Narrative Intelligence

Language Generation with RNNs

Automated story generation has a long history of pursuit in
artiﬁcial intelligence. Early approaches used hand-authored
formal models of a particular story-world domain to generate narratives pertaining to that domain (Klein, Aeschlimann, and Balsiger 1973; Lebowitz 1985; Meehan 1977).
With the advent of machine learning, more recent work has
explored how to construct narrative models automatically
from story corpora (Li et al. 2013; McIntyre and Lapata
2009; Swanson and Gordon 2012). This research has created
a new potential for interactivity in narrative generation. Unlike previous approaches which lacked the breadth of knowledge required for open-domain storytelling, these systems
leverage story data to interface with authors pursuing diverse narrative content. For example, Swanson and Gordon
(Swanson and Gordon 2012) demonstrated an application
where a user and automated agent took turns contributing
sentences to a story. Their system used a case-based reasoning approach to retrieve a relevant continuation of the user’s
sentence from a large database of stories. This research has
given rise to a new type of story generation task, one of “narrative auto-completion”, where a system analyzes an ongoing narrative and generates a new contribution to the story.
Analogous to existing automated writing aids like spelling
and grammar correction, narrative auto-completion is applicable as a writing tool that suggests new ideas to authors.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are a promising machine learning framework for language generation tasks. In
natural language processing (NLP) tasks, RNNs are trained
on sequences of text to model the conditional probability
distribution of predicting a sequence unit (often a character
or word) given the sequence up to that point. After training
it is straightforward to generate new text by iteratively predicting the next unit based on the text generated so far. In
this same way, a given text can be extended by predicting
additional text in the sequence. For this reason an RNN is a
suitable engine for an automated story writing assistant that
takes an ongoing story as input for predicting a continuation of the story. In this thesis I explore the use of RNNs for
this novel generation task, and show how this task affords a
unique opportunity for the evaluation of generation systems.

RNNs are extremely powerful for NLP tasks, having demonstrated success on tasks like speech recognition (Graves and
Jaitly 2014) and machine translation (Sundermeyer et al.
2014). Mikolov et al. (Mikolov et al. 2010) showed that
RNNs encode more accurate language models than traditional n-gram statistics, as measured by performance on a
standard speech recognition task. The simplest RNN architecture has an input layer, hidden layer, and output layer connected respectively by three weight matrices, Win , Whh , and
Wout . When the RNN is used as a language model, a dictionary of size D associates each known word type with an
index. Each word is represented as zero vector of dimensionality D with a 1 at the dictionary index of the word type.
The input layer encodes the current word, the hidden layer
encodes the current underlying state of the sentence, and the
output layer encodes the probability distribution for the next
word in the sentence. During training, for each timestep t in
a sentence, the RNN computes the following recurrence:
hiddent = tanh(wordt Win + hiddent−1 Whh )
outputt = hiddent Wout
Applying a softmax classiﬁer to the output layer gives the
probability distribution of the next word over all dictionary
words. Training occurs by minimizing a cost function, deﬁned as the negative log-likelihood of the probability of each
actual word in the training sequence. The gradient of this
cost is then back-propagated in order to update the weight
matrices (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1988).
During generation, the learned probability distribution
can be sampled in order to generate a sentence, with each
predicted word in the output layer at time t being fed back
into the input layer at time t + 1. The sequential units that
RNNs predict are not required to be words; distributions
over single characters are analogous, and have actually been
favored because of their low dimensionality compared with
words. RNNs have been used to generate Wikipedia articles (Sutskever, Martens, and Hinton 2011) and conversational responses (Sordoni et al. 2015). The former work also
showed that these models could generate plausible completions to the beginning of sentences. My work focuses on performing this completion task speciﬁcally with narrative text.

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4311

