Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

An Image Analysis Environment for
Species Identification of Food Contaminating Beetles
Daniel Martin1, Hongjian Ding2, Leihong Wu3, Howard Semey2, Amy Barnes2,
Darryl Langley2, Su Inn Park4, Zhichao Liu3, Weida Tong3, Joshua Xu3,*
1

School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
ARL Chemistry Lab1, Arkansas Regional Laboratory, Office of Regulatory Affairs, US Food and Drug Administration, AR 72079, USA
3
Division of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson,
AR 72079, USA
4
Data Science Team, System Technology, Samsung Austin Semiconductor LLC, Austin, TX 78754, USA
*Correspondence: Joshua Xu (Zhihua.xu@fda.hhs.gov)

2

The current inspection process used throughout the
industry involves manual examination by analysts (Olsen
et al. 1996), and is subjective and time-consuming. In order
to standardize, streamline, and automate the contaminant
identification process, the authors have proposed the use of
image analysis (Gonzalez et al. 2009) and machine
learning (Mohri et al. 2012) to mirror the current
identification process. This paper is a follow-up to
previous research by Park et al. (preprint), which can be
accessed in the references.
This paper provides an overview of an image analysis
environment for identifying beetle elytra, or hardened
forewings, as well as an evaluation of the implementation
technology.

Abstract

Food safety is vital to the well-being of society; therefore, it
is important to inspect food products to ensure minimal
health risks are present. The presence of certain species of
insects, especially storage beetles, is a reliable indicator of
possible contamination during storage and food processing.
However, the current approach of identifying species by
visual examination of insect fragments is rather subjective
and time-consuming. To aid this inspection process, we
have developed in collaboration with FDA food analysts
some image analysis-based machine intelligence to achieve
species identification with up to 90% accuracy. The current
project is a continuation of this development effort. Here we
present an image analysis environment that allows practical
deployment of the machine intelligence on computers with
limited processing power and memory. Using this
environment, users can prepare input sets by selecting
images for analysis, and inspect these images through the
integrated panning and zooming capabilities. After species
analysis, the results panel allows the user to compare the
analyzed images with reference images of the proposed
species. Further additions to this environment should
include a log of previously analyzed images, and eventually
extend to interaction with a central cloud repository of
images through a web-based interface.

Implementation
The image analysis environment was implemented in
MATLAB. MATLAB was chosen as it is widely used for
image processing and machine learning due to its function
toolboxes for those areas. It also includes a Graphical User
Interface Design Environment (GUIDE) tool that
simplifies the process of constructing basic layouts of
interface components. Although MATLAB is a
commercial application, the MATLAB Compiler Runtime
(MCR) library needed to run compiled MATLAB
applications is free, making MATLAB an attractive
solution for creating a deployable application.
The main screen of the environment is the Image
Manager, which features an image preview area, a list of
possible inputs in the current folder, and information about
the selected image. A settings dialog is also present for the

Background
Food sourcing has become increasingly global in recent
years. This greater distance between source and endpoint
has increased transportation and storage times, leading to a
higher risk of contamination before food products reach
consumers. Thus, food inspection has grown in importance
for enforcing food safety regulations. A common indicator
of contamination acquired during processing and storage is
the presence of storage insects (Olsen et al. 2001).
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4375

