Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multiwinner Analogues of the Plurality Rule:
Axiomatic and Algorithmic Perspectives
Piotr Faliszewski

Piotr Skowron

Arkadii Slinko

Nimrod Talmon

AGH University
Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
p.k.skowron@gmail.com

University of Auckland
Auckland, New Zealand
a.slinko@auckland.ac.nz

TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
nimrodtalmon77@gmail.com

most desired one to the least desired one, and the goal is to
pick a committee of a given size k that, in some sense, best
matches the voters’ preferences. Naturally, the exact meaning of the phrase “best matches” depends strongly on the application at hand, as well as on the societal conventions and
understanding of fairness. For example, if we are to choose
a size-k parliament, then it is important to guarantee proportional representation; if the goal is to pick a group of
products to offer to customers, then it might be important to
maintain diversity of the offer; if we are to shortlist a group
of candidates for a job, then it is important to focus on the
quality of the selected candidates regardless of how similar
some of them might be.
In effect, there is quite a variety of multiwinner voting
rules. For example, under the SNTV rule, the winning committee consists of k candidates who are ranked ﬁrst more
frequently than others. Under the Bloc rule, each voter gives
one point to each candidate he or she ranks among his or
her top k positions, and the committee consists of k candidates with the most points. Under the Chamberlin–Courant
rule, the winning committee consists of k candidates such
that each voter ranks his or her most preferred committee
member as high as possible (for the exact deﬁnition see the
original paper of Chamberlin and Courant (1983) or papers studying the rule’s features and computational complexity (Procaccia, Rosenschein, and Zohar 2008; Lu and
Boutilier 2011; Elkind et al. 2014; Skowron, Faliszewski,
and Slinko 2015; Skowron and Faliszewski 2015)).
The three rules mentioned above are examples of committee scoring rules (a class of rules generalizing single-winner
scoring rules to the multiwinner setting, recently introduced
by Elkind et al. (2014); see the preliminaries for the deﬁnition).1 Of course, there are natural multiwinner rules that
cannot be expressed as committee scoring rules, such as
the single transferable vote rule (the STV rule), the Monroe rule (Monroe 1995), or all the multiwinner rules based
on the Condorcet principle (see, e.g., the works of Elkind et
al. (2011), Fishburn (1981), and Gehrlein (1985)). Nonetheless, we believe that committee scoring rules form a very
diverse class of voting rules that deserves a further study.
We ask for a committee scoring rule that can be seen as

Abstract
We characterize the class of committee scoring rules that satisfy the ﬁxed-majority criterion. In some sense, the committee scoring rules in this class are multiwinner analogues of
the single-winner Plurality rule, which is uniquely characterized as the only single-winner scoring rule that satisﬁes the
simple majority criterion. We ﬁnd that, for most of the rules
in our new class, the complexity of winner determination is
high (i.e., the problem of computing the winners is NP-hard),
but we also show some examples of polynomial-time winner
determination procedures, exact and approximate.

Introduction
The scoring rules in general, and the Plurality rule speciﬁcally, are among the most basic and the best studied singlewinner voting rules. However, our understanding of their
recently-introduced multiwinner analogues, committee scoring rules (Elkind et al. 2014), is very limited. In this paper,
we attempt to rectify this situation by asking a seemingly
very innocuous question: what is the committee scoring rule
analogue of the Plurality rule? Using an axiomatic approach,
we ﬁnd a rather surprising answer. Not only is there a whole
class of committee scoring rules that correspond to the Plurality rule, but also one of the most natural candidates to be
the multiwinner Plurality, the single non-transferable vote
rule (the SNTV rule), falls short on our criterion. On the
other hand, the Bloc rule turns out to be quite a satisfying candidate, but certainly not the only one. In addition to
our axiomatic study, we provide an algorithmic analysis of
this new class of committee scoring rules. In particular, we
show that it can be seen as a subfamily of the OWA-based
rules of Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang (2015) (also studied by Aziz et al. (2015b; 2015a); see also the work of Kilgour (2010) for a more general overview of approval-based
multiwinner rules). However, the hardness results for general OWA rules do not translate directly to our case (and
some indeed do not even hold). On the side, we provide an
axiomatic characterization of the Bloc rule (among the committee scoring rules).
Let us now describe our setting more precisely. In a multiwinner election, each voter ranks the candidates from the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Naturally, these rules were known much earlier than Elkind et
al. (2014) introduced the unifying framework for them.

482

