Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Blind, Greedy, and Random: Algorithms for
Matching and Clustering Using Only Ordinal Information
Elliot Anshelevich

Shreyas Sekar

Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
eanshel@cs.rpi.edu

Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
sekars@rpi.edu

mal matchings, efﬁciently or otherwise. Furthermore, for the
majority of this work, we assume that the edge weights obey
the triangle inequality, since in many important applications
it is natural to expect that the weights have some geometric structure. Such structure occurs, for instance, when the
agents are points in a metric space and the weight of an edge
is the distance between the two endpoints.

Abstract
We study the Maximum Weighted Matching problem in a partial information setting where the agents’ utilities for being
matched to other agents are hidden and the mechanism only
has access to ordinal preference information. Our model is
motivated by the fact that in many settings, agents cannot express the numerical values of their utility for different outcomes, but are still able to rank the outcomes in their order of
preference. Speciﬁcally, we study problems where the ground
truth exists in the form of a weighted graph, and look to design algorithms that approximate the true optimum matching
using only the preference orderings for each agent (induced
by the hidden weights) as input. If no restrictions are placed
on the weights, then one cannot hope to do better than the
simple greedy algorithm, which yields a half optimal matching. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that by imposing a little
structure on the weights, we can improve upon the trivial algorithm signiﬁcantly: we design a 1.6-approximation algorithm for instances where the hidden weights obey the metric
inequality. Our algorithm is obtained using a simple but powerful framework that allows us to combine greedy and random
techniques in unconventional ways. These results are the ﬁrst
non-trivial ordinal approximation algorithms for such problems, and indicate that we can design robust matchings even
when we are agnostic to the precise agent utilities.

1

Partial Information - Ordinal Preferences A crucial
question in algorithm and mechanism design is: “How much
information about the agent utilities does the algorithm designer possess?”. The starting point for the rest of our paper
is the observation that in many natural settings, it is unreasonable to expect the mechanism to know the exact weights
of the edges in G (Boutilier et al. 2015; Chakrabarty and
Swamy 2014). For example, when pairing up students for a
class project, it may be difﬁcult to precisely quantify the synergy level for every pair of students; ordinal questions such
as ‘who is better suited to partner with student x: y or z?’
may be easier to answer. Such a situation would also arise
when the graph represents a social network of agents, as the
agents themselves may not be able to express ‘exactly how
much each friendship is worth’, but would likely be able to
form an ordering of their friends from best to worst.
Motivated by this, we consider a model where for every
agent i ∈ N , we only have access to a preference ordering
among the agents in N − {i} so that if w(i, j) > w(i, k),
then i : j > k, i.e. i prefers j to k. The common approach
in Learning Theory while dealing with such ordinal settings
is to estimate the ‘true ground state’ based on some probabilistic assumptions on the underlying utilities (Oh and Shah
2014; Souﬁani, Parkes, and Xia 2012). In this paper we take
a different approach, and instead focus on the more demanding objective of designing robust algorithms, i.e., algorithms
that provide good performance guarantees no matter what
the underlying weights are.
Despite the large body of literature on computing matchings in settings with preference orderings, there has been
much less work on quantifying the quality of these matchings. As is common in much of social choice theory, the implicit assumption in this literature is that the underlying utilities cannot be measured or do not even exist, and hence there
is no clear way to deﬁne the quality of a matching (Abraham et al. 2007; Bhalgat, Chakrabarty, and Khanna 2011;

Introduction

Consider the Maximum Weighted Matching (MWM) problem, where the input is an undirected complete graph G =
(N , E) and the weight of an edge w(i, j) represents the
utility of matching agent i with agent j. The objective is
to form a matching (collection of disjoint edges) that maximizes the total utility of the agents. The problem of matching agents and/or items is at the heart of a variety of diverse applications and it is no surprise that this problem and
its variants have received extensive consideration in the algorithmic literature (Lovász and Plummer 2009). Perhaps,
more importantly, maximum weighted matching is one of
the few non-trivial combinatorial optimization problems that
can be solved optimally in poly-time (Edmonds 1965). In
comparison, we study the MWM problem in a partial information setting where the lack of precise knowledge regarding agents’ utilities acts as a barrier against computing optic 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

383

