Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Exploiting Anonymity in Approximate Linear Programming:
Scaling to Large Multiagent MDPs
Philipp Robbel

Frans A. Oliehoek

Mykel J. Kochenderfer

MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA

University of Amsterdam
University of Liverpool

Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA

In this paper we focus on approaches that additionally
address larger numbers of agents through value factorization, assuming that smaller value function components can
approximate the global value function well (Guestrin et al.
2003; Kok and Vlassis 2006). The approximate linear programming (ALP) approach of Guestrin et al. (2003) is one of
the few approaches in this class that retains no exponential
dependencies in the number of agents and variables through
the efﬁcient computation of the constraints in the linear program based on a variable elimination (VE) method. While
the approach improved scalability dramatically, the method
retains an exponential dependency on the induced tree-width
(the size of the largest intermediate term formed during VE),
meaning that its feasibility depends fundamentally on the
connectivity and scale of the factor graph deﬁned by the FMMDP and chosen basis function coverage.
We present an approach that aims to mitigate the exponential dependency of VE on the induced width, which is
caused by the need to represent all combinations of state
and action variables that appear in each manipulated factor.
In many domains, however, different combinations lead to
similar effects, or inﬂuence. Serving as a running example is
a disease control scenario over large graphs (Ho et al. 2015;
Cheng et al. 2013). In this setting the aggregate infection rate
of the parent nodes, independent of their individual identity,
fully deﬁnes the behavior of the propagation model. This observation extends to many MASs that are more broadly concerned with the control of dynamic processes on networks,
e.g. with stochastic ﬁre propagation models or energy distribution in power grids (Liu, Slotine, and Barabasi 2011;
Cornelius, Kath, and Motter 2013).
We propose to exploit this anonymity of inﬂuences for
more efﬁcient solution methods for MMDPs. In particular:
1) We introduce a novel redundant representation (RR)
for the factors that VE manipulates which involves count
aggregators. 2) We show how to derive an efﬁcient VE algorithm, RR-VE, that makes use of the redundant representation, and prove its correctness. 3) We then propose RR-ALP,
which extends the ALP approach by making use of RR-VE,
and maintains identical solutions. 4) We show an empirical
evaluation of our methods that demonstrates speed-ups of
the ALP by an order of magnitude in a sampled set of random disease propagation graphs and scale to problem sizes
that were previously infeasible to solve with the ALP.

Abstract
Many solution methods for Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) exploit structure in the problem and are based
on value function factorization. Especially multiagent
settings, however, are known to suffer from an exponential increase in value component sizes as interactions become denser, restricting problem sizes and types
that can be handled. We present an approach to mitigate this limitation for certain types of multiagent systems, exploiting a property that can be thought of as
“anonymous inﬂuence” in the factored MDP. We show
how representational beneﬁts from anonymity translate
into computational efﬁciencies, both for variable elimination in a factor graph and for the approximate linear
programming solution to factored MDPs. Our methods
scale to factored MDPs that were previously unsolvable,
such as the control of a stochastic disease process over
densely connected graphs with 50 nodes and 25 agents.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multiagent systems (MASs) present an important framework for modeling the interaction between agents
that collaborate to solve a task. Decision-theoretic models like the Markov Decision Process (MDP) have seen
widespread use to address such complex stochastic planning
problems. Multiagent settings, however, have state and action spaces that tend to grow exponentially with the agent
number, making common solution methods that rely on the
full enumeration of the joint spaces prohibitive.
Many problem representations thus attempt to exploit
structure in the domain to improve efﬁciency. Single and
multiagent factored MDPs (F(M)MDPs) represent the problem in terms of state and action spaces that are spanned
by a number of variables, or factors (Boutilier, Dean, and
Hanks 1999; Guestrin, Koller, and Parr 2002). Unfortunately, the representational beneﬁts from factored descriptions do not in general translate into gains for policy computation (Koller and Parr 1999). Still, many solution methods
successfully exploit structure in the domain, both in exact
and approximate settings, and have demonstrated scalability
to large state spaces (Hoey et al. 1999; Raghavan et al. 2012;
Cui et al. 2015).
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2537

