Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Artificial Swarm Intelligence,
a Human-in-the-Loop Approach to A.I.
Louis Rosenberg
,
Unanimous A.I, San Francisco, California, USA
Louis@UnanimousAI.com

enabling distributed groups to work together as a unified
dynamic system. In this way, human swarms can answer
questions, make predictions, reach decisions, and solve
problems by collectively exploring a diverse set of options
and converging on preferred solutions in synchrony.

Abstract
Most research into Swarm Intelligence explores swarms of
autonomous robots or simulated agents. Little work, however, has been done on swarms of networked humans. This
paper introduces UNU, an online platform that enables networked users to assemble in real-time swarms and tackle
problems as an Artificial Swarm Intelligence (ASI). Modeled after biological swarms, UNU enables large groups of
networked users to work together in real-time synchrony,
forging a unified dynamic system that can quickly answer
questions and make decisions. Early testing suggests that
human swarming has significant potential for harnessing the
Collective Intelligence (CI) of online groups, often exceeding the natural abilities of individual participants.

Swarms as Intelligent Systems
In the field of A.I., the word “swarm” often refers to
groups of autonomous robots or simulated agents that execute coordinated motions governed by simple localized
rules (Beni 1989). These systems are generally inspired by
flocks of birds and schools of fish, which navigate complex
environments using similar processes. While such systems
have many useful applications, the human swarms described herein are modeled less after the motions of flocks
and schools, and more after the complex decision-making
processes used by honeybee swarms. Honeybee swarms
were selected because the decision-making of honeybees
provide a powerful natural proof of the potential for an
emergent decentralized parallelized intelligence.
As studied by Seeley et al., the decision-making processes of honeybee swarms and neurological brains are
remarkably similar. Both employ large populations of
simple excitable units (i.e., bees and neurons) that (a) work
in parallel to integrate noisy evidence, (b) weigh a set of
competing alternatives in real-time, and (c) converge on
decisions in synchrony. (Seeley 2012). For example, all
honeybees face a life-or-death decision when selecting a
suitable location for a new colony. After searching a 30
square mile area, scout bees bring dozens of potential sites
back to the hive for consideration. Using body vibrations
known as “waggle dances”, the scout bees express preferences for various sites based on numerous quality factors.
Through a real-time negotiation among competing signals,
a decision is reached when a sufficient quorum emerges in
favor of a particular site.
In this way, a Collective Intelligence comprised of hundreds of honeybees is able to select among dozens of candidate home sites, evaluating each with respect to multiple

Introduction
When designing artificially intelligent systems, researchers
have historically turned to Mother Nature for guidance.
Not surprisingly, the first model to be explored was the
most familiar – our own brains. Starting with Perceptrons
of the 1950’s and continuing to this day, neural networks
and other neurologically inspired architectures are the
dominant models for A.I. research. This said, nature is not
a one-trick pony. Billions of years of evolution have produced at least one alternate method of building high-level
intelligence and it is not neural – it is collective.
Referred to as Swarm Intelligence (SI), nature shows us
that by forming closed-loop systems among large groups of
independent agents, high-level intelligence can emerge that
exceeds the capacity of the individual participants. Researchers have explored this extensively for organizing
groups of robots and simulated agents, but only recently
have the principles of swarming been applied to humans.
This paper introduces UNU, an open platform that enables networked users to assemble in online swarms and
tackle problems as an Artificial Swarm Intelligence (ASI).
Modeled after biological swarms, the underlying UNU
software uses real-time feedback loops to connect users,
Copyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4381

