Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Microsummarization of Online Reviews: An Experimental Study
Rebecca Mason ∗

Benjamin Gaska ∗

Benjamin Van Durme

Google, Inc.
Cambridge, Massachusetts
ramason@google.com

University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona
bengaska@email.arizona.edu

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland
vandurme@cs.jhu.edu

Pallavi Choudhury, Ted Hart, Bill Dolan, Kristina Toutanova, and Margaret Mitchell
Microsoft Research
Redmond, Washington
{pallavic,tedhar,billdol,kristout,memitc}@microsoft.com
to as microsummarization, therefore crosscuts the tasks of
entity recognition, sentiment analysis, and summarization.
This research follows an “end-to-end” approach, and is
complementary to research on speciﬁc subtasks within the
end-to-end system: We are motivated by summarization for
real users, as compared to existing efforts that drill down
on a predeﬁned subtask without realistically addressing how
the task may work in practice. We therefore compare both
state-of-the-art and novel methods in order to explore their
utility in an applied end-to-end scenario, and include human
evaluation of the ﬁnal output. This work motivates a new
view of summarization, focused on identifying key items and
the public opinion about them.
Our approach begins with unsupervised clustering of reviews to automatically discover words used in similar contexts. From this, we deﬁne a set of facets1 to identify in
the reviews, and compare models for facet recognition that
require different amounts of supervision.
This content is then tagged using a neural-network based
sentiment model, and the sentiment and entities are used to
create a summary for an end user. We provide automatic evaluation of each component compared against gold standards,
as well as a crowdsourced study on the overall quality of the
ﬁnal microsummaries. We ﬁnd our proposed system utilizing ClusterSum is preferred by users 80% of the time over
traditional extractive summarization techniques.
This research makes the following contributions:
1. Introduces a new NLP task focused on presenting short,
to-the-point summaries based on analysis of social online
review text
2. Provides new approaches for summarization, ClusterSum

Abstract
Mobile and location-based social media applications provide
platforms for users to share brief opinions about products,
venues, and services. These quickly typed opinions, or microreviews, are a valuable source of current sentiment on a wide
variety of subjects. However, there is currently little research
on how to mine this information to present it back to users in
easily consumable way. In this paper, we introduce the task
of microsummarization, which combines sentiment analysis,
summarization, and entity recognition in order to surface key
content to users. We explore unsupervised and supervised
methods for this task, and ﬁnd we can reliably extract relevant
entities and the sentiment targeted towards them using crowdsourced labels as supervision. In an end-to-end evaluation, we
ﬁnd our best-performing system is vastly preferred by judges
over a traditional extractive summarization approach. This
work motivates an entirely new approach to summarization,
incorporating both sentiment analysis and item extraction for
modernized, at-a-glance presentation of public opinion.

Introduction
The proliferation of short thoughts and reviews in social
media and mobile-based communication provides an easy
way for people to communicate their opinions to the rest of
the world. For example, the mobile application FourSquare
(www.foursquare.com) contains user-submitted reviews of
venues, such as restaurants and other businesses. As a
FourSquare user approaches a venue, FourSquare supplies
the user’s phone with review snippets from others who have
visited the same venue. These micro-reviews consist of brief,
somewhat spontaneous observations on others’ experiences
at that venue (see Table 1). These brief texts are a rich source
for determining consensus opinions about different items and
places.
In this work, we analyze FourSquare reviews to create
a short list for at-a-glance information about a venue. We
explore several approaches to identify key items, determine
the sentiment expressed towards these items, and summarize
this content to a user. The proposed task, which we will refer

1

Also known as entities, attributes, or aspects.

Try the Beach Salad!
My favorite is the Chicken Club. It is soooo goooood
Sad to hear my homie Sara doeat work here anymore :-(
They have #The12thCan!!
Urinals are perfect if you’re a midget

∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Table 1: Examples of micro-reviews from FourSquare.

3015

