Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Continual Planning in Golog
Till Hofmann, Tim Niemueller, Jens Claßen, and Gerhard Lakemeyer
Knowledge-Based Systems Group
RWTH Aachen University, Germany
{hofmann, niemueller, classen, lakemeyer}@kbsg.rwth-aachen.de

for sub-tasks (Claßen et al. 2012). However, this earlier approach could cope with incomplete knowledge only in a limited fashion. While sensing could be used in other parts of
the G OLOG program, planning subtasks required the agent
to possess complete information about (the necessary part
of) the world state. This excludes a large class of problems where it is possible to come up with a major part of
a plan beforehand, but that may contain smaller parts to be
ﬁlled later through sensing. In our example, the agent may
generate an overall plan for cleaning the table, but the decision on where to put an individual cup depends on whether
it is dirty, which is subject to sensing. Continual planning
(Brenner and Nebel 2009) addresses this issue by interleaving planning and plan execution, allowing the agent to handle incomplete knowledge even within a planning problem.
In this paper, we extend G OLOG with continual planning,
which so far is only supported in some PDDL-based systems. We deﬁne a new G OLOG action type assertion, which
is a placeholder for conditional sub-plans that depend on
yet missing information. We deﬁne Know-If ﬂuents for representing incomplete knowledge, where a Know-If ﬂuent
FKIF is true iff the value of the ﬂuent F is known. The evaluation shows competitive and even better performance than
PDDL-based continual planning alone. A particular beneﬁt of our approach is that we can combine G OLOG control structures with efﬁcient planning to support incomplete
knowledge in both parts. Moreover, we obtain a framework
that integrates all parts of a robot task in G OLOG, including the top-most execution loop that queries the planner and
then executes and monitors such plans. Using an extended
G OLOG execution monitoring makes the system more robust
and allows to deal with dynamic environments.
In the following section, we introduce G OLOG, PDDL
and continual planning. Next, we deﬁne our approach to
continual planning by means of assertions and describe our
representation of incomplete knowledge. Finally, we evaluate the approach for domestic and logistics service robots.

Abstract
To solve ever more complex and longer tasks, mobile robots
need to generate more elaborate plans and must handle dynamic environments and incomplete knowledge. We address this challenge by integrating two seemingly different
approaches – PDDL-based planning for efﬁcient plan generation and G OLOG for highly expressive behavior speciﬁcation – in a coherent framework that supports continual planning. The latter allows to interleave plan generation and execution through assertions, which are placeholder actions that
are dynamically expanded into conditional sub-plans (using
classical planners) once a replanning condition is satisﬁed.
We formalize and implement continual planning in G OLOG
which was so far only supported in PDDL-based systems.
This enables combining the execution of generated plans with
regular G OLOG programs and execution monitoring. Experiments on autonomous mobile robots show that the approach
supports expressive behavior speciﬁcation combined with efﬁcient sub-plan generation to handle dynamic environments
and incomplete knowledge in a uniﬁed way.

Introduction
Imagine a domestic service robot with the task to clean
up the dining table by fetching cups, putting clean ones
back on the shelf and dirty ones into the dishwasher. This
task can be solved using a G OLOG (Levesque et al. 1997)
program stating that while cups are left on the table fetch
one, sense whether it is clean, and put it at the appropriate place. A different approach is taken in planning where
a planner such as FAST D OWNWARD (Helmert 2006) determines a sequence of actions to clean the table. G OLOG supports incomplete knowledge and sensing (e.g. whether cups
are dirty), but current implementations are very inefﬁcient
when it comes to pure planning, whereas planning is efﬁcient but needs complete knowledge. Real-world execution
furthermore requires a control loop for maintaining a world
model, incorporating sensing results, and monitoring action
execution, which planning-based systems typically implement in an ad-hoc fashion. To alleviate some of these issues,
G OLOG and PDDL planning have been integrated such that
a G OLOG program could call an embedded PDDL planner

Related Work
The Situation Calculus and G OLOG
The Situation Calculus (McCarthy 1963; Reiter 2001) is
a ﬁrst-order logic which allows to represent world states
as ﬁrst-order terms called situations. Relations (functions)

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3346

