Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Modeling Human Ad Hoc Coordination
Peter M. Krafft∗ , Chris L. Baker† , Alex “Sandy” Pentland‡ , Joshua B. Tenenbaum†
∗

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA USA
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, † MIT Media Lab,
‡
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
{pkrafft,clbaker,pentland,jbt}@mit.edu

coordination”—collaborative multiagent planning with previously unknown teammates (Stone et al. 2010). However,
surprisingly little is known about the strategies that humans
use to overcome the difﬁculties of coordination (Thomas et
al. 2014). Understanding how and when people try to coordinate is critical to furthering our understanding of human
group behavior, as well as to the design of agents for humanagent collectives (Jennings et al. 2014). Existing attempts
at modeling human coordination have focused either on unstructured predictive models (e.g., (Frieder, Lin, and Kraus
2012)) or bounded depth socially recursive reasoning models (e.g., (Gal and Pfeffer 2008; Yoshida, Dolan, and Friston
2008)), but there is reason to believe that these accounts miss
important aspects of human coordination.
One concept that appears repeatedly in formal treatments
of coordination but has not appeared meaningfully in empirical modeling is common knowledge. Two agents have common knowledge if both agents have inﬁnitely nested knowledge of the other agent’s knowledge of a proposition, i.e.
the ﬁrst agent knows the second agent knows, the ﬁrst agent
knows the second agent knows the ﬁrst agent knows, etc.
Common knowledge has been shown to be necessary for exact coordination (Halpern and Moses 1990), and a probabilistic generalization of common knowledge, called common p-belief, has been been shown to be necessary for approximate coordination (Monderer and Samet 1989). While
these notions are clearly important normatively, it is not entirely clear how important they are empirically in human coordination. Indeed, supposing that humans are able to mentally represent an inﬁnitely recursive belief state seems a
priori implausible, and the need to represent and infer this
inﬁnite recursive belief state has also been a barrier to empirically testing models involving common knowledge.
Nevertheless, building on the existing normative results,
a group of researchers recently designed a set of experiments to test whether people are able to recognize situations
in which common knowledge might obtain (Thomas et al.
2014) (hereafter referred to as the “Thomas experiments”).
These researchers argued that people do possess a distinct
mental representation of common knowledge by showing
that people will attempt to coordinate more often in situations where common knowledge can be inferred. However,
this previous work did not formalize this claim in a model or
rigorously test it against plausible alternative computational

Abstract
Whether in groups of humans or groups of computer agents,
collaboration is most effective between individuals who have
the ability to coordinate on a joint strategy for collective action. However, in general a rational actor will only intend
to coordinate if that actor believes the other group members
have the same intention. This circular dependence makes rational coordination difﬁcult in uncertain environments if communication between actors is unreliable and no prior agreements have been made. An important normative question with
regard to coordination in these ad hoc settings is therefore
how one can come to believe that other actors will coordinate, and with regard to systems involving humans, an important empirical question is how humans arrive at these expectations. We introduce an exact algorithm for computing the
inﬁnitely recursive hierarchy of graded beliefs required for
rational coordination in uncertain environments, and we introduce a novel mechanism for multiagent coordination that
uses it. Our algorithm is valid in any environment with a ﬁnite state space, and extensions to certain countably inﬁnite
state spaces are likely possible. We test our mechanism for
multiagent coordination as a model for human decisions in a
simple coordination game using existing experimental data.
We then explore via simulations whether modeling humans
in this way may improve human-agent collaboration.

Forming shared plans that support mutually beneﬁcial behavior within a group is central to collaborative social interaction and collective intelligence (Grosz and Kraus 1996).
Indeed, many common organizational practices are designed
to facilitate shared knowledge of the structure and goals of
organizations, as well as mutual recognition of the roles
that individuals in the organizations play. Once teams become physically separated and responsiveness or frequency
of communication declines, the challenge of forming shared
plans increases. Part of this difﬁculty is fundamentally computational. In theory, coming to a fully mutually recognized
agreement on even a simple action plan among two choices
can be literally impossible if communication is even mildly
unreliable, even if an arbitrary amount of communication is
allowed (Halpern and Moses 1990; Lynch 1996).
This problem is well-studied within the AI literature (e.g.,
(Gmytrasiewicz and Durfee 1992)), though the core difﬁculties still manifest in contemporary research on “ad hoc
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3740

