Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Multiple Kernel k-Means Clustering with Matrix-Induced Regularization
Xinwang Liu, Yong Dou, Jianping Yin

Lei Wang

En Zhu

School of Computer
National University
of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073

School of Computer Science
and Software Engineering
University of Wollongong
NSW, Australia, 2522

School of Computer
National University
of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073

ture mapping and then conducts a standard k-means clustering in that space (Schölkopf, Smola, and Müller 1998). This
enables kernel k-means to handle the linearly non-separable
problem in an input space that k-means suffers from.
In many practical applications of clustering, samples are
represented by multiple groups of features extracted from
different information sources. For example, three kinds of
feature representations1 , colour, shape and texture, are extracted to distinguish one ﬂower from another (Nilsback and
Zisserman 2006). These different sources usually provide
complementary information, and it is better to let learning
algorithms optimally combine them in order to obtain excellent clustering. This line of research is known as multiple
kernel (view) clustering in the literature.
Many efforts have been devoted to improving multiple
kernel clustering from all kinds of aspects (Zhao, Kwok, and
Zhang 2009; Lu et al. 2014; Xia et al. 2014; Zhou et al. 2015;
Kumar and Daumé 2011). In this paper, we explore a better way to combine a set of pre-speciﬁed kernels for clustering. The existing research on this aspect can roughly be
grouped into two categories. The ﬁrst category learns a consensus matrix via low-rank optimization (Xia et al. 2014;
Zhou et al. 2015; Kumar and Daumé 2011). In (Xia et al.
2014), a transition probability matrix is constructed from
each single view, and they are used to recover a shared
low-rank transition probability matrix as a crucial input to
the standard Markov chain method for clustering. The work
in (Zhou et al. 2015) proposes to capture the structures of
noises in each kernel and integrate them into a robust and
consensus framework to learn a low-rank matrix. The algorithm (Kumar and Daumé 2011) learns the clustering in
one view and uses it to “label” the data in other views to
modify a similarity matrix. By following multiple kernel
learning (MKL) framework, the other category optimizes a
group of kernel coefﬁcients, and uses the combined kernel
for clustering (Yu et al. 2012; Gönen and Margolin 2014;
Du et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2014). The work in (Yu et al. 2012)
proposes a multiple kernel k-means clustering algorithm.
Similar work has also been done in (Gönen and Margolin
2014), with the difference that the kernels are combined in a
localized way to better capture the sample-adaptive characteristics of data. Differently, by replacing the squared error

Abstract
Multiple kernel k-means (MKKM) clustering aims to optimally combine a group of pre-speciﬁed kernels to improve
clustering performance. However, we observe that existing
MKKM algorithms do not sufﬁciently consider the correlation among these kernels. This could result in selecting
mutually redundant kernels and affect the diversity of information sources utilized for clustering, which ﬁnally hurts
the clustering performance. To address this issue, this paper proposes an MKKM clustering with a novel, effective
matrix-induced regularization to reduce such redundancy and
enhance the diversity of the selected kernels. We theoretically justify this matrix-induced regularization by revealing
its connection with the commonly used kernel alignment criterion. Furthermore, this justiﬁcation shows that maximizing the kernel alignment for clustering can be viewed as a
special case of our approach and indicates the extendability
of the proposed matrix-induced regularization for designing
better clustering algorithms. As experimentally demonstrated
on ﬁve challenging MKL benchmark data sets, our algorithm
signiﬁcantly improves existing MKKM and consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art ones in the literature, verifying
the effectiveness and advantages of incorporating the proposed matrix-induced regularization.

Introduction
Clustering algorithms aim to partition a group of samples
into k clusters, where the similarity of samples from intraclusters shall be greater than that from inter-clusters (Hartigan 1975). As one of the classical clustering algorithms,
k-means provides an intuitive and effective way to perform
clustering. In speciﬁc, the k-means clustering is composed
of (i) calculating k prototypes (i.e., centres of k clusters)
given an assignment of samples to clusters and (ii) updating
the assignment matrix by minimizing the sum-of-squares
cost given the prototypes. These two steps are alternately
performed until convergence. Due to its conceptual simplicity, easy-implementation and high efﬁciency, k-means clustering has been intensively studied and extended (Yu et al.
2012; Gönen and Margolin 2014; Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013;
Du et al. 2015). As an important extension, kernel k-means
ﬁrst maps data onto a high-dimensional space through a feac 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1888

In literature, each representation is also termed as a view.

