Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Constrained Submodular Minimization
for Missing Labels and Class Imbalance in Multi-Label Learning
Baoyuan Wu

Siwei Lyu

Bernard Ghanem

KAUST, Saudi Arabia

SUNY-Albany, NY USA

KAUST, Saudi Arabia

Kapoor, Viswanathan, and Jain 2012; Xu, Jin, and Zhou
2013; Wu et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2015;
Chen et al. 2015). However, most of them disregard another
important challenge in multi-label learning, i.e., class imbalance (CIB), which has two different phenomena. Firstly,
each instance is assigned with only a few positive labels,
while most other labels are negative. We refer to this type of
class imbalance as CIB-1 in this work. Secondly, the proportions of positive instances of different classes may be signiﬁcantly different. We refer to this type of CIB as CIB-2 in this
work. CIB-1 often occurs in binary classiﬁcation problems,
while CIB-2 is more widely encountered in multi-label classiﬁcation problems. It has been observed (Sahare and Gupta
2012; Zhang and Hu 2014) that both CIB-1 and CIB-2 are
likely to lead to the performance degradation of many popular models, such as SVM and neural networks.
The more challenging case is missing labels and two types
of class imbalances co-exist in a multi-label learning problem. This is becuase the bias between the positive and negative labels becomes larger than where there is no missing
labels. Thus the missing labels tend to be negative labels
with the larger degree, as the amount of missing labels increases. To date, there only exist a few works (Zhang, Li,
and Liu 2015; Petterson and Caetano 2010) speciﬁcally consider CIB-1, but no existing work can handle CIB-1 and
CIB-2 simultaneously, in particular in the context of MLML.
The goal of this work is to develop a uniﬁed model to
handle missing labels and class imbalance jointly. We formulate the problem as a transductive learning problem that
include ﬁve components that are label consistency, instancelevel and class-level label smoothness, and two types of class
cardinality (lower and upper) bounds. The ﬁrst three components are used to propagate the label information from the
provided labels to missing labels, and the latter two components are included to handle two types of the class imbalance
problem. We ﬁrst formulate a uniﬁed model that combines
these components as a constrained submodular minimization problem (CSM). However, due to the class cardinality
constraint, it is a NP-hard problem. Utilizing the Lovasz extension of submodular function, we approximate CSM by a
continuous linear programming (LP) with linear constraints.
The LP problem is efﬁciently solved by alternative direction method of multipliers (ADMM). As the ﬁnal output,
the signs of the continuous labels are adopted as the discrete

Abstract
In multi-label learning, there are two main challenges: missing labels and class imbalance (CIB). The former assumes
that only a partial set of labels are provided for each training instance while other labels are missing. CIB is observed
from two perspectives: ﬁrst, the number of negative labels
of each instance is much larger than its positive labels; second, the rate of positive instances (i.e. the number of positive instances divided by the total number of instances) of
different classes are signiﬁcantly different. Both missing labels and CIB lead to signiﬁcant performance degradation. In
this work, we propose a new method to handle these two
challenges simultaneously. We formulate the problem as a
constrained submodular minimization that is composed of a
submodular objective function that encourages label consistency and smoothness, as well as, class cardinality bound
constraints to handle class imbalance. We further present a
convex approximation based on the Lovasz extension of submodular functions, leading to a linear program, which can
be efﬁciently solved by the alternative direction method of
multipliers (ADMM). Experimental results on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the improved performance of our
method over several state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning (ML) assumes that one instance can be
assigned to multiple classes simultaneously. For example,
one image can be annotated with several tags, and one document can be associated with multiple topics. Although many
multi-label learning methods have been proposed in recent
years, a main challenge remains for this problem, i.e., the
lack of completely labeled training instances. This is important because in many real life applications, most training
instances are only partially labeled, while other labels are
not provided or missing. One such example is image annotation, a human labeler can only feasibly annotates each
training image with a subset of tags, especially when the
number of classes/tags is large. Learning from such partially
labeled instances is referred to as the multi-label learning with missing labels (MLML) problem (Wu et al. 2014;
Yu et al. 2014).
Several previous works have tried to handle the MLML
problem, such as (Goldberg et al. 2010; Cabral et al. 2011;
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2229

