Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning to Generate Posters of Scientiﬁc Papers∗
Yuting Qiang1 , Yanwei Fu2 , Yanwen Guo1† , Zhi-Hua Zhou1 and Leonid Sigal2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Disney Research Pittsburgh, 4720 Frobes Avenue, Lower Level, 15213, USA
{qiangyuting.new,ywguo.nju}@gmail.com, zhouzh@nju.edu.cn, {yanwei.fu,lsigal}@disneyresearch.com

In general, poster design is a complicated and timeconsuming task; both understanding of the paper content and
experience in design are required.
Automatic tools for scientiﬁc poster generation would
help researchers by providing them with an easier way to
effectively share their research. Further, given avid amount
of scientiﬁc papers on ArXiv and other on-line repositories,
such tools may also provide a way for other researchers to
consume the content more easily. Rather than browsing raw
papers, they may be able to browse automatically generated
poster previews (potentially constructed with their speciﬁc
preferences in mind).
However, in order to generate a scientiﬁc poster in accordance with, and representative of, the original paper, many
problems need to be solved: 1) Content extraction. Both important textual and graphical content needs to be extracted
from the original paper; 2) Panel layout. Content should ﬁt
each panel, and the shape and position of panels should be
optimized for readability and design appeal; 3) Graphical element (ﬁgures and tables) arrangement. Within each panel,
textual content can typically be sequentially itemized, but
for graphical elements, their size and placement should be
carefully considered. Due to these challenges, there are few
automatic tools for scientiﬁc poster generation.
In this paper, we propose a data-driven method for automatic scientiﬁc poster generation (given a corresponding
paper). Contents extraction and layout generation are two
key components in this process. For content extraction, we
use TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau 2004) to extract textual
content, and provide an interface for extraction of graphical
content (e.g., ﬁgures, tables, etc.). Our approach focuses primarily on poster layout generation. We address the layout in
three steps. First, we propose a simple probabilistic graphical model to infer panel attributes. Second, we introduce
a tree structure to represent panel layout, based on which
we further design a recursive algorithm to generate new layouts. Third, in order to synthesize layout within each panel,
we train another probabilistic graphical model to infer the
attributes of the graphical elements.
Compared with posters designed by the authors, our approach can generate different results to adapt to different
paper sizes/aspect ratios or styles, by training our model
with different dataset, and thus provides more expressiveness in poster layout. To the best of our knowledge, this pa-

Abstract
Researchers often summarize their work in the form of
posters. Posters provide a coherent and efﬁcient way to
convey core ideas from scientiﬁc papers. Generating a
good scientiﬁc poster, however, is a complex and time
consuming cognitive task, since such posters need to be
readable, informative, and visually aesthetic. In this paper, for the ﬁrst time, we study the challenging problem of learning to generate posters from scientiﬁc papers. To this end, a data-driven framework, that utilizes
graphical models, is proposed. Speciﬁcally, given content to display, the key elements of a good poster, including panel layout and attributes of each panel, are
learned and inferred from data. Then, given inferred layout and attributes, composition of graphical elements
within each panel is synthesized. To learn and validate
our model, we collect and make public a Poster-Paper
dataset, which consists of scientiﬁc papers and corresponding posters with exhaustively labelled panels and
attributes. Qualitative and quantitative results indicate
the effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
The emergence of large number of scientiﬁc papers in various academic ﬁelds and venues (conferences and journals)
is noteworthy. For example, IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) accepted over 600
papers in 2016 alone. It is time-consuming to read all of
these papers for the researchers, particularly those interested
to holistically assess state-of-the-art or emerge with understanding of core scientiﬁc ideas explored in the last year.
Converting a conference paper into a poster provides important means to efﬁciently and coherently convey core ideas
and ﬁndings of the original paper. To achieve this goal, it
is therefore essential to keep the posters readable, informative and visually aesthetic. It is challenging, however, to design a high-quality scientiﬁc poster which meets all of the
above design constraints, particularly for those researchers
who may not be proﬁcient at design tasks or familiar with
design packages (e.g., Adobe Illustrator).
∗
This work is supported by NSFC (61333014, 61373059, and
61321491) and JiangsuSF (BK20150016).
†
Corresponding author
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

51

