Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Indeﬁnite Scalability
for Living Computation
David H. Ackley
University of New Mexico
Department of Computer Science
Albuquerque, NM 87131
ackley@cs.unm.edu
hardware architecture depends only on conventional electronics manufacturing and presumes no breakthroughs in
materials science or unconventional computing media.

Abstract
In a question-and-answer format, this summary paper
presents background material for the AAAI-16 Senior
Member Presentation Track “Blue Sky Ideas” talk of
the same name.

Q: So why, exactly, doesn’t determinism scale?
A: Hardware determinism means that digital computer
hardware guarantees to perform the rules of logic ﬂawlessly,
for as long as the program runs—and if the hardware can’t
do that, for any reason, it promises to “crash” the whole machine immediately. With that guarantee in hand, typical software utterly ignores the possibility of hardware errors—and
that ‘reliable hardware + efﬁcient software’ mindset is so
deeply embedded, in academia and industry both, that it is
rarely even mentioned, let alone questioned.
The scaling problem is that hardware’s guarantee isn’t
quite 100%. Any real unit of hardware will have some small
chance of undetected error. Now, if we are given a maximum
computation size up front, we can design hardware units to
make that size computation as reliable as we like. But if we
then keep adding more and more of those hardware units to
the system, and running it longer and longer, eventually the
aggregate space-time computational volume will exceed the
reciprocal of the hardware unit failure rate, and the machine
will deliver undetected errors to the software level.
That’s why, even in principle, hardware determinism
doesn’t scale, and in the supercomputing community, for
example, it is already more than a merely theoretical concern (Cappello et al. 2009).

Q: So, what’s the big idea here?
A: Traditional CPU and RAM computing, based on hardware determinism, is now struggling to scale up, as clock
speed increases have stalled and multicore cache coherence
grows increasingly expensive. Determinism is also a perpetual computer security nightmare, encouraging programmers
to optimize efﬁciency, and thus fragility—while providing,
by default, utter predictability to attackers.
The blue sky idea is: We should forgo deterministic execution and focus instead on best-effort computing—in hardware and software both—to develop indeﬁnitely scalable
computer designs. A machine from here to the horizon if
we want it, built of locally-connected, interchangeable computing tiles; a machine so big parts of it will always be failing; a machine so big we’ll be using it long before we ﬁnish
building it.
To survive and prosper in such a system, software will be
living computation in a far richer sense than today: It will
collaborate and compete with other software, will take damage and heal, will reproduce for redundancy and parallelism,
will migrate and spontaneously colonize new hardware, and
so on. Programming and performing large-scale computations will be less like solving logic puzzles and more like
agriculture or animal husbandry or ecosystem management.

Q: But if determinism fails, doesn’t that mean chaos?
A: Not necessarily at all. Computer science’s focus on efﬁciency makes it easy to forget that digital hardware employs
massive redundancy to accomplish its heroic acts of determinism. It uses whole wires to carry single bits, and deploys
saturating ampliﬁers at every turn to reduce noise while the
chance of error remains small.
When we renegotiate around best-effort hardware, software becomes obligated to look beyond efﬁciency and
embrace robustness, by deploying redundancy effectively
throughout the software stack. The resulting systemic errorresistance will enable scalability, and also fundamentally
beneﬁt security—not like a silver bullet miracle, but like the
way sanitation and hygiene beneﬁts the public health.

Q: Wow! So this is all just wishes and fantasy, right?
A: Well, not entirely. It’s still the earliest days, but for
several years we’ve been working on indeﬁnite scalability,
mostly in simulation. Unless stated otherwise, the material
in this summary paper is drawn from (Ackley and Cannon
2011; Ackley 2013a; 2013b; Ackley, Cannon, and Williams
2013; Ackley and Small 2014; Ackley and Ackley 2015).
And though it can sound like science ﬁction, our proposed
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Q: Hmm. What do we need know most about this idea?

4142

