Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Predicting Online Protest Participation of Social Media Users
Suhas Ranganath

Fred Morstatter

Xia Hu

srangan8@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Fred.Morstatter@asu.edu
Arizona State University

hu@cse.tamu.edu
Texas A&M University

Jiliang Tang

Suhang Wang

Huan Liu

jlt@yahoo-inc.com
Yahoo Labs

swang187@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Huan.Liu@asu.edu
Arizona State University

ticipate the behavior of the protestors and estimate the total
number of participants.
This task faces several challenges. First, the ways in
which protest-related events affect a person are not observable, resulting in a lack of knowledge of factors operating at
that time causing his next post to be a declaration of protest.
Second, a user is subject to various types of inﬂuence in his
past, and many of them are in conﬂict with each other. This
may lead to ambiguities on whether his posts will contain
declarations of protest in the future. Finally, each user can
post a large amount of content and interact with many people, leading to issues of scalability.
Sociological studies have theorized factors from an individual’s history causing his next post to be a declaration of
protest. A user will be more likely to protest if his social
ties have reached out to him with protest-related messages
in his past (Schussman and Soule 2005). The chances of him
protesting are bolstered if these messages are sent by people
interested in protest related issues (Lim 2008). The likelihood of protest is reduced if people uninterested in protestrelated issues have reached out to him in the past with messages unrelated to protests. (Snow, Zurcher Jr, and EklandOlson 1980).
Inspired by these sociological theories, we utilize the
user’s previous status messages and messages interacting
with him to predict whether his next post will be a declaration of protest. To model the effect of the interactions
on the user’s status messages, we build upon concepts from
the Brownian motion theory of ﬂuid particle motion (Zhou
2003). This theory models the path of ﬂuid particles as other
ﬂuid particles come in contact with them over time. We draw
analogies from these concepts to model the probability of
the user declaring protest as other users reach out to him
over time. The primary contributions of this work are:
• Formally deﬁning the problem of predicting whether the
next post of a user will be a declaration of protest based on
past status messages and messages interacting with him,
• Demonstrating the applicability of sociological theories
of protest participation in online social media data,
• Proposing a framework that predicts online protest participation of a user, and
• Evaluating the framework using a real world dataset from
Twitter on the Nigerian election protest in March 2015.

Abstract
Social media has emerged to be a popular platform for people to express their viewpoints on political protests like the
Arab Spring. Millions of people use social media to communicate and mobilize their viewpoints on protests. Hence,
it is a valuable tool for organizing social movements. However, the mechanisms by which protest affects the population is not known, making it difﬁcult to estimate the number of protestors. In this paper, we are inspired by sociological theories of protest participation and propose a framework
to predict from the user’s past status messages and interactions whether the next post of the user will be a declaration of
protest. Drawing concepts from these theories, we model the
interplay between the user’s status messages and messages
interacting with him over time and predict whether the next
post of the user will be a declaration of protest. We evaluate the framework using data from the social media platform
Twitter on protests during the recent Nigerian elections and
demonstrate that it can effectively predict whether the next
post of a user is a declaration of protest.

Social media has emerged as a popular information and
communication channel for protest-related issues (Muthiah
et al. 2015; Contractor et al. 2015; Tufekci and Wilson
2012). It provides an open and accessible platform for people to put forth views on issues affecting them. Millions of
people, therefore, use social media to declare protest, mobilize opinion and participate in discussions on these issues.
For example, electoral malpractice was suspected during the
recent elections in Nigeria (Mark 2014), and users employed
social media to express and mobilize viewpoints.
We concentrate on posting behavior of users and deﬁne
online protest participation as the act of declaring protest
through status messages. However, it is a nontrivial problem to directly predict online protest participation of social
media users. Millions of users post in social media during
popular social movements, and protest organizers have to go
through them to identify potential participants. The mechanisms by which the protest affects the population cannot
be fully observed (Lin et al. 2013), and protest organizers
cannot easily estimate the number of protestors. Designing
algorithms to predict whether the next post of a user will be
a declaration of protest will enable protest organizers to anCopyright © 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

208

