Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Modeling Users’ Preferences and Social Links
in Social Networking Services: A Joint-Evolving Perspective
Le Wu,† Yong Ge,‡ Qi Liu,† Enhong Chen,†∗ Bai Long,,† Zhenya Huang†
†

University of Science and Technology of China ‡ University of North Carolina at Charlotte

China Electronics Technology Group Corporation No.38 Research Institute

social link suggestions (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007;
Menon and Elkan 2011). In summary, these two directions
utilized a particular kind of users’ historical behavior to predict the same kind of behavior, and are usually well researched in parallel.
However, social scientists have long converged that these
two kinds of users’ behaviors are not isolated, instead, the
interplay between them drives the evolution of SNSs. Two
social theories explain this interplay: the social inﬂuence argues users’ future preference behavior is affected by the social network around them, and the homophily effect states
people tend to associate and bond with others that have similar preferences (Aral, Muchnik, and Sundararajan 2009).
An example of such evolving of a SNS platform is shown
in Figure 1. Thus, some research works have leveraged one
type of users’ behavior to help another behavior prediction
task (Jamali and Ester 2010; Tang et al. 2013) or assumed a
time-invariant user latent factor is shared among users’ behaviors (Yang et al. 2011). Nevertheless, these works either
modeled users’ two kinds of behaviors in an isolated way or
relied on a static assumption of a SNS. Thus, we still can
not give an explanatory answer to the question – how do the
roles users’ two kinds of behaviors play in the evolution of
SNSs? Furthermore, can jointly modeling users’ temporal
behaviors beneﬁt both prediction tasks?
To answer these two questions, there are some technical challenges. First, both kinds of users’ behaviors mix together to form the evolution of SNSs. Thus, it is hard to distinguish the contribution of each kind of users’ behavior in
the evolution process. Second, it is still unclear how to build
connections among users’ two kinds of behaviors over time
and jointly model them. To tackle these challenges, in this
paper, we propose an Evolving Joint Prediction (EJP) approach
to fuse the underlying social theories for explaining and
jointly modeling users’ two kinds of behaviors over time.
Speciﬁcally, we associate users and items with latent representations, where the user latent factors are time-dependent
and shared among these two kinds of behaviors. In the meantime, we clearly quantify the inﬂuence of current consumption preference and the social structure for the future users’
behaviors with underlying social theories. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of our proposed model on both behavior prediction tasks by performing experiments on two realworld datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of

Abstract
Researchers have long converged that the evolution of a
Social Networking Service (SNS) platform is driven by the
interplay between users’ preferences (reﬂected in user-item
consumption behavior) and the social network structure (reﬂected in user-user interaction behavior), with both kinds of
users’ behaviors change from time to time. However, traditional approaches either modeled these two kinds of behaviors in an isolated way or relied on a static assumption of a
SNS. Thus, it is still unclear how do the roles of users’ historical preferences and the dynamic social network structure
affect the evolution of SNSs. Furthermore, can jointly modeling users’ temporal behaviors in SNSs beneﬁt both behavior
prediction tasks? In this paper, we leverage the underlying social theories (i.e., social inﬂuence and the homophily effect)
to investigate the interplay and evolution of SNSs. We propose a probabilistic approach to fuse these social theories for
jointly modeling users’ temporal behaviors in SNSs. Thus our
proposed model has both the explanatory ability and predictive power. Experimental results on two real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model.

1

Introduction

Online SNSs, such as Facebook, Twitter, and location-based
social networks, facilitate the building of social relations
among people who share similar interests. Thus, people can
stay connected with others and be informed of new consumption preferences of social friends.
Generally, a SNS platform is built upon two kinds of
users’ behaviors: consuming items (reﬂected in user-item interaction such as rating, buying and check-in) and building
social links (reﬂected in user-user interaction such as the
directed trust and the undirected friendship). One step further, discovering users’ consumption preferences and suggesting new links are two core behavior prediction tasks for
these systems: Collaborative Filtering (CF), which discovers the like-minded users with similar consumption history,
forms the basis of user preference discovery (Adomavicius
and Tuzhilin 2005; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009); Node
Proximity (NP) based models, which exploit the topological structure of social networks, play a central role in the
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author.

279

