Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Monte Carlo Tree Search for Multi-Robot Task Allocation
Bilal Kartal, Ernesto Nunes, Julio Godoy, and Maria Gini
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota
(bilal,enunes,godoy,gini)@cs.umn.edu

evaluate our approach using the Solomon data set (Solomon
1987) for the vehicle routing problem with time-windows.

Abstract
Multi-robot teams are useful in a variety of task allocation
domains such as warehouse automation and surveillance.
Robots in such domains perform tasks at given locations and
speciﬁc times, and are allocated tasks to optimize given team
objectives. We propose an efﬁcient, satisﬁcing and centralized Monte Carlo Tree Search based algorithm exploiting
branch and bound paradigm to solve the multi-robot task allocation problem with spatial, temporal and other side constraints. Unlike previous heuristics proposed for this problem,
our approach offers theoretical guarantees and ﬁnds optimal
solutions for some non-trivial data sets.

Problem Formulation

Let n and m denote the number of robots and tasks, respectively. We model each task with a x-y location, a capacity
cost, a service time duration and a time-window determining when the task can be performed. Assume that there is a
depot where robots are initially located, and to which they
must return after completing their tasks. We use a graph representation, G = (V, E), where V consists of the tasks and
depot locations, and E includes all feasible edges obtained
from pairwise vertices in V . Edge eba ∈ E iff task b can be
completed after task a without violating the time-window
constraints.
|π |
Let πi = {ri , t1i }, {ri , t2i }, ...., {ri , tz i } denote the individual task allocation policy of robot i where tji corresponds
to the j-th allocated task in its policy and tz corresponds to
the depot. Let π̂ = {π1 ∪ π2 ∪ .... ∪ πn } denote the global
task allocation policy for the entire set of robots where each
task can be allocated to a single robot. Let D(π̂) represent
the total distance traveled by the robots while following the
policy π̂. A complete policy is one where all tasks are allocated, i.e., |π̂| = m + n, while in an incomplete policy some
tasks remain unallocated, i.e., |π̂| < m + n. Our objective is
to ﬁnd a complete policy π̂ such that D(π̂) is minimized.

Introduction
Deploying robot teams to perform surveillance and delivery
tasks requires that robots are allocated tasks with temporal
constraints. We study the multi-robot task allocation problem with time-window constraints (henceforth TW-MRTA)
in centralized settings. While centralized methods are regarded as less robust than distributed ones, they appear to be
a natural choice in environments where robots work in tight
spaces, communication is unconstrained, and high quality
solutions and performance guarantees are important.
Many decentralized methods have been proposed for TWMRTA (Koenig, Keskinocak, and Tovey 2010; Godoy and
Gini 2012; Nunes and Gini 2015). However, these methods lack theoretical guarantees. In this work, we propose
a novel centralized approach that offers high quality solutions; it also ﬁnds optimal allocations for many non-trivial
data sets with in less time than existing optimal methods.
Our approach uses Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), an
anytime sampling based technique employing Upper Conﬁdence Bounds (UCB) (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002) to balance exploration vs. exploitation. MCTS with
UCB is proven to converge to an optimal solution for ﬁnite horizon problems. MCTS has been shown to perform
well for problems with high branching factor such as multiagent story generation (Kartal, Koenig, and Guy 2014) and
multi-robot patrolling (Kartal et al. 2015). We improve upon
MCTS by pruning nodes in a branch and bound fashion, and
propose an evaluation function that balances between minimizing distance and maximizing task completion rate. We

Application of MCTS
Our adaptation of MCTS to TW-MRTA guarantees the utilization of all robots. At each level of the tree, a single robot
(which did not return to the depot yet) is assigned one of the
remaining tasks or returns to the depot. We employ robots
one by one from the active ﬂeet at each tree level. During the
search, UCB is used to choose which task to allocate. Each
parent node p chooses its child c with the largest U CB(c)
value according to Eq. 1. Here, w(.) denotes the average
evaluation score obtained by Eq. 2, π̂c is the parent’s policy so far updated to include child node c, pv is visit count
of parent node p, and cv is visit count of child node c.

2 ln pv
(1)
U CB(c) = w(π̂c ) +
cv
We apply branch and bound based on the best solution
with m = m to prune nodes. We keep the best found solu-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4222

