Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Morphological Segmentation
with Window LSTM Neural Networks
Linlin Wang and Zhu Cao and Yu Xia and Gerard de Melo
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{ll-wang13, cao-z13, xiay12}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gdm@demelo.org

supervised approaches have tended to rely on extensive feature engineering.
In recent years, several studies have pointed out the merits of being able to learn linguistic structure “from scratch”
(Collobert et al. 2011), i.e., from raw input features, such as
the raw input characters in our case, forgoing any additional
feature engineering.
In this paper, we embrace this trend and attempt to achieve
this goal by drawing on neural networks equipped with Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) cells (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). LSTM networks have recently enjoyed great
success in sequence learning tasks, including state-of-the-art
results on highly non-trivial tasks such as machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014).
Still, regular LSTM networks do not necessarily give
satisfactory results on morphological segmentation. Most
such networks operate in a forward-directional manner, receiving inputs one-by-one and later predicting outputs. In
our paper, we propose three window-based LSTM neural network architectures, simple Window LSTMs, MultiWindow LSTMs, and Bidirectional Multi-Window LSTMs.
All of these rely on a window-based approach that facilitates predictions based on both past and future inputs, i.e.,
left and right neighbors. This enables the network to better
learn the input sequence structure and predict morphological
boundaries. While reasonably straightforward, this approach
proves fairly powerful.
In the simple Window LSTM model, we use LSTMs to
capture a range of input character sequences. Then, in the
Multi-Window LSTM model, an entire word is processed
jointly, with the number of LSTM applications varying in
accordance with the number of labels in the input word. Finally, we introduce Bidirectional Multi-Window LSTMs to
capture more informative features. When looking at input
character windows and label sequences, this bidirectional
model accomplishes this by making both a forward and a
backward pass for a given word.
The main contributions in this work are as follows:
1. Instead of relying heavily on linguistic knowledge as
in previous work using CRFs, our models automatically
learn the structure of input sequences and predict morphological boundaries for raw words.
2. We present several new LSTM architectures with a window design that captures necessary letter context for mor-

Abstract
Morphological segmentation, which aims to break words into
meaning-bearing morphemes, is an important task in natural language processing. Most previous work relies heavily
on linguistic preprocessing. In this paper, we instead propose
novel neural network architectures that learn the structure of
input sequences directly from raw input words and are subsequently able to predict morphological boundaries. Our architectures rely on Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) units to
accomplish this, but exploit windows of characters to capture
more contextual information. Experiments on multiple languages conﬁrm the effectiveness of our models on this task.

1

Introduction

Morphological segmentation is an important sub-task in
many natural language processing (NLP) applications, aiming to break words into meaning-bearing sub-word units
called morphemes (Creutz et al. 2007). Numerous methods
in NLP, information retrieval, and text mining make use of
word-level information. However, since the number of word
forms in a language is often inﬁnite, morphological preprocessing may be vital for such methods to generalize to new
forms. Morphological segmentation may allow us to break
them down into more familiar units that have been observed
before in the data. For instance, in the English language, we
may want to segment forms such as subreddits, clickbait,
and nanodiamonds. While some of these may be found in
external resources (de Melo 2014), others may be fairly rare.
In languages with complex morphology, we moreover may
ﬁnd thousands of different forms of the same word, causing
severe sparsity challenges in models that rely on token identities. Accurate morphological segmentation not only allows
us to relate new forms to previously known word forms but
also greatly decreases data sparsity.
Most previous work in this area, however, relies heavily on linguistic knowledge to make morphological predictions, and accurate segmentation is particularly challenging
especially for languages with complex morphology that are
under-resourced, such as Arabic and Hebrew. Thus, unsupervised approaches often deliver unsatisfactory results due
to a lack of linguistic guidance, while supervised and semic 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2842

