Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Diversiﬁed Dynamical Gaussian Process
Latent Variable Model for Video Repair
Hao Xiong, Tongliang Liu and Dacheng Tao
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems,
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney
hao.xiong@student.uts.edu.au, tliang.liu@gmail.com, dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

like object contours, they tend to ﬁll in the holes by synthesizing neighboring texture without considering temporal
information from other video frames. Since neighboring information is limited, these methods are likely to repair the
video in the wrong context. Other methods (Wexler, Shechtman, and Irani 2004) have been proposed to ﬁll in missing
holes by sampling and synthesizing a number of patches
from neighboring frames. However, this is still not always
reliable, since the video sequences are likely to be dynamic
or complex. In such circumstances, a scene presents in one
frame may disappear in other frames and, sometimes, the
patches for synthesis are too small to satisfy larger holes.
Furthermore, the aforementioned approaches are highly dependent on texture synthesis techniques, which can create
saw-shaped artifacts at the boundaries of the original region
and the recovered part in a single frame.
Recently, Damianou et al. (Damianou, Titsias, and
Lawrence 2014) developed a dynamical Gaussian process
latent variable model (DGPLVM) to smoothly repair video
without saw-shaped artifacts in the presence of missing pixels. To achieve this, a Gaussian process (GP) prior based on
auxiliary inducing points was introduced so that the variational Bayes approach was tractable. The latent variables
were then variationally integrated out and a closed-form
lower bound on a marginal likelihood function computed.
The original purpose of inducing points in (Csato 2002;
Csato and Opper 2002; Seeger, Williams, and Lawrence
2003; Snelson and Ghahramani 2006; Candela and Rasmussen 2005; Titsias 2009) was to speed up computation by
regarding it as a smaller set representing the entire observed
frames. In this approach, the inducing point was also critical
to obtaining a closed-form lower bound of the deﬁned log
likelihood function to render the model robust to overﬁtting.
However, it transpires that (Damianou, Titsias, and
Lawrence 2014) tends to generate relatively similar inducing
points that can introduce ghost effects in recovered frames.
This is because the inducing points trained in DGPLVM
have a tendency to focus on frequent shots or those with
salient features within the scenes. We propose D2 GPLVM
to address this problem, in which a diversity encouraging
prior is applied to the inducing points so that they are more
diverse and capture more distinct scenes from the observed
complete frames. Since inducing points are pivotal to predicting missing pixels, more resistant inducing points en-

Abstract
Videos can be conserved on different media. However,
storing on media such as ﬁlms and hard disks can suffer
from unexpected data loss, for instance from physical
damage. Repair of missing or damaged pixels is essential for video maintenance and preservation. Most methods seek to ﬁll in missing holes by synthesizing similar
textures from local or global frames. However, this can
introduce incorrect contexts, especially when the missing hole or number of damaged frames is large. Furthermore, simple texture synthesis can introduce artifacts in
undamaged and recovered areas. To address aforementioned problems, we propose the diversiﬁed dynamical Gaussian process latent variable model (D2 GPLVM)
for considering the variety in existing videos and thus
introducing a diversity encouraging prior to inducing
points. The aim is to ensure that the trained inducing
points, which are a smaller set of all observed undamaged frames, are more diverse and resistant for contextaware and artifacts-free based video repair. The deﬁned
objective function in our proposed model is initially not
analytically tractable and must be solved by variational
inference. Finally, experimental testing illustrates the
robustness and effectiveness of our method for damaged
video repair.

Introduction
Videos, from black and white ﬁlms to modern blockbusters,
are an indispensible part of contemporary life. The celluloid or hard disks used to store videos inevitably suffer from
natural deterioration or, sometimes, deliberate damage. Such
damage normally appears as scattered missing blobs or large
holes in video frames, which has an adverse impact on the
appreciation and research value of the videos. It is, therefore,
useful to recover damaged parts of videos. However, this is
not trivial, especially when the missing areas are large.
One major difﬁculty in video repair lies in the uncertainty
and variety of video scenes and the fact that objects are often
highly dynamic in the video sequence. A naive approach to
video repair is to regard the damaged frame as a single image and then applying image inpainting, such as in (Criminisi, Perez, and Toyama 2004), to recover the missing part.
Although such inpainting techniques retain linear structures
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3641

