Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Agenda Separability in Judgment Aggregation
Jérôme Lang and Marija Slavkovik and Srdjan Vesic
LAMSADE, CNRS University of Paris-Dauphine, France, lang@lamsade.dauphine.fr
University of Bergen, Norway, marija.slavkovik@uib.no
CRIL, CNRS – Univ. Artois, France, vesic@cril.fr

tion problem has to be identiﬁed with respect to the desirable
properties that the aggregation process should satisfy.
One of the better studied properties for operators in judgment aggregation is the independence property, which essentially dictates that the collective judgment on any one issue
in the agenda should not depend on the individual judgments
given on any of the other issues in the same agenda. Independence is a desirable property because, among other reasons,
it is a necessary condition for strategyproofness (Dietrich
and List 2007c), and it leads to rules that are both conceptually simple and easy to compute. However, independence is
too strong; in particular, together with mild additional conditions, it implies dictatorship (Dietrich and List 2007a).
We propose a natural weakening of independence, named
agenda separability. A judgment aggregation rule satisﬁes
it if, whenever the agenda is composed of several independent sub-agendas (with an extreme form of independence being when the sub-agendas are syntactically unrelated to each other), the resulting collective judgment
sets can be computed separately for each sub-agenda and
then put together. Resorting to syntactically independent
sub-languages is reminiscent of Parikh’s language splitting
(Parikh 1999), where decomposing a logical theory into several subtheories over disjoint sub-languages simpliﬁes many
tasks in knowledge representation, such as belief change
(Peppas, Chopra, and Foo 2004) or inconsistency handling
(Chopra and Parikh 1999).
The agenda separability property is very intuitive and motivations for it can be easily found. For instance, in computational linguistics, we may want to aggregate annotations from several agents about parts of texts (Kruger et
al. 2014); then, ﬁnding collective annotations about parts of
two unrelated texts can (and should) be performed independently. When a rule satisﬁes agenda separability, it also becomes computationally simpler when applied to decomposable agendas, because the rule can be applied independently
to every subagenda of the decomposition. Agenda separability also offers a weak form of strategyproofness: no agent is
able to inﬂuence the outcome on some issue from one subagenda of the partition by strategically reporting judgments
about another subagenda.
Of course, a weakening of independence is meaningful
only if there are rules that satisfy it. Not only we show that
this is the case, but we also show that agenda separability

Abstract
One of the better studied properties for operators in judgment
aggregation is independence, which essentially dictates that
the collective judgment on one issue should not depend on
the individual judgments given on some other issue(s) in the
same agenda. Independence, although considered a desirable
property, is too strong, because together with mild additional
conditions it implies dictatorship. We propose here a weakening of independence, named agenda separability: a judgment aggregation rule satisﬁes it if, whenever the agenda is
composed of several independent sub-agendas, the resulting
collective judgment sets can be computed separately for each
sub-agenda and then put together. We show that this property
is discriminant, in the sense that among judgment aggregation
rules so far studied in the literature, some satisfy it and some
do not. We brieﬂy discuss the implications of agenda separability on the computation of judgment aggregation rules.

1

Introduction

Judgment aggregation consists in ﬁnding collective judgments that are representative of a collection of individual
judgments on some logically interrelated issues. Judgment
aggregation problems originate in political theory and public
choice, however they also occur in various areas of artiﬁcial
intelligence, as a consequence of the increased distributivity
of computing systems and social networks, together with the
rise of artiﬁcial agency. Judgment aggregation generalises
voting and preference aggregation (Dietrich and List 2007a;
Lang and Slavkovik 2013), and has links with belief revision
(Everaere, Konieczny, and Marquis 2015; Pigozzi 2006) as
well as abstract argumentation (Caminada and Pigozzi 2011;
Awas et al. 2015; Booth 2015; Booth, Awad, and Rahwan
2014). For an overview of applications of judgment aggregation in artiﬁcial intelligence see for instance the work by
Grossi and Pigozzi (2014) or Endriss (2015).
The main focus of research in judgment aggregation is the
development and analysis of judgement aggregation operators. Numerous impossibility results – see the survey by List
and Puppe (2009) for an overview – have dashed the hope
of ﬁnding a universally applicable operator. Consequently,
the suitability of an operator for a given judgment aggregac 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1016

