Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Creating Images by Learning Image
Semantics Using Vector Space Models
Derrall Heath and Dan Ventura
Computer Science Department
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602 USA
dheath@byu.edu, ventura@cs.byu.edu
losophy of DARCI is the notion that the communication of
meaning in visual art is a necessary part of eliciting an aesthetic experience in the viewer (Csı́kzentmihályi and Robinson 1990). In this paper we present a sophisticated semantic
model that allows DARCI to internally represent the meaning of concepts and to express these concepts through images in novel ways.
It is commonly agreed that a word (or concept), at least
in part, is given meaning by how the word is used in conjunction with other words (i.e., its context) (Landauer and
Dumais 1997; Erk 2010). Vector Space Models (VSMs) are
common methods for automatically learning vector representations of word meaning from a large corpus (Turney and
Pantel 2010). These models are based on the idea that similar words will occur in similar contexts and words that are
often associated together will often co-occur close together.
These models reduce words to a vector representation that
can be compared to other word vectors.
VSMs have been successfully used on a variety of tasks
such as information retrieval (Salton 1971), multiple choice
vocabulary tests (Denhière and Lemaire 2004), multiple
choice synonym questions from the TOEFL test (Rapp
2003), multiple choice analogy questions from the SAT
test (Turney 2006), and object recognition systems (Frome
et al. 2013). Additionally, an approach called the ACI (Associative Conceptual Imagination) framework has recently
been proposed as a way to use VSMs for imaginative and
generative tasks (Heath, Dennis, and Ventura 2015).
We apply the ACI framework to DARCI by incorporating a VSM and building a visual semantic model that uses a
large neural network to learn associations between low-level
image features and adjective vectors from the VSM. This
visual semantic model allows DARCI to create images that
convey the meaning of adjectives to the viewer. It also allows
DARCI to take advantage of the semantic structure between
words and render images according to adjectives on which
it was never explicitly trained. For example, DARCI could
be trained on ‘scary’ and ‘dark’ images, but not ‘creepy’ images. DARCI could then “imagine” what a ‘creepy’ image
would look like because ‘creepy’ is similar in meaning to
‘scary’ and ‘dark’. Even higher level concepts (e.g., ‘love’,
‘freedom’) can be partially expressed through the images
DARCI renders.
Clustering techniques have been previously developed to

Abstract
When dealing with images and semantics, most computational systems attempt to automatically extract meaning from
images. Here we attempt to go the other direction and autonomously create images that communicate concepts. We
present an enhanced semantic model that is used to generate novel images that convey meaning. We employ a vector
space model and a large corpus to learn vector representations
of words and then train the semantic model to predict word
vectors that could describe a given image. Once trained, the
model autonomously guides the process of rendering images
that convey particular concepts. A signiﬁcant contribution is
that, because of the semantic associations encoded in these
word vectors, we can also render images that convey concepts
on which the model was not explicitly trained. We evaluate
the semantic model with an image clustering technique and
demonstrate that the model is successful in creating images
that communicate semantic relationships.

Introduction
When considering the relationship between images and
meaning (or semantics), most computational systems focus on extracting meaning from images. For example, image annotation (Wang 2011) and content-based image retrieval (Liu et al. 2007) are two major topics in computer
vision whose goal is to automatically understand the semantics within images. Here we focus on going the other direction, that is to generate images based on semantics.
There are few systems we know of that attempt to autonomously generate images that communicate meaning.
The WordsEye system tries to generate 3D scenes based on
written descriptions (Coyne and Sproat 2001). The Story
Picture Engine (Joshi, Wang, and Li 2006) and the Textto-Picture Synthesis System (Zhu et al. 2007) are both systems built to do automatic text illustration (i.e., to visually
tell a story or to graphically communicate the gist of text).
AARON (McCorduck 1991) and The Painting Fool (Colton
2011) are both systems designed to autonomously create visual art in ways meaningful to human viewers.
Our own system, DARCI, is designed to create novel,
artistic images that explicitly express a given concept (Norton, Heath, and Ventura 2015). Central to the design phic 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1202

