Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-16)

Creating Interactive and Visual Educational Resources for AI
Sameer Singh

Sebastian Riedel

University of Washington, Seattle WA
sameer@cs.washington.edu

University College London, London UK
s.riedel@cs.ucl.ac.uk

McIntyre and Wolff 1998; Naps and al. 2002), existing tools
for creating educational resources, unfortunately, result in a
disjoint collection of static teaching materials that the students process independent of each other. For instance, most of
the current courses consist of notes and textbooks for purely
static descriptions, presentation slides for a visual (and animated) overview, and code snippets for more interactive
exploration of the ideas. These disconnected components,
however, are not effective at communicating the ideas. It
would be much more powerful if, for example, the code for
generating ﬁgures in the textbook, or animations in the slides,
was available for the students to explore or modify. Similarly,
students would beneﬁt greatly if code snippets are provided
alongside the math and textual descriptions, in order to understand the code in context, but more importantly, enable them
to change and see the effects. Although it is not impossible
to create such resources in a format like HTML, the existing
tools are not very friendly for AI instructors; on the other
hand, individual type-speciﬁc tools (LATEX for math/text, Powerpoint for presentations, and Programming-IDEs for code)
are quite user-friendly. There’s a need for resource-creation
tools that can combine multiple media types, while retaining
the ease-of-use and portability of existing editors.
In this work, we introduce Moro, a browser-based tool for
creating visual and interactive educational materials for teaching artiﬁcial intelligence. Each Moro notebook consists of a
number of cells, each of which can be formatted text, mathematical equations, programming code (that can be modiﬁed
and executed by the student), or any embedded media (images, videos, PDFs, etc.). These notebooks can be presented
to the students either as a web-page (akin to class notes or a
textbook) or as animated slides (for in-class presentations),
both of which retain the interactivity of the cells. The Moro
editor has been created to be easy for instructors to use, including WYSIWYG previews, syntax highlighting, support
for existing formats (Markdown, LATEX, HTML), on-server
code compilation and execution (allowing creation from any
device), and broad customization and conﬁguration options.
Moro is inspired by the interactive programming notebooks popularized by IPython (Pérez and Granger 2007),
which also provide a mix of math, coding, and text, are used
for authoring textbooks (Miller et al. 2011), and have found
success in AI education (O’Hara, Blank, and Marshall 2015).
Along with supporting these features, we designed Moro

Abstract
Teaching artiﬁcial intelligence is effective if the experience is
a visual and interactive one, with educational materials that
utilize combinations of various content types such as text,
math, and code into an integrated experience. Unfortunately,
easy-to-use tools for creating such pedagogical resources are
not available to the educators, resulting in most courses being
taught using a disconnected set of static materials, which is
not only ineffective for learning AI, but further, requires repeated and redundant effort for the instructor. In this paper, we
introduce Moro, a software tool for easily creating and presenting AI-friendly teaching materials. Moro notebooks integrate
content of different types (text, math, code, images), allow realtime interactions via modiﬁable and executable code blocks,
and are viewable in browsers both as long-form pages and as
presentations. Creating notebooks is easy and intuitive; the
creation tool is also in-browser, is WYSIWYG for quick iterations of editing, and supports a variety of shortcuts and
customizations for efﬁciency. We present three deployed case
studies of Moro that widely differ from each other, demonstrating its utility in a variety of scenarios such as in-class teaching
and conference tutorials.

1

Introduction

Perhaps more than any other ﬁeld in computer science, teaching artiﬁcial intelligence beneﬁts from a visual and interactive
combination of mathematics, textual description, and programming code. From fundamental concepts such as Markov
Decision Processes to the statistical and probabilistic descriptions in machine learning, mathematical equations underly
much of AI. Similarly, programming is crucial to teach AI as
well, ranging from boiler-plate code for evaluation and data
processing, to basic search and optimization routines that underly much of artiﬁcial intelligence. It is further beneﬁcial if
the student is able to interact and visualize geometric spaces
that are discrete (combinatorial state spaces for search, for
example) and continuous surfaces (high-dimensional parameter vectors in machine learning, for example). For effective
learning of concepts in artiﬁcial intelligence, students need
access to interactive and visual learning materials that combine math, code, and text.
Even though the utility of visual and interactive resources
for computer science educations in well known (Stein 1996;
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4101

