Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Ontology Instance Linking: Towards Interlinked Knowledge Graphs
Jeff Heﬂin

Dezhao Song

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Lehigh University
19 Memorial Drive West
Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Research and Development
Thomson Reuters
610 Opperman Drive
Eagan, MN 55123, USA

facts. Various efforts are also being investigated for building and improving a multilingual DBpedia. Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), similar to DBpedia but with a much larger
amount of 1.7 billion facts, covers entities of various types,
ranging from entertainment, sports to arts, musics, books
and to medicine and biology.
Linked Data (Bizer, Heath, and Berners-Lee 2009) is
a term used to describe best practices for publishing and
connecting data using RDF and Uniform Resource Identiﬁers (URIs). There are currently about 1,000 datasets in the
Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud, amounting to 74 billion
triples and 250 million links across different datasets6 . These
data are often independently generated and distributedly
stored in many locations, and are also heterogeneous and
covering diverse domains, including People, Geographic,
Publications, Media, Social Web, etc.
Although the amount of Semantic Web data is rapidly
growing in many different domains, one observation is that
each real-world entity (e.g., people, organizations, songs,
books, etc.) in the Semantic Web may be described and published by many data publishers with syntactically distinct
identiﬁers. For example, CiteSeer and DBLP assign different identiﬁers to Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World
Wide Web, and describe him in distinct ways with complementary information. Importantly, such identiﬁers from different data sources are often not linked to each other and
thus prevent end users from easily obtaining relatively comprehensive information for the entities.
In order to help users to better utilize and consume Semantic Web data, in recent years, there has been a great
amount of research efforts in trying to interlink ontology instances from different datasets, i.e., generating equivalence
linkages between ontology instances. In the Semantic Web,
the owl:sameAs predicate is used to connect equivalent ontology instances. Such owl:sameAs links help to build an
interlinked Semantic Web and enable users to more easily
obtain relatively comprehensive descriptions of the entities.
This interlinking problem has been studied by Natural Language Processing researchers as the Entity Coreference or Entity Resolution problems (Bagga and Baldwin
1998), and by Database researchers as the Deduplication
or Record Linkage problems (Elmagarmid, Ipeirotis, and

Abstract
Due to the decentralized nature of the Semantic Web, the
same real-world entity may be described in various data
sources with different ontologies and assigned syntactically
distinct identiﬁers. In order to facilitate data utilization and
consumption in the Semantic Web, without compromising the
freedom of people to publish their data, one critical problem
is to appropriately interlink such heterogeneous data. This interlinking process is sometimes referred to as Entity Coreference, i.e., ﬁnding which identiﬁers refer to the same realworld entity. In this paper, we ﬁrst summarize state-of-theart algorithms in detecting such coreference relationships between ontology instances. We then discuss various techniques
in scaling entity coreference to large-scale datasets. Finally,
we present well-adopted evaluation datasets and metrics, and
compare the performance of the state-of-the-art algorithms on
such datasets.

Introduction
Recently, more and more data is being published in Semantic Web formats (e.g., the Resource Description Framework
(RDF)1 and the Web Ontology Language (OWL)2 ) by both
academic researchers and industrial organizations. The New
York Times (NYT) has published data in Semantic Web format, currently consisting of 5,000 people, 1,500 organizations and 2,000 locations3 . The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) has also published their data in RDF, covering
a much more diverse collection of entities4 , e.g., persons,
places, events, etc. Thomson Reuters, an intelligent information and news provider, also provides free access to an
RDF version of its data5 (3.5 million companies, 1.2 million
equity quotes, and so on).
Using natural language processing and information extraction techniques, academics have also created DBpedia
(Lehmann et al. 2015), an RDFized Wikipedia, that describes about 3.7 million entities with a total of 400 million
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-primer
2
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/
3
http://data.nytimes.com/
4
http://www.bbc.co.uk/things/
5
https://permid.org/

6

4163

http://stats.lod2.eu

