Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Ask, and Shall You Receive?
Understanding Desire Fulﬁllment in Natural Language Text
Snigdha Chaturvedi1 , Dan Goldwasser2 , Hal Daumé III1
1

University of Maryland, College Park 2 Purdue University
snigdhac@cs.umd.edu, goldan55@gmail.com, hal@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
The ability to comprehend wishes or desires and their fulﬁllment is important to Natural Language Understanding. This
paper introduces the task of identifying if a desire expressed
by a subject in a given short piece of text was fulﬁlled. We
propose various unstructured and structured models that capture fulﬁllment cues such as the subject’s emotional state and
actions. Our experiments with two different datasets demonstrate the importance of understanding the narrative and discourse structure to address this task.

1

Figure 1: Example of a Desire Expression (d), Evidence
fragments (e1. . .e5) and a binary Desire Fulﬁllment Status
(f). The Desire-subject and Desire-verb are marked in blue
and bold fonts respectively in the Desire-expression.

Introduction

Understanding expressions of desire is a fundamental aspect
of understanding intentional human-behavior. The strong
connection between desires and the ability to plan and execute appropriate actions was studied extensively in contexts
of rational agent behavior (Georgeff et al. 1999), and modeling human dialog interactions (Grosz and Sidner 1986).
In this paper we recognize the signiﬁcant role that expressions of desire play in natural language understanding. Such expressions can be used to provide rationale for
character behaviors when analyzing narrative text (Goyal,
Riloff, and Daumé III 2010; Elson 2012a), extract information about human wishes (Goldberg et al. 2009), explain
positive and negative sentiment in reviews, and support automatic curation of community forums by identifying unresolved issues raised by users.
We follow the intuition that at the heart of the applications mentioned above is the ability to recognize whether
the expressed desire was fulﬁlled or not, and suggest a novel
reading comprehension task: Given text, denoted as Desireexpression (e.g., “Before Lenin died, he said he wished to be
buried beside his mother.”) containing a desire (“be buried
beside his mother”) by the Desire-subject (“he”), and the
subsequent text (denoted Evidence fragments or simply Evidences) appearing after the Desire-expression in the paragraph, we predict if the Desire-subject was successful in fulﬁlling their desire. Fig. 1 illustrates our setting.
Unlike most NLP tasks such as text categorization or
sentiment classiﬁcation which rely on lexical information,

understanding desire fulﬁllment requires complex inferences connecting expression of desire, actions affecting the
Desire-subject, and the extent to which these actions contribute to fulﬁlling the subject’s goals. For example, in
Fig. 1 the action of ‘preserving’ Lenin’s body led to nonfulﬁllment of his desire.
We address these complexities by representing the narrative ﬂow of Evidences, and assessing if the events (and
emotional states) mentioned in this ﬂow contribute to (or
provide indication of) fulﬁlling the desire expressed in the
preceding Desire-expression. Following previous work on
narrative representation, we track the events and states associated with the narrative’s central character(s): the Desiresubject (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008; Chaturvedi et al.
2015; Srivastava, Chaturvedi, and Mitchell 2016).
While this representation captures important properties
required by the desire-fulﬁllment prediction task, such as the
actions taken by the Desire-subject, it does not provide us
with an indication about the outcome of these actions. Recent attempts to support supervised learning of such detailed
narrative structures by annotating data (Elson 2012b), result
in highly complex structures even for restricted domains. Instead we model this information by associating a state, indicating if the outcome of an action (or the mention of an
emotional state) provides evidence for making progress towards achieving the desired goal. We model the transitions
between states as a latent sequence model, and use it to pre-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2697

