Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Simultaneous Feature and Sample
Reduction for Image-Set Classiﬁcation
Man Zhang, Ran He*, Dong Cao, Zhenan Sun, Tieniu Tan
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
{zhangman, rhe, dong.cao, znsun, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
et al. 2014)(Zhang, He, and Davis 2014), sparse representation (Ortiz, Wright, and Shah 2013), Grassmann Manifold (Harandi et al. 2010)(Huang et al. 2015b), Riemannian
manifold (Wang et al. 2015)(Huang et al. 2015a). Recently,
(Hayat, Bennamoun, and An 2015) proposed a deep learning based representation model whose parameters are initialized via Gaussian Restricted Boltzmann Machines. In addition, nearest points (Hu, Mian, and Owens 2012)(Yang et al.
2013) were introduced to calculate the between-set distance.
The existing image-set classiﬁcation methods often perform classiﬁcation tasks based on hundreds of ﬂoating point
features, and store almost every sample from each image
set. When image-set classiﬁcation is applied to surveillance
videos or camera networks, dense features and large-scale
registered samples result in tremendously large time and
space complexity because there can be (many) thousands
of image samples in a video clip. Dense features and largescale samples have become a computational bottleneck of
real-life applications, resulting in two open issues. The ﬁrst
issue is to learn compact binary codes to represent an image
set. The second one is to reduce the number of large-scale
and similar samples in an image set.
To address the two issues simultaneously, we present a
novel method to jointly learn compact binary codes and reduce the number of different samples in each image set.
Firstly, we formulate the proposed method as a joint learning problem that includes two parts. The ﬁrst part seeks a
hashing function to generate binary codes that have larger
inter-class distances and smaller intra-class distances. The
second reduces redundant samples with discrete constraints
in a low-rank way; similar samples from the same image set
are forced to have the same binary codes. Secondly, we relax the proposed discrete objective function to a series of
sub-problems to admit an analytical solution. Then we can
obtain a high-quality discrete solution with a very low computational cost. A kernel method based on anchor points is
further used to handle complex and nonlinear variations of
images, which allows implicit and nonlinear feature mappings. Finally, given a hashing function and a new image set
(not in the training set), we formulate the binarization of an
image set as a structured learning problem with discrete constraints. Experimental results on two standard datasets and
one large-scale dataset (the number of comparisons is more
than 900 million) show that this structured formulation can

Abstract
Image-set classiﬁcation is the assignment of a label to a given
image set. In real-life scenarios such as surveillance videos,
each image set often contains much redundancy in terms of
features and samples. This paper introduces a joint learning
method for image-set classiﬁcation that simultaneously learns
compact binary codes and removes redundant samples. The
joint objective function of our model mainly includes two
parts. The ﬁrst part seeks a hashing function to generate binary codes that have larger inter-class and smaller intra-class
distances. The second one reduces redundant samples with
discrete constraints in a low-rank way. A kernel method based
on anchor points is further used to reduce sample variations.
The proposed discrete objective function is simpliﬁed to a
series of sub-problems that admit an analytical solution, resulting in a high-quality discrete solution with a low computational cost. Experiments on three commonly used image-set
datasets show that the proposed method for the tasks of face
recognition from image sets is efﬁcient and effective.

1

Introduction

Image-set classiﬁcation generally aims to recognize an object from a set of related images that form an image set
(Kim, Arandjelovic, and Cipolla 2007). It is the assignment
of a classiﬁcation label to a given image set. With the development of imaging technology, it has been widely applied
in various real-world scenarios such as recognition from
surveillance videos, camera networks and personal albums.
Compared with single image based classiﬁcation, image-set
classiﬁcation often offers more promises because it can effectively represent image appearance variations incurred by
pose, illumination, expression, and etc (Hayat, Bennamoun,
and An 2015).
In the last decade, image-set classiﬁcation has drawn signiﬁcant attention from the research community and many
methods have been developed. Most of these methods can
be categorized into two groups: ﬁnding a representation of
an image set and deﬁning a distance metric between two image sets. In these methods, an image set has been modeled
by a subspace (Kim, Arandjelovic, and Cipolla 2007)(He
et al. 2015), a combination of subspaces (Nishiyama et al.
2007), a combination of dictionaries (Chen et al. b)(Lu
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1401

