Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16)

Learning Adaptive Forecasting Models
from Irregularly Sampled Multivariate Clinical Data
Zitao Liu and Milos Hauskrecht
Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh
210 South Bouquet St.,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260 USA
• multiple variables: the real-world clinical dynamics are
multivariate and they often exhibit interactions and comovements among different time series.

Abstract
Building accurate predictive models of clinical multivariate time series is crucial for understanding of the
patient condition, the dynamics of a disease, and clinical decision making. A challenging aspect of this process is that the model should be ﬂexible and adaptive
to reﬂect well patient-speciﬁc temporal behaviors and
this also in the case when the available patient-speciﬁc
data are sparse and short span. To address this problem we propose and develop an adaptive two-stage forecasting approach for modeling multivariate, irregularly
sampled clinical time series of varying lengths. The
proposed model (1) learns the population trend from a
collection of time series for past patients; (2) captures
individual-speciﬁc short-term multivariate variability;
and (3) adapts by automatically adjusting its predictions
based on new observations. The proposed forecasting
model is evaluated on a real-world clinical time series
dataset. The results demonstrate that our approach is
superior on the prediction tasks for multivariate, irregularly sampled clinical time series, and it outperforms
both the population based and patient-speciﬁc time series prediction models in terms of prediction accuracy.

• irregular samples: sequential observations are collected at
different times, and the time elapsed between two consecutive observations may vary.
• length variability: the number of observations in each data
sequence is limited and the duration they span may vary a
lot from patient to patient.
The objective of this work is to study and develop models
that can be used for accurate clinical time series forecasting. More speciﬁcally we are interested in developing models and methods that can predict future values of MTS for
a patient given a history of past observations. This problem
is rather challenging for two reasons (1) the time series of
past observations made for a patient of interest may be relatively short so it may be very hard to learn a good time
series model just from one patient data; (2) the patient-topatient variability may be large so it is unclear if the population based model derived from many samples of different
patients will be sufﬁcient to support the predictions. The majority of existing approaches in the literature tackle the clinical time series forecasting problem by taking one of the two
“extreme” approaches: they either build a population based
model or a patient-speciﬁc model ignoring what is known
about the population. In this work we seek to develop a new
approach that aims to beneﬁt from the population trend extracted from past data collection and at the same time adapt
to patient-speciﬁc data, thus allowing one to make more accurate MTS predictions.
We propose and develop a new two-stage adaptive forecasting model to represent both the population and the
patient-speciﬁc multivariate interactions of clinical MTS. In
the ﬁrst stage, we learn a population model from clinical
MTS sequences from many different patients. In this paper we use and experiment with a linear dynamical system
(LDS) (Kalman 1960) whose parameters are learned with
the help of the EM algorithm. In the second stage, we ﬁrst
express the time series of past observations for a patient
in terms of residuals (or differences in between predictions
made by the population model and actually observed values), which reﬂect the patient-speciﬁc deviations from the
population model. Then we use and model these deviations

Introduction
With a wide adoption and availability of electronic health
records (EHRs), the development of models of clinical multivariate time series (MTS) and tools for their analysis is
becoming increasingly important for meaningful applications of EHRs in computer-based patient monitoring, adverse event detection, and improved patient management.
(Bellazzi et al. 2000; Clifton et al. 2013; Lasko, Denny,
and Levy 2013; Liu and Hauskrecht 2013; Liu, Wu, and
Hauskrecht 2013; Schulam, Wigley, and Saria 2015; Ghassemi et al. 2015; Durichen et al. 2015).
In general, a number of models representing various time
series data and their behaviors exist (Hamilton 1994). However, modeling of clinical time series data still presents numerous challenges that come from special characteristics
of clinical data (Liu and Hauskrecht 2015). Brieﬂy, clinical
time series are distinguished from other time series data due
to the following characteristics:
c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1273

