Learning from Biased Data: A Semi-Parametric Approach

Patrice Bertail * 1 Stephan Clémençon * 2 Yannick Guyonvarch * 2 Nathan Noiry * 2

Abstract
We consider risk minimization problems where
the (source) distribution PS of the training observations Z1 , . . . , Zn differs from the (target) distribution PT involved in the risk that one seeks to
minimize. Under the natural assumption that PS
dominates PT , i.e. PT << PS , we develop a semiparametric framework in the situation where we
do not observe any sample from PT , but rather
have access to some auxiliary information at the
target population scale. More precisely, assuming
that the Radon-Nikodym derivative dPT /dPS (z)
belongs to a parametric class {g(z, α), α ∈ A}
and that some (generalized) moments of PT are
available to the learner, we propose a two-step
learning procedure to perform the risk minimization task. We first select α̂ so as to match the moment constraints as closely as possible and then
reweight each (biased) training observation Zi by
g(Zi , α̂) in the final Empirical Risk Minimization
√
(ERM) algorithm. We establish a OP (1/ n) generalization bound proving that, remarkably, the
solution to the weighted ERM problem thus constructed achieves a learning rate of the same order
as that attained in absence of any sampling bias.
Beyond these theoretical guarantees, numerical
results providing strong empirical evidence of the
relevance of the approach promoted in this article
are displayed.

1. Introduction
In the classic formulation of predictive learning problems,
the goal is to find θ in a parameter space Θ with minimum
risk RP (θ) = EP [`(Z, θ)]. Here Z is a random variable, taking its values in some measurable space Z, with unknown
*
Equal contribution 1 Université Paris-Nanterre, France
Télécom Paris, France.
Correspondence to:
Patrice
Bertail <patrice.bertail@parisnanterre.fr>, Stephan Clémençon
<stephan.clemenconp@telecom-paris.fr>, Yannick Guyonvarch <yannick.guyonvarch@telecom-paris.fr>, Nathan Noiry
<nathan.noiry@telecom-paris.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

distribution P and ` : Z × Θ → R+ is a given loss function. In order to solve approximately the risk minimization
problem
inf RP (θ),
(1)
θ∈Θ

one assumes that a training dataset Dn = {Z1 , . . . , Zn }
composed of n ≥ 1 independent copies of the generic r.v.
Z is available. A natural learning procedure consists in
replacing the unknown risk by its empirical version based
on the Zi ’s and solving next
n

1X
`(Zi , θ).
inf
θ∈Θ n
i=1

(2)

The accuracy of this procedure, referred to as Empirical
Risk Minimization (ERM in abbreviated form), is usually
assessed by establishing upper confidence bounds for the
risk excess of empirical minimizers, that is the difference
between the risk of solutions θ̂n to (2) and the minimum
risk attained over the class Θ, under suitable assumptions
on the loss function ` and the parameter space Θ, see e.g.
(Devroye et al., 1996). Such results offer statistical guarantees regarding the generalization capacity of the predictive
rule encoded by the learned parameter θ̂n , when applied to a
new/test observation Ztest with distribution P.
The usual validity framework for ERM crucially relies on
the assumption that the distributions of the random variables
involved in the training and test/prediction stages are the
same. However, this assumption is now highly arguable in a
wide variety of situations. Whereas, in the recent past, data
collection was expensive and still performed by means of
carefully elaborated experimental designs through surveys
and questionnaires, practitioners have more and more often
poor control over the information acquisition process in the
Big Data era. The massive datasets captured by connected
devices (e.g. IoT sensors) or collected via the Internet may
be in significant part corrupted, or non-representative of the
target population. For instance, as recently hotly discussed
and debated (see e.g. (Wang et al., 2019)), certain facial
recognition systems may be trained on public databases, possibly very different from the statistical population to which
they will be applied when deployed. In other words, the data
available for predictive learning may frequently stem from
a source distribution PS that differs from the distribution of
interest PT , referred to as the target distribution here. One

