Solving high-dimensional parabolic PDEs using the tensor train format

Lorenz Richter * 1 2 3 Leon Sallandt * 4 Nikolas Nüsken 5

Abstract
High-dimensional partial differential equations
(PDEs) are ubiquitous in economics, science and
engineering. However, their numerical treatment
poses formidable challenges since traditional gridbased methods tend to be frustrated by the curse of
dimensionality. In this paper, we argue that tensor
trains provide an appealing approximation framework for parabolic PDEs: the combination of reformulations in terms of backward stochastic differential equations and regression-type methods
in the tensor format holds the promise of leveraging latent low-rank structures enabling both compression and efficient computation. Following this
paradigm, we develop novel iterative schemes, involving either explicit and fast or implicit and
accurate updates. We demonstrate in a number
of examples that our methods achieve a favorable
trade-off between accuracy and computational efficiency in comparison with state-of-the-art neural
network based approaches.

1. Introduction
While partial differential equations (PDEs) offer one of the
most elegant frameworks for modeling in economics, science and engineering, their practical use is often limited by
the fact that solving those equations numerically becomes
notoriously difficult in high-dimensional settings. The socalled “curse of dimensionality” refers to the phenomenon
that the computational effort scales exponentially in the dimension, rendering classical grid based methods infeasible.
In recent years there have been fruitful developments in combining Monte Carlo based algorithms with neural networks
in order to tackle high-dimensional problems in a way that
seemingly does not suffer from this curse, resting primarily
*

Equal contribution 1 Freie Universität Berlin, Germany
BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg, Germany 3 dida Datenschmiede
GmbH, Germany 4 Technische Universität Berlin, Germany 5 Universität Potsdam, Germany. Correspondence to:
Lorenz Richter <lorenz.richter@fu-berlin.de>, Leon Sallandt
<sallandt@math.tu-berlin.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

on stochastic representations of the PDEs under consideration (E et al., 2017; Raissi et al., 2019; E et al., 2019; Huré
et al., 2020; Nüsken & Richter, 2020). Many of the suggested algorithms perform remarkably well in practice and
some theoretical results proving beneficial approximation
properties of neural networks in the PDE setting are now
available (Jentzen et al., 2018). Still, a complete picture
remains elusive, and the optimization aspect in particular
continues to pose challenging and mostly open problems,
both in terms of efficient implementations and theoretical
understanding. Most importantly for practical applications,
neural network training using gradient descent type schemes
may often take a very long time to converge for complicated
PDE problems.
Instead of neural networks (NN), we propose relying on the
tensor train (TT) format (Oseledets, 2011) to approximate
the solutions of high-dimensional PDEs. As we argue in
the course of this article, the salient features of tensor trains
make them an ideal match for the stochastic methods alluded to in the previous paragraph: First, tensor trains have
been designed to tackle high-dimensional problems while
still being computationally cheap by exploiting inherent lowrank structures (Kazeev & Khoromskij, 2012; Kazeev et al.,
2016; Dolgov et al., 2012) typically encountered in physically inspired PDE models. Second, built-in orthogonality
relations allow fast and robust optimization in regression
type problems arising naturally in stochastic backward formulations of parabolic PDEs. Third, the function spaces
corresponding to tensor trains can be conveniently extended
to incorporate additional information such as initial or final
conditions imposed on the PDE to be solved. Last but not
least, tensor trains allow for extremely efficient and explicit
computation of first and higher order derivatives.
To develop TT-based solvers for parabolic PDEs, we follow (Bouchard & Touzi, 2004; Huré et al., 2020) and first
identify a backward stochastic differential equation (BSDE)
representation of the PDE, naturally giving rise to iterative
backward schemes for a numerical treatment. We suggest
two versions of our algorithm, allowing to adjust the tradeoff between accuracy and speed according to the application: The first scheme is explicit, relying on L2 projections
(Gobet et al., 2005) that can be solved efficiently using an
alternating least squares algorithm and explicit expressions
for the minimizing parameters (see Section 3.1). The second

