Explore Visual Concept Formation for Image Classification

Shengzhou Xiong 1 Yihua Tan 1 Guoyou Wang 1

Abstract
Human beings acquire the ability of image classification through visual concept learning, in which
the process of concept formation involves intertwined searches of common properties and concept descriptions. However, in most image classification algorithms using deep convolutional neural network (ConvNet), the representation space
is constructed under the premise that concept
descriptions are fixed as one-hot codes, which
limits the mining of properties and the ability
of identifying unseen samples. Inspired by this,
we propose a learning strategy of visual concept
formation (LSOVCF) based on the ConvNet, in
which the two intertwined parts of concept formation, i.e. feature extraction and concept description, are learned together. First, LSOVCF
takes sample response in the last layer of ConvNet to induct concept description being assumed
as Gaussian distribution, which is part of the training process. Second, the exploration and experience loss is designed for optimization, which
adopts experience cache pool to speed up convergence. Experiments show that LSOVCF improves
the ability of identifying unseen samples on cifar10, STL10, flower17 and ImageNet based on
several backbones, from the classic VGG to the
SOTA Ghostnet. The code is available at https:
//github.com/elvintanhust/LSOVCF.

1. Introduction
Image classification is an important task in computer vision
that aims to classify the unseen samples into the correct
categories. In the era of deep learning, the general idea to
this problem is to assign a unique code to each category, and
then learn a mapping between training samples and codes in
1
National Key Laboratory of Science & Technology on Multispectral Information Processing, School of Artificial Intelligence
and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074 , China. Correspondence to: Yihua Tan <yhtan@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

order that unseen samples also fit this mapping. But for humans, the ability of classification is gained through concept
learning, which learns the generalized concept description
from sample observations such that a given observation can
be identified as a learned concept (Seel, 2012). During concept learning, the process of concept formation involves two
intertwined searches: one for the best common properties of
instances, and the second for the best concept descriptions
based on that properties. To generalize the idea of concept formation to deep learning, the common properties are
considered as progressively abstracted deep features while
concept descriptions correspond to output response in the
last layer. These two parts should be explored together as a
whole according to human concept formation, which means
we shouldn’t optimize the feature extraction parameters by
presetting output response of training sample. However, in
literature almost all the algorithms of image classification
based on deep learning violate the principle: each training
sample is given a description code, such as one-hot code.
Inspired by this fact, we try to explore the visual concept
formation by optimizing both parts in training process of
image classification based on deep learning.
Concept learning has been an important research area in
machine learning, but rarely scholars consider both two
part of concept formation. The research goal of the most
works is to construct the representation space by finding
the best common properties of instances. For example, a
model that combines reinforcement learning and clustering
assumption is proposed to extract better deep features for
concepts separation (Shi et al., 2019). Recently, the other
research direction is to build cognitive structures of concepts
by lots of labeled samples, and then new concepts can be
obtained with few samples based on the existing cognitive
structures. The typical example of this type of research
is few-shot learning (Snell et al., 2017). In this paper, we
focus on the learning of concept description motivated by
visual concept formation, which is carried out in image
classification based on deep convolutional neural network
(ConvNet).
Existing image classification algorithms based on ConvNet
only concern about the properties of instances while the
learning of concept descriptions is ignored. Even though
many effective preprocessing methods, network architectures and loss functions have been proposed (DeVries &

