Ditto: Fair and Robust Federated Learning Through Personalization

Tian Li 1 Shengyuan Hu 1 Ahmad Beirami 2 Virginia Smith 1

Abstract
Fairness and robustness are two important concerns for federated learning systems. In this work,
we identify that robustness to data and model poisoning attacks and fairness, measured as the uniformity of performance across devices, are competing constraints in statistically heterogeneous
networks. To address these constraints, we propose employing a simple, general framework for
personalized federated learning, Ditto, that can
inherently provide fairness and robustness benefits, and develop a scalable solver for it. Theoretically, we analyze the ability of Ditto to achieve
fairness and robustness simultaneously on a class
of linear problems. Empirically, across a suite
of federated datasets, we show that Ditto not
only achieves competitive performance relative to
recent personalization methods, but also enables
more accurate, robust, and fair models relative to
state-of-the-art fair or robust baselines.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) aims to collaboratively learn from
data that has been generated by, and resides on, a number of
remote devices or servers (McMahan et al., 2017). FL stands
to produce highly accurate statistical models by aggregating
knowledge from disparate data sources. However, to deploy
FL in practice, it is necessary for the resulting systems to be
not only accurate, but to also satisfy a number of pragmatic
constraints regarding issues such as fairness, robustness, and
privacy. Simultaneously satisfying these varied constraints
can be exceptionally difficult (Kairouz et al., 2019).
We focus in this work specifically on issues of accuracy,
fairness (i.e., limiting performance disparities across the network (Mohri et al., 2019)), and robustness (against trainingtime data and model poisoning attacks). Many prior efforts
have separately considered fairness or robustness in federated learning. For instance, fairness strategies include using
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Facebook AI. Correspondence
to: Tian Li <tianli@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

minimax optimization to focus on the worst-performing devices (Mohri et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2020) or reweighting the
devices to allow for a flexible fairness/accuracy tradeoff (Li
et al., 2020e; 2021). Robust methods commonly use techniques such as gradient clipping (Sun et al., 2019) or robust
aggregation (Blanchard et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018).
While these approaches may be effective at either promoting
fairness or defending against training-time attacks in isolation, we show that the constraints of fairness and robustness
can directly compete with one another when training a single
global model, and that simultaneously optimizing for accuracy, fairness, and robustness requires careful consideration.
For example, as we empirically demonstrate (Section 4),
current fairness approaches can render FL systems highly
susceptible to training time attacks from malicious devices.
On the other hand, robust methods may filter out rare but
informative updates, causing unfairness (Wang et al., 2020).
In this work, we investigate a simple, scalable technique to
simultaneously improve accuracy, fairness, and robustness
in federated learning. While addressing the competing constraints of FL may seem like an insurmountable problem, we
identify that statistical heterogeneity (i.e., non-identically
distributed data) is a root cause for tension between these
constraints, and is key in paving a path forward. In particular, we suggest that methods for personalized FL—which
model and adapt to the heterogeneity in federated settings
by learning distinct models for each device—may provide
inherent benefits in terms of fairness and robustness.
To explore this idea, we propose Ditto, a scalable federated multi-task learning framework. Ditto can be seen as
a lightweight personalization add-on for standard global FL.
It is applicable to both convex and non-convex objectives,
and inherits similar privacy and efficiency properties as traditional FL. We evaluate Ditto on a suite of federated
benchmarks and show that, surprisingly, this simple form of
personalization can in fact deliver better accuracy, robustness, and fairness benefits than state-of-the-art, problemspecific objectives that consider these constraints separately.
We summarize our contributions below:
• We propose Ditto, a multi-task learning objective for
federated learning that provides personalization while
retaining similar efficiency and privacy benefits as traditional FL. We provide convergence guarantees for our

