Mediated Uncoupled Learning:
Learning Functions without Direct Input-output Correspondences

Ikko Yamane 1 2 Junya Honda 3 2 Florian Yger 1 2 Masashi Sugiyama 2 4

Abstract
Ordinary supervised learning is useful when we
have paired training data of input X and output Y .
However, such paired data can be difficult to collect in practice. In this paper, we consider the task
of predicting Y from X when we have no paired
data of them, but we have two separate, independent datasets of X and Y each observed with
some mediating variable U , that is, we have two
datasets SX = {(Xi , Ui )} and SY = {(Uj0 , Yj0 )}.
A naive approach is to predict U from X using
SX and then Y from U using SY , but we show
that this is not statistically consistent. Moreover,
predicting U can be more difficult than predicting
Y in practice, e.g., when U has higher dimensionality. To circumvent the difficulty, we propose a
new method that avoids predicting U but directly
learns Y = f (X) by training f (X) with SX to
predict h(U ) which is trained with SY to approximate Y . We prove statistical consistency and
error bounds of our method and experimentally
confirm its practical usefulness.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning methods have been popular as powerful
tools for many prediction tasks when we have training data
consisting of direct correspondences between the output
variable Y to be predicted and the input variable X to be
used for the prediction (Murphy, 2012; Mohri et al., 2012;
Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014).
However, in some applications, it is difficult or expensive
to collect training data consisting of (X, Y )-pairs (Chapelle
et al., 2006; Zhu, 2005; van Engelen & Hoos, 2020). For
example, consider the case where we want to learn a func1

LAMSADE, CNRS, Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL Research University, 75016 PARIS, FRANCE 2 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo,
Japan 3 Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan 4 The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Ikko Yamane
<ikko.yamane@dauphine.psl.eu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tion predicting sentiment of an image (Mittal et al., 2018).
Even if we do not have image data labeled with sentiment
information, we might be able to find separate datasets consisting of images with text captions (Xu et al., 2015) and
texts with sentiment labels (Medhat et al., 2014). Another
example is translation between minor languages. If there
are bilingual corpora in those languages, we could apply
supervised learning techniques. However, it can be hard
to obtain such training data since there may not be many
speakers bilingual in minor languages. Instead, we may
have a better chance to find separate translation corpora in
each language with a major one such as English.
In this paper, we consider the situation in which we do not
have access to direct correspondences between X and Y ,
but we only have two separate datasets of X and Y , each observed with some mediating variable U , SX = {(Xi , Ui )}
and SY = {(Uj0 , Yj0 )}, where (Xi , Ui ) and (Uj0 , Yj0 ) are independent and thus we have no paired data of X and Y .
Note that Ui and Uj0 are generally different samples. In the
example of image sentiment prediction, text captions can
be used as the mediating variable U ; SX corresponds to
image data with text captions, and SY corresponds to text
data with sentiment labels. We call this framework mediated
uncoupled learning.
A naive approach is to separately learn the function U =
g(X) using (X, U )-data and the function Y = h(U ) using
(U, Y )-data. Then, one can predict Y from X by chaining
b ) with U
b := gb(X),
the estimated functions as Yb := b
h(U
b
where h and gb are estimates of h and g, respectively. However, we show that this method is not statistically consistent
b does not carry enough informasince the point prediction U
tion for predicting Y , unless Y and U have linear relationship or U is a deterministic function of X (see the detailed
discussion in Section 3).
One can fix the inconsistency by (implicitly or explicitly) estimating the conditional probability density function (p.d.f.)
p(u | x) of U given X in place of the deterministic function
g. Then,
one can predict Y given X = x by calculatR
ing h(u)b
p(u | x)du with the estimated conditional p.d.f.
pb(u | x). However, this approach involves the task of conditional density estimation or learning generative models,
which needs delicate modeling and training (Salimans et al.,

