Efficient Generative Modelling of Protein Structure
Fragments using a Deep Markov Model

Christian B. Thygesen 1 2 Ahmad Salim Al-Sibahi 1 Christian S. Steenmanns 2 Lys S. Moreta 1
Anders B. Sørensen * 2 Thomas Hamelryck * 1 3

Abstract
Fragment libraries are often used in protein structure prediction, simulation and design as a means
to significantly reduce the vast conformational
search space. Current state-of-the-art methods
for fragment library generation do not properly
account for aleatory and epistemic uncertainty,
respectively due to the dynamic nature of proteins and experimental errors in protein structures.
Additionally, they typically rely on information
that is not generally or readily available, such as
homologous sequences, related protein structures
and other complementary information. To address
these issues, we developed BIFROST, a novel take
on the fragment library problem based on a Deep
Markov Model architecture combined with directional statistics for angular degrees of freedom,
implemented in the deep probabilistic programming language Pyro. BIFROST is a probabilistic,
generative model of the protein backbone dihedral angles conditioned solely on the amino acid
sequence. BIFROST generates fragment libraries
with a quality on par with current state-of-the-art
methods at a fraction of the run-time, while requiring considerably less information and allowing
efficient evaluation of probabilities.

a protein requires evaluating a conformational space that is
too vast for brute-force sampling to be feasible (Levinthal,
1969). Fragment libraries are used in a divide-and-conquer
approach, whereby a full length protein is divided into a
manageable sub-set of shorter stretches of amino acids for
which backbone conformations are sampled. Typically, sampling is done using a finite set of fragments derived from
experimentally determined protein structures. Fragment
libraries are used in state-of-the-art protein structure prediction frameworks such as Rosetta (Rohl et al., 2004), ITASSER (Roy et al., 2010), and AlphaFold (Senior et al.,
2019).
Generally, knowledge-based methods for protein structure prediction follow two main strategies: homology (or
template-based) modelling (Eswar et al., 2006; Šali & Blundell, 1993; Song et al., 2013) and de novo modelling (Rohl
et al., 2004). Both approaches assume that the native fold of
a protein corresponds to the minimum of a physical energy
function and make use of statistics derived from a database
of known proteins structures (Alford et al., 2017; LeaverFay et al., 2013). Whereas homology modelling relies on
the availability of similar structures to limit the search space,
knowledge-based de novo protocols require extensive sampling of the conformational space of backbone angles (figure
1).
Residue 2
R

1. Introduction
Fragment libraries (Jones & Thirup, 1986) find wide application in protein structure prediction, simulation, design and
experimental determination (Trevizani et al., 2017; Chikenji
et al., 2006; Boomsma et al., 2012). Predicting the fold of
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Evaxion Biotech,
Copenhagen, Denmark 3 Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Christian B. Thygesen <christiank.thygesen@di.ku.dk>, Thomas
Hamelryck <thamelry@bio.ku.dk>.

...

Cα

N
ψ1
ω1

φ1
N

C
φ2

C

ψ2
Cα

ω2
...

R
Residue 1

*

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Schematic of the three dihedral angles (φ, ψ, and ω) that
parameterise the protein backbone. R represents the side chain.

To overcome the shortcomings of either strategy, modelling
tools like Rosetta (Rohl et al., 2004) use a combined approach of extensive sampling and prior information. Rosetta
employs simulated annealing of backbone conformations

