Putting the “Learning” into Learning-Augmented Algorithms for Frequency
Estimation
Elbert Du 1 2 * Franklyn Wang 1 2 * Michael Mitzenmacher 2

Abstract
In learning-augmented algorithms, algorithms
are enhanced using information from a machine
learning algorithm. In turn, this suggests that
we should tailor our machine-learning approach
for the target algorithm. We here consider this
synergy in the context of the learned count-min
sketch from (Hsu et al., 2019). Learning here
is used to predict heavy hitters from a data
stream, which are counted explicitly outside the
sketch. We show that an approximately sufficient
statistic for the performance of the underlying
count-min sketch is given by the coverage of the
predictor, or the normalized L1 norm of keys
that are filtered by the predictor to be explicitly
counted. We show that machine learning models
which are trained to optimize for coverage lead
to large improvements in performance over prior
approaches according to the average absolute
frequency error. Our source code can be found at
https://github.com/franklynwang/
putting-the-learning-in-LAA.

1. Introduction
The nascent research area of algorithms with predictions,
also known as learning-augmented algorithms (see (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii, 2020) for a survey), focuses on
algorithms that can take advantage of predictions. In this
paper, we consider sketch algorithms designed to estimate
frequencies of keys in a data stream, where the predictor is a
machine-learning algorithm used to predict “heavy-hitters,”
which are the most frequent keys in the stream.
Abstractly, we view finding a learning-augmented algorithm
as an optimization problem over the predictor parameterized
*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Mathematics,
Harvard University 2 Department of Computer Science,
Harvard University.
Correspondence to:
Franklyn
Wang <franklyn wang@college.havard.edu>, Elbert Du
<edu@college.havard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

by θ and an algorithm A
max

θ∈Θ,A∈A

M(θ, A)

where M is some suitable performance metric. That is, we
seek to find the best combination of algorithm and predictor. Most work so far in learning-augmented algorithms
has focused on choosing the best parametrization of the
algorithm, taking the predictor as a given. Ideally, learningaugmented algorithms should provide feedback to designers
of predictors, by providing guidance as to what makes for
better predictions in the given context. The goal should be
to devise a method of optimizing θ for A, and not just A for
θ. To do this, we create a simple function g(θ) ≈ M(θ, A)
(which we term an approximately sufficient statistic) for a
fixed A, and directly optimize g(θ). Here, we apply this
framework to the learned frequency estimation problem of
(Hsu et al., 2019), but we believe this approach is quite
general and can be applied to many learning augmented
algorithms.
In (Hsu et al., 2019), the authors perform frequency estimation by using a sketch, which is a data structure designed
to give approximate frequency counts for keys in a data
stream with small amounts of space, using much less than
one counter per key. However, to improve traditional sketch
performance, they take keys that are predicted to be the
most frequent and give them their own counter, and then
apply a sketch to the remaining keys. Removing heavy keys
greatly improves the sketch performance and thereby overall
performance.
We show that in the case of the count-min sketch, the coverage, or the L1 norm of such screened keys, is a particularly
good predictor of its evaluation results. By using this metric,
we are able to evaluate our learned models more quickly, as
well as train against the coverage as a target to obtain better
performance. Given this, we then consider better ways of
parametrizing the sketch to maximize performance.
Summarized, our contributions are as follows:
• We formalize theoretically and show experimentally
that coverage aligns well with performance.
• We show, for suitable Zipfian distributions of keys and

