Intermediate Layer Optimization
for Inverse Problems using Deep Generative Models

Giannis Daras * 1 Joseph Dean * 1 Ajil Jalal 1 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1

Abstract
We propose Intermediate Layer Optimization
(ILO), a novel optimization algorithm for solving
inverse problems with deep generative models.
Instead of optimizing only over the initial latent
code, we progressively change the input layer obtaining successively more expressive generators.
To explore the higher dimensional spaces, our
method searches for latent codes that lie within
a small l1 ball around the manifold induced by
the previous layer. Our theoretical analysis shows
that by keeping the radius of the ball relatively
small, we can improve the established error bound
for compressed sensing with deep generative models. We empirically show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods introduced in
StyleGAN-2 and PULSE for a wide range of inverse problems including inpainting, denoising,
super-resolution and compressed sensing.

1. Introduction
We study how deep generators can be used as priors to solve
inverse problems like inpainting, super-resolution, denoising
and compressed sensing from random projections. Image
reconstruction methods can be either supervised (Pathak
et al., 2016; Richardson et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2018) or
unsupervised (Menon et al., 2020; Bora et al., 2017; Pajot
et al., 2019), see the recent survey (Ongie et al., 2020) for
a unified presentation. Such inverse problems naturally
appear in many applications including medical imaging,
single pixel reconstruction and other domains (Lustig et al.,
2007; 2008; Chen et al., 2008; Duarte et al., 2008; Qaisar
et al., 2013; Hegde et al., 2009).
We focus on unsupervised image reconstruction techniques
*
Equal contribution 1 The University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Giannis Daras <giannisdaras@utexas.edu>,
Joseph Dean <josephdean98@utexas.edu>, Ajil Jalal
<ajiljalal@utexas.edu>, Alexandros G. Dimakis <dimakis@austin.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

that rely on a pre-trained generator, building on the general
framework introduced in CSGM (Bora et al., 2017). The
central optimization problem that appears in unsupervised
image reconstruction is the inversion of a deep generative
model, i.e. finding a latent code that explains the measurements. This can be performed for different generators, e.g.
DCGAN or more recently the powerful StyleGAN-2 (Karras
et al., 2019; 2020) as shown in the excellent results obtained
by PULSE (Menon et al., 2020). Unfortunately, inverting a
generator with even 4 layers is NP-hard (Lei et al., 2019) so
approximate inversion methods are needed.
The CSGM framework (Bora et al., 2017) used gradient
descent to minimize the measurement mean squared error
(MSE) and showed good empirical performance for numerous inverse problems including inpainting and compressed
sensing with random Gaussian measurements using DCGAN. However, this does not work as well for deeper generators e.g. BigGAN as discussed in Daras et al. (2020).
PULSE (Menon et al., 2020) improved the CSGM framework focusing specifically on super-resolution, by refining the latent space optimization and using the StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2019; 2020) generator.
We propose a novel optimization method for solving general inverse problems using a technique we call Intermediate Layer Optimization (ILO). Our method adaptively
changes which layer is optimized, moving from the initial
latent code to intermediate layers closer to the pixels. By
optimizing intermediate layers we expand the range of the
generator to better satisfy the measurements. This has to be
done carefully since intermediate layers can produce nonrealistic images and therefore inversion must be regularized.
1.1. Our Contributions
1. We propose a novel optimization method for solving general inverse problems by adaptively changing
which layer variables are optimized. Our method extends
PULSE (Menon et al., 2020) beyond super-resolution, to all
inverse problems with differentiable forward operators.
2. To avoid over-expanding the range of the generator to
non-realistic images, we only search for latent codes within
a small l1 ball around the manifold induced by the previous
layer. Conceptually, our method generalizes the framework

