Accelerating Safe Reinforcement Learning
with Constraint-mismatched Baseline Policies
Tsung-Yen Yang 1 Justinian Rosca 2 Karthik Narasimhan 1 Peter J. Ramadge 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of reinforcement learning when provided with (1) a baseline control
policy and (2) a set of constraints that the learner
must satisfy. The baseline policy can arise from
demonstration data or a teacher agent and may
provide useful cues for learning, but it might
also be sub-optimal for the task at hand, and
is not guaranteed to satisfy the specified constraints, which might encode safety, fairness or
other application-specific requirements. In order
to safely learn from baseline policies, we propose
an iterative policy optimization algorithm that alternates between maximizing expected return on
the task, minimizing distance to the baseline policy, and projecting the policy onto the constraintsatisfying set. We analyze our algorithm theoretically and provide a finite-time convergence
guarantee. In our experiments on five different
control tasks, our algorithm consistently outperforms several state-of-the-art baselines, achieving 10 times fewer constraint violations and 40%
higher reward on average.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive results in several domains such as games (Mnih et al.,
2013; Silver et al., 2016) and robotic control (Levine et al.,
2016; Rajeswaran et al., 2017). However, in these complex
applications, learning policies from scratch often requires
tremendous amounts of time and computational power. To
alleviate this issue, one would like to leverage a baseline policy available from demonstrations, a teacher or a previous
task. However, the baseline policy may be sub-optimal for
the new application and may not be guaranteed to produce
actions that satisfy desired constraints on safety, fairness,
1
Princeton University 2 Siemens Corporation, Corporate Technology.
Correspondence to: Tsung-Yen Yang
<ty3@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

or other costs. For instance, when you drive an unfamiliar
vehicle, you do so cautiously to ensure safety, while adapting your driving technique to the vehicle characteristics to
improve your ‘driving reward’. In effect, you (as the agent)
gradually adapt a baseline policy (i.e., prior driving skill) to
avoid violating the constraints (e.g., safety) while improving
your driving reward (e.g., travel time, fuel efficiency).
The problem of safely learning from baseline policies is
challenging because directly leveraging the baseline policy, as in DAGGER (Ross et al., 2011) or GAIL (Ho &
Ermon, 2016), may result in policies that violate the constraints since the baseline is not guaranteed to satisfy them.
To ensure constraint satisfaction, prior work either adds a
hyper-parameter weighted copy of the imitation learning
(IL) objective (i.e., imitating the baseline policy) to the RL
objective (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2018; Hester
et al., 2018), or pre-trains a policy with the baseline policy
(e.g., use a baseline policy as an initial policy) and then
fine-tunes it through RL (Mülling et al., 2013; Chernova &
Thomaz, 2014). However, both approaches do not ensure
constraint satisfaction on every learning episode, which is
an important feature of safe RL. In addition, the policy initialized by a low entropy baseline policy may never explore.
In this work, to learn from the baseline policy while satisfying constraints, we propose an iterative algorithm that performs policy updates in three stages. The first step updates
the policy to maximize expected reward using trust region
policy optimization (e.g., TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015)).
This can, however, result in a new intermediate policy that
is too far from the baseline policy and may not satisfy the
constraints. The second step performs a projection in policy space to control the distance between the current policy
and the baseline policy. In contrast to the approach that
regularizes the standard RL objective with the distance w.r.t.
the baseline policy and makes the regularization parameter fade over time, our approach allows the learning agent
to update the distance when needed. In addition, this step
allows the agent to explore without being overly restricted
by the potentially constraint-violating baseline policy. This
also enables the baseline policy to influence the learning
even at later iterations without the computational burden of
learning a cost function for the baseline policy (Kwon et al.,
2020). The third step ensures constraint satisfaction at every

