Counterfactual Credit Assignment
in Model-Free Reinforcement Learning

Thomas Mesnard * 1 Théophane Weber * 1 Fabio Viola 1 Shantanu Thakoor 1 Alaa Saade 1
Anna Harutyunyan 1 Will Dabney 1 Tom Stepleton 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Arthur Guez 1 Éric Moulines 2
Marcus Hutter 1 Lars Buesing 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract
Credit assignment in reinforcement learning is
the problem of measuring an action’s influence on
future rewards. In particular, this requires separating skill from luck, i.e. disentangling the effect
of an action on rewards from that of external factors and subsequent actions. To achieve this, we
adapt the notion of counterfactuals from causality
theory to a model-free RL setup. The key idea
is to condition value functions on future events,
by learning to extract relevant information from
a trajectory. We formulate a family of policy gradient algorithms that use these future-conditional
value functions as baselines or critics, and show
that they are provably low variance. To avoid the
potential bias from conditioning on future information, we constrain the hindsight information
to not contain information about the agent’s actions. We demonstrate the efficacy and validity
of our algorithm on a number of illustrative and
challenging problems.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents act in their environments and learn to achieve desirable outcomes by maximizing a reward signal. A key difficulty is the problem of credit
assignment (Minsky, 1961), i.e. to understand the relation
between actions and outcomes, and to determine to what
extent an outcome was caused by external, uncontrollable
factors. In doing so we aim to disentangle the relative aspects of ‘skill’ and ‘luck’ in an agent’s performance. One
possible solution to this problem is for the agent to build a
model of the environment, and use it to obtain a more fine*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind 2 INRIA XPOP, CMAP, École
Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France. Correspondence to: Théophane
Weber <theophane@deepmind.com>, Thomas Mesnard <mesnard@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

grained understanding of the effects of an action. While this
topic has recently generated a lot of interest (Heess et al.,
2015; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hamrick, 2019; Kaiser
et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2019), it remains difficult
to model complex, partially observed environments.
In contrast, model-free reinforcement learning algorithms
such as policy gradient methods (Williams, 1992; Sutton
et al., 2000) perform simple time-based credit assignment,
where events and rewards happening after an action are
credited to that action, post hoc ergo propter hoc. While
unbiased in expectation, this coarse-grained credit assignment typically has high variance, and the agent will require
a large amount of experience to learn the correct relation
between actions and rewards. Another issue is that existing
model-free methods are not capable of counterfactual reasoning, i.e. reasoning about what would have happened had
different actions been taken with everything else remaining
the same. Given a trajectory, model-free methods can in
fact only learn about the actions that were actually taken to
produce the data, and this limits the ability of the agent to
learn efficiently.
As environments grow in complexity due to partial observability, scale, long time horizons, and increasing number of
agents, actions taken by an agent will only affect a vanishing
part of the outcome, making it increasingly difficult to learn
from classical reinforcement learning algorithms. We need
better credit assignment techniques.
In this paper, we investigate a new method of credit assignment for model-free reinforcement learning which we call
Counterfactual Credit Assignment (CCA). CCA leverages
hindsight information to implicitly perform counterfactual
evaluation–an estimate of the return for actions other than
the ones which were chosen. These counterfactual returns
can be used to form unbiased and lower variance estimates
of the policy gradient by building future-conditional baselines. Unlike classical Q functions, which also provide an
estimate of the return for all actions but do so by averaging
over all possible futures, our methods provide trajectoryspecific counterfactual estimates, i.e. an estimate of the
return for different actions, but keeping as many of the ex-

