12-lead ECG Reconstruction via Koopman Operators

Tomer Golany 1 Daniel Freedman 2 Saar Minha 3 Kira Radinsky 1

Abstract

32% of all global deaths in the world are caused
by cardiovascular diseases. Early detection, especially for patients with ischemia or cardiac arrhythmia, is crucial. To reduce the time between
symptoms onset and treatment, wearable ECG
sensors were developed to allow for the recording
of the full 12-lead ECG signal at home. However, if even a single lead is not correctly positioned on the body that lead becomes corrupted,
making automatic diagnosis on the basis of the
full signal impossible. In this work, we present
a methodology to reconstruct missing or noisy
leads using the theory of Koopman Operators.
Given a dataset consisting of full 12-lead ECGs,
we learn a dynamical system describing the evolution of the 12 individual signals together in time.
The Koopman theory indicates that there exists
a high-dimensional embedding space in which
the operator which propagates from one time instant to the next is linear. We therefore learn both
the mapping to this embedding space, as well as
the corresponding linear operator. Armed with
this representation, we are able to impute missing
leads by solving a least squares system in the embedding space, which can be achieved efficiently
due to the sparse structure of the system. We perform an empirical evaluation using 12-lead ECG
signals from thousands of patients, and show that
we are able to reconstruct the signals in such way
that enables accurate clinical diagnosis.

*
Equal contribution 1 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Google Research 3 Shamir Medical
Center, Zerifin, Israel and Sackler School of Medicine,
Tel-Aviv University, Israel.
Correspondence to: Tomer
Golany <tomer.golany@cs.technion.ac.il>, Kira Radinsky
<kirar@cs.technion.ac.il>, Daniel Freedman <danielfreedman@google.com>, Saar Minha <minha.saar@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Cardiovascular diseases are responsible for about a third
of all deaths globally (Roth et al., 2018). The electrocardiogram (ECG) is a noninvasive tool for detecting diseases
of the heart, and as such is one of the most common tests
performed by cardiologists. The short-duration standard 12lead ECG is the most commonly used ECG exam in medical
facilities (Maron et al., 2014). In this test, ten electrodes are
placed on a patient and the overall electrical potential amplitude of the heart is then measured from twelve different
angles referred to as “leads”, and is recorded over a period
of time (10 seconds in the standard 12-lead ECG exam).
This evaluation provides a full diagnosis of heart activity,
including arrhythmia, acute coronary syndrome, ventricular
dysfunction and cardiac chamber hypertrophy.
However, it is still a challenge to conveniently and robustly
track 12-lead ECG in people’s daily lives. To reduce the
time between the onset of symptoms and their treatment,
wearable ECG sensors such as (Laguna et al., 1990) been
developed to allow the recording of a 12-lead ECG at home.
Accurate ECG monitoring from those devices is of high importance. For example, Atrial Fibrillation, the most common
serious cardiac arrhythmia, affects an estimated 2.7-6.1 million people and increases a person’s risk of a life-changing
stroke, heart failure and death. It can occur without symptoms, thus its timely detection could help physicians and
their patients get an earlier confirmed diagnosis.
In order to properly rely on these sensors for clinical interpretation, each lead measurement must be well grounded.
If even a single lead is not correctly positioned on the body
that lead becomes corrupted, making diagnosis on the basis
of the full 12-lead ECG signal impossible. To overcome this
challenge, the problem of ECG reconstruction has gained
considerable attention and several solutions based on machine learning have been proposed (Scherer et al., 1989;
Nelwan, 2005; Atoui et al., 2004; Zhou et al., 2019). However, all of these methods assume a fixed set of pre-specified
leads to have clean signals. This is a challenge with wearable devices where arbitrary leads can be corrupted. In this
work, we introduce a framework which is able to reconstruct
12-lead ECG from any subset of available leads, without
training a new model for each subset.
Our framework begins by learning the dynamics of 12-lead

