Smooth p-Wasserstein Distance:
Structure, Empirical Approximation, and Statistical Applications

Sloan Nietert 1 Ziv Goldfeld 2 Kengo Kato 3

Abstract
Discrepancy measures between probability distributions, often termed statistical distances, are
ubiquitous in probability theory, statistics and machine learning. To combat the curse of dimensionality when estimating these distances from
data, recent work has proposed smoothing out local irregularities in the measured distributions via
convolution with a Gaussian kernel. Motivated by
the scalability of this framework to high dimensions, we investigate the structural and statistical
behavior of the Gaussian-smoothed p-Wasserstein
(σ)
distance Wp , for arbitrary p ≥ 1. After establishing basic metric and topological properties of
(σ)
Wp , we explore the asymptotic statistical be(σ)
havior of Wp (µ̂n , µ), where µ̂n is the empirical distribution of n independent observations
(σ)
from µ. We prove that Wp enjoys a parametric
empirical convergence rate of n−1/2 , which contrasts the n−1/d rate for unsmoothed Wp when
(σ)
d ≥ 3. Our proof relies on controlling Wp by a
(σ)
pth-order smooth Sobolev distance dp and deriv√ (σ)
ing the limit distribution of n dp (µ̂n , µ), for
all dimensions d. As applications, we provide
asymptotic guarantees for two-sample testing and
(σ)
minimum distance estimation using Wp , with
experiments for p = 2 using a maximum mean
(σ)
discrepancy formulation of d2 .

1. Introduction
The Wasserstein distance Wp is a discrepancy measure between probability distributions rooted in the theory of optimal transport (Villani, 2003; 2008). It has seen a surge of
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY 2 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Correspondence to: Sloan Nietert
<sbn45@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

applications in statistics and ML, ranging from generative
modeling (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017; Tolstikhin et al., 2018) and image recognition (Rubner et al.,
2000; Sandler & Lindenbaum, 2011; Li et al., 2013) to
domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2014; 2016) and robust
optimization (Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn, 2018; Blanchet
et al., 2018; Gao & Kleywegt, 2016). The widespread use
of this statistical distance is driven by an array of desirable
properties, including its metric structure, a convenient dual
form, and its robustness to support mismatch.
In applications, the Wasserstein distance is often estimated
from samples. However, the error of these empirical estimates suffers from an exponential dependence on dimension
that presents an obstacle to sample-efficient bounds for inference and learning. More specifically, the rate at which
Wp (µ̂n , µ) converges to 0, where µ̂n is an empirical measure based on n independent samples from µ, scales as
n−1/d under mild moment conditions, for d ≥ 3 (Dereich
et al., 2013; Boissard & Le Gouic, 2014; Fournier & Guillin,
2015; Panaretos & Zemel, 2019; Weed & Bach, 2019; Lei,
2020). This rate deteriorates poorly with dimension and
seems at odds with the scalability of empirical Wp observed
in modern machine learning practice.
1.1. Smooth Wasserstein Distances
Gaussian smoothing was recently introduced as a means to
alleviate the curse of dimensionality of empirical Wp , while
preserving the virtuous structural properties of the classic
framework (Goldfeld et al., 2020b; Goldfeld & Greenewald,
2020; Goldfeld et al., 2020a). Specifically the σ-smooth p(σ)
Wasserstein distance is Wp (µ, ν) := Wp (µ ∗ Nσ , ν ∗ Nσ ),
2
where Nσ = N (0, σ I) is the isotropic Gaussian measure
of parameter σ. Goldfeld & Greenewald (2020) showed that
(σ)
W1 inherits the metric and topological
structure of W1
√
and approximates it within an O(σ d) gap. At the same
(σ)
time, empirical convergence rates for Wp are much faster.
 (σ)

As shown in (Goldfeld et al., 2020b), E W1 (µ̂n , µ) =
O(n−1/2 ) when µ is sub-Gaussian in any dimension, i.e., it
exhibits a parametric convergence rate. This fast rate was
(σ)
also established for W2 but only when the sub-Gaussian
constant is smaller than σ/2. These results significantly

