Of Moments and Matching:
A Game-Theoretic Framework for Closing the Imitation Gap

Gokul Swamy 1 Sanjiban Choudhury 2 J. Andrew Bagnell 1 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 3

Abstract
We provide a unifying view of a large family of
previous imitation learning algorithms through
the lens of moment matching. At its core, our classification scheme is based on whether the learner
attempts to match (1) reward or (2) action-value
moments of the expert’s behavior, with each option leading to differing algorithmic approaches.
By considering adversarially chosen divergences
between learner and expert behavior, we are able
to derive bounds on policy performance that apply
for all algorithms in each of these classes, the first
to our knowledge. We also introduce the notion of
moment recoverability, implicit in many previous
analyses of imitation learning, which allows us to
cleanly delineate how well each algorithmic family is able to mitigate compounding errors. We
derive three novel algorithm templates (AdVIL,
AdRIL, and DAeQuIL) with strong guarantees,
simple implementation, and competitive empirical performance.

1. Introduction
When formulated as a statistical learning problem, imitation
learning is fundamentally concerned with finding policies
that minimize some notion of divergence between learner
behavior and that of an expert demonstrator. Existing work
has explored various types of divergences including KL
(Pomerleau 1989, Bojarski et al. 2016), Jensen-Shannon
(Rhinehart et al. 2018), Reverse KL (Kostrikov et al. 2019),
f (Ke et al. 2019), and Wasserstein (Dadashi et al. 2020).
At heart, though, we care about the performance of the
learned policy under an objective function that is not known
to the learner. As argued by (Abbeel and Ng 2004) and
(Ziebart et al. 2008), this goal is most cleanly formulated as
1

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Aurora Innovation 3 Institute for Software Research, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Gokul Swamy <gswamy@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

( )

E

f

( )

(a)

( )

E

f

( )

(b)

( )

E

f

( )

(c)

Figure 1. We consider three classes of imitation learning algorithms. (a) On-policy reward moment-matching algorithms require access to the environment to generate learner trajectories. (b)
Off-policy Q-value moment-matching algorithms run completely
offline but can produce policies with quadratically compounding
errors. (c) On-policy Q-value moment-matching algorithms require access to the environment and a queryable expert but can
produce strong policies in recoverable MDPs.

a problem of moment matching, or, equivalently, optimizing
Integral Probability Metrics (Sun et al. 2019) (IPMs). This
is because a learner that in expectation matches the expert
on all the basis functions of a class that includes the expert’s objective function, or matches moments, must achieve
the same performance and will thus be indistinguishable in
terms of quality. Additionally, in sharp contrast to recently
proposed approaches (Ke et al. 2019, Kostrikov et al. 2019,
Jarrett et al. 2020, Rhinehart et al. 2018), moments, due to
their simple forms as expectations of basis functions, can
be effectively estimated via demonstrator samples and the
uncertainty in these estimates can often be quantified to regularize the matching objective (Dudik et al. 2004). In short:
these moment matching procedures are simple, effective,
and provide the strongest policy performance guarantees we
are aware of for imitation learning.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, there are three classes of moments
a learner can focus on matching: (a) on-policy reward moments, (b) off-policy Q-value moments, and (c) on-policy
Q-value moments, each of which have different requirements on the environment and on the expert. We abbreviate
them as reward, off-Q, and on-Q moments, respectively.

