Fairness of Exposure in Stochastic Bandits

Lequn Wang 1 Yiwei Bai 1 Wen Sun 1 Thorsten Joachims 1

Abstract
Contextual bandit algorithms have become widely
used for recommendation in online systems (e.g.
marketplaces, music streaming, news), where they
now wield substantial influence on which items
get exposed to the users. This raises questions of
fairness to the items — and to the sellers, artists,
and writers that benefit from this exposure. We argue that the conventional bandit formulation can
lead to an undesirable and unfair winner-takes-all
allocation of exposure. To remedy this problem,
we propose a new bandit objective that guarantees merit-based fairness of exposure to the items
while optimizing utility to the users. We formulate fairness regret and reward regret in this setting, and present algorithms for both stochastic
multi-armed bandits and stochastic linear bandits.
We prove that the algorithms achieve sub-linear
fairness regret and reward regret. Beyond the
theoretical analysis, we also provide empirical
evidence that these algorithms can fairly allocate
exposure to different arms effectively.

1. Introduction
Bandit algorithms (Thompson, 1933; Robbins, 1952;
Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012; Slivkins, 2019; Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020) provide an attractive model of learning for
online platforms, and they are now widely used to optimize
retail, media streaming, and news-feed. Each round of bandit learning corresponds to an interaction with a user, where
the algorithm selects an arm (e.g. product, song, article),
observes the user’s response (e.g. purchase, stream, read),
and then updates its policy. Over time, the bandit algorithm
thus learns to maximize the user responses, which are often
well aligned with the objective of the online platform (e.g.
profit maximization, engagement maximization).
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Lequn Wang
<lw633@cornell.edu>, Wen Sun <ws455@cornell.edu>,
Thorsten Joachims <tj@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While maximizing user responses may arguably be in the
interest of the platform and its users at least in the short term,
there is now a growing understanding that it can also be
problematic in multiple respects. In this paper, we focus on
the fact that this objective ignores the interests of the items
(i.e. arms), which also derive utility from the interactions.
In particular, sellers, artists and writers have a strong interest
in the exposure their items receive, as it affects their chance
to get purchased, streamed or read. It is well understood that
algorithms that maximize user responses can be unfair in
how they allocate exposure to the items (Singh & Joachims,
2018). For example, two items with very similar merit
(e.g. click-through rate) may receive substantially different
amounts of exposure — which is not only objectionable in
itself, but can also degrade the long-term objectives of the
platform (e.g. seller retention (Mehrotra et al., 2018), antidiscrimination (Noble, 2018), anti-polarization (Epstein &
Robertson, 2015)).
To illustrate the problem, consider a conventional (nonpersonalized) stochastic multi-armed bandit algorithm that
is used to promote new music albums on the front-page of
a website. The bandit algorithm will quickly learn which
album draws the largest click-through rate and keep displaying this album, even if other albums are almost equally good.
This promotes a winner-takes-all dynamic that creates superstars (Mehrotra et al., 2018), and may drive many deserving
artists out of business. Analogously, a (personalized) contextual bandit for news-feed recommendation can polarize a
user by quickly learning which type of articles the user is
most likely to read, and then exclusively recommend such
articles instead of a portfolio that is more reflective of the
user’s true interest distribution.
To overcome these problems of the conventional bandit objective, we propose a new formulation of the bandit problem
that implements the principle of Merit-based Fairness of
Exposure (Singh & Joachims, 2018; Biega et al., 2018). For
brevity, we call this the FairX bandit problem. It incorporates the additional fairness requirement that each item/arm
receives a share of exposure that is proportional to its merit.
We define the merit of an arm as an increasing function of its
mean reward, and the exposure as the probability of being
selected by the bandit policy at each round. Based on these
quantities, we then formulate the reward regret and the fairness regret so that minimizing these two regrets corresponds

