A Novel Method to Solve Neural Knapsack Problems

Duanshun Li * 1 Jing Liu * 2 Dongeun Lee 3 Ali Seyedmazloom 4 Giridhar Kaushik 4 Kookjin Lee 5
Noseong Park 6

Abstract
0-1 knapsack is of fundamental importance across
many fields. In this paper, we present a gametheoretic method to solve 0-1 knapsack problems
(KPs) where the number of items (products) is
large and the values of items are not predetermined but decided by an external value assignment function (e.g., neural network in our case)
during the optimization process. While existing
papers are interested in predicting solutions with
neural networks for classical KPs whose objective functions are mostly linear functions, we are
interested in solving KPs whose objective functions are neural networks. In other words, we
choose a subset of items that maximizes the sum
of the values predicted by neural networks. Its key
challenge is how to optimize the neural networkbased non-linear KP objective with a budget constraint. Our solution is inspired by game-theoretic
approaches in deep learning, e.g., generative adversarial networks. After formally defining our
two-player game, we develop an adaptive gradient
ascent method to solve it. In our experiments, our
method successfully solves two neural networkbased non-linear KPs and conventional linear KPs
with 1 million items.

1. Introduction
The 0-1 knapsack problem (KP), which chooses an optimal subset of items (products) that maximizes an objective
function under a budget constraint, is an NP-hard problem
that frequently occurs in real world applications. According
*

The first two authors equally contributed and were advised
by Noseong Park when he was at George Mason University.
1
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada 2 Walmart Labs.,
Reston, VA, USA 3 Texas AM University-Commerce, Commerce, TX, USA 4 George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
5
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA 6 Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Noseong Park
<noseong@yonsei.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to a study, KPs are one of the top-20 most popular problems (Kellerer et al., 2004; Skiena, 1999). Most of existing
linear and some special non-linear KPs can be solved by
various algorithms (Kellerer et al., 2004; Martello & Toth,
1990; Garey & Johnson, 1979). Some of them are classical
combinatorial optimization algorithms, whereas other works
rely on deep learning methods (Bello et al., 2016; Gu & Hao,
2018; Hertrich & Skutella, 2021). Those deep learning models predict linear KP solutions after being trained. Note that
we use the term ‘predict’ instead of ‘solve’ because given
a linear KP instance they predict its solution. However,
they do not consider non-linear KPs and moreover, their
scalabiliy is not satisfactory either. They consider at most
hundreds of items whereas we consider up to a million of
items in our experiments.
In this paper, we consider a more complicated KP definition
whose objective function consists of neural networks, which
we call neural knapsack problems. Our definition belongs to
non-linear KPs and has many applications in deep learning.
We propose a method to solve such complicated KPs on
deep learning platforms such as TensorFlow — we do not
predict solutions but solve.
However, one difficulty in designing such a constrained optimization technique on top of deep learning platforms is how
to consider the hard budget constraint — we must not violate the budget limitation. As such, our key contribution is
to design a gradient-based constrained optimization method,
which we call adaptive gradient ascent. Our method is optimized to solve a max-min game formulation devised by
us. It is noted that the equilibrium state of our max-min
game is equivalent to the optimal feasible solution of KP
that does not violate the budget limitation and yields the
biggest objective value. While the existence of equilibrium
does not necessarily imply its achievement (see Thm. (1)
and the discussion afterward), our method works well in
practice. As a matter of fact, exact algorithms are known
only for a few special non-linear KPs as will be discussed
in Sec. 2. In our case, neural network-based objectives can
be arbitrary non-linear and non-convex functions whose
global convergence theorems are not known (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004; Bretthauer & Shetty, 2002; Fomeni &
Letchford, 2014).

