Outside the Echo Chamber: Optimizing the Performative Risk

John Miller * 1 Juan C. Perdomo * 1 Tijana Zrnic * 1

Abstract
In performative prediction, predictions guide
decision-making and hence can influence the distribution of future data. To date, work on performative prediction has focused on finding performatively stable models, which are the fixed points
of repeated retraining. However, stable solutions
can be far from optimal when evaluated in terms
of the performative risk, the loss experienced by
the decision maker when deploying a model. In
this paper, we shift attention beyond performative
stability and focus on optimizing the performative risk directly. We identify a natural set of
properties of the loss function and model-induced
distribution shift under which the performative
risk is convex, a property which does not follow
from convexity of the loss alone. Furthermore, we
develop algorithms that leverage our structural assumptions to optimize the performative risk with
better sample efficiency than generic methods for
derivative-free convex optimization.

1. Introduction
Predictions in social settings are rarely made in isolation,
but rather to inform decision-making. This link between
predictions and decisions causes predictive models to often
be performative, meaning they can alter their environment
once deployed. For example, election forecasts impact campaign spending and affect voter turnout, hence influencing
the final election outcome (Westwood et al., 2020). Similarly, long-term climate forecasts shape policy decisions
which can then affect future weather patterns.
Performative prediction is a recent framework introduced
by Perdomo et al. (2020) which formalizes the idea that
predictive models can impact the data-generating process.
So far, work in this area has focused on a particular equilib*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: John Miller <miller john@berkeley.edu>, Juan
C. Perdomo <jcperdomo@berkeley.edu>, Tijana Zrnic <tijana.zrnic@berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

rium notion known as performative stability (Drusvyatskiy
& Xiao, 2020; Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020; Brown et al.,
2020). Stability is a local definition of optimality, by which
a model minimizes the expected risk for the specific distribution that it induces. However, stability provides no
general guarantees of performance beyond this equilibrium
notion. In fact, stable models can have exceedingly poor
performative risk, the central measure of performance in the
performative prediction framework which captures the true
risk incurred by the learner when deploying the model.
Reasoning by analogy, stable classifiers can be thought of as
an echo chamber in an online platform. In an echo chamber,
one is reassured of their ideas by voicing them, but it’s
not clear whether they are reasonable outside of this niche
community. Similarly, stable classifiers minimize risk on
the distribution that they induce, but they provide no global
guarantees of performance.
Therefore, to develop accurate predictions in performative
settings, we shift attention past performative stability and
study optimizing the performative risk directly. This task
has so far remained elusive due to the complexities of modelinduced distribution shift, i.e. performative effects. In particular, even in simple settings with convex losses, these distribution shifts can make the performative risk non-convex Perdomo et al. (2020). Furthermore, optimizing the performative risk requires a different algorithmic approach than what
was previously studied in performative prediction. For instance, the learner needs to actively anticipate performative
effects rather than myopically retrain until convergence, as
the latter would only lead to stability.
1.1. Our Contributions
In this paper, we provide the first set of results describing
when and how the performative risk may be optimized efficiently. We identify natural assumptions under which the
performative risk is convex, even in settings where performative effects can be arbitrarily strong. Furthermore, we
study optimization algorithms which explicitly model distribution shift and provably minimize the performative risk in
an efficient manner.
To give an overview of our main results, we recall the relevant concepts from the performative prediction framework.
Relative to supervised learning, where the learner observes

