How Do Adam and Training Strategies Help BNNs Optimization?

Zechun Liu * 1 2 Zhiqiang Shen * 2 Shichao Li 1 Koen Helwegen 3 Dong Huang 2 Kwang-Ting Cheng 1

Abstract
The best performing Binary Neural Networks
(BNNs) are usually attained using Adam optimization and its multi-step training variants (Rastegari
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2020). However, to the
best of our knowledge, few studies explore the
fundamental reasons why Adam is superior to
other optimizers like SGD for BNN optimization
or provide analytical explanations that support
specific training strategies. To address this, in
this paper we first investigate the trajectories of
gradients and weights in BNNs during the training process. We show the regularization effect
of second-order momentum in Adam is crucial
to revitalize the weights that are dead due to
the activation saturation in BNNs. We find that
Adam, through its adaptive learning rate strategy, is better equipped to handle the rugged loss
surface of BNNs and reaches a better optimum
with higher generalization ability. Furthermore,
we inspect the intriguing role of the real-valued
weights in binary networks, and reveal the effect of weight decay on the stability and sluggishness of BNN optimization. Through extensive experiments and analysis, we derive a simple
training scheme, building on existing Adam-based
optimization, which achieves 70.5% top-1 accuracy on the ImageNet dataset using the same architecture as the state-of-the-art ReActNet (Liu
et al., 2020) while achieving 1.1% higher accuracy. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/liuzechun/AdamBNN.

1. Introduction
Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) have gained increasing
attention in recent years due to the high compression ra*

Equal contribution 1 Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Plumerai. Correspondence to: Zhiqiang Shen <zhiqians@andrew.cmu.edu>, Zechun
Liu <zechun.liu@connect.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(a) real networks

(b) binary networks

Figure 1. The actual optimization landscape from real-valued and
binary networks with the same architecture (ResNet-18). We
follow the method in (Li et al., 2018) to plot the landscape.

tio (Rastegari et al., 2016) and the potential of being accelerated with logic computation on hardware (Zhang et al.,
2019). Their applications range from supervised learning,
e.g., classification (Courbariaux et al., 2016), segmentation (Zhuang et al., 2019), pose estimation (Bulat et al.,
2019) to the self-supervised learning (Shen et al., 2021).
Despite the high compression ratio of BNNs, the discrete nature of the binary weights and activations poses a challenge
for its optimization. It is widely known that conventional
deep neural networks rely heavily on the ability to find good
optima in a highly non-convex optimizing space. Different
from real-valued neural networks, binary neural networks
restrict the weights and activations to discrete values (-1,
+1), which naturally, will limit the representational capacity
of the model and further result in disparate optimization
landscapes compared to real-valued ones. As illustrated
in Figure 1, BNNs are more chaotic and difficult for optimization with numerous local minima compared to realvalued networks. These properties differentiate BNNs from
real-valued networks and impact the optimal optimizer and
training strategy design.
Since Courbariaux et al. (Courbariaux et al., 2016) adopted
Adam as the optimizer for BNNs, multiple researchers independently observed that better performance could be attained by Adam optimization for BNNs (Bethge et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2020; Brais Martinez, 2020). However, few of
these works have analyzed the reasons behind Adam’s superior performance over other methods, especially the commonly used stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins &
Monro, 1951) with first momentum.

