A Zeroth-Order Block Coordinate Descent Algorithm
for Huge-Scale Black-Box Optimization

HanQin Cai 1 Yuchen Lou 2 Daniel Mckenzie 1 Wotao Yin 3

Abstract

and online marketing (Flaxman et al., 2005). Lately, algorithms for zeroth-order optimization have drawn increasing
attention due to their use in finding good policies in reinforcement learning (Salimans et al., 2017; Mania et al.,
2018; Choromanski et al., 2020) and in crafting adversarial
examples given only black-box access to neural-network
based classifiers (Chen et al., 2017; Lian et al., 2016; Alzantot et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2020b). We note that in all of these
applications queries (i.e. evaluating f at a chosen point) are
considered expensive, thus it is desirable for zeroth-order
optimization algorithms to be as query efficient as possible.

We consider the zeroth-order optimization problem in the huge-scale setting, where the dimension of the problem is so large that performing
even basic vector operations on the decision variables is infeasible. In this paper, we propose a
novel algorithm, coined ZO-BCD, that exhibits favorable overall query complexity and has a much
smaller per-iteration computational complexity.
In addition, we discuss how the memory footprint
of ZO-BCD can be reduced even further by the
clever use of circulant measurement matrices. As
an application of our new method, we propose
the idea of crafting adversarial attacks on neural
network based classifiers in a wavelet domain,
which can result in problem dimensions of over
one million. In particular, we show that crafting adversarial examples to audio classifiers in a
wavelet domain can achieve the state-of-the-art attack success rate of 97.9% with significantly less
distortion.

1. Introduction
We are interested in problem (1) under the restrictive assumption that one only has noisy zeroth-order access to f
(i.e. one cannot access the gradient, ∇f )) and the dimension
of the problem, d, is huge, say d > 107 .
minimize f (x).
x∈X ⊂Rd

(1)

Such problems (with small or large d) arise frequently in domains as diverse as simulation-based optimization in chemistry and physics (Reeja-Jayan et al., 2012), hyperparameter
tuning for combinatorial optimization solvers (Hutter et al.,
2014) and for neural networks (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012)
1

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong SAR, China 3 DAMO Academy, AliBaba US, Bellevue, WA,
USA. Correspondence to: HanQin Cai <hqcai@math.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Unfortunately, it is known (Jamieson et al., 2012) that the
worst case query complexity of any noisy zeroth order algorithm for strongly convex f scales linearly with d. Clearly,
this is prohibitive for huge d. Recent works have begun
to side-step this issue by assuming f has additional, lowdimensional, structure. For example, (Wang et al., 2018;
Balasubramanian & Ghadimi, 2018; Cai et al., 2020a;b)
assume the gradients ∇f are (approximately) s-sparse (see
Assumption 5) while (Golovin et al., 2019) and others assume f (x) = g(Az) where A : Rs → Rd and s  d.
All of these works promise a query complexity that scales
linearly with the intrinsic dimension, s, and only logarithmically with the extrinsic dimension, d. However there is
no free lunch here; the improved complexity of (Golovin
et al., 2019) requires access to noiseless function evaluations, the results of (Balasubramanian & Ghadimi, 2018)
only hold if the support of ∇f (x) is fixed1 for all x ∈ X and
while (Wang et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2020a;b) allow for noisy
function evaluations and changing gradient support, both
solve a computationally intensive optimization problem as
a sub-routine, requiring at least Ω(sd log(d)) memory and
FLOPS per iteration.
1.1. Contributions
In this paper we provide the first zeroth-order optimization
algorithm enjoying a sub-linear (in d) query complexity
and a sub-linear per-iteration computational complexity. In
addition, our algorithm has an exceptionally small memory footprint. Furthermore, it does not require the repeated
sampling of d-dimensional random vectors, a hallmark of
1

See Appendix A of (Cai et al., 2020b) for a proof of this.

