PopSkipJump: Decision-Based Attack for Probabilistic Classifiers

Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel 1 Noman Ahmed Sheikh 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Most current classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial examples, small input perturbations that
change the classification output. Many existing
attack algorithms cover various settings, from
white-box to black-box classifiers, but typically
assume that the answers are deterministic and often fail when they are not. We therefore propose a
new adversarial decision-based attack specifically
designed for classifiers with probabilistic outputs.
It is based on the HopSkipJump attack by Chen
et al. (2019), a strong and query efficient decisionbased attack originally designed for deterministic
classifiers. Our P(robabilisticH)opSkipJump
attack adapts its amount of queries to maintain
HopSkipJump’s original output quality across
various noise levels, while converging to its query
efficiency as the noise level decreases. We test our
attack on various noise models, including stateof-the-art off-the-shelf randomized defenses, and
show that they offer almost no extra robustness
to decision-based attacks. Code is available at
https://github.com/cjsg/PopSkipJump.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, many state-of-the-art neural network
classifiers turned out to be vulnerable to adversarial examples: small, targeted input perturbations that manipulate the
classification output. The many existing attack algorithms
to create adversarial inputs cover a wide range of settings:
from white- to black-box algorithms (a.k.a. decision-based)
over various gray-box and transfer-based settings, targeted
and untargeted attacks for various kinds of data (images, text,
speech, graphs); etc. Decision-based attacks are arguably
among the most general attacks, because they try not to rely
on any classifier specific information, except final decisions.
Said differently, they can attack anything that can be queried
often enough; in principle, even humans. Surprisingly however, despite this generality, they typically cannot deal with
1

ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: CJSG <cjsg@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

noisy or probabilistic classification outputs – a quite natural
and common setting in the real world. There could indeed
be many reasons for this noise: occasional measurement
errors, classifiers’ uncertainty about the answer, queries
coming from different/changing classifiers, or intentional
variations from a randomized adversarial defense. Yet, as
shown by Table 1 and Appendix B.1, randomly changing
the output label of only 1 out of 20 queries when applying
SOTA decision-based attacks suffices to make them fail.
One way to deal with probabilistic outcomes would be to
apply majority voting on repeated queries. In practice, however, some input regions may need more queries than others,
either because they are noisier, or because they are more
important for the success of the attack. So a naive implementation where every point gets queried equally often would
require unnecessarily many queries, which is often not acceptable in real-world applications.
Contributions We therefore propose to adapt Chen et al.
(2019)’s HopSkipJump (HSJ) algorithm, a query efficient,
decision-based, iterative attack for deterministic classifiers,
to make it work with noisy, probabilistic outputs. We take
a model-based, Bayesian approach that, at every iteration,
evaluates the local noise level (or probabilities) and uses it
to optimally adapt the number of queries to match HSJ’s
original performance. The result is a probabilistic version
of HopSkipJump, PopSkipJump (PSJ), that
1. outperforms majority voting on repeated queries;
2. efficiently adapts its amount of queries to maintain
HSJ’s original output quality at every iteration over
increasing noise levels;
3. gracefully converges to HSJ’s initial query efficiency
when answers become increasingly deterministic;
4. works with various noise models.
In particular, we test our attack on several recent state-ofthe-art off-the-shelf randomized defenses, which all rely
on some form of deterministic base model. PSJ achieves
the same performance as HSJ on the original base models,
showing that these defense strategies offer no extra robustness to decision-based attacks. Finally, most parameters of
HSJ have a direct counterpart in PSJ. So by optimizing the
parameters of HSJ or PSJ in the deterministic setting we get
automatic improvements in the various stochastic settings.

