Modularity in Reinforcement Learning
via Algorithmic Independence in Credit Assignment

Michael Chang* 1 Sidhant Kaushik* 1 Sergey Levine 1 Thomas L. Griffiths 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Many transfer problems require re-using previously optimal decisions for solving new tasks,
which suggests the need for learning algorithms
that can modify the mechanisms for choosing certain actions independently of those for choosing
others. However, there is currently no formalism nor theory for how to achieve this kind of
modular credit assignment. To answer this question, we define modular credit assignment as a
constraint on minimizing the algorithmic mutual
information among feedback signals for different
decisions. We introduce what we call the modularity criterion for testing whether a learning algorithm satisfies this constraint by performing causal
analysis on the algorithm itself. We generalize
the recently proposed societal decision-making
framework as a more granular formalism than the
Markov decision process to prove that for decision sequences that do not contain cycles, certain
single-step temporal difference action-value methods meet this criterion while all policy-gradient
methods do not. Empirical evidence suggests that
such action-value methods are more sample efficient than policy-gradient methods on transfer
problems that require only sparse changes to a
sequence of previously optimal decisions.

Gusteau’s (Bird et al., 2007) taqueria has a great team for
making burritos: Colette heats the tortillas, Remy adds the
meat, and Alfredo wraps the burrito in aluminum foil. But
today customers fell sick from meat contamination and gave
angry reviews. Clearly, Remy should replace meat with
tofu or something else. But should credit assignment from
the reviews affect the others? Intuitively, no: the feedback
signals to the decision of adding meat and to the decisions
of heating tortillas and wrapping aluminum foil should be
independent. Customer dissatisfaction in burritos are not
reflective of the taqueria’s quesadillas, for which Colette’s
tortilla skills and Alfredo’s wrapping skills are useful.
The example above expresses the intuition that modularity,
or the capacity for the mechanisms in a system to be independently modified, enables flexible adaptation. However,
using principles of modularity to build flexible learning systems has been difficult because the traditional formalism for
precisely describing what modularity means was developed
in the context of analyzing static systems – systems whose
mechanisms are assumed fixed. But learning agents are
dynamic systems composed of mechanisms (i.e. learnable
functions) that evolve over the course of learning. Thus, to
even express the hypothesis that modularity enables flexibility in learning agents, let alone test it, we first need (1) a
formalism that defines what modularity means for dynamic

It is causality that gives us this modularity, and when
we lose causality, we lose modularity.
Judea Pearl (Ford, 2018)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, Princeton University, USA. Correspondence to: Michael
Chang <mbchang@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Minimal motivating example. The optimal action
sequence for the training task is A → B → C, and the optimal
sequence for the transfer task differs only in the last time-step. Continuing to train an optimal policy from the training task on the transfer task with the cloned Vickrey society (CVS) from Chang et al.
(2020) transfers 13.9x more efficiently than with PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017), even though learning efficiency for both on-policy
algorithms during training is comparable. This paper suggests that
this is due to dynamic modularity: the algorithmic independence
among CVS’s learnable mechanisms and among their gradients.

