UneVEn: Universal Value Exploration for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Tarun Gupta 1 Anuj Mahajan 1 Bei Peng 1 Wendelin Böhmer 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
VDN and QMIX are two popular value-based
algorithms for cooperative MARL that learn a
centralized action value function as a monotonic
mixing of per-agent utilities. While this enables
easy decentralization of the learned policy, the
restricted joint action value function can prevent
them from solving tasks that require significant
coordination between agents at a given timestep.
We show that this problem can be overcome by
improving the joint exploration of all agents during training. Specifically, we propose a novel
MARL approach called Universal Value Exploration (UneVEn) that learns a set of related tasks
simultaneously with a linear decomposition of
universal successor features. With the policies
of already solved related tasks, the joint exploration process of all agents can be improved to
help them achieve better coordination. Empirical
results on a set of exploration games, challenging
cooperative predator-prey tasks requiring significant coordination among agents, and StarCraft
II micromanagement benchmarks show that UneVEn can solve tasks where other state-of-the-art
MARL methods fail.

1. Introduction
Learning control policies for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) remains challenging as agents
must search the joint action space, which grows exponentially with the number of agents. Current state-of-the-art
value-based methods such as VDN (Sunehag et al., 2017)
and QMIX (Rashid et al., 2020b) learn a centralized joint
action value function as a monotonic factorization of decentralized agent utility functions. Due to this monotonic
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 2 Department of Software Technology, Delft
University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands. Correspondence to:
Tarun Gupta <tarun.gupta@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

factorization, the joint action value function can be decentrally maximized as each agent can simply select the action
that maximizes its corresponding utility function, known as
the Individual Global Maximum principle (IGM, Son et al.,
2019).
This monotonic restriction cannot represent the value of all
joint actions and an agent’s utility depends on the policies
of the other agents (nonmonotonicity, Mahajan et al., 2019).
Even in collaborative tasks this can exhibit relative overgeneralization (RO, Panait et al., 2006), when the optimal
action’s utility falls below that of a suboptimal action (Wei
et al., 2018; 2019). While this pathology depends in practice on the agents’ random experiences, we show in Section
2 that in expectation RO prevents VDN from learning a
large set of predator-prey games during the critical phase of
uniform exploration.
QTRAN (Son et al., 2019) and WQMIX (Rashid et al.,
2020a) show that this problem can be avoided by weighting
the joint actions of the optimal policy higher. They propose
to deduce this weighting from an unrestricted joint value
function that is learned simultaneously. However, this unrestricted value is only a critic of the factored model, which
itself is prone to RO, and often fails in practice due to insufficient -greedy exploration. MAVEN (Mahajan et al., 2019)
improves exploration by learning an ensemble of monotonic
joint action value functions through committed exploration
and maximizing diversity in the joint team behavior. However, it does not specifically target optimal actions and may
not work in tasks with strong RO.
The core idea of this paper is that even when a target task
exhibits RO under value factorization, there may be similar
tasks that do not. If their optimal actions overlap in some
states with the target task, executing these simpler tasks
can implicitly weight exploration to overcome RO. We call
this novel paradigm Universal Value Exploration (UneVEn).
To learn different MARL tasks simultaneously, we extend
Universal Successor Features (USFs, Borsa et al., 2018) to
Multi-Agent USFs (MAUSFs), using a VDN decomposition.
During execution, UneVEn samples task descriptions from
a Gaussian distribution centered around the target and executes the task with the highest value. This biases exploration
towards the optimal actions of tasks that are similar but have

