Model Fusion for Personalized Learning

Chi Thanh Lam * 1 Trong Nghia Hoang * 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1 Patrick Jaillet 3

Abstract
Production systems operating on a growing domain of analytic services often require generating
warm-start solution models for emerging tasks
with limited data. One potential approach to address this challenge is to adopt meta learning to
generate a base model that can be adapted to solve
unseen tasks with minimal fine-tuning. This however requires the training processes of previous
solution models of existing tasks to be synchronized. This is not possible if these models were
pre-trained separately on private data owned by
different entities and cannot be synchronously
re-trained. To accommodate for such scenarios,
we develop a new personalized learning framework that synthesizes customized models for unseen tasks via fusion of independently pre-trained
models of related tasks. We also establish performance guarantee for the proposed framework and
demonstrate its effectiveness empirically.

1. Introduction
Existing machine learning algorithms are efficient when the
training data are abundant. However, when the training data
of a target task is not sufficiently available, most algorithms
are not designed to reuse knowledge from existing solution models of related tasks. Take for example a learning
scenario on personal assistant devices. One device might
be asked to recommend movies while others are asked to
recommend other entertainment contents that align with a
user’s preference. This leads to situations where one user
might have a good on-device model for a certain content
(movies) but not for others (music), especially for those that
have not been requested before. For such situations, the relevant user-generated data for the task is scarcely available,
and thus, training a model from scratch is not effective.
To address this issue, potential approaches include meta
*
Equal contribution 1 National University of Singapore 2 AWS
AI Labs, Amazon 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Trong Nghia Hoang <tnhoang@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

(Finn et al., 2017; Yoon et al., 2018) and personalized federated learning (Fallah et al., 2020; Dinh et al., 2020) aim to
synchronize the training processes across different models
to distill the common parts of their inferential knowledge
into a base model. Once learned, the base model can either
be used directly in the same task context or be further tuned
with private data to generate a personalized model for a
new task. For example, a base model can learn to represent
different contents in terms of common genres and make
recommendations based on user preference regarding their
mixing proportion, which can be fine-tuned for a new user
(i.e., new task) with limited preferential data.
Nonetheless, to compute the base model, these approaches
require local models to synchronize their training processes
such that their extracted features and corresponding parameters are aligned. This ensures that all models will operate on
the same representation space, which ensures local updates
to parameters modeling different aspects of data will not
be misaligned. From a practical perspective, however, this
solution is not suitable in production systems that compartmentalize into separately pre-trained workflows maintained
by different product groups (Su et al., 2018), which prefer a
decoupled architecture such that updates to those workflow
models can be implemented fast to drive business growth.
Furthermore, another drawback of the existing meta learning
platform is that it does not have a fine-grained representation that characterizes and accounts for different levels of
relevance across tasks when learning a base model. This can
be seen from its generic assumption that tasks are sampled
from the same distribution (Finn et al., 2017), which lacks
a sense of fidelity: if the task distribution is multi-modal,
tasks that were drawn from the same mode would be more
related to one another. Putting this in the context of usercentric personalization, a base model crafted out of relevant
user (task) models from the same sub-population of the target user (task) is more informative than one learned from a
generic population comprising diverge sub-populations.
In light of the above, we argue that the abilities to distill and
reuse inferential knowledge from independently pre-trained
solution models; and to assess and prioritize distillation from
the most relevant models in new task contexts are keys to
address the aforementioned challenges. This motivates us to
develop a new personalized learning framework that learns

