Optimal Off-Policy Evaluation from Multiple Logging Policies

Nathan Kallus * 1 Yuta Saito * 1 Masatoshi Uehara * 1

Abstract
We study off-policy evaluation (OPE) from multiple logging policies, each generating a dataset of
fixed size, i.e., stratified sampling. Previous work
noted that in this setting the ordering of the variances of different importance sampling estimators
is instance-dependent, which brings up a dilemma
as to which importance sampling weights to use.
In this paper, we resolve this dilemma by finding the OPE estimator for multiple loggers with
minimum variance for any instance, i.e., the efficient one. In particular, we establish the efficiency
bound under stratified sampling and propose an
estimator achieving this bound when given consistent q-estimates. To guard against misspecification of q-functions, we also provide a way to
choose the control variate in a hypothesis class
to minimize variance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the benefits of our methods’ efficiently leveraging of the stratified sampling of
off-policy data from multiple loggers.

1. Introduction
In many applications where personalized and dynamic decision making is of interest, exploration is costly, risky, unethical, or otherwise infeasible ruling out the use of online
algorithms for contextual bandits (CB) and reinforcement
learning (RL) that need to explore in order to learn. This
includes both healthcare, where we fear bad patient outcomes, and e-commerce, where we fear alienating users.
This motivates the study of off-policy evaluation (OPE),
which is the task of estimating the value of a given policy
using only historical data, which is generated by current
decision policies. Given how invaluable this is, OPE has
been studied extensively both in CB (Kallus, 2018; Wang
et al., 2017; Dudík et al., 2014; Swaminathan et al., 2017)
and in RL (Farajtabar et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018; Kallus
and Uehara, 2019a; Jiang and Li, 2016; Yin et al., 2020).
*

Alphabetical Order 1 Cornell University, NY, USA . Correspondence to: Masatoshi Uehara <mu223@cornell.edu>.

In most of the above studies, the observations used to evaluate a new policy are assumed generated by a single logging
policy. Often, however, we have the opportunity to leverage
multiple datasets, each potentially generated by a different
logging policy (Agarwal et al., 2017; He et al., 2019; Strehl
et al., 2010; Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016). For example, in
hospitals, we might have the two-types datasets (clinical
trials data) by different design (logging policies) to evaluate
the efficacy of some drugs. The goal here is to combine
these two datasets efficiently. In these cases, the size of each
dataset is generally fixed by design, which distinguishes this
setting from a single logging policy given by the mixture of
logging policies. Such fixed dataset sizes is an example of
stratified sampling (Wooldridge, 2001), where the identity
of the logging policies constitute the stratum.
The distinction of these two settings is crucial since the
same estimator may have varying precision in each setting
(a fact well-known in Monte Carlo integration, Geyer, 1994;
Kong et al., 2003, noise contrastive estimation, Gutmann
and Hyvärinen, 2010; Uehara et al., 2018, and survey sampling (Fuller, 2009)). Thus, many results in the standard
unstratified OPE setting cannot be directly translated to a
multiple logger setting, most crucially the efficiency lower
bound on mean-squared error (MSE) and estimators that
achieve this lower bound (Kallus and Uehara, 2020a; Narita
et al., 2019). In the multiple logger setting, we may additionally consider a much greater variety of estimators that can
utilize the logger identity as data. In this paper, we study a
wide range of such estimators, establish the efficiency lower
bound, and propose estimators that achieve it.
Previous work on OPE with multiple loggers proposed various importance sampling (IS) estimators that use the logger
identity (Agarwal et al., 2017). However, they arrived at a
dilemma: there is no strict ordering between the IS estimate
with marginalized logging probabilities and a precisionweighted combination of the IS estimates in each dataset.
That is, which estimate has lower MSE depends on the problem instance and is not known a priori, and therefore it is
not clear which should be preferred. Our analysis resolves
this dilemma by developing an efficient estimator, which
has MSE better (or not worse) than both of the above.
Our contributions are as follows.

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

• (I) When the logging policies are known, we study the

