Towards Open Ad Hoc Teamwork Using Graph-based Policy Learning

Arrasy Rahman 1 Niklas Höpner 2 Filippos Christianos 1 Stefano V. Albrecht 1

Abstract
Ad hoc teamwork is the challenging problem of
designing an autonomous agent which can adapt
quickly to collaborate with teammates without
prior coordination mechanisms, including joint
training. Prior work in this area has focused on
closed teams in which the number of agents is
fixed. In this work, we consider open teams by
allowing agents with different fixed policies to
enter and leave the environment without prior notification. Our solution builds on graph neural
networks to learn agent models and joint-action
value models under varying team compositions.
We contribute a novel action-value computation
that integrates the agent model and joint-action
value model to produce action-value estimates.
We empirically demonstrate that our approach
successfully models the effects other agents have
on the learner, leading to policies that robustly
adapt to dynamic team compositions and significantly outperform several alternative methods.

1. Introduction
Many real-world problems require autonomous agents to
perform tasks in the presence of other agents. Recent multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) approaches (e.g.
Christianos et al., 2020; Foerster et al., 2018; Rashid et al.,
2018; Lowe et al., 2017) solve such problems by jointly
training a set of agents with shared learning procedures.
However, as agents become capable of long-term autonomy
and are used for a growing number of tasks, it is possible
that agents may have to interact with previously unknown
other agents, without the opportunity for prior joint training.
Thus, research in ad hoc teamwork (Stone et al., 2010) aims
to design a single autonomous agent, which we refer to as
the learner, that can interact effectively with other agents
without pre-coordination such as joint training.
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 2 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Arrasy Rahman <arrasy.rahman@ed.ac.uk>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Prior ad hoc teamwork approaches (Barrett & Stone, 2015;
Albrecht et al., 2016; Barrett et al., 2017; Ravula et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2020) achieved this aim by combining
single-agent RL and agent modeling techniques to learn
from direct interaction with other agents. These approaches
were designed for closed teams in which the number of
agents is fixed. In practice, however, many tasks also require
the learner to adapt to a changing number of agents in the
environment. For example, consider an autonomous car
that needs to drive differently depending on the number
of nearby vehicles, which may be driven by humans or
produced by different manufacturers, and their respective
driving styles (Albrecht et al., 2021).
We make a step towards the full ad hoc teamwork challenge
by considering open teams in which agents with various
fixed policies may enter and leave the team at any time and
without prior notification. Open ad hoc teamwork involves
three main challenges that must be addressed without precoordination. First, the learner must quickly adapt its policy
to the unknown policies of other agents. Second, handling
openness requires the learner to adapt to changing team
sizes in addition to other agents’ types, which may affect the
policy and role a learner must adopt within the team (Tambe,
1997). Third, the changing number of agents results in a
state vector of variable length, which causes standard RL
approaches that require fixed-length state vectors to perform
poorly, as we show in our experiments.
We propose a novel algorithm designed for open ad hoc
teamwork, called Graph-based Policy Learning (GPL) 3 ,
which addresses the aforementioned challenges. GPL adapts
to dynamic teams by training a joint action value model
which allows the learner to disentangle the effect each
agent’s action has on the learner’s returns. To select optimal
actions from the joint action value model, we contribute a
novel action-value computation method which integrates
joint-action value estimates with action predictions learned
using an agent model. To handle dynamic team sizes, the
joint action value model and agent model are both based on
graph neural network (GNN) architectures (Tacchetti et al.,
2019; Böhmer et al., 2020) which have proven useful for
dealing with changing input sizes (Hamilton et al., 2017;
3

Implementation code can be found at https://github.
com/uoe-agents/GPL

