Reinforcement Learning Under Moral Uncertainty

Adrien Ecoffet 1 2 Joel Lehman 1 2

Abstract
An ambitious goal for machine learning is to create agents that behave ethically: The capacity to
abide by human moral norms would greatly expand the context in which autonomous agents
could be practically and safely deployed, e.g.
fully autonomous vehicles will encounter charged
moral decisions that complicate their deployment.
While ethical agents could be trained by rewarding correct behavior under a specific moral theory (e.g. utilitarianism), there remains widespread
disagreement about the nature of morality. Acknowledging such disagreement, recent work in
moral philosophy proposes that ethical behavior
requires acting under moral uncertainty, i.e. to
take into account when acting that one’s credence
is split across several plausible ethical theories.
This paper translates such insights to the field
of reinforcement learning, proposes two training
methods that realize different points among competing desiderata, and trains agents in simple environments to act under moral uncertainty. The
results illustrate (1) how such uncertainty can help
curb extreme behavior from commitment to single
theories and (2) several technical complications
arising from attempting to ground moral philosophy in RL (e.g. how can a principled trade-off
between two competing but incomparable reward
functions be reached). The aim is to catalyze
progress towards morally-competent agents and
highlight the potential of RL to contribute towards
the computational grounding of moral philosophy.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved superhuman performance in increasingly complex benchmark tasks (e.g.
Go (Silver et al., 2017) and Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019)).
1
Uber AI Labs, San Francisco, CA, USA 2 OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA (work done at Uber AI Labs). Correspondence to:
Adrien Ecoffet <adrienecoffet@gmail.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

While such accomplishments are significant, progress has
been less straight-forward in applying RL to unstructured
environments in the real world (e.g. robots that interact with
humans in homes). A considerable challenge is that such
real-world environments constrain solutions in much more
elaborate ways than do typical benchmarks. For example,
there are myriad unacceptable ways for a robotic vacuum
to clean a room, e.g. by breaking a vase, or by harming
a cat. In particular, robots often have affordances in such
environments with ethical implications: they may be able to
harm or help others, and break or abide by human social and
ethical norms (such as the golden rule, or legal codes). The
design of algorithms that embody ethical theories has been
pursued by the machine ethics research community (Abel
et al., 2016; Murray, 2017; Vamplew et al., 2018)1 , and
ideas from that community could inspire reward functions
encoding moral theories that could be maximized by RL to
create ethical agents.
While research into implementing specific ethical theories
is progressing, a more fundamental uncertainty remains:
which ethical theory should an intelligent agent follow?
Moral philosophy explores many theories of ethics, but
there is no consensus over which theory is correct within
that field, or across society in general, and attempts to reconcile multiple ethical theories into a single unified theory
(e.g. Parfit, 2011) are themselves controversial. As a result, if a real-world RL agent is to act ethically, it may be
necessary that it exhibits moral uncertainty. To that end,
we adapt philosophical work on moral (or normative) uncertainty (MacAskill, 2014; Lockhart, 2000) to propose a
similarly-inspired framework for RL.
In the case where ethical reward functions are comparable
on a shared cardinal scale, a composite reward function
(composed by adding together individual reward functions
weighted by their credence, i.e. the degree of belief in that
theory) can be optimized in a straightforward way. However, it is often not clear how to create such a shared reward
scale between theories. Indeed, while related to the concept of non-dominance from multi-objective optimization,
when ethical rewards are fundamentally incomparable, it
is not clear how to apply multi-objective RL to arrive at a
1
Note that these aims are related to those of the fairness, accountability, and transparency community, but with a more central
focus on creating machines that embody moral theories.

