Exact Optimization of Conformal Predictors
via Incremental and Decremental Learning

Giovanni Cherubin 1 Konstantinos Chatzikokolakis 2 Martin Jaggi 3

Abstract
Conformal Predictors (CP) are wrappers around
ML models, providing error guarantees under
weak assumptions on the data distribution. They
are suitable for a wide range of problems, from
classification and regression to anomaly detection.
Unfortunately, their very high computational complexity limits their applicability to large datasets.
In this work, we show that it is possible to speed
up a CP classifier considerably, by studying it in
conjunction with the underlying ML method, and
by exploiting incremental&decremental learning.
For methods such as k-NN, KDE, and kernel LSSVM, our approach reduces the running time by
one order of magnitude, whilst producing exact solutions. With similar ideas, we also achieve a linear speed up for the harder case of bootstrapping.
Finally, we extend these techniques to improve
upon an optimization of k-NN CP for regression.
We evaluate our findings empirically, and discuss
when methods are suitable for CP optimization.

1

Introduction

Conformal prediction refers to a set of techniques providing error guarantees on the predictions of an ML algorithm (Vovk et al., 2005). Its increasing popularity is due to
the fact that these guarantees do not require strict assumptions on the underlying data distribution; one only needs to
assume that the observed examples are exchangeable (i.e.,
any permutation of them is equally likely to appear) – a
weaker requirement than IID. These guarantees hold for any
desired ML algorithm, even if underspecified or overfitting.
A conformal predictor (CP) can be instantiated for various tasks: classification and regression (Vovk et al., 2005),
anomaly detection (Laxhammar & Falkman, 2010), and

clustering (Cherubin et al., 2015). Furthermore, they can
be used to test if data is exchangeable (or IID) (Vovk et al.,
2003). Our work focuses on classification, and it can be
directly applied to tasks such as anomaly detection, clustering, and sequence prediction (Section 9). We discuss CP
regression separately, in Section 8.
In this paper, we consider the original definition of CP (also
referred to as “full” or transductive CP), which is known
to have a good predictive power and to attain the desired
coverage intervals. Unfortunately, full CP requires running
a leave-one-out (LOO) procedure on the entire training set
for every test point. This makes its complexity prohibitive
for most real world cases: if training the ML method on n
examples takes T (n) time, the cost of a CP prediction for m
test points is proportional to O(T (n)n`m), for a training set
of n examples in an `-label classification setting. A number
of time-efficient modifications of CP exist (Vovk et al., 2005;
Vovk, 2015; Carlsson et al., 2014; Barber et al., 2019), which
although have a weaker predictive power and/or coverage
guarantees (e.g., Linusson et al. (2014)).
In this work, we focus on exact optimizations of the full
CP classification algorithm. We first observe that, while
a CP can be constructed around virtually any ML method,
most applications of CP classification only use a handful of
models. It therefore makes sense to optimize the CP routine
in conjunction with its underlying model. In this paper, we
use this idea and exploit incremental&decremental learning
principles to produce exact optimizations of CP for: i) kNN, ii) Kernel Density Estimation (KDE), iii) kernel LeastSquares SVM (LS-SVM); all these reduce the complexity by
at least one order of magnitude. Furthermore, iv) we show
that bootstrapping methods can be marginally improved by
similar ideas, and v) we extend our optimizations to CP
regression. Our results demonstrate that full CP is practical
for several choices of underlying methods.
1.1

Related work

3

1
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 2 University of Athens
EPFL. Correspondence to: Giovanni Cherubin <gcherubin@turing.ac.uk>.

We first review computationally-efficient alternatives to CP,
and then discuss related work on full CP optimization.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Alternatives to full CP. Despite the desirable properties of
full CP, its computational complexity makes it impractical

