Differentially-Private Clustering of Easy Instances

Edith Cohen 1 2 Haim Kaplan 1 2 Yishay Mansour 1 2 Uri Stemmer 1 3 Eliad Tsfadia 1 2

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental problem in data analysis. In differentially private clustering, the goal
is to identify k cluster centers without disclosing
information on individual data points. Despite significant research progress, the problem had so far
resisted practical solutions. In this work we aim
at providing simple implementable differentially
private clustering algorithms that provide utility
when the data is ”easy,” e.g., when there exists a
significant separation between the clusters.
We propose a framework that allows us to apply
non-private clustering algorithms to the easy instances and privately combine the results. We are
able to get improved sample complexity bounds
in some cases of Gaussian mixtures and k-means.
We complement our theoretical analysis with an
empirical evaluation on synthetic data.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b) is a mathematical definition of privacy, that aims to enable statistical
analyses of databases while providing strong guarantees
that individual-level information does not leak. Privacy is
achieved in differentially private algorithms through randomization and the introduction of “noise” to obscure the
effect of each individual, and thus differentially private algorithms can be less accurate than their non-private analogues.
In most cases, this loss in accuracy is studied theoretically,
using asymptotic tools. As a result, there is currently a
significant gap between what is known to be possible theoretically and what can be done in practice with differential
privacy. In this work we take an important step towards
bridging this gap in the context of clustering related tasks.

and many different algorithms have been suggested.1 However, to the best of our knowledge, none of these algorithms
have been implemented: They are not particularly simple
and suffer from large hidden constants that translate to a
significant loss in utility, compared to non-private implementations.
Question 1.1. How hard is it to cluster privately with a
practical implementation?
We take an important step in this direction using the following approach. Instead of directly tackling “standard”
clustering tasks, such as k-means clustering, we begin by
identifying a very simple clustering problem that still seems
to capture many of the challenges of practical implementations (we remark that this problem is completely trivial
without privacy requirements). We then design effective
(private) algorithms for this simple problem. Finally, we
reduce “standard” clustering tasks to this simple problem,
thereby obtaining private algorithms for other tasks.
In more detail, we introduce the following problem, called
the k-tuple clustering problem.
Definition 1.2 (informal, revised in Definition 3.6). An instance of the k-tuple clustering problem is a collection of
k-tuples. Assuming that the input tuples can be partitioned
into k “obvious clusters”, each consisting of one point of
each tuple, then the goal is to report k “cluster-centers”
that correctly partition the input tuples into clusters. If this
assumption on the input structure does not hold, then the
outcome is not restricted.
Remark 1.3.
1. By “obvious clusters” we mean clusters which are far
away from each other.
2. The input tuples are unordered. This means, e.g., that
the “correct” clustering might place the first point of
one tuple with the fifth point of another tuple.

The construction of differentially private clustering algorithms has attracted a lot of attention over the last decade,

3. Of course, we want to solve this problem while guaranteeing differential privacy. Intuitively, this means

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Blavatnik School of
Computer Science, Tel Aviv University 3 Ben-Gurion University.
Correspondence to: Eliad Tsfadia <eliadtsfadia@gmail.com>.

1
(Blum et al., 2005; Nissim et al., 2007; Feldman et al., 2009;
McSherry, 2009; Gupta et al., 2010; Mohan et al., 2012; Wang
et al., 2015; Nock et al., 2016; Su et al., 2016; Nissim et al., 2016;
Feldman et al., 2017; Balcan et al., 2017; Nissim & Stemmer,
2018; Huang & Liu, 2018; Kaplan & Stemmer, 2018; Stemmer,
2020; Shechner et al., 2020; Ghazi et al., 2020; Nguyen, 2020)

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

