Fold2Seq: A Joint Sequence(1D)-Fold(3D) Embedding-based Generative Model
for Protein Design

Yue Cao 1 2 * Payel Das 1 Vijil Chenthamarakshan 1 Pin-Yu Chen 1 Igor Melnyk 1 Yang Shen 2
..
.

Abstract
Designing novel protein sequences for a desired
3D topological fold is a fundamental yet nontrivial task in protein engineering. Challenges exist due to the complex sequence–fold relationship,
as well as the difficulties to capture the diversity of
the sequences (therefore structures and functions)
within a fold. To overcome these challenges,
we propose Fold2Seq, a novel transformer-based
generative framework for designing protein sequences conditioned on a specific target fold.
To model the complex sequence–structure relationship, Fold2Seq jointly learns a sequence embedding using a transformer and a fold embedding from the density of secondary structural
elements in 3D voxels. On test sets with single, high-resolution and complete structure inputs for individual folds, our experiments demonstrate improved or comparable performance of
Fold2Seq in terms of speed, coverage, and reliability for sequence design, when compared to
existing state-of-the-art methods that include datadriven deep generative models and physics-based
RosettaDesign. The unique advantages of foldbased Fold2Seq, in comparison to a structurebased deep model and RosettaDesign, become
more evident on three additional real-world challenges originating from low-quality, incomplete,
or ambiguous input structures. Source code and
data are available at https://github.com/
IBM/fold2seq.

1. Introduction
Computationally designing protein sequences that fold into
desired 3D structures has a broad range of applications ranging from therapeutics to materials (Kraemer-Pecore et al.,
2001). Despite significant advancements in methodologies
and computing power, this task known as inverse protein design still remains challenging, primarily due to the vast size
of the sequence space as well as the difficulty of learning a
function that maps from the 3D structure space to the 1D
sequence space.

Work primarily done during Yue Cao’s internship at IBM Research. 1 IBM Research 2 Texas A&M University. Correspondence
to: Y. Cao <cyppsp@tamu.edu>, P. Das <daspa@us.ibm.com>,
V. Chenthamarakshan <ecvijil@us.ibm.com>, P.-Y. Chen <pinyu.chen@ibm.com>, I. Melnyk <igor.melnyk@ibm.com>, Y.
Shen <yshen@tamu.edu>.

While majority of data-driven approaches (Chen et al., 2019;
O’Connell et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018b; Ingraham et al.,
2019; Strokach et al., 2020) are focusing on designing sequences for a desired backbone structure, only a few works
(Greener et al., 2018; Karimi et al., 2020) have studied protein design for a desired fold. A protein fold is defined by
the spatial arrangement (or topology) of its 3D form of local
segments called secondary structure elements or SSEs (Hou
et al., 2003). As protein structure is inherently hierarchical,
a complete native structure can have fold combinations and
a fold can be present in many protein structures. A simple fold or topological architecture can be highly adaptable,
as shown by the low-sequence homology among its members, and the different functions they carry out (Basanta
et al., 2020; Chandra et al., 2001; Boutemy et al., 2011).
Therefore, a primary goal of de novo protein design is to
generate a larger and more diverse set of protein structures
than currently available yet still consistent with a specific
fold, which has proven to be a means for achieving new functions through design (Basanta et al., 2020; Woolfson et al.,
2015). In contrast, targeting a backbone structure per se is
known to restrict the diversity and novelty of the designs,
as “high-resolution protein backbone coordinates contain
some memory of the original native sequence” (Kuhlman
et al., 2003). Accordingly, an ensemble of structures is a
better representative of a fold than a single structure, as it
additionally captures the structural and therefore functional
diversity within the fold.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Compared to structure-based protein design, fold-based
protein design carries additional challenges: the difficul-

∗

