Improved Regret Bound and Experience Replay in Regularized Policy Iteration

Nevena Lazić 1 Dong Yin 1 Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori 1 Csaba Szepesvári 1 2

Abstract
In this work, we study algorithms for learning
in infinite-horizon undiscounted Markov decision
processes (MDPs) with function approximation.
We first show that the regret analysis of the P O LITEX algorithm (a version of regularized policy iteration)
can be sharpened from O(T 3/4 )
√
to O( T ) under nearly identical assumptions,
and instantiate the bound with linear function approximation. Our
√ result provides the first highprobability O( T ) regret bound for a computationally efficient algorithm in this setting. The
exact implementation of P OLITEX with neural
network function approximation is inefficient in
terms of memory and computation. Since our
analysis suggests that we need to approximate
the average of the action-value functions of past
policies well, we propose a simple efficient implementation where we train a single Q-function on
a replay buffer with past data. We show that this
often leads to superior performance over other
implementation choices, especially in terms of
wall-clock time. Our work also provides a novel
theoretical justification for using experience replay within policy iteration algorithms.

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms combined with powerful function approximation have achieved
impressive performance in a variety of application domains
over the last decade. Unfortunately, the theoretical understanding of such methods is still quite limited. In this work,
we study single-trajectory learning in infinite-horizon undiscounted Markov decision processes (MDPs), also known as
average-reward MDPs, which capture tasks such as routing
and the control of physical systems.
One line of works with performance guarantees for the
average-reward setting follows the “online MDP” approach
1

DeepMind 2 University of Alberta. Correspondence to: Nevena
Lazic <nevena@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

proposed by Even-Dar et al. (2009), where the agent selects policies by running an online learning algorithm in
each state, typically mirror descent. The resulting algorithm is a version of approximate policy iteration (API),
which alternates between (1) estimating the state-action
value function (or Q-function) of the current policy and
(2) setting the next policy to be optimal w.r.t. the sum of
all previous Q-functions plus a regularizer. Note that, by
contrast, standard API sets the next policy only based on
the most recent Q-function. The policy update can also be
written as maximizing the most recent Q-function minus
KL-divergence to the previous policy, which is somewhat
similar to recently popular versions of API (Schulman et al.,
2015; 2017; Achiam et al., 2017; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018;
Song et al., 2019a).
The original work of Even-Dar et al. (2009) studied this
scheme with known dynamics, tabular representation, and
adversarial reward functions. More recent works (AbbasiYadkori et al., 2019; Hao et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020a)
have adapted the approach to the case of unknown dynamics,
stochastic rewards, and value function approximation. With
linear value functions, the P OLITEX algorithm of AbbasiYadkori et al. (2019) achieves O(T 3/4 ) high-probability
regret in ergodic MDPs, and the results only scale in the
number of features
√ rather than states. Wei et al. (2020a)
later show an O( T ) bound on expected regret for a similar
algorithm named MDP-EXP2. In this work, we revisit the
analysis
of P OLITEX and show that it can be sharpened to
√
O( T )√under nearly identical assumptions, resulting in the
first O( T ) high-probability regret bound for a computationally efficient algorithm in this setting.
In addition to improved analysis, our work also addresses
practical implementation of P OLITEX with neural networks.
The policies produced by P OLITEX in each iteration require
access to the sum of all previous Q-function estimates. With
neural network function approximation, exact implementation requires us to keep all past networks in memory and
evaluate them at each step, which is inefficient in terms of
memory and computation. Some practical implementation
choices include subsampling Q-functions and/or optimizing
a KL-divergence regularized objective w.r.t. a parametric
policy at each iteration. We propose an alternative approach,
where we approximate the average of all past Q-functions
by training a single network on a replay buffer with past

