Unsupervised Embedding Adaptation via Early-Stage Feature Reconstruction
for Few-Shot Classifcation
Dong Hoon Lee 1 Sae-Young Chung 1

Abstract
We propose unsupervised embedding adaptation
for the downstream few-shot classifcation task.
Based on fndings that deep neural networks learn
to generalize before memorizing, we develop
Early-Stage Feature Reconstruction (ESFR) — a
novel adaptation scheme with feature reconstruction and dimensionality-driven early stopping that
fnds generalizable features. Incorporating ESFR
consistently improves the performance of baseline methods on all standard settings, including
the recently proposed transductive method. ESFR
used in conjunction with the transductive method
further achieves state-of-the-art performance on
mini-ImageNet, tiered-ImageNet, and CUB; especially with 1.2%∼2.0% improvements in accuracy over the previous best performing method on
1-shot setting.1

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved impressive results on visual
recognition tasks. However, it still has diffculty generalizing
to novel classes with few examples; while humans can learn
to recognize from few experiences. Few-shot classifcation
(Miller et al., 2000; Vinyals et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle,
2017) is designed to bridge the gap between the two and has
recently attracted substantial attention.
Several works (Liu et al., 2019; Hou et al., 2019; Qiao
et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2020; Dhillon et al., 2020; Ziko
et al., 2020; Boudiaf et al., 2020) have shown the effectiveness of transductive methods in few-shot classifcation,
showing a signifcant improvement over inductive methods.
While test samples are inaccessible in an inductive few-shot
classifcation setting, one can utilize all the unlabeled test
samples together to make an inference in a transductive
1

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea. Correspondence to: Dong Hoon Lee <donghoonlee@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/movinghoon/ESFR

setting. The co-existence of labeled- and unlabeled-data in
this setting motivates the use of transductive inference or
semi-supervised learning. A popular transductive approach
is pseudo-label-based methods that progressively update the
labels or inference models by predicted test samples. For
instance, Liu et al. (2019); Kim et al. (2019) use a neighbor
graph for label propagation, Hou et al. (2019); Liu et al.
(2020) use predicted labels on test samples to update the
class prototypes, and Antoniou & Storkey (2019); Hu et al.
(2020) use prediction to produce an intrinsic loss or synthetic gradient. Another line of works utilizes regularization
terms on unlabeled test samples. To list a few, Dhillon et al.
(2020); Boudiaf et al. (2020) use entropy minimization of
the prediction on unlabeled data, Ziko et al. (2020) uses the
Laplacian regularization term for graph clustering. These
methods are mostly originated from semi-supervised learning studies; approaches in semi-supervised learning are still
motivating few-shot classifcation research.
On the other hand, semi-supervised learning research has
recently benefted from unsupervised learning. Rapidly advancing self-supervised learning methods (Caron et al.,
2020; Grill et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020) have shown strong
performance on semi-supervised image classifcation tasks.
A popular approach is to use a self-supervision loss for representation learning to acquire more general features. Learned
representations are then used with fne-tuning (Caron et al.,
2020; Grill et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020) or other semisupervised learning methods (Zhai et al., 2019; Kim et al.,
2021) for downstream tasks. These studies achieved stateof-the-art performance on semi-supervised learning tasks,
especially in settings with extremely few labels.
The success of unsupervised learning on semi-supervised
tasks suggests the potential beneft of fnding shared features
or patterns without labels in relevant research areas. In fewshot classifcation, several works (Gidaris et al., 2019; Su
et al., 2020) use additional self-supervision loss during the
training of base datasets to learn more general features.
However, the use of unsupervised learning on unlabeled
data that appears in test-time is less studied. In this work,
we study unsupervised learning for adaptation to satisfy the
thirst.

