iDARTS: Differentiable Architecture Search with Stochastic Implicit Gradients

Miao Zhang 1 2 Steven Su 2 Shirui Pan 1 Xiaojun Chang 1 Ehsan Abbasnejad 3 Reza Haffari 1

Abstract
Differentiable ARchiTecture Search (DARTS) has
recently become the mainstream of neural architecture search (NAS) due to its efficiency and
simplicity. With a gradient-based bi-level optimization, DARTS alternately optimizes the inner
model weights and the outer architecture parameter in a weight-sharing supernet. A key challenge
to the scalability and quality of the learned architectures is the need for differentiating through the
inner-loop optimisation. While much has been
discussed about several potentially fatal factors in
DARTS, the architecture gradient, a.k.a. hypergradient, has received less attention. In this paper, we
tackle the hypergradient computation in DARTS
based on the implicit function theorem, making it
only depends on the obtained solution to the innerloop optimization and agnostic to the optimization
path. To further reduce the computational requirements, we formulate a stochastic hypergradient
approximation for differentiable NAS, and theoretically show that the architecture optimization
with the proposed method, named iDARTS, is
expected to converge to a stationary point. Comprehensive experiments on two NAS benchmark
search spaces and the common NAS search space
verify the effectiveness of our proposed method.
It leads to architectures outperforming, with large
margins, those learned by the baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an efficient and effective method on automating the process of neural network
design, with achieving remarkable success on image recognition (Tan & Le, 2019; Li et al., 2021b; 2020), language
modeling (Jiang et al., 2019), and other deep learning ap1
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia 2 Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Australia 3 Australian Institute for
Machine Learning, University of Adelaide, Australia. Correspondence to: Shirui Pan <Shirui.Pan@monash.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

plications (Ren et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2019b; Hu et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2021).
The early NAS frameworks are devised via reinforcement
learning (RL) (Pham et al., 2018) or evolutionary algorithm
(EA) (Real et al., 2019) to directly search on the discrete
space. To further improve the efficiency, a recently proposed Differentiable ARchiTecture Search (DARTS) (Liu
et al., 2019) adopts the continuous relaxation to convert
the operation selection problem into the continuous magnitude optimization for a set of candidate operations. By
enabling the gradient descent for the architecture optimization, DARTS significantly reduces the search cost to several
GPU hours (Liu et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Dong & Yang,
2019a).
Despite its efficiency, more current works observe that
DARTS is somewhat unreliable (Zela et al., 2020a; Chen
& Hsieh, 2020; Li & Talwalkar, 2019; Sciuto et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020c; Li et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2020b)
since it does not consistently yield excellent solutions, performing even worse than random search in some cases. Zela
et al. (2020a) attribute the failure of DARTS to its supernet training, with empirically observing that the instability
of DARTS is highly correlated to the dominant eigenvalue
of the Hessian matrix of the validation loss with respect
to architecture parameters. On the other hand, Wang et al.
(2021a) turn to the magnitude-based architecture selection
process, who empirically and theoretically show the magnitude of architecture parameters does not necessarily indicate how much the operation contributes to the supernet’s
performance. Chen & Hsieh (2020) observe a precipitous
validation loss landscape with respect to architecture parameters, which leads to a dramatic performance drop when
discretizing the final architecture for the operation selection.
Accordingly, they propose a perturbation based regularization to smooth the loss landscape and improve the stability.
While there are many variants on improving the DARTS
from various aspects, limited research attention has been
paid to the approximation of the architecture parameter
gradient, which is also called the outer-loop gradient or
hypergradient. To fill the gap, this paper focuses on the hypergradient calculation in the differentiable NAS. The main
contribution of this work is the development of the differentiable architecture search with stochastic implicit gradients
(iDARTS). Specifically, we first revisit the DARTS from

