Grad-TTS: A Diffusion Probabilistic Model for Text-to-Speech

Vadim Popov * 1 Ivan Vovk * 1 2 Vladimir Gogoryan 1 2 Tasnima Sadekova 1 Mikhail Kudinov 1

Abstract
Recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models and generative score matching have shown
high potential in modelling complex data distributions while stochastic calculus has provided
a unified point of view on these techniques allowing for flexible inference schemes. In this
paper we introduce Grad-TTS, a novel text-tospeech model with score-based decoder producing mel-spectrograms by gradually transforming
noise predicted by encoder and aligned with text
input by means of Monotonic Alignment Search.
The framework of stochastic differential equations
helps us to generalize conventional diffusion probabilistic models to the case of reconstructing data
from noise with different parameters and allows
to make this reconstruction flexible by explicitly
controlling trade-off between sound quality and
inference speed. Subjective human evaluation
shows that Grad-TTS is competitive with stateof-the-art text-to-speech approaches in terms of
Mean Opinion Score.

1. Introduction
Deep generative modelling proved to be effective in various
machine learning fields, and speech synthesis is no exception. Modern text-to-speech (TTS) systems often consist of
two parts designed as deep neural networks: the first part
converts the input text into time-frequency domain acoustic
features (feature generator), and the second one synthesizes raw waveform conditioned on these features (vocoder).
Introduction of the conventional state-of-the-art autoregressive models such as Tacotron2 (Shen et al., 2018) used for
feature generation and WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016)
used as vocoder marked the beginning of the neural TTS
era. Later, other popular generative modelling frameworks
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Moscow, Russia Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Vadim Popov <vadim.popov@huawei.com>, Ivan Vovk
<vovk.ivan@huawei.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2014) and Normalizing Flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015)
were used in the design of TTS engines for a parallel generation with comparable quality of the synthesized speech.
Since the publication of the WaveNet paper (2016), there
have been various attempts to propose a parallel nonautoregressive vocoder, which could synthesize high-quality
speech. Popular architectures based on Normalizing Flows
like Parallel WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2018) and WaveGlow (Prenger et al., 2019) managed to accelerate inference
while keeping synthesis quality at a very high level but
demonstrated fast synthesis on GPU devices only. Eventually, parallel GAN-based vocoders such as Parallel WaveGAN (Yamamoto et al., 2020), MelGAN (Kumar et al.,
2019), and HiFi-GAN (Kong et al., 2020) greatly improved
the performance of waveform generation on CPU devices.
Furthermore, the latter model is reported to produce speech
samples of state-of-the-art quality outperforming WaveNet.
Among feature generators, Tacotron2 (Shen et al., 2018)
and Transformer-TTS (Li et al., 2019) enabled highly natural speech synthesis. Producing acoustic features frame
by frame, they achieve almost perfect mel-spectrogram reconstruction from input text. Nonetheless, they often suffer
from computational inefficiency and pronunciation issues
coming from attention failures. Addressing these problems,
such models as FastSpeech (Ren et al., 2019) and Parallel
Tacotron (Elias et al., 2020) substantially improved inference speed and pronunciation robustness by utilizing nonautoregressive architectures and building hard monotonic
alignments from estimated token lengths. However, in order
to learn character duration, they still require pre-computed
alignment from the teacher model. Finally, the recently
proposed Non-Attentive Tacotron framework (Shen et al.,
2020) managed to learn durations implicitly by employing
the Variational Autoencoder concept.
Glow-TTS feature generator (Kim et al., 2020) based on
Normalizing Flows can be considered as one of the most
successful attempts to overcome pronunciation and computational latency issues typical for autoregressive solutions. Glow-TTS model made use of Monotonic Alignment
Search algorithm (an adoption of Viterbi training (Rabiner,
1989) finding the most likely hidden alignment between
two sequences) proposed to map the input text to melspectrograms efficiently. The alignment learned by Glow-

