Leveraging Language to Learn Program Abstractions and Search Heuristics

Catherine Wong 1 Kevin Ellis 2 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1 3 Jacob Andreas 1

Abstract
Inductive program synthesis, or inferring programs from examples of desired behavior, offers
a general paradigm for building interpretable, robust, and generalizable machine learning systems.
Effective program synthesis depends on two key
ingredients: a strong library of functions from
which to build programs, and an efficient search
strategy for finding programs that solve a given
task. We introduce LAPS (Language for Abstraction and Program Search), a technique for using
natural language annotations to guide joint learning of libraries and neurally-guided search models
for synthesis. When integrated into a state-of-theart library learning system (DreamCoder), LAPS
produces higher-quality libraries and improves
search efficiency and generalization on three domains – string editing, image composition, and
abstract reasoning about scenes – even when no
natural language hints are available at test time.

1. Introduction
Machine learning approaches based on program synthesis–
the automatic inference of symbolic programs–can offer
robustness, interpretability, verifiability, and strong generalization in few-shot learning settings (Appel et al., 2017;
Lake et al., 2017). Many machine learning tasks can be
formulated as program synthesis problems, including data
manipulation (Delaware et al., 2015; Gulwani et al., 2017),
semantic parsing (Artzi & Zettlemoyer, 2013; Liang, 2016),
structured visual understanding (Johnson et al., 2017b; Yi
et al., 2018), image generation (Ellis et al., 2017; Ganin
et al., 2018), and policy learning (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971;
Cropper & Muggleton, 2015; Silver et al., 2020).
This paper introduces Language for Abstraction and Program Search (LAPS), a framework for improving the efficiency and generalizability of learned program synthesis
1
MIT 2 Cornell University 3 Center for Brains, Minds and
Machines (CBMM) - MIT. Correspondence to: Catherine Wong
<catwong@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

models using natural language supervision. In LAPS, language guides learning of both libraries of reusable program
abstractions and heuristics for searching in the space of
programs. High-quality program libraries and search methods are the main ingredients of effective program synthesis
approaches (Gulwani et al., 2017). Recent approaches to
program synthesis have attempted to learn search models
(Gulwani et al., 2015; Polozov & Gulwani, 2015; Balog
et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2017), program libraries, or both
jointly from data (Shin et al., 2019; Dumancić & Cropper;
Ellis et al., 2021; 2020; Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2019), but
even the current best learning approaches can be computationally inefficient (often requiring upwards of thousands of
CPU hours to bootstrap learning) and do not always discover
generalizable libraries or search strategies.
LAPS builds on the intuition that natural language offers a
powerful source of information for tackling both learning
problems. Language simultaneously provides an efficient
channel for communicating the structure of the search space
(an instruction like draw a large hexagon next to a small
pentagon decomposes a complex graphics task into highlevel parts) and a lexicon that names important reusable
concepts in a given domain (for instance, suggesting that
a function to draw variable-sized polygons might be useful for future graphics tasks). In this work we show how
inducing jointly compositional generative models over natural language and programs provides a strong scaffold for
library and search model learning in a hierarchical program
induction model. When integrated into a state-of-the-art
learning algorithm, DreamCoder (Ellis et al., 2021; 2018),
our approach dramatically improves performance on three
different synthesis domains: string editing, structured image
generation and scene understanding. Compared to the base
synthesis approach, LAPS solves and learns more quickly
from synthesis tasks, and produces higher-quality libraries
that improve generalization to downstream tasks without
natural language hints.
LAPS builds on several recent developments in (nonlanguage-based) program synthesis, so we begin with a
review of related work (Sec. 2), then formalize the search
and library learning problems (Sec. 3) and base synthesis
algorithm (Sec. 4). We then describe how LAPS extends the
base algorithm to include language in learning (Sec. 5) and
conclude with empirical results (Sec. 6).

