Equivariant Learning of Stochastic Fields:
Gaussian Processes and Steerable Conditional Neural Processes
Peter Holderrieth * 1 Michael Hutchinson * 1 Yee Whye Teh 1 2

Abstract
Motivated by objects such as electric fields or
fluid streams, we study the problem of learning
stochastic fields, i.e. stochastic processes whose
samples are fields like those occurring in physics
and engineering. Considering general transformations such as rotations and reflections, we show
that spatial invariance of stochastic fields requires
an inference model to be equivariant. Leveraging
recent advances from the equivariance literature,
we study equivariance in two classes of models.
Firstly, we fully characterise equivariant Gaussian processes. Secondly, we introduce Steerable
Conditional Neural Processes (SteerCNPs), a new,
fully equivariant member of the Neural Process
family. In experiments with Gaussian process vector fields, images, and real-world weather data,
we observe that SteerCNPs significantly improve
the performance of previous models and equivariance leads to improvements in transfer learning
tasks.

1. Introduction
In physics and engineering, fields are objects which assign
a physical quantity to every point in space. They serve
as a unifying concept for objects such as electro-magnetic
fields, gravity fields, electric potentials or fluid dynamics
and are therefore omnipresent in the natural sciences and
their applications (Landau, 2013). Our goal in this work is
to be able to predict the value of a field everywhere given
some finite set of observations (see f in fig. 1). We will be
interested in cases where these fields are not fixed but are
drawn from a random distribution, which we term stochastic
fields.
Viewing fields as usual mathematical functions, we can consider stochastic fields as stochastic processes. A well-known
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford, United Kingdom
DeepMind, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Peter Holderrieth <peter.holderrieth@new.ox.ac.uk>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A schematic of equivariant learning of vector fields. The
model f predicts a vector field from a set of vectors (red arrows).
It is equivariant to the action of rotations, here a 90◦ rotation.

example of these are Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen
& Williams, 2005) which have been widely used in machine learning. More recently, Neural Processes (NPs) and
their related models were introduced as an alternative to
GPs which enable to learn a stochastic process from data
leveraging the flexibility of neural networks (Garnelo et al.,
2018a;b; Kim et al., 2019).
When applying models to data from the natural sciences, it
is a logical step to integrate scientific knowledge about the
problem into these models. The physical principle of homogeneity of space states that all positions and orientations in
space are equivalent, i.e. there is no canonical orientation
or absolute position. A natural modelling assumption stemming from this is that the prior we place over a random field
should be invariant, i.e. it should look the same from all
positions and orientations. We will show that this implies
that the posterior as a function of the observed points is
equivariant.
Figure 1 illustrates this equivariance. The input is a discrete
set of vectors at certain points in space, the red arrows, and
the predictions a continuous vector field. If the space is

