Federated Deep AUC Maximization for Heterogeneous Data
with a Constant Communication Complexity
Zhuoning Yuan * 1 Zhishuai Guo * 1 Yi Xu 2 Yiming Ying 3 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract
Deep AUC (area under the ROC curve)
Maximization (DAM) has attracted much attention recently due to its great potential for imbalanced data classification. However, the research
on Federated Deep AUC Maximization (FDAM)
is still limited. Compared with standard federated
learning (FL) approaches that focus on decomposable minimization objectives, FDAM is more
complicated due to its minimization objective is
non-decomposable over individual examples. In
this paper, we propose improved FDAM algorithms for heterogeneous data by solving the popular non-convex strongly-concave min-max formulation of DAM in a distributed fashion, which can
also be applied to a class of non-convex stronglyconcave min-max problems. A striking result of
this paper is that the communication complexity
of the proposed algorithm is a constant independent of the number of machines and also independent of the accuracy level, which improves
an existing result by orders of magnitude. The
experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness
of our FDAM algorithm on benchmark datasets,
and on medical chest X-ray images from different organizations. Our experiment shows that
the performance of FDAM using data from multiple hospitals can improve the AUC score on testing data from a single hospital for detecting lifethreatening diseases based on chest radiographs.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an emerging paradigm for largescale learning to deal with data that are (geographically)
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa 2 Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of
New York at Albany. Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang <tianbaoyang@uiowa.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

distributed over multiple clients, e.g., mobile phones, organizations. An important feature of FL is that the data remains
at its own clients, allowing the preservation of data privacy.
This feature makes FL attractive not only to internet companies such as Google and Apple but also to conventional
industries such as those that provide services to hospitals
and banks in the big data era (Rieke et al., 2020; Long et al.,
2020). Data in these industries is usually collected from
people who are concerned about data leakage. But in order
to provide better services, large-scale machine learning from
diverse data sources is important for addressing model bias.
For example, most patients in hospitals located in urban
areas could have dramatic differences in demographic data,
lifestyles, and diseases from patients who are from rural
areas. Machine learning models (in particular, deep neural
networks) trained based on patients’ data from one hospital
could dramatically bias towards its major population, which
could bring serious ethical concerns (Pooch et al., 2020).
One of the fundamental issues that could cause model bias
is data imbalance, where the number of samples from different classes are skewed. Although FL provides an effective
framework for leveraging multiple data sources, most existing FL methods still lack the capability to tackle the model
bias caused by data imbalance. The reason is that most existing FL methods are developed for minimizing the conventional objective function, e.g., the average of a standard loss
function on all data, which are not amenable to optimizing
more suitable measures such as area under the ROC curve
(AUC) for imbalanced data. It has been recently shown
that directly maximizing AUC for deep learning can lead
to great improvements on real-world difficult classification
tasks (Yuan et al., 2020b). For example, Yuan et al. (2020b)
reported the best performance by DAM on the Stanford
CheXpert Competition for interpreting chest X-ray images
like radiologists (Irvin et al., 2019).
However, the research on FDAM is still limited. To the
best of our knowledge, Guo et al. (2020a) is the only work
that was dedicated to FDAM by solving the non-convex
strongly-concave min-max problem in a distributed manner. Their algorithm (CODA) is similar to the standard
FedAvg method (McMahan et al., 2017) except that the
periodic averaging is applied both to the primal and the

