Revenue-Incentive Tradeoffs in Dynamic Reserve Pricing
Yuan Deng 1 Sébastien Lahaie 1 Vahab Mirrokni 1 Song Zuo 1

Abstract
Online advertisements are primarily sold via repeated auctions with reserve prices. In this paper,
we study how to set reserves to boost revenue
based on the historical bids of strategic buyers,
while controlling the impact of such a policy on
the incentive compatibility of the repeated auctions. Adopting an incentive compatibility metric
which quantifies the incentives to shade bids, we
propose a novel class of dynamic reserve pricing
policies and provide analytical tradeoffs between
their revenue performance and bid-shading incentives. The policies are inspired by the exponential mechanism from the literature on differential privacy, but our study uncovers mechanisms
with significantly better revenue-incentive tradeoffs than the exponential mechanism in practice.
We further empirically evaluate the tradeoffs on
synthetic data as well as real ad auction data from
a major ad exchange to verify and support our
theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Online advertising is the practice of placing text, banner,
or video ads on search engines, publisher websites, or social media for the purpose of raising brand awareness and
generating sales to site visitors. This form of advertising
represents a major source of revenue for both online publishers and Internet companies; the revenue of this market
exceeded $124.6 billion in 2019, witnessing a 15.9% increase from 2018 (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2020). A large
fraction of online ads are sold via repeated auctions in which
the advertisers bid in real time.
Reserve pricing is a key tool used to boost revenue in repeated auctions (Ostrovsky & Schwarz, 2011; Paes Leme
et al., 2016). However, according to classical auction theory,
setting the reserve in an effective manner requires knowledge of the advertisers’ valuation distributions (Myerson,
1

Google Research, New York City, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Yuan Deng <dengyuan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1981). A natural idea to circumvent this difficulty in practice
is to learn a reserve price from the advertisers’ historical
bids, a practice known as dynamic reserve pricing. Although
this approach is intuitive, one must be cautious with this
kind of pricing policy since it complicates the long-term
incentives of the advertisers. In particular, an advertiser may
have an incentive to shade her bids in order to lower future
reserve prices, even if each auction in isolation is truthful
(e.g., second-price).
In the past decade, there has been a growing body of literature on dynamic reserve pricing with strategic advertisers
under different settings. Two typical assumptions made
in the literature are that the advertisers are impatient, so
that they discount their utilities in the future (Amin et al.,
2014; Drutsa, 2018; Golrezaei et al., 2019; Deng et al.,
2019; 2020a), and that the market is large enough that each
advertiser contributes a negligible fraction of the total revenue (Liu et al., 2018; Epasto et al., 2018). It has been
shown that a constant fraction of revenue loss against the
revenue-optimal benchmark is inevitable if these two assumptions do not hold (Amin et al., 2013). Nonetheless,
in practice, many ad slots see competition from only a few
large advertisers and it is likely that these advertisers care
about their long-run utilities as much as their instantaneous
payoffs in each auction (Nedelec et al., 2019).
In this paper, we consider an environment in which the advertisers are patient and the market might be small with only
a few advertisers. Our objective is to understand the tradeoff
between bid-shading incentives and revenue performance
for different reserve pricing policies. Intuitively, in a singlebuyer second-price auction environment, a reserve pricing
policy that does not learn from the advertisers’ historical
bids and always sets a zero reserve would result in zero
revenue, and induce no bid-shading incentive; on the other
hand, a reserve pricing policy setting the Myersonian (i.e,
revenue-optimal) reserve (Myerson, 1981) with respect to
the advertisers’ historical bid distribution maximizes revenue (provided that the advertisers bid truthfully in the past),
but it induces a significant bid-shading incentive.
We consider a multi-stage model in which the auctioneer
learns a reserve from the bids in the last stage and applies it
in the current stage (see Section 2.1). Incentive compatibility
is classically defined as a binary notion: An auction is either

