Variance Reduction via Primal-Dual Accelerated Dual Averaging
for Nonsmooth Convex Finite-Sums
Chaobing Song 1 Stephen J. Wright 1 Jelena Diakonikolas 1

Abstract
Structured nonsmooth convex finite-sum optimization appears in many machine learning applications, including support vector machines
and least absolute deviation. For the primaldual formulation of this problem, we propose
a novel algorithm called Variance Reduction
via Primal-Dual Accelerated Dual Averaging
(VRPDA2 ). In the nonsmooth and general convex setting, VRPDA2 has the overall complexity O(nd log min{1/✏, n} + d/✏) in terms of the
primal-dual gap, where n denotes the number of
samples, d the dimension of the primal variables,
and ✏ the desired accuracy. In the nonsmooth and
strongly convex setting, the overall complexitypof
VRPDA2 becomes O(nd log min{1/✏, n}+d/ ✏)
in terms of both the primal-dual gap and the
distance between iterate and optimal solution.
Both these results for VRPDA2 improve significantly on state-of-the-art complexity p
estimates—
which are O(nd log min{1/✏, n} + nd/✏) for
the nonsmooth and general
p convex
p setting and
O(nd log min{1/✏, n} + nd/ ✏) for the nonsmooth and strongly convex setting—with a simpler and more straightforward algorithm and analysis. Moreover, both complexities are better than
lower bounds for general convex finite-sum optimization, because our approach makes use of additional, commonly occurring structure. Numerical
experiments reveal competitive performance of
VRPDA 2 compared to state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
We consider large-scale regularized nonsmooth convex empirical risk minimization (ERM) of linear predictors in machine learning. Let bi 2 Rd , i = 1, 2, . . . , n, be sample
1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, WI. Correspondence to: Chaobing Song
<chaobing.song@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

vectors with n typically large; gi : R ! R, i = 1, 2, . . . , n,
be possibly nonsmooth convex loss functions associated
with the linear predictor hbi , xi; and ` : Rd ! R be an
extended-real-valued, -strongly convex (
0) and possibly nonsmooth regularizer that admits an efficiently computable proximal operator. The problem we study is
n

min f (x) := g(x)+`(x) :=

x2Rd

1X
gi (bTi x)+`(x), (P)
n i=1

Pn
where g(x) := n1 i=1 gi (bTi x). Instances of the nonsmooth ERM problem (P) include `1 -norm and `2 -norm
regularized support vector machines (SVM) and least absolute deviation. For practicality of our approach, we require
in addition that the convex conjugates of the functions gi ,
defined by gi⇤ (yi ) := supzi (zi yi gi (zi )), admit efficiently
computable proximal operators. (The examples mentioned
above have this property.) From the statistical perspective,
nonsmoothness in the loss function is essential for obtaining
a model that is both tractable and robust. But from the optimization viewpoint, nonsmooth optimization problems are
intrinsically more difficult to solve. On one hand, the lack of
smoothness in g precludes the use of black-box first-order
information to obtain efficient methods. On the other hand,
the use of structured composite optimization methods that
rely on the proximal operator of g is out of question
Pn here too,
because the proximal operator of the sum n1 i=1 gi (bi T x)
may not be efficiently computable w.r.t. x, even when the
proximal operators of the individual functions gi (·) are.
Driven by applications in machine learning, computational
statistics, signal processing, and operations research, the
nonsmooth problem (P) and its variants have been studied
for more than two decades. There have been two main lines
of work: deterministic algorithms that exploit the underlying simple primal-dual structure to improve efficiency (i.e.,
dependence on the accuracy parameter ✏) and randomized
algorithms that exploit the finite-sum structure to improve
scalability (i.e., dependence on the number of samples n).
Exploiting the primal-dual structure. A naı̈ve approach
for solving (P) would be subgradient descent, which requires
access to subgradients of g(x) and `(x). To find a solution
x with f (x) f (x⇤ )  ✏, where x⇤ is an optimal solution

