Learning Self-Modulating Attention in Continuous Time Space with
Applications to Sequential Recommendation

Chao Chen 1 Haoyu Geng 1 2 Nianzu Yang 1 2 Junchi Yan 1 2 Daiyue Xue 3 Jianping Yu 3 Xiaokang Yang 1 2

Abstract
User interests are usually dynamic in the real
world, which poses both theoretical and practical
challenges for learning accurate preferences from
rich behavior data. Among existing user behavior
modeling solutions, attention networks are widely
adopted for its effectiveness and relative simplicity. Despite being extensively studied, existing
attentions still suffer from two limitations: i) conventional attentions mainly take into account the
spatial correlation between user behaviors, regardless the distance between those behaviors in the
continuous time space; and ii) these attentions
mostly provide a dense and undistinguished distribution over all past behaviors then attentively
encode them into the output latent representations.
This is however not suitable in practical scenarios where a user’s future actions are relevant to
a small subset of her/his historical behaviors. In
this paper, we propose a novel attention network,
named self-modulating attention, that models the
complex and non-linearly evolving dynamic user
preferences. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on top-N sequential recommendation tasks, and the results on three largescale real-world datasets show that our model can
achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Preference learning is of critical importance in modern machine learning applications, such as online advertising, Ecommerce and social media. Often, users’ preferences are
not static and evolve over time due to a variety of reasons.
For example, a user’s interest in a particular brand might
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 3 Meituan, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Junchi
Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

fade away due to maturity or a change in lifestyle. Nonetheless, it is difficult to model all causal aspects explicitly
(Widmer & Kubat, 1996; Koren, 2009; Wu et al., 2017).
To model the dynamics in user preferences, many research
works (Kang & McAuley, 2018; Ying et al., 2018; Zhou
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019) develop different attention
mechanisms to learn the sequential patterns of how users’
future actions are interacted with previous behaviors, and
so far have achieved state-of-the-art performance on many
benchmark datasets. The majority of these attentions (implicitly) assume that the underlying sequential patterns are
time independent(Kumar et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Chang
et al., 2020). This is however contradicted with the fact that
more recent behaviors will have more impact on the future
actions, or more specifically identical behavior sequences of
two users with different time intervals should have different
implications on their current and future decisions.
To tackle the challenging problem, recent approaches generalize the notion of positional embedding to continuous time
(Xu et al., 2019; Shukla & Marlin, 2021). The idea behind
these approaches is to encode periodic patterns dependent on
the progression of time into a high-dimensional vector space
(i.e., time embedding), then by using translation-invariant
random Fourier features (Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Yu et al.,
2016) to approximately measure the temporal distance between user behaviors in the sequence.
Orthogonal to prior studies, we focus on two pertinent questions fundamental to attention-based preference learning in
continuous time space: (i) how can attentions model the impact of both sequential positions and continuous timestamps
in an explicit manner? — This matters a lot for business, as
it helps to better understand users and their needs (Zhang
& Chen, 2020; Arrieta et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a); and
(ii) how can attentions identify sparse behaviors interacted
with future actions? — Existing techniques in this direction
mainly base on sparsemax (Martins & Astudillo, 2016; Niculae & Blondel, 2017) to yield sparse distributions over past
behaviors. These approaches tend to preserve very limited
temporal information which leads to the difficulty to capture
complex and fine-grained temporal dynamics.
In this paper, we propose a novel attention mechanism,

