Tighter Bounds on the Log Marginal Likelihood of
Gaussian Process Regression using Conjugate Gradients

Artem Artemev * 1 2 David R. Burt * 3 Mark van der Wilk 1

Abstract
We propose a lower bound on the log marginal
likelihood of Gaussian process regression models
that can be computed without matrix factorisation
of the full kernel matrix. We show that approximate maximum likelihood learning of model parameters by maximising our lower bound retains
many benefits of the sparse variational approach
while reducing the bias introduced into hyperparameter learning. The basis of our bound is a
more careful analysis of the log-determinant term
appearing in the log marginal likelihood, as well
as using the method of conjugate gradients to derive tight lower bounds on the term involving a
quadratic form. Our approach is a step forward in
unifying methods relying on lower bound maximisation (e.g. variational methods) and iterative approaches based on conjugate gradients for training
Gaussian processes. In experiments, we show improved predictive performance with our model for
a comparable amount of training time compared
to other conjugate gradient based approaches.

1. Introduction
Scaling models involving Gaussian process priors to large
datasets is an important and well-researched problem
in Bayesian statistics and machine learning. In order
for a method to succeed in this task, it should provide
high-quality approximations to 1) the posterior mean and
(co-)variance over functions, 2) the log marginal likelihood
(LML). While only the former is needed for making predictions, the latter is a useful tool for model selection; when the
kernel is differentiable with respect to hyperparameters, the
LML or an approximation to it can be optimised using gra*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing, Imperial
College London, London, UK 2 Secondmind, Cambridge, UK
3
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. Correspondence to: David R. Burt <drb62@cam.ac.uk>,
Artem Artemev <a.artemev20@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

dient based methods in order to automatically select model
hyperparameters (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006, section 5).
We derive a lower bound on the LML of regression with
a Gaussian process prior and a Gaussian likelihood. We
refer to this bound as CGLB. Parameter learning with
CGLB combines many of the strengths of sparse variational
Gaussian process regression (SGPR) (Titsias, 2009) with
the strengths of conjugate gradient (CG) methods (Gibbs
& Mackay, 1997) for GP inference. We use an improved
bound on the log-determinant of the covariance matrix
as well as CG to tighten the SGPR evidence lower bound
(ELBO). We show empirically that this leads to less bias
in parameter selection than maximisation of the ELBO.
This reduced bias leads to improved performance on several
benchmark tasks involving large datasets.
Maximisation of our lower bound provides an alternative to
current CG-based GP inference schemes Gibbs & Mackay
(1997); Wang et al. (2019), which simplifies hyperparameter
learning. Recently, Wang et al. (2019) showed that CGbased GP inference can scale impressively to large datasets,
and provide excellent performance on many regression tasks.
While Wang et al. (2019) argued that their method should be
considered ‘exact’, there are two caveats which complicate
training. First, gradient estimates provided by these methods are biased if conjugate gradients is stopped too early;
while this bias can be reduced by running more iterations of
CG, this comes at an additional computational cost. Second,
the estimates of the LML are stochastic. The variance of the
estimator provided can be reduced at the cost of needing to
solve more systems of equations. Following Davies (2015),
we refer to these approaches as ‘Iterative GPs’, to contrast
them with implementations using deterministic, direct methods (e.g. Cholesky decomposition) for computing the LML.
Building on work in Gibbs & Mackay (1997) and Davies
(2015) we derive a stopping criterion for our application of
CG that ensures more iterations of CG would not improve
the bound on the LML significantly. We also exploit old
solutions to CG from previous iterations of hyperparameter
learning. This approach allows us to often run zero or
one steps of CG per iteration of hyperparameter learning
without significantly impacting the approximate LML, even
on large datasets. Using a similar approach to Gardner et al.

