Exploiting Structured Data For Learning Contagious Diseases Under
Incomplete Testing

Maggie Makar 1 Lauren West 2 David Hooper 2 Eric Horvitz 3 Erica Shenoy 2 John Guttag 1

Abstract
One of the ways that machine learning algorithms
can help control the spread of an infectious disease is by building models that predict who is
likely to become infected making them good candidates for preemptive interventions. In this work
we ask: can we build reliable infection prediction
models when the observed data is collected under
limited, and biased testing that prioritizes testing
symptomatic individuals? Our analysis suggests
that when the infection is highly transmissible,
incomplete testing might be sufficient to achieve
good out-of-sample prediction error. Guided by
this insight, we develop an algorithm that predicts
infections, and show that it outperforms baselines
on simulated data. We apply our model to data
from a large hospital to predict Clostridioides difficile infections; a communicable disease that is
characterized by both symptomatically infected
and asymptomatic (i.e., untested) carriers. Using a
proxy instead of the unobserved untested-infected
state, we show that our model outperforms benchmarks in predicting infections.

1. Introduction
Preemptively identifying individuals at a high risk of contracting a contagious (i.e., transmissible) infection is important for guiding treatment decisions to mitigate symptoms,
and for preventing further spread of the infection through
appropriate isolation. In this paper, we study how to build
individual-level predictive models for contagious infections
while explicitly addressing the challenges inherent to contagious diseases.
Building accurate infection prediction models is hindered by
two main factors. First, contagious infections defy the usual
1
CSAIL, MIT 2 Infection Control Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital 3 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Maggie Makar
<mmakar@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

iid assumption central to most machine learning methods.
This is because an individual’s infection state is not independent of their contacts’ infection states. Previous work
has often relied on expert knowledge to construct exposure
proxies (Wiens et al., 2012; Oh et al., 2018). It is then
assumed that conditional on the exposure proxy and individual characteristics, individual outcomes are independent
of one another. Such an assumption is violated if the exposure proxy is noisy or misspecified leading to inaccurate
prediction.
Second, the observed data is biased. The primary clinical
purpose of testing for a disease is to provide guidance for
treatment decisions for the individual being tested. Therefore, there is a strong bias in who is tested—people for
whom knowing whether they have the disease will affect
treatment (e.g., symptomatic individuals) are far more likely
to be tested than other members of the population. But for
some infectious diseases, only a fraction of those individuals
carrying the pathogen experience noticeable symptoms. We
use the term “incomplete testing” to describe the scenario
where only a small, biased subset of individuals harboring a
pathogen are tested. Incomplete testing makes learning accurate models difficult since the collected labels are missing
not at random, leading to biased and inconsistent estimates.
In this work, we leverage the non-independence of outcomes to construct robust predictors. Specifically, we use
the knowledge that infections are caused by exposure to
the pathogen through contacts to impute missing infection
labels. Our proposed approach uses the fact that an individual’s infection state provides useful information about their
contacts’ true infection states. This information is used to
generate pseudo-labels for untested individuals, mitigating
issues caused by incomplete testing. The key idea behind
our approach is that highly structured patterns of disease
transmission can serve as a complementary signal to identify
even untested carriers. The stronger that signal is, the less
impact that incomplete testing will have. Our contributions
can be summarized as follows:
1. We identify two properties of collected data that can be
exploited to mitigate the effects of incomplete testing.
2. We present an algorithm that leverages that insight to

