Mixed Cross Entropy Loss for Neural Machine Translation

Haoran Li * 1 Wei Lu * 1

Abstract
In neural machine translation, cross entropy (CE)
is the standard loss function in two training methods of auto-regressive models, i.e., teacher forcing and scheduled sampling. In this paper, we
propose mixed cross entropy loss (mixed CE) as
a substitute for CE in both training approaches.
In teacher forcing, the model trained with CE
regards the translation problem as a one-to-one
mapping process, while in mixed CE this process
can be relaxed to one-to-many. In scheduled sampling, we show that mixed CE has the potential
to encourage the training and testing behaviours
to be similar to each other, more effectively mitigating the exposure bias problem. We demonstrate the superiority of mixed CE over CE on
several machine translation datasets, WMT’16
Ro-En, WMT’16 Ru-En, and WMT’14 En-De
in both teacher forcing and scheduled sampling
setups. Furthermore, in WMT’14 En-De, we
also find mixed CE consistently outperforms CE
on a multi-reference set as well as a challenging paraphrased reference set. We also found the
model trained with mixed CE is able to provide
a better probability distribution defined over the
translation output space. Our code is available at
https://github.com/haorannlp/mix.

1. Introduction
Conditional language generation tasks, e.g., machine translation, text summarization, are all text-to-text problems. The
most popular models to solve these tasks include RNNs (Elman, 1990; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al.,
2014), Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), etc., which
are usually arranged in an encoder-decoder architecture
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014). Given a training example (x, y) ∈ D, the encoder first compresses the
source sequence x = (x1 , ..., xm ) into a vector h and then
*
Equal contribution 1 StatNLP Research Group, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Wei Lu <luwei@sutd.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Source

Die

Geburtenrate

geht weiter zurück .

Target

The birth rate continues to decline .

one-hot

model
prediction

ground
truth

at index:

Other
Translations

The birth rate continues to drop

.

at index:

The birth rate continues to decrease .
at index:

Figure 1. Example of machine translation’s one-to-many property.
“Source” and “Target” belong to the training set while “Other
Translations”
denotes other
plausible
translations
which are not
Die Geburtenrate
geht weiter
zurück
.
present in the training data.
The birth rate continues to decline .

the decoder will produce a target sequence ŷ = (ŷ1 , ..., ŷn )
from h1 . However, due to information loss in the compression process and the limited expressiveness power of the
model, it can be hard for the decoder to recover a good target sequence ŷ from h alone. To solve this problem, people
often use teacher forcing (Williams & Zipser, 1989) where
both h and the gold target y = (y1 , ..., yn ) are fed into
the decoder during training. Next, the aim is typically to
minimize
Pn the cross entropy (CE) loss, which can be written
as − t=1 log pθ (yt |y<t , x).2 The general idea is that, by
optimizing the CE, we hope the output probability distribution pθ (·|y<t , x) ∈ R|V | (|V | is the vocabulary size) can
approximate the target one-hot encoding of yt (a vector with
only one position being 1, others being 0). In practice, empirical success of various neural machine translation (NMT)
models trained with CE (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani
et al., 2017) has demonstrated CE’s effectiveness.
However, it is worth noting that NMT is inherently a one-tomany mapping problem where a source sentence has multiple plausible translations. In Fig. 1, suppose we want to
predict the last word y6 “decline” conditioned on the source
sentence and the prefix y<6 . Although “decline” is the gold
target that our model should assign the most probability
mass to, other synonyms of “decline” such as “drop”, “decrease” are also plausible translations in this context, namely
the corresponding values of these synonyms in the vector
1
With potential reference to x, e.g., through the attention mechanism. We ignore this for brevity in our discussion.
2
Here y<t = (y0 , y1 , ..., yt−1 ) is the partial target sequence,
where y0 is the special start token, and θ denotes model parameters.

