On the Difficulty of Unbiased Alpha Divergence Minimization

Tomas Geffner 1 Justin Domke 1

Abstract
Several approximate inference algorithms have
been proposed to minimize an alpha-divergence
between an approximating distribution and a target distribution. Many of these algorithms introduce bias, the magnitude of which becomes
problematic in high dimensions. Other algorithms are unbiased. These often seem to suffer from high variance, but little is rigorously
known. In this work we study unbiased methods for alpha-divergence minimization through
the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of the gradient
estimator. We study several representative scenarios where strong analytical results are possible,
such as fully-factorized or Gaussian distributions.
We find that when alpha is not zero, the SNR
worsens exponentially in the dimensionality of
the problem. This casts doubt on the practicality
of these methods. We empirically confirm these
theoretical results.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (VI) typically minimizes the KLdivergence from an approximating distribution qw to a target
distribution p (Jordan et al., 1999; Blei et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2017). While computationally convenient, the use of
this objective may lead to distributions qw with undesirable
statistical properties (e.g. variance underestimation (Minka,
2005)). To avoid this, recent methods instead attempt to
minimize an alpha-divergence (Amari, 1985). This is a class
of divergences indexed by a parameter α, that reduces to
the typical KL-divergence when α → 0. The α parameter
determines the divergence’s properties. For instance, for
α  0, the divergence penalizes distributions qw that place
no mass in regions where p does, penalizing variance underestimation. For many use-cases, approximating distributions
minimizing these divergences would be more useful.
1

College of Information and Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Tomas Geffner <tgeffner@cs.umass.edu>, Justin Domke
<domke@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Existing alpha-divergence minimization algorithms can be
classified into two broad groups: biased methods (Li &
Turner, 2016; Regli & Silva, 2018) and unbiased methods
(Kuleshov & Ermon, 2017; Dieng et al., 2017). While some
positive empirical results have been obtained using biased
methods, it has been recently observed that, in problems
with high dimensionality, these often fail to minimize the
target alpha-divergence (Geffner & Domke, 2021).1 Thus,
in this paper we turn our attention to unbiased methods.
These attempt to minimize an alpha-divergence by running
stochastic optimization algorithms with unbiased estimators
of the divergence’s gradient.
The major open question for unbiased methods concerns the
difficulty of the optimization problem. Too much variability
in the gradient estimator would force a very small step-size
and thus a huge number of optimization steps. While some
positive empirical results have been observed, authors have
cautioned the the gradient estimators used can be temperamental (Kuleshov & Ermon, 2017; Dieng et al., 2017). It
is currently unclear when these methods will succeed, and
how their performance depends on α or the dimensionality
of the problem.
We address this question. Informally, our main conclusion
is that methods based on unbiased gradient estimates of an
alpha-divergence will often require catastrophically large
amounts of computation to scale to high dimensional models
for any α 6= 0. This is not always due to high variance
gradients, but to an extremely low Signal-to-Noise ratio
(SNR).
In Section 3 we present two gradient estimators used by
unbiased methods, one obtained using reparameterization,
and a novel one obtained by applying “double” reparameterization. An empirical evaluation shows that, even in simple
scenarios, these methods do not seem scale to problems of
moderately high dimension (d ≈ 100), nor to moderately
large values of α (α ≈ 0.4). Curiously, optimization fails
even in cases where the gradient estimator has provably
low variance. Instead, we propose that this failure is best
explained by the estimator’s (SNR), which is known to be
related to optimization convergence (Section 4.3).
1

In fact, it was observed that, in high dimensions, biased methods often just minimize the typical VI objective, the KL divergence
from qw to p, regardless of the target alpha-divergence chosen.

