Diffusion Source Identification on Networks with Statistical Confidence
Quinlan Dawkins 1 Tianxi Li 2 Haifeng Xu 1

Abstract
Diffusion source identification on networks is a
problem of fundamental importance in a broad
class of applications, including rumor controlling
and virus identification. Though this problem has
received significant recent attention, most studies
have focused only on very restrictive settings and
lack theoretical guarantees for more realistic networks. We introduce a statistical framework for
the study of diffusion source identification and
develop a confidence set inference approach inspired by hypothesis testing. Our method efficiently produces a small subset of nodes, which
provably covers the source node with any prespecified confidence level without restrictive assumptions on network structures. Moreover, we
propose multiple Monte Carlo strategies for the
inference procedure based on network topology
and the probabilistic properties that significantly
improve the scalability. To our knowledge, this
is the first diffusion source identification method
with a practically useful theoretical guarantee
on general networks. We demonstrate our approach via extensive synthetic experiments on
well-known random network models, a large data
set of hundreds of real-world networks, as well as
a mobility network between cities concerning the
COVID-19 spreading.

1 Introduction
One pressing problem today is the spreading of misinformation or malicious attacks/virus in various cyberspaces.
For example, rumors and fake news on social networks may
result in many serious political, economic, and social issues
(Vosoughi et al., 2018). Viruses that spread via emails and
computer communication may cause severe privacy and
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Tianxi Li <tianxili@virginia.edu>, Haifeng Xu
<hx4ad@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

leakage problems (Newman et al., 2002; Halperin & Almogy, 2002; Xu & Ren, 2016). The negative impacts stem
from a few source users/locations and then spread over the
social networks via a diffusion process in such events. One
crucial step to reduce the loss from such an event is to
quickly identify the sources so that counter-measures can
be taken in a timely fashion.
Though early practices have been done for this important
problem with motivations from various domains, systematic research on this problem only began very recently, arguably starting from the seminal work of (Shah & Zaman,
2011), which proposed a rumor center estimator that can
be located by an efficient message-passing algorithm with
linear time complexity. Despite the significant interest and
progress on this problem in recent years (Shah & Zaman,
2012; Dong et al., 2013; Khim & Loh, 2016; Bubeck et al.,
2017; Yu et al., 2018; Crane & Xu, 2020), many challenges
remain unaddressed. First, the theoretical understanding of
these methods is currently only available under very restrictive and somewhat unrealistic structural assumptions of the
networks such as regular trees. This is perhaps partially explained by the well-known computational hardness about
the probabilistic inference of diffusion process in general
graphs (Shapiro & Delgado-Eckert, 2012). Therefore, intuitive approximations have been used for general networks
(Nguyen et al., 2016; Kazemitabar & Amini, 2020). However, such methods lack theoretical guarantees. Second,
even for regular trees, the available performance guarantee
is far from being useful in practice. Even in the most idealized situation of infinite regular trees, the correct probability of the rumor center is almost always below 0.3 (Shah
& Zaman, 2011; Dong et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2018). For
general graphs, as we show later, the correct rate of such a
single-point estimation method only becomes too low to be
practical.
To guarantee higher success probability, a typical approach,
as in both machine learning theory (Valiant, 1984) and
data-driven applied models (LeCun et al., 2015), is perhaps
to obtain more data. However, a fundamental challenge
in diffusion source identification (DSI) is that the problem
by nature has only one snapshot of the network information, i.e., the earliest observation about the infection status

