A Representation Learning Perspective on the Importance of
Train-Validation Splitting in Meta-Learning

Nikunj Saunshi 1 Arushi Gupta 1 Wei Hu 1

Abstract
An effective approach in meta-learning is to utilize multiple “train tasks” to learn a good initialization for model parameters that can help solve
unseen “test tasks” with very few samples by finetuning from this initialization. Although successful in practice, theoretical understanding of such
methods is limited. This work studies an important aspect of these methods: splitting the data
from each task into train (support) and validation (query) sets during meta-training. Inspired
by recent work (Raghu et al., 2020), we view
such meta-learning methods through the lens of
representation learning and argue that the trainvalidation split encourages the learned representation to be low-rank without compromising on expressivity, as opposed to the non-splitting variant
that encourages high-rank representations. Since
sample efficiency benefits from low-rankness, the
splitting strategy will require very few samples
to solve unseen test tasks. We present theoretical
results that formalize this idea for linear representation learning on a subspace meta-learning
instance, and experimentally verify this practical
benefit of splitting in simulations and on standard
meta-learning benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Humans can learn from prior experiences, summarize them
into skills or concepts and leverage those to solve new tasks
with very few demonstrations (Ahn & Brewer, 1993). Since
labeled data is often expensive to obtain, it would be desirable for machine learning agents to emulate this behavior
of exploiting data from prior experiences to make solving
new tasks sample efficient. In this regard, we consider the
meta-learning or learning-to-learn paradigm (Schmidhuber,
1987; Thrun & Pratt, 1998), where a learner utilizes data
1

Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to:
Nikunj Saunshi <nsaunshi@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

from many “train” tasks to learn a useful prior that can
help solve new “test” tasks. The goal is to do well on test
tasks with way fewer samples per task than would be required without access to train tasks. There is a rich history
of successful methods in meta-learning and related fields
of multi-task, lifelong and few-shot learning (Evgeniou &
Pontil, 2004; Ruvolo & Eaton, 2013; Vinyals et al., 2016).
The advent of the deep learning pipeline has led to more recent model-agnostic methods (Finn et al., 2017) that learn a
good initialization for model parameters by using train tasks
(meta-training) and solve test tasks by fine-tuning from this
initialization using little data (meta-testing). Such methods
have helped with many problems like few-shot classification in computer vision (Nichol et al., 2018), reinforcement
learning (Finn et al., 2017), federated learning (McMahan
et al., 2017), neural machine translation (Gu et al., 2018).
This empirical success has encouraged theoretical studies
(cf. Section 2) of the statistical and optimization properties of such methods. We are interested in the statistical
aspect, where a meta-learner is evaluated based on the number of test task samples it requires to achieve small error.
Specifically, we focus our attention on the design choice of
data splitting that is used in many meta-learning methods
(Finn et al., 2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Raghu et al.,
2020). In this setting, a typical meta-learner learns a good
initialization by 1) splitting the train task data into train
(support) and validation (query) sets, 2) running the inner
loop or base-learner of choice on the train set of the task
starting from the current initialization, 3) minimizing the
loss incurred on the validation set of the task by parameters
from the inner loop, 4) updating the initialization in outer
loop. The learned initialization is used to solve an unseen
test task, typically in the few-shot regime with very few
samples available. Here we study the sample complexity
benefit offered by such train-validation (tr-val) splitting by
arguing that it learns low-rank & expressive representations.
We further compare this splitting strategy to the non-splitting
variant where the entire task data is used for both, inner loop
and outer loop updates (Nichol et al., 2018; Zhou et al.,
2019). Recent theoretical work (Bai et al., 2020) makes
the case for the non-splitting variant (referred to as tr-tr
variant) with an analysis in the centroid learning setting for

