Incentivizing Compliance with Algorithmic Instruments

Daniel Ngo * 1 Logan Stapleton * 1 Vasilis Syrgkanis 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 3

Abstract
Randomized experiments can be susceptible to
selection bias due to potential non-compliance by
the participants. While much of the existing work
has studied compliance as a static behavior, we
propose a game-theoretic model to study compliance as dynamic behavior that may change over
time. In rounds, a social planner interacts with a
sequence of heterogeneous agents who arrive with
their unobserved private type that determines both
their prior preferences across the actions (e.g.,
control and treatment) and their baseline rewards
without taking any treatment. The planner provides each agent with a randomized recommendation that may alter their beliefs and their action
selection. We develop a novel recommendation
mechanism that views the planner’s recommendation as a form of instrumental variable (IV) that
only affects an agents’ action selection, but not
the observed rewards. We construct such IVs by
carefully mapping the history –the interactions
between the planner and the previous agents– to
a random recommendation. Even though the initial agents may be completely non-compliant, our
mechanism can incentivize compliance over time,
thereby enabling the estimation of the treatment
effect of each treatment, and minimizing the cumulative regret of the planner whose goal is to
identify the optimal treatment.

1. Introduction
In many applications, estimating the causal effect of a treatment or intervention is at the heart of a decision-making
process. Examples include a study on the effect of a vaccine
on immunity, an assessment of the effect of a training program on workers’ efficiency, and a evaluation of the effect
of a sales campaign on a company’s profit. Many studies on
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Minnesota 2 Microsoft Research 3 Carnegie Mellon University. ZSW is supported by an
NSF FAI Award #1939606. Correspondence to: Logan Stapleton
<lstaple99@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

causal effects rely on randomized experiments, which randomly assign each individual in a population to a treatment
group or a control group and then estimate the causal effects
by comparing the outcomes across groups. However, in
many real-world domains, participation is voluntary, which
can be susceptible to non-compliance. For example, people
may turn down a vaccine or a drug when they are assigned
to receive the treatment (Wright, 1993). Another example is
a randomized evaluation of the Job Training Partnership Act
(JTPA) training program (Bloom et al., 1997), where only
60 percent of the workers assigned to be trained chose to
receive training, while roughly 2 percent of those assigned
to the control group chose to receive training. In many cases,
non-compliance can cause selection bias: for example, those
who choose to receive the drug or vaccine in a randomized
trial tend to be healthier, and those who join the training
program might may more productive to begin with.
Although non-compliance in randomized experiments has
been well studied in many observational studies (see e.g.
Angrist and Pischke (2008)), there has been little work that
studies and models how compliance varies over time. In reality, however, participants’ compliance behaviors may not
be static: they may change according to their time-varying
beliefs about the treatments. If the outcomes from the previous trials suggest that the treatments are effective, then the
participants may become more willing to accept the recommendation. For example, those initially weary about a new
vaccine may change their mind once they see others take
it without experiencing negative symptoms.1 Motivated by
this observation, this paper studies the design of dynamic
trial mechanisms that map history–the observations from
previous trials–to a treatment recommendation and gradually incentivize compliance over time.
In this paper, we introduce a game theoretic model to study
the dynamic (non)-compliance behavior due to changing
beliefs. In our model, there is a collection of treatments
such that each treatment j is associated with an unknown
treatment effect θj . We study an online learning game, in
which a set of T myopic agents arrive sequentially over
T rounds. Each agent t has a private unobserved type ut ,
1

A recent survey shows that many Americans choose to wait
before deciding to receive a COVID-19 vaccine (Hamel et al.,
2021).

