Dynamic Planning and Learning under Recovering Rewards

David Simchi-Levi 1 Zeyu Zheng 2 Feng Zhu 1

Abstract
Motivated by emerging applications such as livestreaming e-commerce, promotions and recommendations, we introduce a general class of multiarmed bandit problems that have the following
two features: (i) the decision maker can pull and
collect rewards from at most K out of N different arms in each time period; (ii) the expected
reward of an arm immediately drops after it is
pulled, and then non-parametrically recovers as
the idle time increases. With the objective of maximizing expected cumulative rewards over T time
periods, we propose, construct and prove performance guarantees for a class of “Purely Periodic
Policies”. For the offline problem when all model
parameters are known, our proposed policy obtains an approximation
ratio that is at the order
√
of 1 − O(1/ K), which is asymptotically optimal when K grows to infinity. For the online
problem when the model parameters are unknown
and need to be learned, we design an Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
√ based policy that approxe
imately has O(N
T ) regret against the offline
benchmark. Our framework and policy design
may have the potential to be adapted into other
offline planning and online learning applications
with non-stationary and recovering rewards.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we introduce and solve a general class of
multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems that have two unique
features, which extends the class of classical MAB problems. First, in each time period, the decision maker can
simultaneously pull and collect rewards from at most K
arms out of N arms. Second, the expected reward of an arm
1

Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts, USA 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of
California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: David SimchiLevi <dslevi@mit.edu>, Zeyu Zheng <zyzheng@berkeley.edu>,
Feng Zhu <fengzhu@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

immediately drops after it is pulled, and then gradually recovers if the arm is not pulled in the subsequent time periods.
This class of problems are motivated by emerging applications such as live-streaming e-commerce, promotions and
recommendations, and have the potential to include other
applications with non-stationary and recovering rewards.
We use the contexts of live-streaming e-commerce to briefly
describe the problem background, before moving into the
discussion of contributions, related literature, and specific
problem settings.
Promotion in Live-streaming E-commerce: The rapidly
growing live-streaming e-commerce is estimated to hit $100
billion in annual global sales in the year of 2020; see Greenwald (2020) and Kharif & Townsend (2020). A most common form of live-streaming e-commerce is session-based
promotions held by a key opinion leader (KOL) on platforms such as Amazon Live and Taobao Live. In sessionbased promotions, a KOL holds sessions on consecutive
days. The KOL chooses about K = 50 products to discuss
their features, promote and sell during the session, one after
another, often at deep discounts. The prepared inventory for
the promoted products can often sell out in seconds. Many
manufacturers pitch the KOL and create a large pool of products for the KOL to choose from, with an estimated ten to
one selection ratio (Greenwald, 2020; Kharif & Townsend,
2020). Therefore, the entire pool of products can be of
size N = 500. This emerging application of live-streaming
e-commerce gives rise to the need for dynamic planning
and learning with two unique features. First, in each time
period, the decision maker selects K = 50 products (arms)
to promote and sell (pull) out of a pool of N = 500. Second,
if a product is promoted and on sale in some time period t
with expected reward R, the expected reward of promoting
and selling the same product again in time period t + 1 will
drop and can be much smaller than R. On the other hand, as
the idle time (number of time periods that a product is not
promoted) increases, the expected reward of this product
can increase. Because of this, even for the most popular
product, a KOL will not promote and sell the product in
every single session, but alternatively, select the product in
every few other sessions.
Aside from the example of live-streaming e-commerce, there
are a number of other applications that exhibit such rewards
dropping and recovering phenomenon. For example, in the

