Sharper Generalization Bounds for Clustering

Shaojie Li 1 2 Yong Liu 1 2

Abstract
Existing generalization analysis of clustering
mainly focuses on specific instantiations, such
as (kernel) k-means, and a unified framework
for studying clustering performance is still lacking. Besides, the existing excess clustering
risk
√
bounds are mostly of order O(K/ n) provided
that the underlying distribution has bounded support, where n is the sample size and K is the cluster numbers, or of order O(K 2 /n) under strong
assumptions on the underlying distribution, where
these assumptions are hard to be verified in general. In this paper, we propose a unified clustering
learning framework and investigate its excess risk
bounds, obtaining state-of-the-art upper bounds
under mild assumptions. Specifically, we derive
sharper bounds of order O(K 2 /n) under mild
assumptions on the covering number of the hypothesis spaces, where these assumptions are easy
to be verified. Moreover, for the hard clustering
scheme, such as (kernel) k-means, if just assume
the hypothesis functions to be bounded, we√improve the
√ upper
√ bounds from the order O(K/ n)
to O( K/ n). Furthermore, state-of-the-art
bounds of faster order O(K/n) are obtained with
the covering number assumptions.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the fundamental issues in unsupervised learning and has been used in various applications
(Xu & Wunsch, 2005; Von Luxburg, 2007; Jain, 2010; Shaham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018). In a clustering scheme,
datasets are divided into several subgroups, such that data
points in the same subgroup are more similar to each other
than to those in other subgroups. Although clustering has
been studied for decades, by contrast to the thriving of
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yong Liu <liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

clustering algorithm design and application, the statistical
theory of clustering may appear to be not sufficient. The
existing excess risk bounds are mostly derived for different specific instantiations of clustering learning problems,
such as k-means (Thorpe et al., 2015; Tang & Monteleoni,
2016; Levrard et al., 2013; Antos, 2005), kernel k-means
(Biau et al., 2008; Antos et al., 2005; Levrard et al., 2015;
Levrard, 2018) or spectral clustering (Terada & Yamamoto,
2019), and a unified framework to study generalization performance for clustering learning is still lacking. Moreover,
the existing excess clustering risk bounds either have a slow
convergence rate or require pretty strong assumptions on
the underlying distribution to get the faster convergence
rate, however, whose assumptions are hard to be verified
in general. Specifically, if the distribution has bounded
support, the
√ excess risk upper bounds are mostly of order O(K/ n) (Linder, 2000; Biau et al., 2008; Maurer &
Pontil, 2010). If the distribution further satisfies a strong
assumption called margin condition, the faster convergence
rate of order O(K 2 /n) appears to be obtained (Chou, 1994;
Antos et al., 2005; Levrard et al., 2015).
Motivated by these problems, we first propose a clustering
learning framework, which is suitable for (kernel) k-means,
soft k-means, spectral clustering, neural network clustering
scheme, etc, and then investigate its excess risk bounds. We
start our analysis by proposed clustering Rademacher complexity and show
√ that the upper bound obtained by it is just
of order O(K/ n) under the bounded hypothesis functions
assumption. Since the Rademacher complexity (Bartlett
& Mendelson, 2002) considers the worst case, we further
define the more reasonable local clustering Rademacher
complexity (Bartlett et al., 2005) and use it to get a basic
excess risk bound with the fixed point under the same assumptions. After that, by using some assumptions of the
covering number on the hypothesis function classes, we obtain suitable fixed points and get sharper excess risk upper
bounds, whose convergence rates are of order O(K 2 /n).
Note that our assumptions of covering number on hypothesis classes are mild and easy to be verified compared with
the margin condition (Pollard et al., 1982; Chou, 1994; Antos et al., 2005; Levrard et al., 2015; Terada & Yamamoto,
2019). Furthermore, different from bounding the clustering Rademacher complexity by the maximum Rademacher
complexity of the restrictions of the function class along

