One for One, or All for All:
Equilibria and Optimality of Collaboration in Federated Learning

Avrim Blum 1 Nika Haghtalab 2 Richard Lanas Phillips 3 Han Shao 1

Abstract
In recent years, federated learning has been embraced as an approach for bringing about collaboration across large populations of learning agents.
However, little is known about how collaboration
protocols should take agents’ incentives into account when allocating individual resources for
communal learning in order to maintain such collaborations. Inspired by game theoretic notions,
this paper introduces a framework for incentiveaware learning and data sharing in federated learning. Our stable and envy-free equilibria capture
notions of collaboration in the presence of agents
interested in meeting their learning objectives
while keeping their own sample collection burden
low. For example, in an envy-free equilibrium, no
agent would wish to swap their sampling burden
with any other agent and in a stable equilibrium,
no agent would wish to unilaterally reduce their
sampling burden.
In addition to formalizing this framework, our
contributions include characterizing the structural
properties of such equilibria, proving when they
exist, and showing how they can be computed.
Furthermore, we compare the sample complexity of incentive-aware collaboration with that of
optimal collaboration when one ignores agents’
incentives.

1. Introduction
In recent years, federated learning has been embraced as
an approach for enabling large numbers of learning agents
to collaboratively accomplish their goals using collectively
fewer resources, such as smaller data sets. Indeed, collaborative protocols are starting to be used across networks of hos*
Equal contribution 1 Toyota Technological Institute 2 University
of California, Berkeley 3 Cornell University. Correspondence to:
<nika@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

pitals (Wen et al., 2019; Powell, 2019) and devices (McMahan & Ramage, 2017) and are behind important breakthroughs such as understanding the biological mechanisms
underlying schizophrenia in a large scale collaboration of
more than 100 agencies (Bergen & Petryshen, 2012).
This promise of creating large scale impact from mass participation has led to federated learning receiving substantial
interest in the machine learning research community, and
has resulted in faster and more communication-efficient collaborative systems. But, what will ultimately decide the
success and impact of collaborative federated learning is the
ability to recruit and retain large numbers of learning agents
— a feat that requires collaborative algorithms to
help agents accomplish their learning objectives
while “equitably” spreading the data contribution
responsibilities among agents who want a lower
sample collection burden.
This is to avoid the following inequitable circumstances that
may otherwise arise in collaborative learning. First, when
part of an agent’s data is exclusively used to accomplish
another agent’s learning goals; for example, if an agent’s
learning task can be accomplished even when she (unilaterally) lowers her data contribution. Second, when an agent
envies another agent; for example, if an agent’s learning goal
can be accomplished even when she swaps her contribution
burden with another agent who has a lower burden.
In this paper, we introduce the first comprehensive game theoretic framework for collaborative federated learning in the
presence of agents who are interested in accomplishing their
learning objectives while keeping their individual sample
collection burden low. Our framework introduces two notions of equilibria that avoid the aforementioned inequities.
First, analogous to the concept of Nash equilibrium (Nash,
1951), our stable equilibrium requires that no agent could
unilaterally reduce her data contribution responsibility and
still accomplish her learning objective. Second, inspired by
the concept of envy-free allocations (Foley, 1967; Varian,
1974), our envy-free equilibrium requires that no agent could
swap her data contribution with an agent with lower contribution level and still accomplish her learning objective.
In addition to capturing what is deemed as an “equitable”
collaboration to agents, using stable and envy-free equilibria

