Sparsifying Networks via Subdifferential Inclusion

Sagar Verma 1 Jean-Christophe Pesquet 1

Abstract
Sparsifying deep neural networks is of paramount
interest in many areas, especially when those
networks have to be implemented on lowmemory devices. In this article, we propose a new
formulation of the problem of generating sparse
weights for a pre-trained neural network. By
leveraging the properties of standard nonlinear
activation functions, we show that the problem
is equivalent to an approximate subdifferential
inclusion problem.
The accuracy of the
approximation controls the sparsity. We show
that the proposed approach is valid for a broad
class of activation functions (ReLU, sigmoid,
softmax). We propose an iterative optimization
algorithm to induce sparsity whose convergence
is guaranteed. Because of the algorithm flexibility,
the sparsity can be ensured from partial training
data in a minibatch manner. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method, we perform
experiments on various networks in different
applicative contexts:
image classification,
speech recognition, natural language processing,
and time-series forecasting.
Project page:
https://sagarverma.github.io/compression

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have evolved to the state-of-the-art
techniques in a wide array of applications: computer vision
(Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; He et al., 2016; Huang
et al., 2017), automatic speech recognition (Hannun et al.,
2014; Dong et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Watanabe et al.,
2018; Hayashi et al., 2019; Inaguma et al., 2020), natural
language processing (Turc et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019;
Dai et al., 2019b; Brown et al., 2020), and time series
forecasting (Oreshkin et al., 2020). While their performance
in various applications has matched and often exceeded
1
Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, Inria, Centre
de Vision Numérique. Correspondence to: Sagar Verma
<sagar.verma@centralesupelec.fr>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

human capabilities, neural networks may remain difficult
to apply in real-world scenarios. Deep neural networks
leverage the power of Graphical Processing Units (GPUs),
which are power-hungry. Using GPUs to make billions of
predictions per day, thus comes with a substantial energy
cost. In addition, despite their quite fast response time,
deep neural networks are not yet suitable for most real-time
applications where memory-limited low-cost architectures
need to be used. For all those reasons, compression and
efficiency have become a topic of high interest in the deep
learning community.
Sparsity in DNNs has been an active research topic
generating numerous approaches. DNNs achieving the stateof-the-art in a given problem usually have a large number of
layers with non-uniform parameter distribution across layers.
Most sparsification methods are based on a global approach,
which may result in a sub-optimal compression for a reduced
accuracy. This may occur because layers with a smaller
number of parameters may remain dense, although they
may contribute more in terms of computational complexity
(e.g., for convolutional layers). Some methods, also known
as magnitude pruning, use a hard or soft-thresholding
to remove less significant parameters. Soft thresholding
techniques achieve a good sparsity-accuracy trade-off at the
cost of additional parameters and increased computation
time during training (Kusupati et al., 2020). Searching
for a hardware efficient network is another area that has
been proven quite useful, but it requires a huge amount of
computational resources. Convex optimization techniques
such as those used in (Aghasi et al., 2017) often rely upon
fixed point iterations that make use of the proximity operator
(Moreau, 1962). The related concepts are fundamental
for tackling nonlinear problems and have recently come
into play in the analysis of neural networks (Combettes
& Pesquet, 2020a) and nonlinear systems (Combettes &
Woodstock, 2021).
This paper shows that the properties of nonlinear activation
functions can be utilized to identify highly sparse
subnetworks. We show that the sparsification of a
network can be formulated as an approximate subdifferential
inclusion problem. We provide an iterative algorithm
called subdifferential inclusion for sparsity (SIS) that uses
partial training data to identify a sparse subnetwork while
maintaining good accuracy. SIS makes even few-parameter

