K-shot NAS: Learnable Weight-Sharing for NAS with K-shot Supernets

Xiu Su * 1 Shan You * 2 3 Mingkai Zheng 2 Fei Wang 2 Chen Qian 2 Changshui Zhang 3 Chang Xu 1

Abstract
In one-shot weight sharing for NAS, the weights
of each operation (at each layer) are supposed to
be identical for all architectures (paths) in the supernet. However, this rules out the possibility of
adjusting operation weights to cater for different
paths, which limits the reliability of the evaluation results. In this paper, instead of counting
on a single supernet, we introduce K-shot supernets and take their weights for each operation as
a dictionary. The operation weight for each path
is represented as a convex combination of items
in a dictionary with a simplex code. This enables a matrix approximation of the stand-alone
weight matrix with a higher rank (K > 1). A
simplex-net is introduced to produce architecturecustomized code for each path. As a result, all
paths can adaptively learn how to share weights in
the K-shot supernets and acquire corresponding
weights for better evaluation. K-shot supernets
and simplex-net can be iteratively trained, and we
further extend the search to the channel dimension.
Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets validate that K-shot NAS significantly improves the
evaluation accuracy of paths and thus brings in
impressive performance improvements.

1. Introduction
Deep neural models have thrived in various walks of life
with artificial intelligence and edge computing. Before deploying a model for a task of interest, practitioners need
to consider the hardware budgets and specify a decent architecture or structure for the model. In this way, much
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Faculty of
Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia 2 SenseTime
Research 3 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science
and Technology (BNRist). Correspondence to: Shan You
<youshan@sensetime.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

effort have devoted to designing sophisticated structures,
such as ResNet (He et al., 2016), SENet (Hu et al., 2018)
and MobileNet (Sandler et al., 2018), and further boosting
the performance within the hardware budgets, e.g., knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015; You et al., 2017; Du
et al., 2020) and quantization (Gholami et al., 2021). Recently, neural architecture search (NAS) (Tan et al., 2019;
Wan et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020b) merges both sides and
aims to directly generate architectures with a promising performance by liberating manual labor and surmounting the
cognitive bottleneck of humans.
Pioneer works usually design architectures via a decisionmaking process with reinforcement learning (Zoph & Le,
2016) or pure evolutionary algorithms (Real et al., 2019).
However, they often involve unbearable training costs and
resource consumption. For the sake of searching efficiency,
current methods mainly leverage a one-shot supernet with
all architectures (paths) that can be derived and share their
weights mutually. Gradient-based methods introduce architecture parameters to deferentially optimize the weights and
architecture parameters, such as DARTS (Liu et al., 2018)
and its variants (Xu et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2020; 2021). But they may suffer the significant memory cost and the detrimental gap when deriving the final
architecture. Sample-based methods (You et al., 2020) thus
propose to decouple the supernet weights and architecture
parameters. They train the supernet by sampling paths from
it (Guo et al., 2020b) and then take it as an evaluator for
ranking different paths, with the more stable and promising
performance achieved.
In one-shot NAS methods, the assumption of weight sharing
plays an important role. Specifically, it postulates that the
weights of an operation at a layer are identical for all the
paths containing this operation. Thus, the training efficiency
of the supernet can be largely ensured, as only one copy of
the operation weight has to be maintained for the massive
number of paths. However, this also rules out the possibility of adjusting the operation weight to cater for different
paths. As a result, any two different paths will always be
compulsively required to inherit the weights of the same
operations. Nevertheless, they may be far from the standalone weights obtained by training each path from scratch.
With such a harsh and limited space to adapt to the optimal operation weight, the resulting evaluation performance

