Pareto GAN: Extending the Representational
Power of GANs to Heavy-Tailed Distributions

Todd Huster 1 Jeremy E.J. Cohen 1 Zinan Lin 2 Kevin Chan 3 Charles Kamhoua 3 Nandi Leslie 4
Cho-Yu Jason Chiang 1 Vyas Sekar 2

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are often billed as "universal distribution learners",
but precisely what distributions they can represent and learn is still an open question. Heavytailed distributions are prevalent in many different domains such as financial risk-assessment,
physics, and epidemiology. We observe that existing GAN architectures do a poor job of matching the asymptotic behavior of heavy-tailed distributions, a problem that we show stems from
their construction. Additionally, when faced with
the infinite moments and large distances between
outlier points that are characteristic of heavytailed distributions, common loss functions produce unstable or near-zero gradients. We address these problems with the Pareto GAN. A
Pareto GAN leverages extreme value theory and
the functional properties of neural networks to
learn a distribution that matches the asymptotic
behavior of the marginal distributions of the features. We identify issues with standard loss functions and propose the use of alternative metric
spaces that enable stable and efficient learning.
Finally, we evaluate our proposed approach on a
variety of heavy-tailed datasets.

1. INTRODUCTION
Heavy-tailed, and particularly power-law, distributions are
regularly encountered in a diverse set of applications such
as spectroscopy, particle motion, finance, geological processes, epidemiology, etc. (Michel & Chave, 2007; Fortin
& Clusel, 2015; Gilli & këllezi, 2006; Caers et al., 1999;
1
Perspecta Labs, Basking Ridge, NJ, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Army Research
Lab, Adelphi, Maryland, USA 4 Raytheon Technologies, Adelphi, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to: Todd Huster <thuster@perspectalabs.com>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Evans & Erlandson, 2004). Analysis of these distributions
is often focused on the prevalence (i.e., risk) of rare events.
Models that can fit sample data while accurately predicting the probabilities of extreme events are useful for risk
assessment in these fields.
How suitable are GANs to serve as these models? They
have proven to be wildly successful at learning complex
distributions in the image domain, without simply memorizing the data (Brock et al., 2018). They can famously
generate convincing images of the faces of non-existent
celebrities (Karras et al., 2017). Can they also convincingly
generate samples of the default rates of mortgages and the
features of 100-year floods?
The universal approximation theorem (Hornik et al., 1989)
and effective loss functions like Wasserstein distance (Arjovsky et al., 2017) suggest that GANs can learn to generate an arbitrary dataset, regardless of the distribution it was
drawn from. Of course, simple bootstrap sampling from the
dataset can do the same. It is the ability of GANs (or any
generative model) to appropriately generalize from training
examples that separates them from a static dataset.
In the case of heavy-tailed distributions, this generalization
is not effective. As we will show in section 4, the asymptotic behavior of a GAN marginals is predictable based
solely on the combination of input distribution and activation function, irrespective of the training data. In most
cases, the generator is able to fit the training data closely
and interpolate between these points, but it does not extrapolate in a reasonable fashion.
This does not have to be the case, however. In their extremes, most naturally occurring marginal distributions follow one of a handful of asymptotic behaviors (Balkema &
de Haan, 1974). These behaviors are all captured by the
generalized Pareto distribution. Since we are able to predict the asymptotic behavior of a GAN from its architecture, we can therefore also design our GAN to take on a
particular belief about the tail behavior of its marginals. To
create such a generator, we feed a standard neural network
a noise function with heavy-tailed characteristics and provide a few mechanisms for controlling how heavy the tails

