Meta-Thompson Sampling
Branislav Kveton 1 Mikhail Konobeev 2 Manzil Zaheer 1 Chih-wei Hsu 1 Martin Mladenov 1 Craig Boutilier 1
Csaba Szepesvári 3 2

Abstract
Efficient exploration in bandits is a fundamental
online learning problem. We propose a variant of
Thompson sampling that learns to explore better
as it interacts with bandit instances drawn from
an unknown prior. The algorithm meta-learns the
prior and thus we call it MetaTS. We propose several efficient implementations of MetaTS and analyze it in Gaussian bandits. Our analysis shows
the benefit of meta-learning and is of a broader interest, because we derive a novel prior-dependent
Bayes regret bound for Thompson sampling. Our
theory is complemented by empirical evaluation,
which shows that MetaTS quickly adapts to the
unknown prior.

1. Introduction
A stochastic bandit (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Auer et al., 2002;
Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2019) is an online learning problem where a learning agent sequentially interacts with an
environment over n rounds. In each round, the agent pulls
an arm and then receives the arm’s stochastic reward. The
agent aims to maximize its expected cumulative reward over
n rounds. It does not know the mean rewards of the arms a
priori, so must learn them by pulling the arms. This induces
the well-known exploration-exploitation trade-off : explore,
and learn more about an arm; or exploit, and pull the arm
with the highest estimated reward. In a clinical trial, the arm
might be a treatment and its reward is the outcome of that
treatment for a patient.
Bandit algorithms are typically designed to have low regret
for some problem class of interest to the algorithm designer
(Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2019). In practice, however, the
problem class may not be perfectly specified at the time of
the design. For instance, consider applying Thompson sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933; Chapelle & Li, 2012; Agrawal
& Goyal, 2012; Russo et al., 2018) to a 2-armed bandit in
1

Google Research 2 University of Alberta 3 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Branislav Kveton <bkveton@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

which the prior distribution over mean arm rewards, a vital
part of TS, is unknown. While the prior is unknown, the designer may know that it is one of two possible priors where
either arm 1 or arm 2 is optimal with high probability. If the
agent could learn which of the two priors has been realized,
for instance by interacting repeatedly with bandit instances
drawn from that prior, it could adapt its exploration strategy
to the realized prior, and thereby incur much lower regret
than would be possible without this adaptation.
We formalize this learning problem as follows. A learning
agent sequentially interacts with m bandit instances. Each
interaction has n rounds and we refer to it as a task. The
instances share a common structure, namely that their mean
arm rewards are drawn from an unknown instance prior P∗ .
While P∗ is not known, we assume that it is sampled from a
meta-prior Q, which the agent knows with certainty. The
goal of the agent is to minimize the regret in each sampled
instance almost as well as if it knew P∗ . This is achieved
by adapting to P∗ through interactions with the instances.
This is a form of meta-learning (Thrun, 1996; 1998; Baxter,
1998; 2000), where the agent learns to act from interactions
with bandit instances.
We make the following contributions. First, we formalize
the problem of Bayes regret minimization where the prior
P∗ is unknown, and is learned by interactions with bandit
instances sampled from it in m tasks. Second, we propose
MetaTS, a meta-Thompson sampling algorithm that solves
this problem. MetaTS maintains a distribution over the unknown P∗ in each task, which we call a meta-posterior Qs ,
and acts optimistically with respect to it. More specifically,
in task s, it samples an estimate of P∗ as Ps ∼ Qs and then
runs TS with prior Ps for n rounds. We show how to implement MetaTS efficiently in Bernoulli and Gaussian bandits.
In addition, we bound its Bayes regret in Gaussian bandits.
Our analysis is conservative because it relies only on a single pull of each arm in each task. Nevertheless, it yields an
improved regret bound due to adapting to P∗ . The analysis
is of broader interest, as we derive a novel prior-dependent
upper bound on the Bayes regret of TS. Our theoretical results are complemented by synthetic experiments, which
show that MetaTS adapts quickly to the unknown prior P∗ ,
and its regret is comparable to that of TS with a known P∗ .

