Pointwise Binary Classification with Pairwise Confidence Comparisons

Lei Feng 1 Senlin Shu 2 Nan Lu 3 4 Bo Han 5 4 Miao Xu 6 4 Gang Niu 4 Bo An 7 Masashi Sugiyama 4 3

Abstract
To alleviate the data requirement for training effective binary classifiers in binary classification,
many weakly supervised learning settings have
been proposed. Among them, some consider using pairwise but not pointwise labels, when pointwise labels are not accessible due to privacy, confidentiality, or security reasons. However, as a
pairwise label denotes whether or not two data
points share a pointwise label, it cannot be easily
collected if either point is equally likely to be positive or negative. Thus, in this paper, we propose a
novel setting called pairwise comparison (Pcomp)
classification, where we have only pairs of unlabeled data that we know one is more likely to be
positive than the other. Firstly, we give a Pcomp
data generation process, derive an unbiased risk
estimator (URE) with theoretical guarantee, and
further improve URE using correction functions.
Secondly, we link Pcomp classification to noisylabel learning to develop a progressive URE and
improve it by imposing consistency regularization.
Finally, we demonstrate by experiments the effectiveness of our methods, which suggests Pcomp is
a valuable and practically useful type of pairwise
supervision besides the pairwise label.

1. Introduction
Traditional supervised learning techniques have achieved
great advances, while they require precisely labeled data.
In many real-world scenarios, it may be too difficult to collect such data. To alleviate this issue, a large number of
1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, China 3 The University of Tokyo, Japan 4 RIKEN Center
for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan 5 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, China 6 School of
Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Australia 7 School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Lei Feng <lfeng@cqu.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

weakly supervised learning problems (Zhou, 2018) have
been extensively studied, including semi-supervised learning (Zhu & Goldberg, 2009; Niu et al., 2013; Sakai et al.,
2018), multi-instance learning (Zhou et al., 2009; Sun et al.,
2016; Zhang & Zhou, 2017), noisy-label learning (Han
et al., 2018; Xia et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2020), partiallabel learning (Zhang et al., 2017; Feng et al., 2020b; Lv
et al., 2020), complementary-label learning (Ishida et al.,
2017; Yu et al., 2018; Ishida et al., 2019; Feng et al.,
2020a), positive-unlabeled classification (Elkan & Noto,
2008; Niu et al., 2016; Gong et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020), positive-confidence classification (Ishida et al., 2018),
similar-unlabeled classification (Bao et al., 2018), similardissimilar classification (Shimada et al., 2020; Bao et al.,
2020), unlabeled-unlabeled classification (Lu et al., 2019;
2020), and triplet classification (Cui et al., 2020).
Among these weakly supervised learning problems, some
of them (Bao et al., 2018; Shimada et al., 2020; Bao et al.,
2020) consider learning a binary classifier with pairwise
labels that indicate whether two instances belong to (similar)
the same class or not (dissimilar), when pointwise labels
are not accessible due to privacy, confidentiality, or security
reasons. However, if either of the two instances is equally
likely to be positive or negative, it becomes difficult for us
to accurately collect the underlying pairwise label of them.
This motivates us to consider using another type of pairwise
supervision (instead of the pairwise label) for successfully
learning a binary classifier.
In this paper, we propose a novel setting called pairwise comparison (Pcomp) classification, where we aim to perform
pointwise binary classification with only pairwise comparison data. A pairwise comparison (x, x0 ) represents that
the instance x has a larger confidence of belonging to the
positive class than the instance x0 . Such weak supervision
(pairwise confidence comparison) could be much easier for
people to collect than full supervision (pointwise label) in
practice, especially for applications on sensitive or private
matters. For example, it may be difficult to collect sensitive
or private data with pointwise labels, as asking for the true
labels could be prohibited or illegal. In this case, it could be
easier for people to collect other weak supervision like the
comparison information between two examples.
It is also advantageous to consider pairwise confidence com-

