Correcting Exposure Bias for Link Recommendation

Shantanu Gupta 1 2 Hao Wang 3 Zachary Lipton 2 Yuyang Wang 4

Abstract
Link prediction methods are frequently applied in
recommender systems, e.g., to suggest citations
for academic papers or friends in social networks.
However, exposure bias can arise when users are
systematically underexposed to certain relevant
items. For example, in citation networks, authors
might be more likely to encounter papers from
their own field and thus cite them preferentially.
This bias can propagate through naively trained
link predictors, leading to both biased evaluation
and high generalization error (as assessed by true
relevance). Moreover, this bias can be exacerbated by feedback loops. We propose estimators
that leverage known exposure probabilities to mitigate this bias and consequent feedback loops.
Next, we provide a loss function for learning the
exposure probabilities from data. Finally, experiments on semi-synthetic data based on real-world
citation networks, show that our methods reliably identify (truly) relevant citations. Additionally, our methods lead to greater diversity in the
recommended papers’ fields of study. The code
is available at github.com/shantanu95/
exposure-bias-link-rec.

1. Introduction
Diverse application domains, including both citation networks and social networks, are characterized by graphstructured data. Here, nodes represent entities (like papers or
users) and edges represent associations between two nodes
(like citations, friendships, or follows). Link recommender
systems (RSs) leverage node attributes and existing links to
suggest new nodes that a given node should link to (Li et al.,
2017; Bai et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2020). Typically, RSs are
trained and evaluated directly on the observed graph, raising
1
Work done while interning at Amazon 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University 3 Department of Computer
Science, Rutgers University 4 Amazon Web Services (AWS) AI
Labs, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Shantanu Gupta
<shantang@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

concerns about exposure bias—many missing links are false
negatives, and did not form due to lack of exposure rather
than a lack of affinity.
Consider the example of an RS that recommends relevant
citations to authors given attributes of their paper (like title,
abstract, etc.). In this case, equally relevant papers from different fields of study (FOS) might be less cited historically
because authors have been preferentially exposed to papers
in their own FOS. In the observed citation graph, a number
of relevant papers are observed as not cited because the user
was not exposed to those papers. Thus evaluating a link RS
directly on the observed graph may yield a biased estimate
of the true risk.
Exposure bias can exacerbate popularity bias, causing relevant but unpopular items to not be shown (Chen et al., 2020).
In social networks, diverse recommendations can help users
form links with communities they would otherwise not discover (Li et al., 2017; Brandão et al., 2013). In citation
networks, exposure bias can also lead to lines of research being duplicated across fields. Examples include model-based
science and linear canonical transforms, which were developed in isolation (Vincenot, 2018; Liberman & Wolf, 2015).
Thus it would be valuable to have an RS that recommends
relevant low-exposure nodes.
In this paper, we call the probability that a node is exposed
to another node the propensity score; and we call the probability that, given exposure, a node links to another node the
link probability. An RS trained directly on the observed data
will underestimate the link probability for low propensity
nodes relative to high propensity nodes. We demonstrate
this with a simple example in the context of academic citation recommendation.
Example 1 (Exposure Bias). Let’s say that there are two
FOS: Machine Learning (ML) and Physics (PH), with n
papers in each. An ML researcher is looking for papers to
cite. The probability of them being exposed to papers in
ML and PH is 0.9 and 0.6, respectively. Given exposure,
the probabilities that they cite papers from ML and PH are
0.8 and 0.8, respectively. In the observed data, we will see
≈ 0.72n(= 0.9 × 0.8n) ML papers cited and ≈ 0.48n(=
0.6 × 0.8n) PH papers cited. Thus, if we directly learn
link probabilities from the observed data, the probability
of citing a PH paper will be underestimated (0.48 instead

