Towards Tight Bounds on the Sample Complexity
of Average-reward MDPs

Yujia Jin 1 Aaron Sidford 1

Abstract
We prove new upper and lower bounds for sample
complexity of finding an -optimal policy of an
infinite-horizon average-reward Markov decision
process (MDP) given access to a generative model.
When the mixing time of the probability transition matrix of all policies is at most tmix , we provide an algorithm that solves the problem using
e
O(tmix −3 ) (oblivious) samples per state-action
pair. Further, we provide a lower bound showing
that a linear dependence on tmix is necessary in
the worst case for any algorithm which computes
oblivious samples. We obtain our results by establishing connections between infinite-horizon
average-reward MDPs and discounted MDPs of
possible further utility.

1. Introduction
In this paper we consider the fundamental problem of computing an approximately optimal policy in a Markov decision process (MDP) given by a generative model. We
consider a standard MDP model with a known set of states
and actions. If an agent chooses an action at a given state,
a known reward is immediately given to the agent and the
agent probabilistically transitions to a new state by an (unknown) fixed distribution (as a function of the state-action
pair). Given access to a generative model (Kakade et al.,
2003), i.e. an oracle which when queried by a state-action
pair returns an independent sample from the distribution
over next states, our goal is to find a policy, i.e. a choice of
action per state, that approximately maximizes a measure
of (cumulative) reward over time, e.g. discounted reward,
average reward, etc.
Solving MDPs with a generative model is a fundamental
problem in learning theory and a classic model for decision
1

Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University, CA, United States. Correspondence to: Yujia Jin <yujiajin@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

making under uncertainty and reinforcement learning (Puterman, 2014; Sutton & Barto, 2018). It is a prominent theoretical test-bed for learning algorithms and has been studied extensively over past 20 years (Kakade et al., 2003). Multiple
algorithms have been proposed for the problem (Puterman,
2014) and there has been extensive research on improving
the sample complexity for finding an approximately optimal
policy (Wang, 2017a; Sidford et al., 2018a; Wainwright,
2019; Agarwal et al., 2020).
In certain settings, the sample complexity of the problem is
settled. For example, consider discounted MDPs (DMDPs)
where the goal is to minimize the γ-discounted reward, i.e.
the sum of the rewards where the reward at step t ≥ 0 is
discounted by γ t ∈ [0, 1). For a DMDP with Atot total
e tot /(1 − γ)3 2 ) 1
state-action pairs, it is known that Ω(A
samples are necessary to find an -optimal policy (Azar
et al., 2013; Feng et al., 2019) and there are algorithms
e tot /(1 −
which solve the problem with near-optimal O(A
3 2
γ)  ) samples (Sidford et al., 2018a; Agarwal et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2020) for certain ranges of . Similarly, in the
case of finite-horizon MDPs, again optimal sample and
query complexities are known (Sidford et al., 2018a) for
sufficiently small .
Another popular class of MDPs are infinite-horizon averagereward MDPs (AMDPs) (Mahadevan, 1996). Here the reward function (also known as the gain for AMDPs) is the
infinite-horizon average reward and it is assumed that for
any given policy the transition matrix it induces has a mixing time bounded by tmix > 0. AMDPs arise naturally
in controlling computer systems and communication networks, where a controller makes frequent decisions, and for
inventory systems with frequent restocking decisions (Puterman, 2014). However, despite advancements in the theory of DMDPs and multiple proposed algorithms (Wang,
2017b; Jin & Sidford, 2020), the optimal sample complexity
of AMDPs has resisted similar characterization.The best
1

Many results in literature instead consider MDPs where at
each state there are a fixed A actions and use |S|A to denote
the total number of state-action pair in their result. These results
typically generalize to non-uniform action set among states, and
thus we replace this total number of state-action pair with Atot
throughout.

