Provably Efficient Learning of Transferable Rewards

Alberto Maria Metelli * 1 Giorgia Ramponi * 1 Alessandro Concetti 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
The reward function is widely accepted as a succinct, robust, and transferable representation of a
task. Typical approaches, at the basis of Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (IRL), leverage expert
demonstrations to recover a reward function. In
this paper, we study the theoretical properties of
the class of reward functions that are compatible
with the expert’s behavior. We analyze how the
limited knowledge of the expert’s policy and of
the environment affects the reward reconstruction
phase. Then, we examine how the error propagates to the learned policy’s performance when
transferring the reward function to a different environment. We employ these findings to devise
a provably efficient active sampling approach,
aware of the need for transferring the reward function, that can be paired with a large variety of
IRL algorithms. Finally, we provide numerical
simulations on benchmark environments.

1. Introduction
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL, Osa et al., 2018)
aims at recovering a reward function by observing the behavior of an expert. One of the main challenges of IRL is
that the problem itself is ill-posed, as multiple solutions are
admissible (Ng & Russell, 2000). Several criteria have been
proposed to address this ambiguity issue, based on different
principles, including feature-based matching (Abbeel & Ng,
2004), maximum margin planning (Ratliff et al., 2006a),
maximum entropy (Ziebart et al., 2008), maximum Hessian
eigenvalue (Metelli et al., 2017), and generative adversarial
learning (Ho & Ermon, 2016). These algorithms were evaluated either experimentally, in terms of performance of the
policy learned using the recovered reward function (Ratliff
et al., 2006a; Ziebart et al., 2008; Silver et al., 2010; Ziebart
et al., 2010; Boularias et al., 2011; Ho & Ermon, 2016), or
*

1
Equal contribution
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Alberto Maria Metelli
<albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it>.
th

Proceedings of the 38 International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

theoretically, under the strong assumption of reward uniqueness (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Pirotta & Restelli, 2016; Ramponi
et al., 2020b). Nevertheless, as noted in Osa et al. (2018),
the evaluation of IRL algorithms remains, to a large extent,
an open question.
Taking a step back, in the IRL framework, typically, the
transition model of the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP, Puterman, 2014) is unknown to the algorithm
as well as the expert’s policy. In general, these elements
are estimated by interacting with the environment and by
querying the expert. This leads to an unavoidable error on
the feasible set of reward functions, i.e., the ones compatible
with the expert’s demonstrations. Motivated by this, the first
question we aim to address is:
(Q1) How does the error on the transition model and on the
expert’s policy propagate to the recovered reward?
Clearly, any answer to this question will depend on the
chosen IRL algorithm, i.e., on the criterion for selecting
one reward function within the feasible set. To avoid the
dependence on the specific IRL algorithm, we will address
(Q1), studying directly the properties of the feasible set.
From an applicative point of view, the IRL’s objective is
twofold: explainability and transferability. On the one hand,
understanding the expert’s intentions is useful for descriptive
purposes and can help interpret the expert’s decisions (Russell & Santos, 2019; Juozapaitis et al., 2019; Hayat et al.,
2019; Likmeta et al., 2021). On the other hand, the recovered reward function can be used to learn the same task in a
possibly different environment (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Levine
et al., 2011; Fu et al., 2017). This ability makes the IRL
approach more powerful than Behavioral Cloning (BC, Osa
et al., 2018). Indeed, the reward function is the most “succinct” representation of a task (Sutton et al., 1998), and it
can be transferred to other domains, unlike a cloning policy
that is tightly connected to the environment in which it is
played. These considerations motivate our second question:
(Q2) How does the error on the recovered reward affect
the performance of the policy learned in a different
environment?
Thus, the performance of the policy learned in the new
environment will be our index for evaluating the quality

