Trees with Attention for Set Prediction Tasks
Roy Hirsch 1 Ran Gilad-Bachrach 2

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, each
record represents a set of items. For example,
when making predictions from medical records,
the medications prescribed to a patient are a set
whose size is not fixed and whose order is arbitrary. However, most machine learning algorithms
are not designed to handle set structures and are
limited to processing records of fixed size. SetTree, presented in this work, extends the support
for sets to tree-based models, such as RandomForest and Gradient-Boosting, by introducing an
attention mechanism and set-compatible split criteria. We evaluate the new method empirically on
a wide range of problems ranging from making
predictions on sub-atomic particle jets to estimating the redshift of galaxies. The new method outperforms existing tree-based methods consistently
and significantly. Moreover, it is competitive and
often outperforms Deep Learning. We also discuss the theoretical properties of Set-Trees and
explain how they enable item-level explainability.

1. Introduction
In this study, we focus on predictive tasks where each record
contains a set of items. The number of items in a set may
vary and predictions are expected to be independent of the
items’ ordering. Most modern machine learning algorithms
are not designed for processing such structures, and very few
works explicitly model them (Sutherland et al., 2012; Oliva
et al., 2013; Zaheer et al., 2017). Problems where sets of
items emerge abound in many fields, from particle physics
(Qu & Gouskos, 2020) and cosmology (Rykoff et al., 2014)
to statistics (Oliva et al., 2013) and computer graphics (Qi
et al., 2017a). In this work, we present a novel tree-based
algorithm for processing sets.
1
Department of EE, Tel-Aviv University, Israel 2 Department
of Bio-Medical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Israel and the
Edmond J. Safra Center for Bioinformatics. Correspondence to:
Roy Hirsch <royhirsch@mail.tau.ac.il>, Ran Gilad-Bachrach
<rgb@tauex.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

Tree-based models, such as Decision Tree (DT), Random
Forest (RF) and Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBT)
are broadly used in practice (Breiman et al., 1984; Breiman,
2001; Friedman, 2001). In a survey conducted by Kaggle
among data scientists in 2020, RFs and GBTs were ranked as
two of the three most commonly used ML algorithms (used
by 78.1% and by 61.4% of the data scientists respectively)
(Kaggle, 2020). They continue to serve as the state of the art
in many tabular data predictive tasks (Sandulescu & Chiru,
2016; Munkhdalai et al., 2019; Desai et al., 2020a). Despite
their ubiquity, relatively little progress has been made in
extending trees to handle varying length inputs, with some
exceptions for time series prediction tasks (Meek et al.,
2002; Douzal-Chouakria & Amblard, 2012). Few recent
works explicitly extend trees for sets, but these are restricted
to categorical features and were designed for specific tasks,
such as text classification (Lucena, 2020; Guillame-Bert
et al., 2020).
Our method, Set-Tree, is a tree-based general framework
for processing sets. We introduce set compatible split criteria and an attention mechanism that allows applying them
to subsets of the input set which we refer to as attentionsets. In a theoretical analysis we show that composing splitcriteria that are possibly applied over different attention-sets
allows expressing complex set-functions. Learning from
unordered sets is attracting growing attention in the field
of Deep Learning (DL). Recent studies have focused on
the theory of learning from sets (Segol & Lipman, 2019;
Zaheer et al., 2017) or specifically designed for computer
vision or computer graphics problems (Li et al., 2018; Qi
et al., 2017b). We empirically prove that GBeST, a gradient
boosting algorithm applied over Set-Trees, is competitive
and often outperforms DL solutions. Moreover, it provides
item-level explainability that allows quantifying the relative
importance of each item in the input set.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows: (1)
Set-Tree, a new framework based on attention and setcompatible split criteria, that allows applying tree-based
models to problems defined over sets. (2) A theoretical
analysis of Set-Tree. (3) Empirical evaluation in diverse
domains that shows that Set-Tree consistently outperforms
other tree-based approaches and, in most cases, is on a par
or better than DL-based methods. (4) Introduce a new, itemlevel explainabiity method, derived from the attention-sets.

