KO codes: inventing nonlinear encoding and decoding for reliable wireless
communication via deep-learning

Ashok Vardhan Makkuva * 1 Xiyang Liu * 2 Mohammad Vahid Jamali 3 Hessam Mahdavifar 3 Sewoong Oh 2
Pramod Viswanath 1

Abstract
Landmark codes underpin reliable physical layer
communication, e.g., Reed-Muller, BCH, Convolution, Turbo, LDPC and Polar codes: each
is a linear code and represents a mathematical
breakthrough. The impact on humanity is huge:
each of these codes has been used in global wireless communication standards (satellite, WiFi, cellular). Reliability of communication over the
classical additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
channel enables benchmarking and ranking of
the different codes. In this paper, we construct
KO codes, a computationaly efficient family of
deep-learning driven (encoder, decoder) pairs that
outperform the state-of-the-art reliability performance on the standardized AWGN channel. KO
codes beat state-of-the-art Reed-Muller and Polar codes, under the low-complexity successive
cancellation decoding, in the challenging shortto-medium block length regime on the AWGN
channel. We show that the gains of KO codes
are primarily due to the nonlinear mapping of
information bits directly to transmit symbols (bypassing modulation) and yet possess an efficient,
high performance decoder. The key technical innovation that renders this possible is design of a
novel family of neural architectures inspired by
the computation tree of the Kronecker Operation
(KO) central to Reed-Muller and Polar codes.
These architectures pave way for the discovery
of a much richer class of hitherto unexplored nonlinear algebraic structures. The code is available
at https://github.com/deepcomm/KOcodes.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Paul G.
Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of
Washington 3 Department of Electrical Engineerign and Computer
Science, University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Ashok,
Xiyang <makkuva2@illinois.edu, xiyangl@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Physical layer communication underpins the information
age (WiFi, cellular, cable and satellite modems). Codes,
composed of encoder and decoder pairs, are the basic mathematical objects enabling reliable communication: encoder
maps original data bits into a longer sequence, and decoders
map the received sequence to the original bits. Reliability
is precisely measured: bit error rate (BER) measures the
fraction of input bits that were incorrectly decoded; block
error rate (BLER) measures the fraction of times at least
one of the original data bits was incorrectly decoded.
Landmark codes include Reed-Muller (RM), BCH, Turbo,
LDPC and Polar codes (Richardson & Urbanke, 2008): each
is a linear code and represents a mathematical breakthrough
discovered over a span of six decades. The impact on
humanity is huge: each of these codes has been used in
global communication standards over the past six decades.
These codes essentially operate at the information-theoretic
limits of reliability over the additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel, when the number of information bits is
large, the so-called “large block length" regime. In the small
and medium block length regimes, the state-of-the-art codes
are algebraic: encoders and decoders are invented based
on specific linear algebraic constructions over the binary
and higher order fields and rings. Especially prominent binary algebraic codes are RM codes and closely related polar
codes, whose encoders are recursively defined as Kronecker
products of a simple linear operator and constitute the state
of the art in small-to-medium block length regimes.
Inventing new codes is a major intellectual activity both in
academia and the wireless industry; this is driven by emerging practical applications, e.g., low block length regime
in Internet of Things (Ma et al., 2019). The core challenge is that the space of codes is very vast and the sizes
astronomical; for instance a rate 1/2 code over even 100
information bits involves designing 2100 codewords in a 200
dimensional space. Computationally efficient encoding and
decoding procedures are a must, apart from high reliability.
Thus, although a random code is information theoretically
optimal, neither encoding nor decoding is computationally
efficient. The mathematical landscape of computationally

