Neural Feature Matching in Implicit 3D Representations

Yunlu Chen 1 Basura Fernando 2 Hakan Bilen 3 Thomas Mensink 4 1 Efstratios Gavves 1

Abstract
Recently, neural implicit functions have achieved
impressive results for encoding 3D shapes. Conditioning on low-dimensional latent codes generalises a single implicit function to learn shared
representation space for a variety of shapes, with
the advantage of smooth interpolation. While the
benefits from the global latent space do not correspond to explicit points at local level, we propose
to track the continuous point trajectory by matching implicit features with the latent code interpolating between shapes, from which we corroborate
the hierarchical functionality of the deep implicit
functions, where early layers map the latent code
to fitting the coarse shape structure, and deeper
layers further refine the shape details. Furthermore, the structured representation space of implicit functions enables to apply feature matching
for shape deformation, with the benefits to handle topology and semantics inconsistency, such as
from an armchair to a chair with no arms, without
explicit flow functions or manual annotations.

1. Introduction
In recent years neural implicit functions for 3D representations (Park et al., 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019; Chen
& Zhang, 2019; Michalkiewicz et al., 2019) have gained
popularity with benefits including continuous resolutionfree representation and handling complicated topologies.
Moreover, a single implicit function can be generalised to
encode a variety of shapes, by representing each shape with
a low-dimensional latent code that conditions the function.
This is advantageous in terms of the better reconstruction
performance as well as better smoothness and reasonable
interpolations between shapes (Park et al., 2019; Chen &
Zhang, 2019; Chen et al., 2019b) compared to explicit rep1
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands 2 AI3, IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore 3 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Scotland 4 Google Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Correspondence to: Yunlu Chen
<y.chen3@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

source

appearance
fitting

feature
matching

target

Figure 1. Feature Matching applied to mesh deformation.
Appearance-fitting methods overfit to the raw geometry of the
target shape and fail with inconsistent semantics or topologies
easily. Showing MeshODE (Huang et al., 2020) as an example
when deforming an armchair to a no-arm chair. Instead, feature
matching helps to resolve the semantic inconsistency issue and
generate meaningful shapes with no extra annotations.

resentations (Yang et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2017; Groueix
et al., 2018b; Chen et al., 2020).
Intuitively, implicit functions enjoy smooth interpolations
because they rely on continuous coordinates as query point
inputs. However, due to the nature of the encoding, the
learned representations are global and do not correspond
to any explicit local points. Thus, the advantage of smooth
interpolations cannot be applied to shape manipulation of
explicit 3D representations like meshes or CAD models.
We propose to extract point-level transformations from the
deep features and the gradients with regard to the coordinate
input in implicit functions. We track the continuous point
trajectory that matches with the minimum change in pointwise features from implicit function with interpolated latent
code. These can be considered as “generalised” correspondences, in the sense that the point does not necessarily lie
on the interpolated shape surface but can be at any spatial
location for the implicit function input.
The resulting transformed shapes will reflect the characteristics of the layer where we collect features. This provides
insights of what each layer learns, which was not possible
before. By analyzing the hierarchy in standard deep implicit
functions, we find that early layers gradually map the latent
code to coarse shapes, while deeper layers refine finer details. Mid-layer features are semantically distinctive that

