Bilinear Classes: A Structural Framework for
Provable Generalization in RL
Simon S. Du 1 Sham M. Kakade 1 Jason D. Lee 2 Shachar Lovett 3 Gaurav Mahajan 3 Wen Sun 4
Ruosong Wang 5

Abstract
This work introduces Bilinear Classes, a new
structural framework, which permit generalization in reinforcement learning in a wide variety
of settings through the use of function approximation. The framework incorporates nearly all
existing models in which a polynomial sample
complexity is achievable, and, notably, also includes new models, such as the Linear Q∗ /V ∗
model in which both the optimal Q-function and
the optimal V -function are linear in some known
feature space. Our main result provides an RL
algorithm which has polynomial sample complexity for Bilinear Classes; notably, this sample complexity is stated in terms of a reduction to the
generalization error of an underlying supervised
learning sub-problem. These bounds nearly match
the best known sample complexity bounds for
existing models. Furthermore, this framework
also extends to the infinite dimensional (RKHS)
setting: for the the Linear Q∗ /V ∗ model, linear
MDPs, and linear mixture MDPs, we provide sample complexities that have no explicit dependence
on the explicit feature dimension (which could be
infinite), but instead depends only on information
theoretic quantities.

1. Introduction
Tackling large state-action spaces is a central challenge in
reinforcement learning (RL). Here, function approximation
and supervised learning schemes are often employed for
generalization across large state-action spaces. While there
have been a number of successful applications (Mnih et al.,
2013; Kober et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2017).
1

University of Washington 2 Princeton University 3 University
of California, San Diego 4 Cornell University 5 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Gaurav Mahajan <gmahajan@eng.ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

there is also a realization that practical RL approaches are
quite sample inefficient.
Theoretically, there is a growing body of results showing how sample efficiency is possible in RL for particular
model classes (often with restrictions on the model dynamics though in some cases on the class of value functions),
e.g. State Aggregation (Li, 2009; Dong et al., 2020), Linear MDPs (Yang and Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020), Linear
Mixture MDPs (Modi et al., 2020a; Ayoub et al., 2020), Reactive POMDPs (Krishnamurthy et al., 2016), Block MDPs
(Du et al., 2019a), FLAMBE (Agarwal et al., 2020b), Reactive PSRs (Littman et al., 2001), Linear Bellman Complete
(Munos, 2005; Zanette et al., 2020).
More generally, there are also a few lines of work which
propose more general frameworks, consisting of structural
conditions which permit sample efficient RL; these include
the low-rankness structure (e.g. the Bellman rank (Jiang
et al., 2017) and Witness rank (Sun et al., 2019)) or under
a complete condition (Munos, 2005; Zanette et al., 2020).
The goal in these latter works is to develop a unified theory
of generalization in RL, analogous to more classical notions
of statistical complexity (e.g. VC-theory and Rademacher
complexity) relevant for supervised learning. These latter
frameworks are not contained in each other (see Table 1),
and, furthermore, there are a number of natural RL models
that cannot be incorporated into each of these frameworks
(see Table 2).
Motivated by this latter line of work, we aim to understand
if there are simple and natural structural conditions which
capture the learnability in a general class of RL models.
Our Contributions. This work1 provides a simple structural condition on the hypothesis class (which may be either
model-based or value-based), where the Bellman error has a
particular bilinear form, under which sample efficient learning is possible; we refer such a framework as a Bilinear
Class. This structural assumption can be seen as generalizing the Bellman rank (Jiang et al., 2017); furthermore, it not
only contains existing frameworks, it also covers a number
1

Full version appears as [arXiv:2103.10897].

