Watermarking Deep Neural Networks with Greedy Residuals

Hanwen Liu 1 Zhenyu Weng 1 Yuesheng Zhu 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are considered as
intellectual property of their corresponding owners and thus are in urgent need of ownership
protection, due to the massive amount of time
and resources invested in designing, tuning and
training them. In this paper, we propose a novel
watermark-based ownership protection method
by using the residuals of important parameters.
Different from other watermark-based ownership
protection methods that rely on some specific neural network architectures and during verification
require external data source, namely ownership indicators, our method does not explicitly use ownership indicators for verification to defeat various
attacks against DNN watermarks. Specifically,
we greedily select a few and important model parameters for embedding so that the impairment
caused by the changed parameters can be reduced
and the robustness against different attacks can be
improved as the selected parameters can well preserve the model information. Also, without the external data sources for verification, the adversary
can hardly cast doubts on ownership verification
by forging counterfeit watermarks. The extensive
experiments show that our method outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods in five tasks.

1. Introduction
Due to the impressive performance on predictive tasks, machine learning, and deep neural networks (DNNs) particularly have become an increasingly popular method for
a variety of usages in real-world applications. Such applications need models to be well-trained, which requires
massive training data and computing resources (Strubell
et al., 2019). The process of training data collecting, cleansing, storing, and model training can be quite troublesome
and time-consuming, not to mention the potential security
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University. Correspondence to: Yuesheng Zhu <zhuys@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

and privacy issues (Shokri et al., 2017; Song et al., 2017;
Salem et al., 2019), and thus the models are considered to
be the valuable intellectual property of their legitimate owners. However, since the models are supposed to be exposed
and serve users with some helpful information for commercial use, the threat of well-trained model theft seems to be
inevitable (Oh et al., 2018; Orekondy et al., 2019). Also, although well-trained models are closely protected in general,
if the cost of the theft is much lower than that of legal purchase, the value incorporated in such models makes stealing
a lucrative task for malicious adversaries.
One solution to the model theft problem is watermarking
DNN models (Uchida et al., 2017), which is an insightful
way to identify model ownership of the legal owner. Watermarking objects is a well-studied problem in the security
community under the general theme of digital watermarking.
Essentially, the aim of watermarking is to mark the model
with some kind of identity information, in favor of further
ownership tracking. To ensure that the embedded identity
information will not greatly affect the model performance,
this watermarking process usually takes place during model
training. An external data source, e.g., a carefully selected
picture (Adi et al., 2018), is usually used for ownership
verification of the watermarked model. We refer to this
data source as the ownership indicator by analogy with the
acid-based indicator in elementary chemistry.
Designing a practical yet robust watermarking method for
DNN models, however, is not easy. On the one hand, with
the embedding of additional information, the model may not
be able to maintain its original performance. On the other
hand, the model can be easily modified due to the intrinsic
nature of DNN, making it possible to perform removal attacks, such as fine-tuning for transfer learning (Pan & Yang,
2010) and pruning for model compression (Li et al., 2017).
Besides, in some cases, the adversary can always make an
adversarial example of the ownership indicator (Fan et al.,
2019) or directly overwriting the existing watermark to cast
doubt on the ownership verification. The various attacks that
DNN watermarks need to face are summarized in Figure 1
and described in Section 3.1 in detail. Furthermore, as for
practicality and robustness, most current methods have to
rely on specific DNN architectures, which greatly limits the
application scenarios of watermarking.

