Run-Sort-ReRun: Escaping Batch Size Limitations
in Sliced Wasserstein Generative Models
José Lezama 1 Wei Chen 2 Qiang Qiu 2

Abstract
When training an implicit generative model, ideally one would like the generator to reproduce all
the different modes and subtleties of the target
distribution. Naturally, when comparing two empirical distributions, the larger the sample population, the more these statistical nuances can be
captured. However, existing objective functions
are computationally constrained in the amount of
samples they can consider by the memory required to process a batch of samples. In this
paper, we build upon recent progress in sliced
Wasserstein distances, a family of differentiable
metrics for distribution discrepancy based on the
Optimal Transport paradigm. We introduce a
procedure to train these distances with virtually
any batch size, allowing the discrepancy measure
to capture richer statistics and better approximating the distance between the underlying continuous distributions. As an example, we demonstrate the matching of the distribution of Inception features with batches of tens of thousands
of samples, achieving FID scores that outperform
state-of-the-art implicit generative models.

1. Introduction
A fundamental resource for training implicit deep generative models is the ability to characterize the discrepancy
between the distribution of generated samples and that of
real training data. Naturally, as one would like the generative model to capture the subtleties of the target distribution, the larger the population this characterization takes
into account, the more accurate it will be. In recent years,
a lot of progress has been made in developing and improving differentiable measures of discrepancy between empirical distributions (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al.,
1

IIE, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay
2
ECE, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA. Correspondence
to: <jlezama@fing.edu.uy>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

2017; Li et al., 2017; Mroueh et al., 2017; Heusel et al.,
2017; Deshpande et al., 2018). However, the number of
samples that one can consider when optimizing a generative model is typically constrained by the memory required
to store the model, activations and gradients in the computing device (i.e. the GPU). This limits the richness and
complexity of the statistics that the objective function can
extract from the available samples. Figure 1 illustrates this
point with an extreme example: learning a data distribution
containing four modes, but using only four samples at each
training iteration. Clearly this is not enough to capture the
complexity of the target distribution for existing models.
In this paper, we present a method to overcome the limitations in the number of samples that can be considered
when computing the mismatch between the generated and
real distributions. The algorithm, termed Run-Sort-ReRun,
allows to efficiently compute a measure of distribution mismatch, effectively considering tens of thousands of samples
in each training iteration. The algorithm is thus able to capture the complexities of the target distribution, regardless
of the hardware constraints imposed on the batch size, as
exemplified in Figure 1.
The method is based on the recent success of sliced Wasserstein distances (Rabin et al., 2011; Bonneel et al., 2015;
Deshpande et al., 2018; Kolouri et al., 2018; 2019a) for
training generative models. The main idea is to use an
average of 1-D Wasserstein distances obtained from random projections of the original distributions. These methods have the advantage of efficiently computing a stochastic measure that in expectation approximates the actual
Wasserstein distance between the full distributions (Bonnotte, 2013). Moreover, this type of training does not necessarily require adversarial training, which is often unstable. On top of these advantages, we add the ability to use
arbitrarily large batch sizes, making the empirical distance
even closer to the actual distance between the distributions.
In our experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
the method by directly matching the distribution of real
and generated image features, considering empirical populations of thousands of samples. By directly optimizing
over Inception features (Szegedy et al., 2016), our models obtain FID scores that surpass the most advanced GAN

