Characterizing Fairness Over the Set of Good Models Under Selective Labels

Amanda Coston * 1 Ashesh Rambachan * 2 Alexandra Chouldechova 3

Abstract
Algorithmic risk assessments are used to inform
decisions in a wide variety of high-stakes settings.
Often multiple predictive models deliver similar overall performance but differ markedly in
their predictions for individual cases, an empirical phenomenon known as the “Rashomon Effect.”
These models may have different properties over
various groups, and therefore have different predictive fairness properties. We develop a framework for characterizing predictive fairness properties over the set of models that deliver similar
overall performance, or “the set of good models.”
Our framework addresses the empirically relevant
challenge of selectively labelled data in the setting
where the selection decision and outcome are unconfounded given the observed data features. Our
framework can be used to 1) audit for predictive
bias; or 2) replace an existing model with one that
has better fairness properties. We illustrate these
use cases on a recidivism prediction task and a
real-world credit-scoring task.

1. Introduction
Algorithmic risk assessments are used to inform decisions
in high-stakes settings such as health care, child welfare,
criminal justice, consumer lending and hiring (Caruana et al.,
2015; Chouldechova et al., 2018; Kleinberg et al., 2018;
Fuster et al., 2020; Raghavan et al., 2020). Unfettered use
of such algorithms in these settings risks disproportionate
harm to marginalized or protected groups (Barocas & Selbst,
2016; Dastin, 2018; Vigdor, 2019). As a result, there is
widespread interest in measuring and limiting predictive
disparities across groups.
The vast literature on algorithmic fairness offers numer*

Equal contribution 1 Heinz College and Machine Learning
Department, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of
Economics, Harvard University 3 Heinz College, Carnegie
Mellon Univesrity.
Correspondence to: Amanda Coston <acoston@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Ashesh Rambachan
<asheshr@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

ous methods for learning anew the best performing model
among those that satisfy a chosen notion of predictive fairness (e.g. Zemel et al. (2013), Agarwal et al. (2018), Agarwal et al. (2019)). However, for real-world settings where a
risk assessment is already in use, practitioners and auditors
may instead want to assess disparities with respect to the
current model, which we term the benchmark model. For example, the benchmark model for a bank may be an existing
credit score used to approve loans. The relevant question
for practitioners is: Can we improve upon the benchmark
model in terms of predictive fairness with minimal change
in overall accuracy?
We explore this question through the lens of the “Rashomon
Effect,” a common empirical phenomenon whereby multiple models perform similarly overall but differ markedly
in their predictions for individual cases (Breiman, 2001).
These models may perform quite differently over various
groups, and therefore have different predictive fairness properties. We propose an algorithm, Fairness in the Rashomon
Set (FaiRS), to characterize predictive fairness properties
over the set of models that perform similarly to a chosen
benchmark model. We refer to this set as the set of good
models (Dong & Rudin, 2020). FaiRS is designed to efficiently answer the following questions: What are the range
of predictive disparities that could be generated over the set
of good models? What is the disparity minimizing model
within the set of good models?
A key empirical challenge in domains such as credit lending
is that outcomes are not observed for all cases (Lakkaraju
et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2018). This selective labels
problem is particularly vexing in the context of assessing
predictive fairness. Our framework addresses selectively
labelled data in contexts where the selection decision and
outcome are unconfounded given the observed data features.
Our methods are useful for legal audits of disparate impact.
In various domains, decisions that generate disparate impact
must be justified by “business necessity” (civ, 1964; ECO,
1974; Barocas & Selbst, 2016). For instance, financial regulators investigate whether credit lenders could have offered
more loans to minority applicants without affecting default
rates (Gillis, 2019). Employment regulators may investigate
whether resume screening software screens out underrepresented applicants for reasons that cannot be attributed to

