Online Submodular Resource Allocation with Applications to
Rebalancing Shared Mobility Systems
Pier Giuseppe Sessa 1 Ilija Bogunovic 1 Andreas Krause 1 Maryam Kamgarpour 1

Abstract
Motivated by applications in shared mobility,
we address the problem of allocating a group of
agents to a set of resources to maximize a cumulative welfare objective. We model the welfare
obtainable from each resource as a monotone
DR-submodular function which is a-priori unknown and can only be learned by observing the
welfare of selected allocations. Moreover, these
functions can depend on time-varying contextual
information. We propose a distributed scheme to
maximize the cumulative welfare by designing a
repeated game among the agents, who learn to act
via regret minimization. We propose two design
choices for the game rewards based on upper
confidence bounds built around the unknown
welfare functions. We analyze them theoretically,
bounding the gap between the cumulative welfare
of the game and the highest cumulative welfare
obtainable in hindsight. Finally, we evaluate our
approach in a realistic case study of rebalancing a
shared mobility system (i.e., positioning vehicles
in strategic areas). From observed trip data, our
algorithm gradually learns the users’ demand
pattern and improves the overall system operation.

1. Introduction
A number of important real-world problems consist of repeatedly allocating agents to resources to maximize a cumulative welfare objective. Examples include positioning sensors to maximize the probability of detecting an
event (Krause & Guestrin, 2007), or allocating bandwidth to
nodes of a wireless network (Stanczak et al., 2006). These
problems have far-reaching applications in several areas of
science and engineering (Katoh & Ibaraki, 1998).
In certain applications, however, the welfare objective func1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Pier Giuseppe
Sessa <sessap@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

tion (i.e., the quality measure of a given allocation) is apriori unknown and can only be learned online by observing
the outcome of proposed allocations. Moreover, outcomes
can depend on external varying contextual factors, e.g., time,
weather, etc.
A concrete example scenario, which we address in Section 6, is the problem of rebalancing a Shared Mobility
System (SMS), such as bike or scooter sharing. Here the
goal is to strategically reposition vehicles in a city (typically overnight by using transportation trucks) to increase
the vehicles’ availability and minimize the users’ dissatisfaction level. SMSs have experienced tremendous growth
over the past decade, offering a compelling alternative to
classic transportation systems. Their potential benefits are
numerous, including sustainability, increase in efficiency,
and reduction of costs, among many others (Laporte et al.,
2018). Effective rebalancing of such systems, however, is
key to their success. In these application, the exact demand
for vehicles is unknown ahead of time and depends on external factors such as weather.
Motivated by this important application, we consider the
problem of online resource allocation with unknown welfare functions. We propose a distributed approach that provably attains near-optimal solutions to this problem, and we
demonstrate the performance in a realistic case study on
data from an SMS in Louisville (KY, US).
1.1. Related work
Distributed resource allocation. Resource allocation problems are typically addressed by distributed protocols, where
each agent is assigned to one or more resources based on
local computations. The general game-theoretic framework
of Marden & Wierman (2013) proposes to design a game
between the agents and retrieve allocations by computing
the resulting game equilibria. In the case of submodular
welfare functions (which is a typical assumption in these
problems), games can be designed according to Vetta (2002)
so that such equilibria attain at least a 0.5-approximation
to the optimal achievable welfare. These guarantees hold
also in the online setting where agents act via regret minimization (Blum et al., 2008), and with continuous strategy
sets (Sessa et al., 2019a). Typical game design choices,

