Model-based Reinforcement Learning for Continuous Control with Posterior
Sampling

Ying Fan 1 Yifei Ming 1

Abstract
Balancing exploration and exploitation is crucial
in reinforcement learning (RL). In this paper, we
study model-based posterior sampling for reinforcement learning (PSRL) in continuous stateaction spaces theoretically and empirically. First,
we show the first regret bound of PSRL in continuous spaces which is polynomial in the episode
length to the best of our knowledge. With the
assumption that reward and transition functions
can be modeled by Bayesian linear regression,
we
√
develop a regret bound of Õ(H 3/2 d T ), where
H is the episode length, d is the dimension of
the state-action space, and T indicates the total
time steps. This result matches the best-known regret bound of non-PSRL methods in linear MDPs.
Our bound can be extended to nonlinear cases
as well with feature embedding: using linear kernels on the feature representation
φ, the regret
√
bound becomes Õ(H 3/2 dφ T ), where dφ is the
dimension of the representation space. Moreover,
we present MPC-PSRL, a model-based posterior
sampling algorithm with model predictive control
for action selection. To capture the uncertainty
in models, we use Bayesian linear regression on
the penultimate layer (the feature representation
layer φ) of neural networks. Empirical results
show that our algorithm achieves the state-of-theart sample efficiency in benchmark continuous
control tasks compared to prior model-based algorithms, and matches the asymptotic performance
of model-free algorithms.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent interacts with
an unknown environment which is typically modeled as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP). Efficient exploration
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison. Correspondence to: Ying
Fan <yfan87@wisc.edu>, Yifei Ming <ming5@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

in RL has been one of the main challenges: the agent is
expected to balance between exploring unseen state-action
pairs to gain more knowledge about the environment, and
exploiting existing knowledge to optimize rewards in the
presence of known data. Specifically, when the state-action
spaces are continuous, function approximation is necessary
to approximate the value function (in model-free settings)
or the reward and transition functions (in model-based settings), which raises extra challenges for both computational
and statistical efficiency compared to finite tabular cases1 .
Frequentist Regrets with Upper Confidence Bound
Most existing works, which focus on using function approximations to achieve efficient exploration with performance guarantees, use algorithms based on Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) to develop frequentist regret bounds.
In the model-based settings, the state-of-the-art frequentist
bound is given by UC-MatrixRL (Yang√& Wang, 2019),
which achieves a regret bound of Õ(H 2 d T ), where H is
the episode length, d is the dimension of the state-action
space, and T indicates the total time steps. In model-free settings, Jin et al. (2020) proposed
LSVI-UCB and developed a
√
3/2 3/2
d
bound of Õ(H
T
).
This
bound is further improved
√
to Õ(H 3/2 d T ) by (Zanette et al., 2020) and (Ayoub et al.,
2020), which achieve the best-known frequentist bound
among model-free and model-based algorithms. All above
bounds are achieved in linear MDPs where both reward and
transition functions are modeled as linear functions. Those
results can be extended to non-linear cases using kernel
functions, replacing d with dφ where dφ is the dimension of
the feature space. However, there are two main drawbacks
of UCB-based methods. First, UCB requires optimizing
over a confidence set, which is likely to be computationally
prohibitive. Second, the lack of statistical efficiency can
emerge from the sub-optimal construction of the confidence
set (Osband & Van Roy, 2017). Accordingly, this line of
works mostly focuses on theoretical analysis rather than
empirical applications.
1

Tabular
√ RL has been extensively studied with a regret bound
of Õ(H SAT ), where S and A denote the number of states and
actions respectively. However, in continuous state-action spaces
S and A can be infinite, hence the above results do not apply to
continuous spaces.

