Decomposed Mutual Information Estimation
for Contrastive Representation Learning

Alessandro Sordoni* 1 Nouha Dziri* 2 Hannes Schulz* 1 Geoff Gordon 1 Phil Bachman 1 Remi Tachet 1

Abstract
Recent contrastive representation learning methods rely on estimating mutual information (MI)
between multiple views of an underlying context.
E.g., we can derive multiple views of a given image by applying data augmentation, or we can
split a sequence into views comprising the past
and future of some step in the sequence. Contrastive lower bounds on MI are easy to optimize,
but have a strong underestimation bias when estimating large amounts of MI. We propose decomposing the full MI estimation problem into a sum
of smaller estimation problems by splitting one
of the views into progressively more informed
subviews and by applying the chain rule on MI
between the decomposed views. This expression
contains a sum of unconditional and conditional
MI terms, each measuring modest chunks of the
total MI, which facilitates approximation via contrastive bounds. To maximize the sum, we formulate a contrastive lower bound on the conditional
MI which can be approximated efficiently. We
refer to our general approach as Decomposed Estimation of Mutual Information (DEMI). We show
that DEMI can capture a larger amount of MI than
standard non-decomposed contrastive bounds in a
synthetic setting, and learns better representations
in a vision domain and for dialogue generation.

1. Introduction
The ability to extract actionable information from data in the
absence of explicit supervision seems to be a core prerequisite for building systems that can, for instance, learn from
few data points or quickly make analogies and transfer to
other tasks. Approaches to this problem include generative
models (Hinton, 2012; Kingma & Welling, 2014) and self*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research 2 University of
Alberta.
Correspondence to: Alessandro Sordoni <alsordon@microsoft.com>, Nouha Dziri <dziri@cs.ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

supervised representation learning approaches, in which the
objective is not to maximize likelihood, but to formulate
a series of (label-agnostic) tasks that the model needs to
solve through its representations (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016;
Devlin et al., 2019; Gidaris et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2019).
Self-supervised learning includes successful models leveraging contrastive learning, which have recently attained
comparable performance to their fully-supervised counterparts (Bachman et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020a).
Recent self-supervised learning methods can be seen as
training an encoder f such that it maximizes the mutual
information (MI) between representations f (·) of a pair of
views x and y of the same input datum, I(f (x); f (y)) ≤
I(x; y)1 . For images, different views can be built using
random flipping or color jittering (Bachman et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2020a). For sequential data such as conversational text, the views can be past and future utterances in
a given dialogue, or a particular word and its surrounding
context (Stratos, 2019). Contrastive approaches train representations of pairs of views to be more similar to each
other than to representations sampled from a negative sample distribution. The InfoNCE bound on I(x; y) (Oord
et al., 2018) has been successful insofar as it enjoys much
lower variance than competing approaches (Song & Ermon,
2020a). However, the capacity of the bound is limited by the
number of contrastive samples used (McAllester & Stratos,
2020a; Poole et al., 2019) and is therefore likely biased when
a large amount of MI needs to be estimated, e.g. between
high dimensional objects such as natural images.
The starting point of this paper is to decompose I(x, y) by
applying the chain rule on MI to obtain a sum of terms, each
containing smaller chunks of the total MI that can be approximated with less bias by contrastive approaches. For example, consider creating a subview x0 by removing information
from x, e.g. by masking some pixels as depicted in Fig. 1
(left). By construction, I(x0, x; y) = I(x0; y)+I(x; y|x0) =
I(x; y). Decomposed Estimation of Mutual Information
(DEMI) prescribes learning representations that maximize
each term in the sum, by contrastive learning. The condi1

In what follows, we will slightly abuse language and use the
expression “maximizing I(x, y)” as a shortcut for “maximizing a
lower bound on I(x, y) with respect to f ”.

