Skew Orthogonal Convolutions

Sahil Singla 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
Training convolutional neural networks with a
Lipschitz constraint under the l2 norm is useful for
provable adversarial robustness, interpretable gradients, stable training, etc. While 1-Lipschitz networks can be designed by imposing a 1-Lipschitz
constraint on each layer, training such networks
requires each layer to be gradient norm preserving
(GNP) to prevent gradients from vanishing. However, existing GNP convolutions suffer from slow
training, lead to significant reduction in accuracy
and provide no guarantees on their approximations. In this work, we propose a GNP convolution layer called Skew Orthogonal Convolution
(SOC) that uses the following mathematical property: when a matrix is Skew-Symmetric, its exponential function is an orthogonal matrix. To
use this property, we first construct a convolution
filter whose Jacobian is Skew-Symmetric. Then,
we use the Taylor series expansion of the Jacobian exponential to construct the SOC layer that
is orthogonal. To efficiently implement SOC, we
keep a finite number of terms from the Taylor
series and provide a provable guarantee on the
approximation error. Our experiments on CIFAR10 and CIFAR-100 show that SOC allows us to
train provably Lipschitz, large convolutional neural networks significantly faster than prior works
while achieving significant improvements for both
standard and certified robust accuracies.

1. Introduction
The Lipschitz constant2 of a neural network puts an upper
bound on how much the output is allowed to change in
proportion to a change in input. Previous work has shown
that a small Lipschitz constant leads to improved generalization bounds (Bartlett et al., 2017; Long & Sedghi, 2020),
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to: Sahil Singla <ssingla@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

adversarial robustness (Cissé et al., 2017; Szegedy et al.,
2014) and interpretable gradients (Tsipras et al., 2018). The
Lipschitz constant also upper bounds the change in gradient norm during backpropagation and can thus prevent
gradient explosion during training, allowing us to train very
deep networks (Xiao et al., 2018). Moreover, the Wasserstein distance between two probability distributions can be
expressed as a maximization over 1-Lipschitz functions (Villani, 2008; Peyré & Cuturi, 2018), and has been used for
training Wasserstein GANs (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani
et al., 2017) and Wasserstein VAEs (Tolstikhin et al., 2018).
Using the Lipschitz
composition property i.e. Lip(f ◦g) ≤

Lip(f )Lip(g) , a Lipschitz constant of a neural network
can be bounded by the product of the Lipschitz constant
of all layers. 1-Lipschitz neural networks can thus be designed by imposing a 1-Lipschitz constraint on each layer.
However, Anil et al. (2018) identified a key difficulty with
this approach: because a layer with a Lipschitz bound of
1 can only reduce the norm of the gradient during backpropagation, each step of backprop gradually attenuates the
gradient norm, resulting in a much smaller gradient for the
layers closer to the input, thereby making training slow and
difficult. To address this problem, they introduced Gradient Norm Preserving (GNP) architectures where each layer
preserves the gradient norm by ensuring that the Jacobian
of each layer is an Orthogonal matrix (for all inputs to the
layer). For convolutional layers, this involves constraining
the Jacobian of each convolution layer to be an Orthogonal
matrix (Li et al., 2019b; Xiao et al., 2018) and using a GNP
activation function called GroupSort (Anil et al., 2018).
Li et al. (2019b) introduced an Orthogonal convolution layer
called Block Convolutional Orthogonal Parametrization
(BCOP). BCOP uses a clever application of 1D Orthogonal convolution filters of sizes 2 × 1 and 1 × 2 to construct
a 2D Orthogonal convolution filter. It overcomes common
issues of Lipschitz-constrained networks such as gradient
norm attenuation and loose lipschitz bounds and enables
training of large, provably 1-Lipschitz Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) achieving results competitive with existing methods for provable adversarial robustness. However,
BCOP suffers from slow training, significant reduction in
accuracy and provides no guarantees on its approximation
2

Unless specified, we use Lipschitz constant under the l2 norm.

