Active Learning of Continuous-time Bayesian Networks through
Interventions
Dominik Linzner 1 2 Heinz Koeppl 1 3

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning structures
and parameters of Continuous-time Bayesian Networks (CTBNs) from time-course data under minimal experimental resources. In practice, the cost
of generating experimental data poses a bottleneck, especially in the natural and social sciences.
A popular approach to overcome this is Bayesian
optimal experimental design (BOED). However,
BOED becomes infeasible in high-dimensional
settings, as it involves integration over all possible experimental outcomes. We propose a novel
criterion for experimental design based on a variational approximation of the expected information
gain. We show that for CTBNs, a semi-analytical
expression for this criterion can be calculated for
structure and parameter learning. By doing so, we
can replace sampling over experimental outcomes
by solving the CTBNs master-equation, for which
scalable approximations exist. This alleviates the
computational burden of integrating over possible
experimental outcomes in high-dimensions. We
employ this framework in order to recommend interventional sequences. In this context, we extend
the CTBN model to conditional CTBNs in order
to incorporate interventions. We demonstrate the
performance of our criterion on synthetic and realworld data.

Learning directed dependencies in multivariate data is a
fundamental problem in science and has application across
many disciplines such as in the natural and social sciences,
finance, and engineering (Acerbi et al., 2014; Schadt et al.,
2005). However, large amounts of data are needed in order
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering and Information Technology, TU Darmstadt, Germany 2 The Why Company GmbH, Berlin, Germany 3 Department of Biology, TU
Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Dominik Linzner
<dlinzner90@gmail.com>, Heinz Koeppl <heinz.koeppl@bcs.tudarmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

to learn these dependencies. This is a problem when data
is acquired under limited resources, which is the case in
dedicated experiments, e.g. in molecular biology or psychology (Steinke et al., 2007; Zechner et al., 2012; Liepe
et al., 2013; Myung & Pitt, 2015; Dehghannasiri et al., 2015;
Prangemeier et al., 2018). Active learning schemes pave a
principled way to design sequential experiments such that
the required resources are minimized.
The framework of Bayesian optimal experimental design
(BOED) (Chaloner, 1987; Ryan et al., 2016) allows for the
design of active learning schemes, which are provably (Lindley, 1956; Sebastiani & Wynn, 2000) one-step optimal. However, BOED becomes infeasible in high-dimensional settings, as it involves integration over possible experimental
outcomes.
While active learning schemes have been previously applied
in order to learn dependency structures (Tong & Koller,
2001; Eaton & Murphy, 2007; He & Geng, 2008; Lindgren et al., 2018) or parameters (Rubenstein et al., 2017)
of probabilistic graphical models from snapshot or static
data, active learning schemes for longitudinal and especially temporal data is as of yet under-explored. Dynamic
Bayesian networks offer an appealing framework to formulate structure learning for temporal data within the graphical
model framework (Koller & Friedman, 2010). The fact that
the time granularity of the data can often be very different
from the actual granularity of the underlying process motivates the extension to continuous-time Bayesian networks
(CTBN) (Nodelman et al., 1995), where no time granularity
of the unknown process has to be assumed.
In this manuscript, we present an active learning scheme for
learning CTBNs from interventions. We make the following
contributions: (i) We derive a criterion for active learning
suited for the case when the space of possible experimental
outcomes is high-dimensional in Section 2. (ii) In Section
3, we extend CTBNs to incorporate interventions, thereby
introducing conditional CTBNs (cCTBNs). (iii) We discuss pooling of interventional data in cCTBNs in Section
4. (iv) We derive semi-analytical expressions of our design
criterion from Section 2 for parameter and structure learning
in Section 5. (v) We demonstrate the performance of our
approach on synthetic and real-world data in section 6.

