Problem Dependent View on Structured Thresholding Bandit Problems

James Cheshire 1 Pierre Ménard 1 Alexandra Carpentier 1

Abstract
We investigate the problem dependent regime
in the stochastic Thresholding Bandit problem
(TBP) under several shape constraints. In the
TBP the objective of the learner is to output, at
the end of a sequential game, the set of arms
whose means are above a given threshold. The
vanilla, unstructured, case is already well studied
in the literature. Taking K as the number of arms,
we consider the case where (i) the sequence of
arm’s means (µk )K
k=1 is monotonically increasing (MTBP) and (ii) the case where (µk )K
k=1 is
concave (CTBP). We consider both cases in the
problem dependent regime and study the probability of error - i.e. the probability to mis-classify
at least one arm. In the fixed budget setting, we
provide upper and lower bounds for the probability of error in both the concave and monotone
settings, as well as associated algorithms. In both
settings the bounds match in the problem dependent regime up to universal constants in the exponential.

1. Introduction
Stochastic multi-armed bandit problems model situations
in which a learner faces multiple unknown probability distributions, or “arms”, and has to sequentially sample these
arms.
In this paper, we focus on the Thresholding Bandit Problem (TBP), a Combinatorial Pure Exploration (CPE) bandit setting introduced by Chen et al. (2014). The learner
is presented with [K] = {1, . . . , K} arms, each following
an unknown distribution νk with unknown mean µk . We
focus on the fixed budget variant of this problem. Given a
budget T > 0, the learner samples the arms sequentially
for a total of T times and then aims at predicting the set of
arms whose mean is above a known threshold τ ∈ R. We
will measure the learner’s performance by the probability
1

Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg. Correspondence
to: James Cheschire <james.cheschire@ovgu.de>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

of error - i.e. the probability that the learner mis-classifies
at least one arm - and consider therefore the problem dependent regime.
The focus of this paper is on structured, shape constrained
TBP. More precisely, we study the influence of some classical structures, in the form of a shape constraint on the
sequence of means of the arms, on the TBP problem. That
is, we study how classical shape constraints influence the
probability of error. A related study was performed by
Cheshire et al. (2020) for the problem independent (overall worst-case) regime, and we aim at extending this study
to the problem dependent regime. We will aim at finding
the problem dependent quantities that have an impact on
the optimal probability of error, and at providing matching
upper and lower bounds.
We will discuss three structured TBPs in this paper; among
those, we recall existing results of one, and provide results
for two. Here is a short overview.
Vanilla, unstructured case TBP The vanilla, unstructured case is the simplest TBP where we only assume that
the distributions of the arms are sub-Gaussian - also related to the TOP-M1 setting. The TBP is already well studied in the literature - both in a fixed budget and in a fixed
confidence context - and we only introduce it here to provide a benchmark for later structured problems. We recall
here results in the problem dependent, fixed budget, setting, which is most relevant for this paper. Locatelli et al.
(2016) prove that up to multiplicative constants, and additives log(T K) terms, in the exponential, the optimal probability of regret in this problem is exp(− P T ∆−2 ),
i:∆i >0

i

where ∆i = |τ − µi |. We present their results for completeness and comparison to the bounds under additional
shape constraints in Table 5.3 - see also Subsection 3.1.
The TBP in the problem dependent regime is also studied
by Mukherjee et al. (2017) and Zhong et al. (2017), however they consider a problem complexity based also upon
variance making their results not so relevant to our setting.
The problem independent regime for the TBP is studied by
Cheshire et al. (2020), we also present their results in Ta1
In the TOP-M setting, the objective of the learner is to output
the M arms with highest means. A popular version of it it is the
TOP-1 or ”best arm identification” problem where the aim is to
find the arm that realises the maximum.

