Crowdsourcing via Annotator Co-occurrence Imputation and Provable
Symmetric Nonnegative Matrix Factorization

Shahana Ibrahim 1 Xiao Fu 1

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of the Dawid-Skene (D&S)
model from noisy, incomplete and crowdsourced
annotations has been a long-standing challenge,
and is a critical step towards reliably labeling massive data. A recent work takes a coupled nonnegative matrix factorization (CNMF) perspective, and shows appealing features: It ensures the
identifiability of the D&S model and enjoys low
sample complexity, as only the estimates of the
co-occurrences of annotator labels are involved.
However, the identifiability holds only when certain somewhat restrictive conditions are met in the
context of crowdsourcing. Optimizing the CNMF
criterion is also costly—and convergence assurances are elusive. This work recasts the pairwise
co-occurrence based D&S model learning problem as a symmetric NMF (SymNMF) problem—
which offers enhanced identifiability relative to
CNMF. In practice, the SymNMF model is often
(largely) incomplete, due to the lack of co-labeled
items by some annotators. Two lightweight algorithms are proposed for co-occurrence imputation.
Then, a low-complexity shifted rectified linear
unit (ReLU)-empowered SymNMF algorithm is
proposed to identify the D&S model. Various
performance characterizations (e.g., missing cooccurrence recoverability, stability, and convergence) and evaluations are also presented.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning systems, in particular, deep learning systems, are empowered by massive high-quality labeled
data (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Najafabadi et al., 2015). However, massive data labeling is an arduous task—reliable data
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. Correspondence to: Shahana Ibrahim <ibrahish@oregonstate.edu>, Xiao
Fu <xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

annotation requires substantial human efforts with considerable expertise, which are costly. Crowdsourcing techniques
deal with various aspects of data labeling, ranging from
crowd (annotators)-based reliable annotation acquisition to
effective integration of the acquired labels (Kittur et al.,
2008). Many online platforms—such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) (Buhrmester et al., 2011), CrowdFlower
(Wazny, 2017), and Clickworker (Vakharia & Lease, 2013)—
have been launched for these purposes. In platforms such as
AMT, the (oftentimes self-registered) annotators do not necessarily provide reliable labels. Hence, simple integration
strategies such as majority voting may work poorly (Karger
et al., 2011a).
Annotation integration is a long-existing research topic in
machine learning; see, e.g., (Ibrahim et al., 2019; Karger
et al., 2011a; Karger et al., 2011b; Karger et al., 2013; 2014;
Liu et al., 2012; Ma et al., 2018; Snow et al., 2008; Traganitis et al., 2018; Welinder et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2016).
As an unsupervised learning task, it is often tackled from
a statistical generative model identification viewpoint. The
Dawid-Skene (D&S) model (Dawid & Skene, 1979) has
been widely adopted in the literature. The D&S model assumes a ground-truth label prior and assigns a “confusion”
matrix to each annotator. The entries of an annotator’s confusion matrix correspond to the probabilities of the correct
and incorrect annotations conditioned on the ground-truth
labels. Hence, annotation integration boils down to learning
the model parameters of the D&S model.
Perhaps a bit surprisingly, despite its popularity, the identifiability of the D&S model had not been satisfactorily addressed until recent years. The model identifiability of D&S
was first shown under some special cases (e.g., binary labeling cases) (Dalvi et al., 2013; Ghosh et al., 2011; Karger
et al., 2013). The more general multi-class cases were discussed in (Traganitis et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2016), assuming the availability of third-order statistics of the crowdsourced annotations. A challenge is that the third-order
statistics may be difficult to estimate reliably, especially in
the sample-starved regime. The work of (Ibrahim et al.,
2019) used pairwise co-occurrences of the annotators’ responses (i.e., second-order statistics) to identify the D&S
model, which substantially improved the sample complexity,

