A Second look at Exponential and Cosine Step Sizes:
Simplicity, Adaptivity, and Performance

Xiaoyu Li ∗ 1 Zhenxun Zhuang ∗ 2 Francesco Orabona 1 2 3

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a popular tool in training large-scale machine learning
models. Its performance, however, is highly variable, depending crucially on the choice of the
step sizes. Accordingly, a variety of strategies
for tuning the step sizes have been proposed,
ranging from coordinate-wise approaches (a.k.a.
“adaptive” step sizes) to sophisticated heuristics to
change the step size in each iteration. In this paper,
we study two step size schedules whose power has
been repeatedly confirmed in practice: the exponential and the cosine step sizes. For the first time,
we provide theoretical support for them proving
convergence rates for smooth non-convex functions, with and without the Polyak-Łojasiewicz
(PL) condition. Moreover, we show the surprising
property that these two strategies are adaptive to
the noise level in the stochastic gradients of PL
functions. That is, contrary to polynomial step
sizes, they achieve almost optimal performance
without needing to know the noise level nor tuning their hyperparameters based on it. Finally, we
conduct a fair and comprehensive empirical evaluation of real-world datasets with deep learning
architectures. Results show that, even if only requiring at most two hyperparameters to tune, these
two strategies best or match the performance of
various finely-tuned state-of-the-art strategies.

1. Introduction
In the last 10 years, non-convex machine learning formulations have received more and more attention as they can
*

Equal contribution 1 Division of System Engineering, Boston
University, Boston, MA, US 2 Department of Computer Science,
Boston University, Boston, MA, US 3 Department of Electrical
& Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, US.
Correspondence to: Xiaoyu Li <xiaoyuli@bu.edu>, Zhenxun
Zhuang <zxzhuang@bu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

typically better scale with the complexity of the predictors and the amount of training data compared with convex
ones. One such example is the deep neural networks. Over
the years, various algorithms have been proposed and employed to optimize non-convex machine learning problems,
among which Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins
& Monro, 1951) has become the most important ingredient
in Machine Learning pipelines. Practitioners prefer it over
more sophisticated methods for its simplicity and speed.
Yet, this generality comes with a cost: SGD is far from
the robustness of, e.g., second-order methods that require
little to no tweaking of knobs to work. In particular, the
step size is still the most important parameter to tune in the
SGD algorithm, carrying the actual weight of making SGD
adaptive to different situations.
The importance of step sizes in SGD is testified by the
numerous proposed strategies to tune step sizes (e.g., Duchi
et al., 2010; McMahan & Streeter, 2010; Tieleman & Hinton,
2012; Zeiler, 2012; Kingma & Ba, 2015). However, for most
of them, there is little or no theory that can really explain
their empirical success. Moreover, SGD with appropriate
step sizes is already optimal in all the possible situations, so
it is unclear what kind of advantage we might show.
An interesting viewpoint is to go beyond worst-case analyses
and show that these learning rates provide SGD with some
form of adaptivity to the characteristics of the function.
More specifically, an algorithm is considered adaptive (or
universal) if it has the best theoretical performance w.r.t. to a
quantity X without the need to know it (Nesterov, 2015). So,
for example, it is possible to design optimization algorithms
adaptive to scale (Orabona & Pál, 2015; Orabona & Pál,
2018), smoothness (Levy et al., 2018), noise (Levy et al.,
2018; Li & Orabona, 2019), and strong convexity (Cutkosky
& Orabona, 2018). On the other hand, as noted in Orabona
(2019), it is remarkable that even if most of the proposed
step size strategies for SGD are called “adaptive”, for most
of them their analyses do not show any provable advantage
over plain SGD nor any form of adaptation to the intrinsic
characteristics of the non-convex function.
In this paper, we look at the two simple to use and
empirically successful step size decay strategies, the exponential and the cosine step size (with and without

