Instance-Optimal Compressed Sensing via Posterior Sampling

Ajil Jalal 1 Sushrut Karmalkar 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 1 Eric Price 2

Abstract
We characterize the measurement complexity of
compressed sensing of signals drawn from a
known prior distribution, even when the support
of the prior is the entire space (rather than, say,
sparse vectors). We show for Gaussian measurements and any prior distribution on the signal, that
the posterior sampling estimator achieves nearoptimal recovery guarantees. Moreover, this result is robust to model mismatch, as long as the
distribution estimate (e.g., from an invertible generative model) is close to the true distribution in
Wasserstein distance. We implement the posterior
sampling estimator for deep generative priors using Langevin dynamics, and empirically find that
it produces accurate estimates with more diversity
than MAP.

1. Introduction
The goal of compressed sensing is to recover a structured
signal from a relatively small number of linear measurements. The setting of such linear inverse problems has
numerous and diverse applications ranging from Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (Lustig et al., 2008; 2007), neuronal
spike trains (Hegde et al., 2009) and efficient sensing cameras (Duarte et al., 2008). Estimating a signal in Rn would
in general require n linear measurements, but because realworld signals are structured—i.e., compressible—one is
often able to estimate them with m  n measurements.
Formally, we would like to estimate a “signal” x∗ ∈ Rn
from noisy linear measurements,
y = Ax∗ + ξ
Code and models available at: https://github.com/
ajiljalal/code-cs-fairness. 1 University of Texas at
Austin, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
2
University of Texas at Austin, Department of Computer
Science. Correspondence to: Ajil Jalal <ajiljalal@utexas.edu>,
Sushrut Karmalkar <sushrutk@cs.utexas.edu>, Alexandros G. Dimakis <dimakis@austin.utexas.edu>, Eric Price
<ecprice@cs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

for a measurement matrix A ∈ Rm×n and noise vector
ξ ∈ Rm . We will focus on the i.i.d. Gaussian setting, where
2
1
) and ξi ∼ N (0, σm ), and one would like to
Aij ∼ N (0, m
recover x
b from (A, y) such that
kx∗ − x
bk ≤ Cσ

(1)

with high probability for some constant C. When x∗ is ksparse, this was shown by Candés, Romberg, and Tao (Candes et al., 2006) to be possible for m at least O(k log nk ).
Over the past 15 years, compressed sensing has been extended in a wide variety of remarkable ways, including by
generalizing from sparsity to other signal structures, such
as those given by trees (Chen & Huang, 2012), graphs (Xu
et al., 2011), manifolds (Chen et al., 2010; Xu & Hassibi,
2008), or deep generative models (Bora et al., 2017; Asim
et al., 2019). These are all essentially frequentist approaches
to the problem: they define a small set of “structured” signals x, and ask for recovery of every such signal.
Such set-based approaches have limitations. For example, (Bora et al., 2017) uses the structure given by a deep
generative model G : Rk → Rn ; with O(kd log n) measurements for d-layer networks, accurate recovery is guaranteed
for every signal x∗ near the range of G. But this completely
ignores the distribution over the range. Generative models
like Glow (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) and pixelRNN (Oord
et al., 2016) have seed length k = n and range equal to the
entire Rn . Yet because these models are designed to approximate reality, and real images can be compressed, we know
that compressed sensing is possible in principle.
This leads to the question: Given signals drawn from some
distribution R, can we characterize the number of linear
measurements necessary for recovery, with both upper
and lower bounds? Such a Bayesian approach has previously been considered for sparsity-inducing product distributions (Aeron et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2014) but not
general distributions.
Second, suppose that we don’t know the real distribution R,
but instead have an approximation P of R (e.g., from a GAN
or invertible generative model). In what sense should P approximate R for compressed sensing with good guarantees
to be possible?

