Solving Challenging Dexterous Manipulation Tasks With Trajectory
Optimisation and Reinforcement Learning

Henry Charlesworth 1 Giovanni Montana 1

Abstract
Training agents to autonomously control anthropomorphic robotic hands has the potential to lead
to systems capable of performing a multitude of
complex manipulation tasks in unstructured and
uncertain environments. In this work, we first introduce a suite of challenging simulated manipulation tasks where current reinforcement learning
and trajectory optimisation techniques perform
poorly. These include environments where two
simulated hands have to pass or throw objects between each other, as well as an environment where
the agent must learn to spin a long pen between
its fingers. We then introduce a simple trajectory
optimisation algorithm that performs significantly
better than existing methods on these environments. Finally, on the most challenging “PenSpin”
task, we combine sub-optimal demonstrations
generated through trajectory optimisation with offpolicy reinforcement learning, obtaining performance that far exceeds either of these approaches
individually. Videos of all of our results are available at: https://dexterous-manipulation.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Developing dexterous multi-fingered robotic arms capable
of performing complex manipulation tasks is both highly
desirable and extremely challenging. In industry today, a
majority of robots make use of simple parallel jaw grippers for manipulation. Whilst this works well in structured
settings, as we look to develop more autonomous robots
capable of performing a wider variety of tasks in more
complicated environments it will be necessary to develop
considerably more sophisticated manipulators. The most
sophisticated and versatile manipulator that we know of is
1

Warwick Manufacturing Group, University of Warwick,
Coventry, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Henry
Charlesworth <H.Charlesworth.1@warwick.ac.uk>, Giovanni
Montana <G.Montana@warwick.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

the human hand — capable of tasks ranging from complex
grasping to writing and tool use. As such, it is natural to
attempt to create robotic hands that mimic the human hand
and that can perform similarly complicated manipulation
tasks.
This is difficult for traditional robotic control approaches,
both with real robotic hands and in simulation. The primary challenges stem from the need to precisely coordinate
numerous joints as well as complex, discontinuous contact
patterns that can arise between the hand and the object being
manipulated. This motivates the use of techniques that can
learn directly via interactions with the environment, without
requiring accurate physics models of the hand-object system. In recent years, there has been significant success in
applying both reinforcement learning (RL) and gradient-free
trajectory optimisation to a range of dexterous manipulation
tasks, both in simulation (Plappert et al., 2018; Rajeswaran
et al., 2018; Lowrey et al., 2019) and with real robotic hands
(Andrychowicz et al., 2018; Akkaya et al., 2019; Nagabandi
et al., 2019). Nevertheless, many of these successes involve tasks that by human standards are relatively simple,
and complex manipulation tasks still remain a significant
challenge.
In this paper we make three primary contributions. Firstly,
we introduce a suite of challenging new manipulation tasks
based on OpenAI Gym’s simulated shadow-hand environments. These include tasks that require coordination between two hands, such as handing over and catching objects,
as well as a challenging “PenSpin” environment where a
hand has to learn to spin a long pen between its fingers. We
demonstrate that many of these tasks are extremely difficult
for existing RL/trajectory optimisation techniques, making
them potentially useful benchmarks for testing new algorithms.
Secondly, we introduce a simple trajectory optimisation
algorithm that is able to significantly outperform existing
methods that have been applied to dexterous manipulation,
achieving high levels of success on most of the tasks considered.
Finally, on the environment for which our trajectory optimisation algorithm struggles the most (“PenSpin”), we

